cuneiform texts         (e.g.,   the absence of bilingual texts providing
translations into fully known languages         and the long and com-
plex later history of            Sumero-Akkadian writing), the purely
philological aspects of scholarship that intercede            between the
student and meaningful problems of sociocultural interpreta-
tion are prodigiously       more difficult and time-consuming than
those in        Mesoamerica. Works that genuinely synthesize and
analyze the primary textual sources with respect to social                 in-

stitutions are correspondingly rarer           and seldom confront one
another directly on crucial points of difference. As a degree of
compensation, the rate and direction of long-term social trends
are at least potentially much better known. Successive steps in
the development of social and economic institutions connected

               THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                        37

with the state are often traceable over       many centuries. Here
too,    however, the crucial early stages of the Urban Revolution
lie   far back in an essentially prehistoric record, salvageable   by
archeological means alone.
     The shift from almost exclusively archeological evidence at
the outset of the Urban Revolution to composite, mutually rein-
forcing forms of documentation in which texts play an increas-
ing role thus significantly affects interpretation. However, this
is   not an admission of defeat but only a statement of difficulties
to be faced. Similarly, the differences in documentary sources
between the Old and the New World are not a justification for
eschewing comparison but rather a problem to be recognized
and overcome if the comparative outlook claimed for anthro-
pology is more than a pious, meaningless pledge. The broad
similarities in the course of theUrban Revolution in a number
of historically independent areas, and in the organization of
the primitive states that were its culminating products, simply
demand recognition and study as essentially parallel examples
of a particular type of development in a "multilinear" evolu-
tionary framework.
      As Julian Steward has put it, what is necessary is that "com-
parative cultural studies should interest themselves in recurrent
phenomena as well as in unique phenomena, and that anthro-
pology explicitly recognizes that a legitimate and ultimate ob-
jective   is   to   see through the differences of cultures to the
similarities,   to   ascertain processes that are   duplicated inde-
pendently in cultural sequences, and to recognize cause and
effect in both temporal and functional relationships" ( 1955:180).

It is   with the detailed discussion of these questions, as they
apply in the specific cases of Mesopotamia and central Mexico,
that the remainder of this study deals.

             n
                         SUBSISTENCE AND
                                         SETTLEMENT
IT IS A TRUISM THAT COMPLEX, CIVILIZED SOCIETIES DEPEND UPON
a subsistence base that is sufficiently intensive and reliable to
permit sedentary, nucleated settlements, a circumstance that
under most circumstances, and certainly in the long run, has
implied agriculture.
    A significant exception to that generalization may have oc-
curred in restricted regions of the Near East during and soon
after the closing phases of the Pleistocene. Recently Jean Perrot
has argued that the evidence for either plant or animal domesti-
cates in Palestine        and Syria remains at best highly ambiguous
until possibly as late as the fifth millennium B.C., in spite of the
fact that a settlement like Jericho already had become a small
walled town or village as early as the eighth millennium (1964:
18 ) In this case, of course, the major resources would Lave been
    .




the wild progenitors of the later domesticated races of wheat,
barley, sheep,        and goats, supplemented by a greater quantity
and variety of wild plant foods and lacustrine products than is
available in the region today. Probably even the wild cereals
alone, einkorn, emmer,          and two-row barley, were a larger and
more         stable   subsistence resource than commonly has been
realized.       Recent experiments indicate 1 that yields of as much
as 40 kilograms per family per day of actual grain equivalents
over a three-week harvest period are              still   possible   on unpro-
tected Near Eastern stands of wild einkorn, suggesting that the

        1.   Jack R. Harlan, personal communication.

                                        38

            SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                            39

harvest of wild grain could even have been the basic subsistence
resource, at least within the relatively limited (and not identi-
cal!) ecological niches     where conditions for each of the plants
were favorable.
   But the important point is that these conditions seemingly
were transitory and passed on without having generated civi-
lized, urban societies. The early florescence represented by "neo-

lithic" Jericho   was followed in that area by widespread aban-
donments, and settled life, when it reappeared in that area and
apparently even upon its first appearance elsewhere, was and
thenceforth remained agricultural.
   The domestication of cereals immensely expanded the en-
vironmental range within which these crops were an effective
subsistence source, and it surely also increased substantially the
size and reliability of yields in relation both to labor input   and
to available land. As the numbers and range of sheep and goats
also expanded following their domestication,     an assured supply
of milk and meat products came to overlap the expanding ranges
of distribution of the cereals, further establishing the superiority
of agriculture.   It   was upon this basis, although with such im-
portant later additions as cattle, pigs, donkeys, and the domesti-
cated date palm, that early Mesopotamian civilization met its
underlying subsistence needs.
   In Mesoamerica, the pattern was somewhat different.           The
wild progenitors of the great New World triad of food plants,
especially maize but also beans      and squash, required a much
longer period of selective breeding before they became         suffi-

cient, as domesticates, to replace a     wide spectrum of hunted
and gathered products. Fully sedentary village life accordingly
began much later than in the Old World, perhaps even as late
as the middle of the first millennium B.C., although the earliest
incipient cultivation extends back into at least the seventh mil-
lennium.
   Perhaps the very limited role of domesticable animals— only
the dog and turkey ever became economically important out-

40                   The Evolution of Urban Society

side Peru— contributed to this retardation        by failing to provide
inducements to an agricultural mode of subsistence as compel-
ling as those that    had been present in the Old World. Hus-
bandry, for example, permitted the involvement of even quite
young children      in the   productive process as herdsmen, thus
perhaps stimulating population growth.       It    also created special
opportunities for enhanced resource utilization, as exemplified
by stubble-grazing and consequent manuring.
   For purposes of understanding the Urban Revolution, how-
                                                between the
ever, differences in the onset of food production
Old and the New World are of little consequence, except inso-
far as they reflect cumulative differences in subsistence poten-
tialities.   What matters are the underlying similarities in the
conditions precipitating the Food-Producing Revolution, as well
as in the major changes of which it was constituted.        For these,
it   now seems clear, identify the Food-Producing Revolution not
merely as the predecessor and prerequisite for the Urban Revo-
lution   but as a type of transformation profoundly different
from the latter.
      As I have argued elsewhere, the closing phases of the Pleis-
tocene saw a whole series of adaptive changes in subsistence, of
which the incipient development of agriculture at first was only
a regional variant (Adams 1693). Perhaps foremost among the
more general features of the changes was an increasing seden-
tism, based upon the substitution of patterns of intensive local-
ized, "broad-spectrum" collecting for the more wide-ranging
selective pursuit of migratory herbivores.        These localized pat-
terns took     many forms, ranging from new techniques for the
exploitation of riverine and lacustrine resources to a fuller and
more variegated reliance on seeds, fruits, nuts, and small forest
animals. Many, if not most, of the new patterns involved the
development of a new technology as well: composite tools and
weapons like drills and bows, more specialized reaping and dig-
ging tools than had been necessary earlier, grinding stones for
extracting seeds from husks, cooking processes suitable for the

                         SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                                              41

new       task of         making vegetal foods edible and palatable in bulk,
not to mention even                more ambitious devi< es, su< h as boats, nets,
weirs,            and     their associated             equipment       which were necessary
for the successful exploitation of                             shoreline environments.                      It    is

apparent thai               much    of       tin's    technological advance               is      "preadapt-
ive"      for       successful     agriculture,              which even         in    cultural          terms
consists of hardl) anything                           more profound than the intentional
sowing or breeding                     of     plants and          animals whose exploitation
for food            must alread) have been well known. Moreover, it has
recently been pointed out                             thai   from an ecological standpoint
the distinction between terminal food-collecting and the onset
of    food production              is    equally elusive and                artificial:


      .   .   .    the important point      is not that man planted wheal bul
that he           (i)    moved it to niches to which it was not adapted, (ii) re-
moved             certain pressures of               natural   selection,    which allowed more
deviants from the norma] phenotype to survive, and                                    (   \\\ j   eventually
selected           for    characters     not         beneficial   undei     conditions            of   natural
selection           [Flannery 1965:1251],
                                                                                                       15

In short, the               Food-Producing Revolution was                         a   "process              and
not an "event,* in that it developed gradually or by small steps
over a considerable period and followed different emphases and
sequences according                     to     differing local        conditions even within
the       Near East and Mesoarnerica.
      What were the essential features of agriculture, not only as
a mode- of subsistence but                            as a set of    social    problems and ac-
tivities,         which seem to have influenced the course of the Urban
Revolution?                We may begin with certain very general conse-
quences             of   food production that tend to be                       common to all its
manifestations,               and then turn subsequently                         to       those        whose
effects           may have been at least partly different in Mesopotamia
and in Mesoarnerica.
      Increased yields,                 in    relations to labor input,                   have already
been mentioned. An essential feature of virtually every agricul-
tural regime is that its                 demands upon the farmer are discontinu-
ous through the year and. moreover, are generally phased fairly

42                   The Evolution of Urban Society

uniformly for the population of an entire region. This provides
a basis not merely for a substantially greater         aggregate of
leisure time than     most hunting-eolleeting societies can achieve
but also for its organized disposition as labor not directly tied
to the satisfaction of the      immediate subsistence requirements
of the primary producers       and their families— and hence for the
control    and manipulation of labor as a form of capital.
       Figures are obviously variable according to local conditions,
particularly in Mesoamerica, but under the traditional swidden
agricultural regime a representative published estimate of an-
nually required labor ranges from 143 to 161 man-days at Te-
poztlan, including time required for fencing against cattle (not
a prehispanic problem)       and providing substantial surpluses
available for sale. In   Mesopotamia the local differences prob-
ably are less significant, but the problem of obtaining estimates
is   obscured by oppressive conditions of tenancy. In general,
however, the same impression of substantial potential leisure
is   confirmed. Recent calculations from the northern part of the
alluvial plain suggest that maximally there are about 249 man-

days of agricultural labor per family unit per year under the
traditional   methods of cultivation, with the immediate subsist-
ence requirements of the producing family of peasants seem-
ingly needing only half or less of this time investment. In both
cases, to be sure,   it   should be noted that the estimates include
only the work of the men in the fields and in crop transport. To
this    must be added the frequently onerous and always time-
consuming tasks of fuel collection and food preparation, the
former also men's work,            modern Mexico, while in
                               at least in

contemporary Iraq both fall to women.
     As to yields in relation to land, the virtue of agriculture is
not so much in its higher potential value over that for hunting-
collecting under ideal local conditions as it is in the aggregate
number of units in a relatively large area that can maintain sub-
stantial   and roughly equivalent outputs. In this sense, agricul-
ture can be said to constitute an artificial extension of the

                SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                   43

ecological niche available        for   certain    cultigens through such
techniques as weeding, clearing, seeding, and irrigation, an ex-
tension that permits immensely larger population aggregates
in suitable areas.      Of course, it remains an empirical question
whether great size and density of rural population were a pre-
condition for the growth of nucleated, urban settlements or
whether, instead, the progress of the Urban Revolution pro-
vided a profound inducement to the growth of the rural popu-
lation as well.
     Representative figures for land requirements for subsistence
in   Mesoamerica again tend to be highly variable according to
local conditions       and type of agriculture. Under the traditional
swidden or "slash-and-burn" system                in   the forested tropical
lowlands, from 7.5 to 15 or more hectares per family are re-
quired either under cultivation or as part of a cyclically utilized
reserve.   In    the    highlands,   the   maintenance        of     permanent
kitchen gardens in addition to the practice of swidden has been
reported to reduce land requirements to perhaps 6.5 hectares
per family.     Where there is irrigation, these figures are much
more radically reduced— to less than a hectare where alternate
rainfall and irrigation permit two crops to be harvested per

year and to less than half a hectare under the especially inten-
sive conditions of chinampa cultivation around the lakes in the
Valley of Mexico. For Mesopotamia, there are no adequate
data available on maximal yields attainable with irrigation.
Since shortages of water limit the land that can be cultivated,
there is little incentive to maximize output per unit area; hence
cultivation has always        been extensive rather than              intensive,

with single crop cultivation during the winter growing season
and with alternate years in fallow. Even on this basis, however,
a recent report indicates that in one district the median holding
of   farm-owning families was 6 hectares. Presumably minimal
requirements for subsistence are considerably                 less    than this
figure.

     A third concomitant of agricultural subsistence related to

44                    The Evolution of Urban Society

the growth of civilization  was increased stability of residence.
Data on                 would depend on kinds of longitudinal
             this subject

studies that    are seldom undertaken even by modern ethnog-
raphers and that are essentially unavailable in ancient records
or in archeological findings. But surely we are justified in as-
suming that agriculture generally is a strong inducement to at
least relative stability    and that residential stability in turn is
positively associated with an increasing technological repertoire.
Perhaps as important as its effect on the development of new
tools   and specialized     skills,    residential stability   may also en-
gender social stability, encouraging an irregular but cumulative
shift   from small lineage-oriented systems           in   which   fissionary
tendencies dominate to larger, more open-ended systems tend-
ing toward local continuity and endogamy.
     Certain built-in incentives to population growth constitute
a fourth feature of agricultural regimes              generally and, pre-
sumably, of those in early            Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica as
well. Children, for example,           can be incorporated into the pro-
ductive process earlier than is the case among hunter-gathers.
More important, since agriculture constitutes not merely the
passive exploitation of an existing ecological niche but an ex-
pansion of it, the number and size of agricultural communities
in a given region can grow substantially without increasing the
pressure     upon   their resource base;        on the other hand, such
pressures tend to increase on hunter-gatherers as population
increases.
     The foregoing is not meant to imply that population                  in-

creases that are due to agriculture set the stage for urbanization.
Possibly the attainment of some minimal population level was
necessary to set the process into motion. But such evidence as
there   is   suggests that appreciable population increases gen-
erally followed, rather than preceded, the core processes of the
Urban Revolution.       Particularly       in   Mesopotamia, where the
sedentary village pattern seems to have been stabilized for
several millennia     between the establishment of effective food

                 SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                      45

production and the "take-off* into urbanism,                    it   may be noted
that there       is   simply no evidence for gradual population                  in-

creases that might have helped to precipitate the                     Urban Revo-
lution    after       reaching    some undefined           threshold.   Given the
nature of the evidence available at present, of course,                   it   must
be added that any attempt to describe the extent or timing of
demographic changes               in relation     to the   Urban Revolution in
both Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica remains hazardous in the
extreme.
    Next we may consider the nature of agricultural "surpluses"
insofar as they         may have been a precondition for the Urban
Revolution in Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica. That agricultural
producers can, to a degree quite unprecedented among hunters
and collectors, be induced or compelled to provide a surplus
above their own subsistence needs for socially defined ends is
littlemore than a truism. But does the exploitation of a given
environment by a given agricultural technology, implying a
potential level of productivity from which actual consumption
can be subtracted to define the surplus available for realloca-
tion, actually        help to engender the ideologies and institutional
contexts that are required to mobilize that surplus? Is there an
inherent tendency for agriculturalists to advance in productivity
toward the highest potential              level consistent      with their tech-
nology, that is, to maximize their production above subsistence
needs and so to precipitate the growth of new patterns of ap-
propriation and consumption involving elites freed from re-
sponsibilities        for   food production? Gordon Childe, although
never    dealing        with     these   issues    directly,   appears   to    have
thought    so.    Karl Polanyi and his collaborators have argued
persuasively to the contrary (1957), noting that actual agricul-
tural surpluses are always defined and mobilized in a particular
institutional setting          and that it is precisely the growth of the
collective   symbols and institutions of the primitive states that
can explain the conversion of peasant leisure into foodstuffs in
urban storehouses.

46                     The Evolution of Urban Society

     A useful and somewhat different approach to the problem
of interpreting the significance of agricultural           surpluses has
recently been suggested          by Martin Orans (1966).      Briefly,   he
focuses criticism on the conception of surplus as it is applied at
the level of the individual producer.        What really matters, he
argues,    is   not the margin between per capita production and
consumption, which implies improving "efficiency" as the major
factor in change and which is inherently incalculable from the
usual archeological-historical data. At least from the viewpoint
of understanding sociocultural change, the crucial variable, in-
stead,    is   the gross   amount of deployable wealth or "surplus."
     There are several advantages to conceptualizing the prob-
lem in these terms. First, it calls attention to the fact that a
chain of processes is involved in mobilizing "surpluses" in any
sociocultural context rather than merely the attainment of a
margin between production and consumption on the part of the
primary producers. The accumulation of a surplus is              at least

facilitated by improvements in technological-transport facilities

not directly related to agriculture at all     (e.g.,   boats and carts)
and, in any case, involves the elaboration of complex institu-
tional    mechanisms, not merely for assuring production of a
surplus by the peasantry, but also for concentrating and reallo-
cating it. Equally important, the concept of gross surplus directs
attention to the political or religious centers of the society,
urban or otherwise.      was in those centers, after all, that its
                            It

utilization resulted in the formation of the   new classes and
groups of specialists, as well as the monumental structures and
luxuries primarily associated with them, by which we identify
the Urban Revolution in the first place.
    Emphasis on gross surplus rather than per capita surplus
serves other functions as well. It suggests, for example, that an
increase in the gross size of population and territorial unit may
offer at least as strong a stimulus to the       Urban Revolution as
putative increases in "efficiency." Trends toward territorial ag-
grandizement, political unification, and population concentra-

               SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                                  47

tion within the political unit accordingly can be interpreted not

merely as expressions of the outcome oi the Urban Revolution
hiii   as functionally interrelated processes thai                   are central to         it.


       Calculated as gross amounts                 of    deployable wealth rather
than per capita ones, the significance oi surpluses changes from
an implied independent factor oi change to a component                               in    an
interdependent network             ol   e;uise     and    effect.   Extensions of         ter-

ritorial   control,   new forms of political               superordination, and a
multiplicity    ol    technological        advances         all     may have had           as
much effect on the- size ol the surplus as improvements in im-
mediate agricultural "efficiency," while the deployment                             ol    the
surplus, however it was formed, obviously had important re-
ciprocal effects on these othei factors. Further to emphasize the
interdependence of surpluses with a host of political, economic,
and technological institutions, it may be noted that agriculture
received organizational inputs from some of the institutions that
emerged during the course of the Urban Revolution. At least
in the case of        Mesopotamia, rationalization                   of   production       in

large-scale, internally specialized units surely increased not only
gross output but also per capita productivity, suggesting that
surpluses can be isolated from the processes constituting the
Urban Revolution as a whole only in the sense that they may
serve as convenient indices for              it.    In reality, they        and the in-
stitutions    promoting and disposing of them were inextricably
intertwined to form         its   substance.
   The composite character of both Mesopotamian and Meso-
american subsistence patterns is a somewhat less easily defined
and tangible common feature that nevertheless seems certain
to be functionally related to the onset of the                      Urban Revolution.
Phrased      differently,    there      were       significant      respects   in    both
cases in   which their component producing units were not self-
sustaining.  While specific forms naturally differed greatly, some
of the most characteristic institutions of the emergent states in
both areas played a decisive role in mediating the relationship
between the complementarity specialized                        units of production.

48                   The Evolution of Urban Society

This point may be more fully explained by considering each of
the areas separately.
     While from a distance the Mesopotamian alluvium appears
to   be an ecologically undifferentiated region, in fact there al-
ways have been a number of distinctively specialized subsist-
ence zones within it. Wheat and barley cultivation is perhaps
the best known, with the prevailing emphasis on the latter be-
ing related to the fluctuating effects of salinity.          It   takes the
form of field cultivation on an extensive rather than intensive
basis, both   along levee back-slopes and the margins of swamps
and depressions. A second niche consists of garden and orchard
cultivation. These summer harvests are small, limited to 10 per
cent or less of the areas devoted to the winter cereals             by the
sharply reduced availability of water; hence they are largely
confined    to   favorable   low-lying       areas   adjoining permanent
watercourses.    A third adaptation is that of the herdsman, in-
cluding weeds and stubble in fallow fields (establishing a pat-
tern of symbiosis with cultivators )     ,   as well as great enclosed or
marginal tracts of semiarid pastureland. Fourth, the swamps
and rivers constitute a subsistence system whose importance is
often neglected, serving as the source of reeds, one of the few
locally available building materials outside the soil itself,          and
also of fish. Fish constituted perhaps the major source of pro-
tein in the southern    Mesopotamian diet; its importance as an
economic activity is suggested by the fact that more than 100
of the 1,200 or so     members of the Bau community in Early
Dynastic Lagash are listed in contemporary texts as fishermen,
and 125 more as oarsmen, pilots, longshoremen, and sailors.
    The important point about these subsistence alternatives is
that they  were pursued by specialists in whose activities and
interrelations the formal organizations of the community played

a substantial intervening role. In the case of cultivators, for
example, we learn from the tablets of ancient Shuruppak that
both seed and plow animals were often centrally maintained,
supplied, and accounted for. As many as 9,660 donkeys are ac-

               SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                               49

counted for on one Early Dynastic administrative text alone,
and the responsibility for plowing, even on private land, seems
to   have rested with corvees under the direction of appointive
officials.   Significantly,   signs   apparently referring to plowing
officials    can be recognized on Protoliterate texts representing
temple accounts, so this centralization is as old as our earliest
written evidence.
     With respect to herding, the involvement of the central in-
stitutions of the city was as decisive as in the case of farming.

It is   suggested by the preoccupation of so much of the early
glyptic art with sacred herds and by the substantial temple and
palace holdings of domesticated animals recorded on Early Dy-
nastic texts.    Or, to refer again to the           Bau texts from Early
Dynastic Lagash, almost 100 members of that community were
listed as specialized    herdsmen. Perhaps the problem of sparse
summer forage was a particularly critical one, necessitating cen-
tralized     management, particularly         in    the case of the larger
bovids and equids, but in addition part of the explanation surely
lies inthe importance of wool for the manufacture of textiles
upon which the long-distance trade for needed raw materials
like copper must have depended.

    Another part of the domain of the herdsmen lay outside the
perimeters of cultivation and settlement, depending on open,
semiarid steppes for the sustenance of migratory herds rather
than on young barley shoots or stubble in cultivated                fields.

But, although the nomads occupying the region may have been
able to resist political ties with the scattered enclaves of urban
settlement and irrigation agriculture in their midst, in a           more
important sense they remained a vital part of an interacting
cultural     and economic whole. Recently it has been noted, for
example, that the great early centers of the cult of the shepherd
god, Dumuzi, lay in cities bordering the Sumerian edin or
pasturing ground.
     Similarly in the case of the fishermen, the central institutions
of the emergent       Sumerian        city-states   played an active role

50                      The Evolution of Urban Society

with respect to both their production and their consumption
patterns.    The so-called "mashdaria" texts from Lagash, for ex-
ample, have been interpreted for many years as reflecting very
large "offerings" of fish by the fishermen to the temple— offerings
so large that their further employment for food by a large part
of the    working force of the temple community has generally
been taken for granted. Insofar as these texts deal with "offer-
ings" at all, there are indications that they refer to contributions
made to the exchequer of the ruler and his family, from which
in turn we may assume they were redistributed. But probably

it   would be more accurate to conclude that they deal with a
form of ritualized interchange, carefully accounted for by the
officials of   the Bau community, in which herdsmen and fisher-
men exchanged milk products and fish with each other and for
cloth. And it should be remembered that the large quantities

of fishbones reported to have been found in late         Ubaid temple
levels at    Eridu point to a very early beginning of ritualized
patterns of either offering or exchange in which at least the
products of the specialized group of fishermen were made avail-
able to a considerably wider segment of the population.
     A still more direct and basic form of interchange of subsist-
ence products      is   attested   by numerous Early Dynastic and
Akkadian texts. It consisted of large-scale distributions of ra-
tions to    dependents of the great state institutions. The com-
plexity of this system, with regard both to the commodities
involved and to the gradations of support that were extended
to different age, occupational,      and social groups, recently have
been adumbrated by I. J. Gelb (1965). Presumably in exchange
                                         by productive adult
for corresponding periods of labor service
workers, the system made allowance for the aged and even for
nursing infants. At least       among the parishioners of the large
landed demesnes, the allotment of subsistence plots thus was
importantly supplemented by the issuance of monthly rations
of barley— for varying periods of the year,     depending upon po-
litical   conditions as well as     upon degrees of dependency. In

                 SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                            51

addition, there        were annua! rations of Oil and wool, as well as
distributions     at    festivals   and, on other special   occasions, of
mutton, beef and          fish,   dairy products, vegetables, dates and
other fruits, and beer and wine.
    In short, the subsistence patterns of late fourth and early
                    Mesopotamia involve specialized groups
third millennium b.c.
of producerswhose relations were characteristically mediated
by the dominant urban institutions, including the palace and
the temple. Although a quantitative summary has not yet been
attempted ( and indeed may be meaningless until a wider selec-
tion of contemporary Early Dynastic archives is available), the
general outline of the system conforms strikingly well to the
"redistributive"       model that Polanyi and his collaborators have
sketched; moreover, there are at least hints in the available
data that the actual flow of goods and services was large in
relation to the total available supply of such goods and services.
Surely   we see here, as was adumbrated earlier, not merely a
complex pattern of subsistence but one in which the interde-
pendence of its component features played a material part in
shaping the institutions by which we identify the Urban Revo-
lution itself.
    The Mesoamerican pattern was different in important ways
and yet generically similar. There were densely settled enclaves
where conditions were favorable for continuous or intensive
agriculture with the indigenous crops and technology, separated
from one another by extremely rugged areas, permitting, at
best,   marginal settlement. Differences in rainfall, in soils, and,
above all, in elevation, profoundly affected the complex of cul-
tivable crops     upon which depended not only trade in luxuries
but also some commodities closely linked with subsistence.
Regionally adapted varieties of maize, to be sure, grew in vir-
tually every habitable zone, but chiles          and maguey, the latter
an important source of amino acids in diets generally low in
protein, were specialized highland products. Cotton and cacao
beans, on the other hand, were cultivated only at lesser eleva-

52                  The Evolution of Urban Society

tions,   the former having already been imported into the great
central valley of   Mexico long before the Christian Era, while
the latter had    become the accepted medium of interregional
exchange by the Postclassic period, if not earlier. Salt, obtained
particularly along the seacoasts,    was another important com-
modity of trade. Perhaps most significant as a specialized sub-
sistence zone     was the Valley   of Mexico, occupying only an
insignificant proportion of the    Mesoamerican gross land area
but supporting highly productive chinampa horticulture and
providing a rich lacustrine fauna as well.
     This regional contrast, and the prevailing symbiosis that     it

encouraged, constituted an "ecological mosaic," as it has been
called, of strikingly different   and yet interdependent zones of
specialization.   The pattern as   a whole was similar to Meso-
potamia in its high degree of internal differentiation, and, as in
Mesopotamia, it is not unreasonable to suppose that some of
the most advanced and characteristic institutions of Mesoamer-
ican society were centrally involved, and may even have           had
their origins, in mediating the relationships        and interchanges
between the specialized components.
   Further, one of the profound differences between the early
state societies of Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica may lie in the
particular local features that this complexity assumed. In Meso-
potamia distances were small, geographical barriers were un-
important, and interaction between those engaged in different
subsistence pursuits  was close, many-faceted, and continuous.
Most communities, accordingly, were composite with regard to
subsistence specializations, and the responsibility of religious
and political authorities in relation to subsistence was to main-
tain and improve a system of relationships already existing
within their boundaries. At least down through the Akkadian
period and perhaps somewhat        later,   the careful   management
and recording of a system for the redistribution of subsistence
products in the form of rations was the central economic ac-
tivity   and concern of the state institutions. The institution of

              SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                           53

the marketplace, with ancillary jural and ceremonial features,
was largely or entirely absent.
     In Mesoamerica, on the other hand, only the relatively less
deep-rooted "imperial" polities like that of the Aztecs might be
said to have transcended the limitations of a single geographical
(mainly altitudinal) zone, and a dominant orientation of the
urban elites lay in the promotion of "external" trade. Hence it
is   not surprising that upon their arrival in central Mexico the
Spaniards found the institution of the marketplace in hyper-
developed form; 60,000 persons, for example, were daily in
attendance at the market in Tlatelolco, and 30,000 even in a
much smaller principality like Tlaxcala. Large-scale trade by
barter is reported not only in luxuries but in virtually all sub-
sistence products, clothing,    and even rudimentary agricultural
implements, and there were elaborate juridical institutions for
maintaining market norms. By as early as the middle of the first
millennium a.d. at Teotihuacan, there are suggestions that great
marketplaces had emerged as architectual establishments with
well-defined internal arrangements. All these are features that
are missing in Mesopotamia.
     A further general similarity between Mesopotamian and
Mesoamerican subsistence patterns, again accompanied by re-
gionally variable forms     whose differences are also significant
for our purposes,   is   an increasing intensity of land use. Best
known among the patterns of ecological modification to which
this refers is the introduction of irrigation, and there seems little

reason to doubt that it was generally accompanied by at least
a relative increase in the productivity of lands under cultivation.
But in one sense the term "intensity" is perhaps a misleading
one. It implies a special emphasis     upon labor-intensive tech-
niques of agriculture in which the productivity of a fixed,
limited amount of agricultural land rises in direct proportion to
a spiraling labor input. Something of the kind can indeed be
discerned on an extremely limited scale in the chinampa horti-
culture practiced in the Valley of Mexico, but there is no evi-

54                     The Evolution of Urban Society

dence that it ever was a widespread, general feature of either
central       Mexican or Mesopotamian agriculture.
      A better way of characterizing these modified patterns of
land use, at least in terms of the changes in social organization
they may have brought about, involves not their productivity
in relation to land area or labor input         but their unstabilizing
effect   upon communal systems of land tenure and the conse-
quent inducement they provide to the growth of social stratifi-
cation. Irrigation systems, for example, are capital investments
that enhance the productivity of the tracts              and groups they
serve    but not others.      Given inadequacies         in    water supply
(whether arising from a limited average supply in relation to
land, from year-to-year fluctuations, or from lack of congruence
between maximum stream flow and the growing season), the
usual condition in both Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica, such
systems represent relatively permanent improvements, which
restrict or distort uniformity of access to the primary productive

resources of the community and which tend to concentrate the
potentialities for the      production of a surplus of deployable
wealth in the hands of a limited social segment. Depending on
local    circumstances, such potentialities      may be reckoned           in
terms of rights to land or to water, but the effect is the same in
either case.      They stimulate the concentration            of hereditable,
alienable wealth in productive resources,          and hence         also the
emergence of a class society
      Such, at least, is the pattern that can be followed in some
ethnographic examples, for example, Ralph Linton's account
of    the introduction of wet rice         cultivation    in    Madagascar
(   1939 ) In Sinhalese villages, on the other hand, Edmund Leach
          .




reports that such effects can be held in check for long periods
within the community by internal leveling mechanisms based
upon periodic        fractionation   and   redistribution       of   holdings
(1961).       Given such diametrically opposed           alternatives,   our
question becomes:       Under the particular conditions present in
early Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica were the disequilibrating

               SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                         55

effects   of patterns of differential land use             somehow held in
check or were they instead an important inducement to the
growth of a stratified society? In both cases there is good evi-
dence for a decisive increase in social stratification; before deal-
ing with it, however, we should examine the possible roots of
the process in the prevailing subsistence patterns.
   In Mesopotamia the problem of ecological inducements to
social                both complex and obscure. There are
          stratification   is

abundant records, from Protoliterate times on, of great differ-
ences in ownership of land or rights to its usufruct. But it has
not yet been possible to position these early holdings with
respect to one another, to establish the relationship between
purchase price and yield for the same fields, or to show how
closely the very large holdings coincided with superior soils,
access to irrigation water, and productivity. Seemingly, all that
we can fall back on at present are some indirect and rather
doubtful hints.
   First,   the rate of seeding in late Early Dynastic times was
exceedingly      low— only      a   sixth   or   seventh   of    contemporary
Western      practice,     although not greatly different from con-
temporary practice         in the   same area. This low seeding rate,
together with reliance on a simple system of fallow rotation
throughout antiquity (and, for the most part, up until the
present), suggests prevailingly extensive rather than intensive
cultivation.However, it does not rule out the possibility that
there  were substantial relative differences in the value of
arable lands, since under the traditional agricultural regime a
low seeding rate is ecologically advantageous                   (it   provides a
measure of protection against water shortages,                        as   well   as
higher proportionate yields in relation to a given volume of
applied water )    .   Such differences are confirmed by the fact that
in a number of cases the purchase price is differentiated into a
component       directly    based on land area and a supplemental
charge for capital improvements or extras like a standing crop
or adjacent canals. Indeed, pre-Sargonic purchase prices for

56                   The Evolution of Urban Society

land range rather widely— between factors of one and six times
per given unit of surface area, clearly suggesting important
differences in productivity, ease of access, assurance of adequate
irrigation water, devotion to intensive orchard cultivation, or

the like.
      In spite of this considerable variability, the price of land in
the Early Dynastic sale texts is prevailingly low, generally cor-
responding to no more than might be harvested from it over a
two- or three-year period and on occasion             less   than even a
single year's harvest. This low land price     seems to confirm the
existence of a relatively non-intensive system of cultivation,
with greatly excessive areas of potentially cultivable land in re-
lation to the available supplies of irrigation water, but, of course,
may mean little, since it is not known what proportion of which
fields are referred to in     the existing sale texts— whether mar-
ginally irrigated or well supplied with water. It is entirely pos-
sible that the   more favorably situated lands constituted large,
growing holdings in the hands of elites; if so, they would seldom
be formally transferred and hence recorded.
      Somewhat surprisingly, in view of the critical scarcity of
water rather than land, rights of ownership apparently were
calculated exclusively in land and not in water, which must
reflect the   wide variations in flow of the major streams, their
tendency to shift their courses, and the difficulties of measuring
water consumption. There is also a noteworthy absence among
the literary sources— proverbs, disputations, etc.— of references
to controversies over     water rights, such as might be expected
if   there were gross, permanent inequalities in access rights to
this critical resource.   And, similarly, the early references to the
construction of canal systems generally specify their importance
as arteries of communication and do not mention at all the water
they provided for irrigation.
     The large corpus of texts touching on the agricultural econ-
omy also contains little to indicate the development on a sig-
nificant scale of   any more intensive type of land use than the

                SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                             57

traditional system of fallow rotation,which suggests no very
marked trend to increase field productivity even on favorably
situated tracts.     On the other hand, it leaves unexplained the
substantial differences in the unit costs for land. Finally, the
role of the corporate landholding groups that are in evidence in
Early Dynastic times subsequently seems to be a progressively
more restricted one, and no mechanisms for periodic land re-
distribution within such groups, which might have prolonged
their survival by reducing internal differentiation, are directly
attested in the available record. 2
      What emerges from this miscellany of observations is that
agriculture remained overwhelmingly extensive rather than in-
tensive and that there is little or no evidence of intracommunity
competition over scarce land and water resources. Thus, while
all   our evidence points to increasing inequalities in the control
of deployable wealth, the available evidence from ancient texts
neither proves nor disproves that they were significantly en-
hanced by locally emerging patterns of differentiation in sub-
sistence control or productivity.         Of   course, such inequalities
were increasingly reflected in differences in landownership, as
the great acquisitions by single individuals that are recorded
in Early Dynastic texts clearly show. But, while wide variations
in sizes of holdings      may have perpetuated, or even intensified,
the process of social stratification as a whole, it simply cannot
be shown directly how much of that variation was an outcome
of trends inherent in the local subsistence system.
      Even if unambiguous contemporary evidence is still lacking,
however, a consideration of the ecological circumstances char-
acteristic of the     Mesopotamian plain strongly suggests that in-
creasing disproportions in the control of deployable wealth
were at least partly induced by the local subsistence system. It


      2.   On the other hand, Miguel Civil suggests (personal communica-
tion) that the extremely long and narrow shape of fields recorded in some-
what later (Ur III)     texts   may imply impermanent boundaries between
individual allotments within larger corporate holdings.

58                     The Evolution of Urban Society

cannot be overstressed that traditional irrigation agriculture in
that context is maintained within at best an unstable eco-system.
Great variations in rainfall and river flow,          silting,   increasing
salinity with rising groundwater levels, periodic infestations          by
blights and insect pests, the delicately shifting balance between
nomads and settled peoples— all are repeatedly attested through-
out the historical record and are still in evidence today. Con-
sidered in relation to human settlement, in vulnerable, narrow
enclaves along shifting, inadequate watercourses, such factors
leading to marked differences in the control of productive land
and agricultural surpluses have always been overwhelming and
chronic.
      While these processes are perhaps most obvious among cul-
tivators, Frederik Barth's work on the nomadic Basseri of south-

western Iran provides a paradigm that must have obtained
among ancient Mesopotamian herdsmen as well (Barth 1961).
Barth emphasizes that nomadic life is not to be understood as
an isolate but that, instead, there is a continuing dependence
upon neighboring zones of cultivation. One form of this de-
pendence, and perhaps the primary one for our purposes,                  is

that there    is    a continuing feedback of population into the
settlements. In part      it   consists of a relatively large proportion
of the nomadic population whose herds for one reason or an-
other fall below the minimal level necessary to maintain ex-
tended family groups. Such groups have no recourse but to
trickle into the cultivated       zones as a disorganized, depressed,
landless labor force.      A smaller, but for our purposes equally
important, upper stratum of nomads is successful in increasing
its   ratio of animals to      herdsmen past the point at which it is
economical to manage them. This stratum must seek to convert
its herds into     a more stable form of capital, and specifically into
land that can be maintained in production either by the former
herdsman and some of his followers or on an absentee basis.
Even without considering the political effects of large groupings
of nomads, in other words, we can identify potent disequilibrat-

              SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                            59

ing factors arising from the symbiotic interaction of herdsmen
and farmers that must always have been reflected in tendencies
toward increasing inequalities in landholdings.
   As the example of herdsman-cultivator symbiosis           testifies,

ecological relationships that were significant for the growth of
social stratification are not necessarily    understood best from
the standpoint of the nucleated community.         The network of
signficant ecological relationships need not be coterminous with
the self-conscious territorial, social, or religious unit. Granting
the biases and limitations of the contemporary sources,           what
they attest is not so much the onset of processes of social dif-
ferentiation within communities as the existence of prolonged
and bitter intercommunity struggles. In most cases such strug-
gles    may have had their origins in subsistence practices or re-
quirements, for example, the opposing demands of upstream
and downstream irrigators, rival claims to adjacent lands, or
the characteristically divergent local patterns of substantial sur-
plus and impoverishment. But they clearly are to be understood
in a regional rather than an intracommunity framework.           What-
ever their initial roots, rivalries of this kind lead to consolida-
tions    of land, population,    and agricultural surplus  which
                                                            in
political and economic factors were closely intertwined. Thus

externally imposed patterns of political and military domination
are an important facet of the development of social differentia-
tion, complementing its emergence as a result of ecological

pressures within the community.
   There is an additional reason for considering the adaptive
patterns characteristic of Mesopotamia as regional in scope
rather than as centering        upon an individual sedentary com-
munity. Mesopotamian herdsmen and farmers, or rural folk and
city-dwellers, for the   most part have never been fully stable
types but a shifting continuum. Particularly in early times, the
self-conscious,   committed urban elite was extraordinarily thin,
a relative handful of administrators, priests, scribes, and per-
haps craftsmen in a population among most of whom settled

60                    The Evolution of Urban Society

city life was continuously viewed as merely one of several avail-

able alternatives.        Although Leo Oppenheim was concerned
primarily with later periods in a recent discussion of this theme,
there is no reason to doubt that his account is equally applicable
to the city-states of the Early Dynastic and Akkadian periods:

    The palace, of course, the temple, and the hard core of city-
dwellers in the large and old cities had only occasional contacts
with the people in the open country,   who subsisted on the yield
of this environment  and were not to be forced into sedentary con-
ditions. Between these two groups there were important fluctuations
comprising smaller or larger segments of the population of the
cities as   well as the open country. Difficult economic and political
situationswere liable to crowd out of the cities such persons as
delinquent debtors, power groups defeated in intracity striving, de-
fectors from the great organizations, and others. In the open country,
they joined the inhabitants of abandoned villages and settlements
who had been driven into a seminomadic way of life by the deteri-
oration of the    soil,   the breakdown of facilities for irrigation, or
because they had rebelled against taxes and rents. The number of
these was increased by infiltrating groups from the mountains and
the deserts around Mesopotamia. Thus the ranks of this fluctuating
element of the population could swell at times of crisis to a dan-
gerous degree, even engulfing the cities, and— if led by an energetic
and   efficient political or military   leader— it could transfer the rule
over the city, and even that over the entire country, into the hands
of outsiders or  newcomers. Whenever linguistic differences appear
between the city and such power groups in the rebellious hinter-
lands, or more exactly, between the dialect used to write official
documents in the city and that actually spoken by the group in
command, we have the impression of sudden foreign invasions,
bringing kings bearing foreign names to the throne. Such dramatic
changes need not have been the result, necessarily, of foreign
invasion but could have been brought about by a rather slow eco-
nomic and political process of increasing social unrest which would
not be reflected in extant documents. The most effective remedy
against these potentially dangerous elements were projects of internal
and frontier colonization which only a powerful king could set afoot.
The inscriptions of such kings speak triumphantly of the ingathering
... of the scattered, the resettling ... of the shiftless on new land,
where the king forced them to dig or re-dig canals, build or resettle

                  SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                           61

cities,   and till the soil, pay taxes, do corvee work to maintain the
irrigation system,     and— last but not least— perform   military service
[1964:82-83].

    Parallels between the process that Oppenheim describes and
the relationships between city-dwellers in central Mexico and
the so-called Chichimecs along the northern periphery of Meso-
american settlement are immediately apparent. The ecological
frontier of farming in the latter region repeatedly failed to coin-
cide with the cultural frontier, so marginal groups must have
shifted    back and forth from farming to nomadic hunting and
collecting as the political authority and prosperity of the great
urban centers at their rear waxed and waned. The traditional
accounts tend to speak of the Chichimecs as invaders exclu-
sively from beyond the limes of civilization, responsible for the
fall of cities     through their unaided military pressure. Given the
limited numbers and resources of nomads and their necessarily
high degree of dispersal, this explanation seems most unlikely;
Pedro Armillas (1964a) has very recently demolished such an
interpretation in detail. It     is   the characteristic "urban" distor-
tion of a         complex, dynamic relationship and bears a close
analogy     to,                          Arab attributions of
                   for example, the Chinese or
overwhelming strength and destructiveness to their Mongol in-
vaders.     The decisive forces, in fact, were the marginal culti-
vators within the ambit of political           and   religious influences
emanating from the major centers, for to them slight environ-
mental   shifts (for which Armillas argues) and increases in

nomadic pressure could upset a sensitive balance and pre-
cipitate a widespread withdrawal from patterns of peaceful
settlement.
    Under the conditions of territorial expansion and firm po-
litical control that     seemingly obtained at the time of the Toltec
"empire," for example, there is evidence that the zone of settle-
ment not only reached its outermost continuous limits but
jumped beyond them to form a series of isolated enclaves of
local irrigation extending      northward for hundreds of miles in

62                   The Evolution of Urban Society

the narrow ecological niche formed by the junction between the
hot steppe and the mesothermal savannah belt. With the in-
ternal collapse of Toltec political control, with the       weakening
or abandonment of Toltec frontier defenses, and possibly with
environmental deterioration as an additional cause of move-
ment, most of these marginal groups would have had                 little

choice but to drift southward into the heart of the former Toltec
realm, where they would have constituted a formidable threat
to the   remaining urban settlements. However, whether they
were the agents responsible for the         final   destruction of the
major centers, or whether, instead, primarily internecine warfare
among the major centers was involved, remains an open ques-
tion. The Chichimecs of Xolotl (who clearly were not nomadic

food-gatherers but a people long experienced with agriculture),
after all, did not themselves    overwhelm Tula but arrived there
only after the great capital was "fallen and destroyed, its streets
overgrown with grass, and totally abandoned" (Dibble 1951:
18).
     In calling attention to the complexities of the relationships
between the     settled political   systems, their marginally agri-
cultural outliers, and the seminomadic collectors, Angel Palerm
and Eric Wolf rightly stress that the pattern was one involving
active acculturation:


     Obviously, the adoption of Toltec political, military and agri-
cultural patterns by Chichimecs and marginal farmers involved more
than mere imitation. As    we have seen, the Toltecs equipped and
trained such groups with the purpose of using       them as auxiliaries
along the frontier and in their internal struggles, as well as settlers.
Thus some groups learned agricultural skills, achieved a fairly high
level of military organization and efficiency, and came to form tribal
federations. When the Toltec order began to weaken, these groups
stood ready to penetrate Mesoamerica, to enter into symbiotic re-
lationships with   remnant Toltec groups, and in the end to merge
with the mainstream of Civilization. This process is exemplified by
the Chichimecs of Xolotl, founders      of the   dynasty which ruled

                SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                        63

Texcoco when the Spaniards arrived, and thus founders of one of
the most important centers of civilization in Mesoamerica [1957:4].


   Here we catch glimpses of the many-layered character of
even the major urban centers in prehispanic central Mexico. It
closely corresponds to the fluidity of much of the urban popula-
tion in early    Mesopotamia, although differing from the latter
in its apparent emphasis on the retention of self-conscious ethnic

divisions.   How are we to understand the composition of a city
like Tula, said to have included not only a Tolteca-Chichimeca

elite stratum   but also a stratum of Nonoalcas, speaking a differ-
ent tongue or tongues, venerating different gods, and apparently
more skilled in the sedentary arts of construction and crafts-
manship? Or the curious amalgam of supposed geographic de-
rivations and separate customs characterizing the groups of
specialized craftsmen who were said to preserve the Toltec
heritage in the later Aztec capital? Surely even the internal
structuring of such cities, to say nothing of the dynamics of their
development in relation to their rural hinterlands, requires that
we extend beyond the city and its immediately dependent
hinterlands and, instead, adopt a regional frame for ecological
analysis.

    The problem of the relationship between Mesoamerican sub-
sistence patterns    and the growth of social differentiation still
remains to be adumbrated. There are both striking similarities
and important differences between central Mexico and Meso-
potamia with respect to systems of cultivation and tenure. While
the lands of Aztec commoners ( macehuales ) were held by cor-
porate kin groups (calpullis) and were inalienable, with her-
editable usufruct rights depending on continued cultivation,
the conditions of tenure on the lands of the nobility were more
fluid.   Leaving for a later time discussion of the system of social
statuses of which land tenure was only a partial reflection, it is
sufficient to   note that some estates were hereditable and en-
tailed, reverting to the    king in the event of the death of the

64                    The Evolution of Urban Society

noble without issue, while others reportedly eould be sold or
otherwise disposed of. Unfortunately, the sources provide very
few details on who the purchasers of land were or under what
circumstances purchases were made. All that can be said with
certainty is that land was distributed by the king as spoils of
war, both to members of noble lineages and to commoners who
had distinguished themselves in warfare.
     In other words, the available sources from central Mexico
attest only the imposition of large-scale       landownership "from
above," as an act of political largesse       accompanying military
conquest.    The bulk of the population obtained its livelihood
only within the framework of corporate kin groups or else as
dependent retainers bound to a lord's land and to his service.
Under such circumstances the sale of land would appear to be
a correspondingly late development, arising only after unen-
tailed fields had accumulated in the hands of the nobility in an
unprecedented process of territorial expansion. Indeed, Jacques
Soustelle has argued that as late as the time of the arrival of
the Spaniards private property was still "in the act of coming
into existence" (1962:80).      To be sure, we must bear in mind
the bias and disproportionate emphasis in most of the contem-
porary accounts of the powers and activities of royal lineages.
Given this narrowly restricted viewpoint in at least the surviv-
ing documents, the few passing references to privately held land
may assume a greater significance than would otherwise be the
case. But it must still be said that on present evidence the role
of differential access to land in generating class differences re-
mains uncertain.
     Generally, it is impossible to determine where privately held
lands   (i.e.,   lands not associated with the performance of an
office) lay,     how significant a proportion of the arable area in
different regions they constituted,      and whether or not they
tended to be devoted to market-oriented production employing
more intensive regimes of cultivation. Such information would
be particularly important for regions of especially high agricul-

              SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                  65

tural productivity and corresponding economic importance, such
as the chinampa regions around the lakes in           (lie   Valley of Mex-
ico, but apparently it is as unavailable there as       elsewhere. While
the unique but fragmentary "Maguey Map," for example, indi-
cates a rectangular grid of intensively cultivated chinampa-like
houseplots,its position cannot be clearly fixed and it provides

no information on whether the plots represented small-scale
private ownership or merely usufruct rights.    Torquemada and
Clavijero describe indigenous       maps on which different types
of landholdings     were painted    in contrasting colors,        and late
sixteenth century exemplars of this tradition appear in legal
depositions over Indian rights to land. But, while examples
testifying   to   prehispanic conditions apparently survived the
initial   ravages of the Conquest, they were neither copied nor
preserved for present study.
    Although the evidence      is   admittedly inconclusive,          there
are suggestions of a significant,     if   partial,    contrast    between
Mesopotamia and centfal Mexico. In the former, we have seen
that leveling devices involving the redistribution of corporately
held lands apparently were absent, while, on the other hand,
there was vigorous buying and selling not merely                among roy-
ally   appointed officeholders but among small agricultural pro-
ducers,    applying, according to Igor Diakonoff's estimate, to
"at least 40 to 50 per cent of the lands, with          about two thirds
of the population" of the important city-state of                Lagash   at

the end of Early Dynastic times (1954:21). In central Mexico,
on the other hand, the institutions of sale were poorly devel-
oped and largely limited      to the nobility, while the           bulk of
the population enjoyed only a portion of the usufruct (minus
tribute and labor service) of corporately owned, rigorously
entailed land. In the Mesopotamian instance, a contribution
to the growth of social stratification from local differentia in
subsistence seems assured. In Mesoamerica, on the contrary,
the growth of social stratification seems to have been pre-
eminently a politically induced process associated with royal

66                           The Evolution of Urban Society

largesse in the distribution of lands                   and   tribute.   Of    course,
this is           not to deny the linkages between politics and subsist-
ence, but at any rate the linkages seem in fundamental respects
to       have been different ones. Lloyd Fallers provides a succinct
statement of what seems an applicable ethnographic parallel:

         ... in traditional Africa goods and services, both as symbols
and as facilities,          circulate primarily in terms of political relations,
for it is the polity that dominates stratification. Persons
                                                          and groups
                    symbols and facilities that are the expressions
strive to control the
of authority and the means of strengthening and extending it. A
good case could be made that, at least in eastern, central and south-
ern Africa, the most important             facilities   are people. This does not
mean that people are regarded by their rulers as mere                         "things,"
though of course various forms of slavery have sometimes been in-
volved, but rather simply that in the production of goods and serv-
ices in this part of Africa, the most problematic factor is usually
human labor.
     .   .   .   land is on the whole not scarce and agricultural and military
technology               simple. The means of production are
                      are relatively
                   by groups of village cultivators. For the chief
therefore controlled
who wishes to strengthen and extend his rule, the main problem
consists in securing  an adequate supply of labor. The solution of
this problem lies in attracting and holding the maximum number of
subjects who, as cultivators and warriors, can then produce the maxi-
mum amount of tribute and booty in craft and agricultural prod-
ucts. These in turn can be redistributed as largess to the maximum
number of loyal supporters [1964:126].

         There is one further respect in which control over produc-
tive         subsistence resources      may have initiated political proc-
esses connected with the               growth of the state.       I   refer to Karl
Wittfogel's thesis on "Oriental Despotism"                    (1957). Wittfogel
asserts that irrigation-based societies like those commonly asso-
ciated with the great oriental civilizations constitute a separate
class of socialphenomena in which a number of interacting
                     combined to shape a course of develop-
institutional features
ment different from what took place among stratified agricul-
tural societies in western Europe.                 Their special features, he

              SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                            67

maintains, were the imposition of inordinately strong political
controls necessary for hydraulic                 management, a related tend-
ency for their         elites        to   become monopolistic bureaucracies,
close identification of the                dominant religion with the officials
of the government,          and the fractionation and atrophy of pri-
vate property and other non-state-controlled centers of eco-
nomic     initiative    and power. Such              societies,    after   an   initial

creative period during which they were formed, he regards as
stagnating or retrogressing until the impact of                      modern tech-
nical  and social changes associated with the Industrial Revo-
lution. One of the areas with which we deal, Mesopotamia,

appears in his typology as a "compact" hydraulic society; the
central   Mexican highlands fall within his "loose" subtype, in
which centers of hydraulic agriculture were dispersed rather
than concentrated.
   I    am not concerned here with a general discussion of this
grandiose theory, although it may be noted in passing that a
detailed scrutiny of the historical development of a                          number
of regions crucial to           it    tends not to confirm either the specific
role of irrigation      management in the growth of governmental
controls or the existence of structural barriers to further de-
velopment that Wittfogel adduces. A theory that finds it useful
to characterize the temple centers of the Classic lowland Maya
as a "marginal hydraulic society" obviously                   is    overdrawn and
at least requires radical revisionand reduction in scope. But
what is important for the present discussion are two empirical
questions    about the growth of early states in Mesopotamia
and central Mexico, which WittfogeFs thesis                        at least   has the
virtue of bringing forcefully to our attention.                 The first con-
cerns the nature of irrigation systems:                  Were they sufficiently
large in scale or complex in managerial requirements during
the periods with which                    we are dealing to have served as a
stimulus to the growth of specialized political bureaucratic
elites?   The second concerns the nature of irrigation manage-
ment, again during our specific periods. Who assumed respon-

68                         The Evolution of Urban Society

sibility    for    canal      construction         and maintenance, and how
closely    was control over the distribution of water articulated
with other patterns of superordinate authority?
      In Mesopotamia there are sporadic references to the con-
struction      of occasional large canals                  and     irrigation    works             in
late   Early Dynastic royal inscriptions, but the settled zone
in the     main tended to follow bifurcating and rejoining stream
channels running along natural levees. In other words,                                           irri-

gation, on the whole,               was conducted on a               small-scale basis,
which involved little alteration of the natural hydraulic regime
and the construction               of only relatively small-scale field                          and
feeder canals that were wholly artificial. To judge from slightly
later times, the allocation of irrigation                  water was in the hands
of    temple      officials      rather    than royally appointed overseers,
and as early as Early Dynastic times the necessary labor forces
for the    maintenance work were apparently organized and                                         di-

rected by the individual temples. "In short, there                              is       nothing
to    suggest that the rise               of    dynastic    authority      in        southern
Mesopotamia was linked                    to    the administrative requirements
of a major canal system"                   (Adams 1960b:281).
     Our knowledge            of the      detailed physical layout of settle-
ments in relation             to   their       irrigated   agricultural     hinterlands
unfortunately            stems     almost       entirely   from the        central               and
northern parts of the Mesopotamian plain. Here the blanket
of alluvium         is    very     much        thicker than around the ancient
Sumerian       city-states in the              extreme south, and        much denser
and more continuous later occupation has also helped to ob-
scure the early patterns. But, pending more intensive recon-
naissance in the south, the positioning of settlements around
ancient Eshnunna, in a district east of modern Baghdad, pro-
vides the fullest available information:

   The main towns ... do not form the hubs of radiating canal
networks along which the subsidiary villages are strung. The                         .   .   .




subsistence requirements for the existing,                 still   comparatively small,
population could have been met with flood irrigation based on tern-

                  SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                   69

porary dams and small ditches to direct the water, supplemented
with, or perhaps increasingly replacedin time by, small canal sys-
tems that grew slowly by accretion but that never were extended
more than a few kilometers inland from the streams. In the context
of     Mesopotamian conditions, it has recently been shown             that this
kind of irrigation     well within the capabilities of local groups
                          is

without state intervention. Elaborate control works to regulate the
water supply certainly were not necessary for so rudimentary an
irrigation system.Hence it is difficult to see the emergence of the
towns as a consequence of any monopolistic control of the water
supply of surrounding villages, and still more difficult to imagine
the growth of their political institutions as a consequence of a need
for a bureaucracy concerned with canal management [Adams
1965:40-41].


       As this description implies, a map of Early Dynastic settle-
ments     in    Mesopotamia       (Fig. 2)    tends to convey a false im-
pression about the density and uniformity of ancient land use.
In spite of the relatively slight differences in the topography
of the alluvial plain between the levees of the braided stream
networks that were characteristic of that period and the                      in-

terior depressions separating them, this             system is characterized
by decisive ecological boundaries. Much of the land, such as
the great Sumerian edin, or pasturing ground, in the empty
region between the major southern cities, was permanently
unusable for irrigation agriculture within the terms of the
political      and economic system prevailing until Classical times.
The area        actually cultivated at any one time              was small in
relation both to the gross area of potentially arable land                and
to the    amount cultivated during much of the first millennium
a.d.    and again today. Hence population levels also were rela-
tively low.       There    is   reason to believe that even the largest
          Uruk with 450 hectares, were not continuously built
cities, like

up within their walls but included open areas and even cul-
tivated     gardens.      A maximum          urban   concentration      of   fifty

thousand persons or so seems consistent with excavated remains
and calculations from modern urban                   densities   in   the    same

Figure 2. Early Dynastic settlements in southern Mesopotamia, and
      reconstructed network of contemporary watercourses
         {After Adams 1958, 1965; Jacohsen I960; etc.)

                   SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                             71

area, and only a handful of Sumerian settlements could have
approached even this figure. It follows that a total population
for the entire alluvial plain during the            first   half of the third
millennium          B.C.   of   between a half-million and a million per-
sons     is    perhaps the most reasonable estimate possible with
currently available evidence.
   As         to   Mesoamerica, estimates of the population density
within the central part of the Aztec realm at the time of the
Spanish Conquest vary widely. Systematic and detailed studies
by Sherburne F. Cook, Woodrow Borah, and their co-workers, 3
largely based         on inferences from tribute rolls in the light of
Post-Conquest sources, have been interpreted as suggesting
levels        significantly     higher even than those obtaining under
modern         conditions of industrialization and rapidly improving
public health. According to their estimates, the gross popu-
lation of central Mexico was on the order of 20 million inhabi-
tants;    about 5 million persons would have lived within the
heartland of Aztec control shown in Figure 3. Rural densities
as high as 800 persons per square kilometer are proposed for
the Valley of Mexico, and a correspondingly high estimate of
360,000 persons            is   given for the population of the Tenochtit-
lan-Tlatelolco urban cluster.
  Some          of the     assumptions underlying these estimates are
clearly        debatable,       and a recent review    of   the   Old World
evidence by R. J. Russell (1958) seems to indicate that they
are excessively high in comparison not only with Mesopotamia
but with preindustrial societies generally. Quite possibly Mex-
ico attained population levels substantially higher than those
of early Mesopotamia, in spite of the close similarities in the
Urban Revolutions that transformed both areas. But it is dif-
ficult to believe that the two areas could differ, as the Cook

and Borah figures imply, by a full order of magnitude. And,
in any case, just as in Mesopotamia, it is impossible to support

    3. Most recently, Borah and Cook 1963. A full bibliography of earlier
works is included therein.

72                  The Evolution of Urban Society

an explanation of Aztec militarism and expansionism in terms
of increasing    demographic pressure          as   a major independent
variable.   As Pedro Armillas observes,

This Lebensraum justification     fails   to explain the facts.   Undoubt-
edly, the high density of occupation on the central plateau provided
stimulus and    manpower for aggression.        Nevertheless, the purpose
of resettling populations is never mentioned as a motive for waging
war in the native chronicles, nor did the conquests result in large-
scale movements of people, although in some instances military
colonists were established in newly conquered marches to defend
the frontier [1964b: 323-24].

     In light of the possibility of greater population densities
in   Mesoamerica than in Mesopotamia, the problem of Meso-
american irrigation    is   of particular interest.      At present, how-
ever, a summary evaluation of the role of prehispanic irrigation
is   more difficult, since important new data on the problem is
continuing to be brought forward. An intensive study of docu-
mentary sources by Angel Palerm has disclosed references to
almost 400 widely scattered instances of irrigation in late pre-
hispanic times, their distribution perhaps implying, as he sug-
gests,   "a considerable antiquity." In most cases the systems
were of no more than local importance, but the largest works,
and the greatest concentration of references to them, "coincide,
in   general terms, with the greatest densities of population,
with the distribution of the most important urban centers and
with the nuclei of political power and military expansion"
(1954:71). Clearly, techniques of irrigation agriculture played
a not insignificant part in      Mesoamerican subsistence patterns
of at least the late prehispanic period.
     Our special concern here, however, is not with the impor-
tance of irrigation as one of the          vital,   interacting factors in-
creasing agricultural productivity and hence surpluses, or even
with its possible contribution to the growth of social stratifica-
tion through its encouragement of differential yields. If perhaps
not quite to the same degree, these effects of irrigation almost

20°30'N




          Figure 3. Late prehispanic settlements in central Mexico,
                  largely from Aztec documentary sources.
                            (After Barlow 1949.)

74                         The Evolution of Urban Society

certainlywere present in central Mexico just as they were in
Mesopotamia. But it is Wittfogel's contention that the primary
significance of irrigation arose not                  from its encouragement of
new economic resources and social complexity but rather from
the impetus given to the formation of coercive political institu-
tions   by the managerial requirements of large-scale canal sys-
tems. And in this respect the available evidence, closely paral-
leling that for early         Mesopotamia, fails to support him.
   The scale and organization of irrigation in the Old Acolhua
domain on the eastern flanks of the Valley of Mexico, for ex-
ample, has been described as follows:

     The Texcocan system certainly represents one of the largest ir-
rigation systems known to date in Middle America. Yet its construc-
tion cannot  compare with the massive systems of dykes and dams
characteristic of the hydraulic societies of theOld World and Peru.
Rather modest in scale, it served to integrate a number of com-
munities or settlement areas into what might be called an "irrigation
cluster." .   Such clusters
              .   .              differ from "local irrigation" in that
                                     .   .   .




the individual community lacks direct access to water, and the
problem of allocating water can no longer be met within one com-
munity alone [Wolf and Palerm 1955:276].

In this case, as also in the case of the system of dikes and
aqueducts marveled at by the Spaniards upon their first arrival
in Tenochtitlan,         we may indeed have irrigation on a sufficient
scale for its         management to have had an effect on the growth
of political institutions. But these systems are known to antedate
the arrival of the Spaniards by less than a century and to have
been undertaken as state enterprises by strong, fully constituted
political authorities in response to a critical period of general

famine. While undoubtedly they                       may have served further to
centralize        and    intensify       political    controls,   accordingly they
were hardly responsible for bringing such controls into being
in the first place.
     A perhaps more significant, but also more ambiguous, case
concerns the valley of Teotihuacan to the north of Texcoco and

             SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                               75

the extraordinary urban center that flourished there a full mil-
lennium and more before the Texcocan irrigation system. This
is   not the point at which to discuss Teotihuacan       itself,   except
to indicate that        Rene   Millon's surveys confront us with the
hitherto   unimagined problem of an enormous ceremonial and
population cluster covering close to thirty square kilometers
early in the first millennium a.d., several times the largest esti-
mates (already mystifyingly large) of less than a decade ago.
What is important in the present context, however, is the sub-
sistence pattern that sustained this great urban center, and here
the arguments for its dependence upon irrigation that have been
put forward by William Sanders, although admittedly all based
upon indirect evidence like the placement of contemporary out-
lying sites with relation to springs, channeled watercourses, and
alluvial fans,seem cumulatively conclusive (n.d., pp. 73-74).
     Having admitted the presence of irrigation at Teotihuacan,
however, we must concede that we have "explained" very little.
The springs provide irrigation water only for an area of some
38 square kilometers, an area not substantially larger than the
urban zone alone and in terms of size surely to be classified as
no more than an irrigation "cluster" or "district" in Wolf's and
Palerm's terms. That such an incredible concentration of urban
growth should coincide with a relatively modest irrigation sys-
tem, of a type that elsewhere can both come into being and be
sustained merely as a result of informal, ad hoc arrangements
between villagers, merely underlines the limited role that irriga-
tion management must have played. Its complex system of hier-
archies, after   all,   surely exercised administrative control over a
very large surrounding— largely unirrigated— region.
     Not unreasonably, Sanders believes that, if irrigation helped
to provide the subsistence base on which Teotihuacan was built,
the introduction of irrigation techniques ought to be traced
