on public lands and in the construction of public works, cor-
porately recruited corvees of tributaries and the internal calpulli
population provided both a more flexible source of labor and
one that was largely self-sustaining from a subsistence point of
view; hence it is not surprising that the wsc of slaves for these
purposes is unreported. Similarly, there is no reference to their
employment in the crafts.
   There were two areas of strategic concentration of slaves
in the        Aztec economy, recalling their similarly discontinuous
distribution in Mesopotamia. In the absence of draft animals in
the prehispanic           New World, it is not surprising that one of
these     concentrations        was        in    the     transport      of   commodities,
although even in             this    case slaves failed to               supplant "free"
carriers in the delivery of the tribute to                           which subject towns
were obligated. Slaves               also are repeatedly reported to                 have
been very numerous              in       the great households of the nobility,
although here too they merely supplemented                                   and did not
replace the obligated services of tributaries.
       There are suggestions that the number of slaves was increas-
                                                  1




ing during the last decades before                         the   1
                                                                     Conquest. Both the
increasing degree of autocracy and                             stratification   within the
core of Aztec society and the increasing How of tribute, includ-
ing slaves, from conquered towns make this a probable trend
even    we are unable to document it in quantitative terms.
         if

But if so, it may be asked whether increasing numbers of

                         KIN AND CLASS                         117

slaves merely reinforced existing social relationships or whether
instead they began to have qualitative effects on the socio-
political structure.   Unlike mayeques on nobles' estates, whose
surplus product    went only for the support of their lords and
might not be attached as tribute, slaves in the hands of the
commoner population would have served to augment state
revenues. Hence the issuance of slaves to commoners would
have tended to counterbalance the loss of potential sources of
tribute through the award of conquered lands and their attached
agricultural populations to the nobility. At the same time, the
forging of further links of this kind between the state and the
calpullis would enhance the trends toward stratification within
the latter and would help keep in check the independent powers
of the nobility.
   To hazard a larger and more speculative conclusion from a
comparison of slavery in early Mesopotamia with that in pre-
hispanic central Mexico, one is first struck by many formal and
functional similarities: the relatively small   number of slaves,
their discontinuous distribution throughout the economy, their
apparent concentration particularly in the service of the political
and economic elites of the society, the absence of abrupt dis-
continuities between slaves and numerous other groups of
impaired social status. Beyond these similarities, however, are
suggestions of an important underlying difference that may be
traced also in the origins of the nobility and of their control
over land.
   We have described the great Mesopotamian estates as semi-
integrated, implying that their owners or administrators       em-
ployed   at least a    degree of comprehensive management and
planning in order for resources to be made available in sufficient
amounts and with sufficient regularity to justify the retention
of substantial numbers of slaves in economic production rather
than merely in service functions. By contrast, the Aztec nobility
seems to have been almost exclusively military in origin and
predatory in effect. Characteristically, they sacrified both war

118                 The Evolution of Urban Society

captives    and slaves on a scale, and with a degree of ritual
elaboration,   which elsewhere was quite unprecedented. How-
ever elaborate their rationale of social superiority    may have
been (and, parenthetically, our ignorance of a corresponding
rationale in Mesopotamia may be only a result of the different
character of our available sources), the Aztec nobles seem to
have received land exclusively as royal gifts in return for polit-
ical   support or military prowess— that is, for reasons unrelated
to their economic functions. Cortes tells us that all the nobility,
as well as the royal court,   were housed for at least part of the
year in the capital (1952:92-93), and, to judge from all avail-
able evidence, that city was larger and more heavily populated
than any of the city-states of early Mesopotamia. In spite of
the ease of communication by boat within the Valley of Mexico,
in turn    we must assume (particularly in the absence of draft
animals) a substantial diversion of labor merely to the task of
transporting provisions to the nobility and the court.      Mean-
while, the techniques of agriculture remained primitive       and
unspecialized, undoubtedly differing from one zone to another
but at any rate not encouraging the division of the labor on a
single crop into specialized operations for separate work teams
like thoseknown from the Shuruppak and Lagash archives.
   Thus the conditions for the nobility to exercise a role in
economic management were largely absent, while their pre-
occupation with expansionistic warfare along distant frontiers
would have precluded their acquisition of the necessary skills.
Hence it is no surprise to find that, as Charles Gibson
(1964:263-64) reports, the holdings of individuals in central
Mexico were often widely separated; the only role open to the
nobility in respect to land, after       was the imposition of
                                       all,

onerous tribute schedules. In Mesopotamia, by contrast, we
have already noted that Sammelurkunden, deeds recording the
formation of territorially consolidated estates, were the domi-
nant form of transaction in land.
   All of which is, of course, merely another way of asserting

                       KIN AND CLASS                                  119

the contrast already alluded     to   between   stratification   as    a
mechanical, politically superimposed process on the African
model and stratification as an organic process intimately inter-
related with agricultural management. Yet this difference is not
large in relation to the   accompanying     similarities.   From the
viewpoint of stratification, it is not too much to describe early
Mesopotamia and central Mexico as slightly variant patterns
of a single, fundamental course of development in which
corporate kin groups, originally preponderating in the control
of land, were gradually supplemented by the growth of private
estates in the hands of urban elites.   And, while such corporate
kin groups still remained active and viable in many respects at
the termination points in our two sequences, it is only fair to
conclude that they had by then become encapsulated in a
stratified pattern of social organization that was rigidly divided

along class lines.

        IV
                  PARISH AND POLITY

THE RESTRUCTURING OF STRATIFIED CLANS ALONG CLASS LINES HAS
a vital but indirect relation to the growth of the state. Older,
vertically oriented, solidary forms of organization were replaced
by more functionally             specified, authoritarian,        and all-encom-
passing horizontal ones that were better adapted to the admin-
istrative        requirements         of   increasingly   large    and    complex
societies.   In some respects the older forms may have provided
a model that the newer ones needed only to readapt                        and sys-
tematize; such was the case in connection with the extension
of the traditional labor  and tribute system from within the
calpullis tomeet the needs of the emergent Aztec state. But
an analysis of the state, and of the class system on which it
was based, nevertheless are more than complementary ap-
proaches to the same unified reality. Their paths of develop-
ment obviously intertwined and reinforced one another, but
in important respects           each followed laws of its own. To intro-
duce a dramatic             simile,   what we have followed thus far in
discussing the growth of social stratification                is   the action of
the chorus— its conflicts and resolutions somewhat diffuse and
gradual,     broad     in    impact, but always impersonal.              Now we
must deal with the central protagonists.
    The first to appear were the priests— or, at any rate, an elite
whose claims to leadership were primarily validated in religious
terms. Shrines and small temples surely long antedate the
beginnings of our chronological chart. In                  fact,   for the   New
World       at    least,    Gordon         Willey   (Braidwood      and    Willey

                                            120

                     PARISH AND POLITY                                     121

1962:350) has argued that they may be as old as the establish-
ment of settled village life. But, as the precincts of specialists
somehow chosen to lead or represent the community in worship,
there is little basis at present for assuming that they antedate
the Middle Formative period in Mesoamerica and the Ubaid
period in Mesopotamia.
   For those remote time periods it must be pointed out again
that the data of archeology remains unsupplemented from docu-
mentary sources. Religious     rituals,   it   may be argued, are by
nature more stylized, repetitive, and capable of association with
complex, durable symbolism than are channels of political
decision-making and authority. Moreover,            it    is   entirely con-
ceivable that there     were other motivations            for   ritual    than
religious ones,   even in   stylized,   monumental         settings   whose
formal features identify them as related to known temples of
later periods. Clearly, therefore, the dominance of the religious
component— or indeed its differentiation at this time from other
symbolic forms of social representation and activity— ought not
to be merely assumed.
   On the other hand, the intensity and omnipresence of pre-
dominantly religious forms of expression, and their preponder-
ance over all other surviving traces of social activity not directly
concerned with subsistence, are uniformly acknowledged by
investigators   who have dealt with the era beginning with the
Ubaid and Middle Formative periods. Hence the probability
of a primarily religious focus to social life at the outset of the
Urban Revolution, while often somewhat naively exaggerated,
appears to be the decidedly most reasonable reconstruction of
the available evidence.
   Why should this have been so? Part of the answer may lie
with the necessity for providing an intelligible moral framework
of organization for society as it increased cumulatively in scale
and complexity. As Clifford Geertz has recently argued,
A society consisting of a multiplicity of overlapping groups, each
directed to a distinct and fairly specific       end— a    pattern    I   have

122                     The Evolution of Urban Society

elsewhere called "pluralistic collectivism"— would seem to need some
ritual expression      of the elemental    components of      its    structure in
order to maintain a level of conceptual precision sufficient to per-
mit its participants to find their way around in it. The temple
system provides both a simplified model of Balinese social structure
and a schoolroom in which the kinds of attitudes and values neces-
sary to sustain it are inculcated and celebrated [1964:301.

    Although it is hardly possible to elucidate all the specific
factors at  work in Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica, our earlier
discussion of underlying subsistence patterns in the  two areas
at least suggests what some of the most important of the factors
are likely to have been. In the           first   place, there is substantial
evidence from both areas of ecological                instability,   which has
repeatedly been reflected in drouths, famines, floods, and sim-
ilar disasters.     At a magicoreligious level, it is thus no surprise
to find that the earliest conceptions of deity to crystallize were
those associated with the assurance of fertility and the annual
regeneration of crops and livestock.
   Thorkild Jacobsen has argued plausibly that in Mesopo-
tamia thename of the goddess Inanna, whose symbol is
common on even the earliest Uruk seals, may be derived from
her association with the ripening dates.                 The etymology        of
Dumuzi, he suggests, is 'lie who quickens the young ones," and
he interprets representations of Protoliterate ritual as already
reflecting community celebration of a sacred marriage ceremony
between them (1963:474-76). Other authorities, more cautious
about projecting the contents of later myths so far into the
past,      deny the    attribution   of   the     ceremony but uniformly
acknowledge the prevailing identification of the earliest known
deities with the life-giving powers in nature. Eridu, the earliest

city to      emerge out     of the primeval waters in the             Sumerian
creation epic,was the seat of Enki, god of the sweet waters.
The name  of the god Ashnan is a word for grain, of Lahar for
sheep, and of Sumugan for flocks of wild asses and gazelles. 1


      1.   Miguel Civil, personal communications.

                       PARISH AND POLITY                            123

The motif of the rosette-shaped flower, apparently symbolizing
vegetable life in general, prevails alike on Protoliterate temple
facades and as food tendered to divine herds on Protoliterate
seals.

      This   phenomenon corresponds closely with the prevailing
religions emphases throughout the long "Classic" period in
central Mexico. Perhaps the central conception at Teotihuacan,
for example,     was the god usually identified by his later Aztec
name, Tlaloc.     He was variously depicted on murals with at-
tributes of a jaguar, a serpent, a feathered serpent, a butterfly,
an owl, and a shell, and Rene Millon (n.d. ) observes that "he
was apparently conceived not solely as a god of rain but as a
god of life, of living things, a life-giving god." Whatever the
precise attributes of this conception, in each instance there is
reflected a pervasive     and protean preoccupation with fertility,
and particularly with the fertility of the major sources of sub-
sistence.    Although harder to define, other deities whose asso-
ciations are at least suggested at Teotihuacan include an earth
god, a maize god, an old fire god, and others.
      It is interesting to note that in both   Mesopotamia and Mex-
ico   gods were conceived, or at any rate depicted, in anthropo-
morphic form, though it is a gross generalization and conceals
a considerable      underlying divergence.       In    Mesopotamia the
earliest representations of    Inanna apparently were in terms of
her symbol only, while the          human practitioners of her cult
were     realistically portrayed.   Very   shortly,   however, the gods
were also represented as humans, and only a horned crown can
be said unequivocally to distinguish a deity. Special areas of
concern or competence were assigned to various deities, as we
have seen, which in at least one instance— the association of
Inanna with the planet Venus— can be established directly
rather than from presumably retrospective accounts in later
myths. But, in general, all the available evidence forms a con-
sistent picture of a    pantheon whose members, from the latter
part of the Protoliterate period onward, were             endowed with

124                  The Evolution of Urban Society

divine powers but   who otherwise were characterized by the
ordinary    human appetites, failings, and emotions. In central
Mexico, on the other hand, the incredible wealth of mural art at
Teotihuacan suggests that the gods were more remote and awe-
some in their powers, more closely identified with the demonia-
cal and animal attributes with whose masks and features they
were clothed, and surely less human either in their relations
with one another or with man. The beginnings of propitiatory
human sacrifice, even if on a relatively modest scale as yet,
only serve to underline this difference.
      Yet, in spite of this partial contrast, the appearance of gen-
erally anthropomorphic forms may not           be without significance,
for in both instances    we confront under similar circumstances,
and hence must seek to explain, the emergence of representa-
                               where it had been almost en-
tional art in cultural traditions
tirely lacking   during the immediately previous        eras.   Since in
both cases the representational portrayal of          deities   seems to
occur somewhat later or at any rate with           less clearly   anthro-
pomorphic attributes than the portrayal of human figures, per-
haps this trend is associated not so much with the elaboration
of a great religious tradition as with the ongoing process of
social stratification. In short,   perhaps it was the emergence of
an elite— whether secular or sacred makes little difference— that
promoted those aspects of individuality for which portraiture
became necessary as an enduring symbol and monument.
      Powerless as man might be before the major disasters, the
emphasis on the building of temples and the formation of priest-
hoods undoubtedly also       reflects   a   more "rational," economic
aspect. In the absence of widely extended political controls,
offerings   brought to a sanctuary in aggregate would have con-
stituted a larger reserve than otherwise could          be attained, a
reserve transcending the environmental limitations of its parent
community and reflecting the advantages of complementarity
to   be derived from establishing a network of permanently re-
lated communities in adjacent ecological zones.

                         PARISH AND POLITY                          125

    For reasons already suggested, Mesopotamia met this chal-
lenge in one way and central Mexico in another. In the former,
the temple developed not only as a sanctuary but also as a re-
distributive center  and a focus of managerial activity. In the
latter,           was turned outward, overcoming great dis-
          attention
tances, as well as the absence of long navigable waterways and
draft animals, with an astonishing hyperdevelopment of inter-
regional exchange or "trade." In neither case is it necessary to
argue that the socioeconomic importance of the function fully
"explains" the      enormous growth      of temples   as   architectural
complexes and as consumers of a major share of the available
surplus in the form of subsistence goods and luxury products.
Their socioeconomic contribution at one time might be shown
(but only in the complex, reified calculations of an external ob-
server) to have been very nearly equivalent to their consump-
tion, or again it     may not. All that I would insist on is that their
genesis is likely to have involved elements of a direct economic
contribution by the temples to the well-being of their commu-
nities, as   well as a perhaps more clearly perceived and deeply
felt religious one.

    Let us consider the character of temple     activities and or-

ganization   somewhat more fully for our two respective areas,
both as it existed soon after the outset of the Urban Revolution
and as it began to change toward the end of the era of Theo-
cratic Polities, the Urban Revolution's first phase.
    In Mesopotamian temples we can trace a broad trend to-
ward both an increase in size and an increasing differentiation
in function. There are some embarrassing loose ends suggesting
that this process may not be an entirely regular and irreversible
one (e.g., an enigmatic exposure of what may have been an
imposing public building at Tell Uqair as early as the Ubaid
period), but on the whole the evidence from the half-dozen or
so sites where temples are        known— and above all from Uruk—
forms a consistent picture. Well before the end of the Protoliter-
ate period both the resources        and the administrative skills for

126                 The Evolution of Urban Society

building on a truly monumental scale were clearly in hand;
according to one authority, the labor force required for the sub-
structure of the   Anu Ziggurat alone at Uruk was 7,500 man-
years. Perhaps even more important, there was a transition from
the reduplication of separate, traditionally planned structures
that were seemingly oriented exclusively toward ceremonies to
functionally specialized, interdependent complexes that inclu-
ded attached living quarters for their attendant personnel and
tended to be set apart as a separate precinct by an enclosure
wall.   The hypothesis of a progressive detachment of the per-
sonnel of the temple from direct involvement in the life of the
community herein finds considerable support.
   After making due allowance for the far greater emphasis that
Protoliterate temples have received than all other contemporary
structures of a secular character,     it   remains clear that they
were the dominating architectural features of the urban centers
growing up around them. And, in at least partial return for the
agricultural surpluses they absorbed in the gods' service,     it   is

also clear that they were the crucial centers for innovation in
such specialized administrative skills as writing and the keeping
of accounts. The first application of writing was, in fact, to the
keeping of economic records within the temple. Soon afterward
itwas extended to the preparation of lexical lists, including lists
of gods. Writing remained technically primitive and hence
limited in application until the latter part of the Early Dynastic
period, but as early as late Protoliterate times     knowledge of
its   application for purposes of keeping accounts     would have
strengthened the managerial functions of temples. On the part
of the specialized groups to    whom knowledge of writing was
confined, it would also have encouraged a sense of detachment
from and superiority to the day-to-day concerns of secular life.
      Temples also seem to have been the chief innovative centers
for at least the crafts that depended on expensive raw materials
from distant sources. Among them were metallurgy, stone sculp-
ture,   and perhaps the more specialized subdivisions of carpen-

                               PARISH AND POLITY                                       127

try concerned with boats and with wheeled transport.                         While an
economic contribution from the sponsorship of these innova-
tions cannot         be denied, it also must not be overemphasized. It
appears from documentary sources, for example, that extensive
practical use of carts began more than a millennium after their
introduction for cultic and military purposes.
    On the whole, the picture is one of an extremely precocious
development on a relatively limited scale. Glyptic art, for ex-
ample, seemingly leaped into being almost overnight.                                  From
the first,  maintained uniformly high standards of workman-
                it

ship       were never surpassed and displayed what Henri
         that
Frankfort (1939:23) describes as a "creative power       such            .    .   .




that we meet among its astonishingly varied products anticipa-
tions of every school of glyptic art which subsequently flour-
ished in Mesopotamia." Typically,                  its   splendid early products
seem to have been designed exclusively for administrative and
ritual   purposes within the temple establishment;                  it   was only
toward the end of the Protoliterate period that the functionally
interrelated         complex of writing, seal-making, and the use of
seal impressions   was extended to secular economic uses else-
where. Similarly in the case of metallurgy, the finest early work
reflects full control of all major alloys and techniques save a

knowledge of bronze and devotes itself to the limited but highly
exacting production of ritual furniture. Tablets found in temple
contexts from the latter part of the Protoliterate period already
differentiate,       it   is   interesting to note,      between the position of
the smith and that of the master-craftsman who was his super-
visor.

    A study of the organization of the Protoliterate temple en-
counters serious handicaps. The graves of specialists associated
with the temple are unknown, or at least unrecognized, elimi-
nating a valuable potential source of insight into their status in
relation to the community as a whole. While representations of
offering rituals          and other     cult   activities   are fairly numerous,
the fact that        many of the participants were nude deprives us

128                       The Evolution of Urban Society

of information that otherwise           might have been obtained from
differences in their dress. And even the Protoliterate documents,
so helpful with respect to specialization within the crafts, pro-
vide at best a series of administrative             titles   whose authority
and responsibilities are not specified.
    At least in Uruk and probably elsewhere as well, the figure
at the head of the temple community in Protoliterate times, in
both     its    secular   and its religious aspects, seems to have been
the en, or lord. Such a figure is shown taking a central part in
cult    and military activities, distinctively dressed and of heroic
size,    but his superordinate position in relation to a priestly
hierarchy is not apparent. Until the functions associated with
the     title   changed in Akkadian and later times, Dietz Edzard
(1965:74-75) observes that it denoted not a priestly office but
a broadly politicoreligious one.         Even in relation to the temple
economy, Jacobsen defines its concerns (admittedly not on the
basis of contemporary references ) only as "successful economic
management: charismatic power to make things thrive and to
produce abundance" (Jacobsen and Kramer 1953:181).
      Our difficulties are not lessened with respect to other offi-
cialswho occupied a place within the temple administration.
One of those most commonly met on the early Uruk tablets, for
example, is the sanga, sometimes translated as "priest" but by
other authorities only as "accountant." Before the end of the
Protoliterate period several ranks of sanga can be distinguished
at Jemdet Nasr, but in the context of a puzzling, poorly under-

stood architectural complex, which in some respects                  is   more
suggestive of a "palace" than a temple.             It is    perhaps more in-
structive to note that a ration         list   from the Eanna temple pre-
cinct at Uruk accounts for a day's beer and bread allotment for
almost fifty individuals, presumably in its current employ or at
any rate in its parish following, while other fragments record
the consumption of barley and fish. Here, in a clearly religious
setting of Protoliterate date, the centrally administered redis-

                         PARISH AND POLITY                            129

tributive patterns typified by,      and best understood in, the Bau
archive several centuries later thus were already in existence.
Having developed in such a setting, of course, there was noth-
ing to prevent many of the same patterns from being adopted
in     time for the administrative purposes of the palace or of
private estates.
       So   far,   we have considered early Mesopotamian religious
patterns without reference to their geographical distribution.
The fact that all the major gods in the later pantheon were re-
garded as having their principal sanctuaries in particular cities
clearly points back to a time when they were closely identified
with particular places or         districts   and were correspondingly
limted in their assumed radii of efficacy and importance. Yet
this time must have ended early, since the later myths are con-

sistent in conceptualizing the        members of the pantheon as a
hierarchically organized interacting family.      The head of that
family, Enlil, resided at Nippur, a city important subsequently
as a symbol of political control       and a center of religious learn-
ing but apparently never a capital. Presumably, the explanation
lies   not in the forcible extension of local cults by politicomili-
tary means, of which there is no trace in the available evidence,
but in the establishment of interconnections between the ad-
ministrative staffs of different temples as they sought to sys-
tematize a         common    Great Tradition and to solve        common
administrative problems.
       In this sense, it is interesting to note that even the earliest
known forms of writing were not localized; an example has
been found at Kish, in the northern part of the alluvial plain,
as well as in Uruk, near its southern extremity. Toward the end
of the Protoliterate period, word lists, the characteristic means
of instruction of Mesopotamian scribes, were set down in identi-
cal order at Jemdet         Nasr (also in the north) and at Uruk. At
least at the level of the specialized elite,       it   thus appears that
a conscious unity of outlook, a sense of qualitative distinctive-

130                 The Evolution of Urban Society

ness in relation to other, non-eivilized areas,      had been forged
under theocratie auspices well before the advent of the             first

serious attempts at political unification.
      Less can be said with respect to the overall organization of
temples, and of the theocratic elite that presumably was identi-
fied   with them, in central Mexico during the "Classic" period
than in Protoliterate Mesopotamia. Teotihuacan stands out as
an urban center of a qualitatively different order of size than
any    we know or reasonably can anticipate in Mesopotamia,
and, in spite of a generic similarity to the latter in its theocratic
overtones, this difference in size     is   associated with other im-
portant differences as well. Teotihuacan exhibits, for example,
an imposed unity of plan on an enormous scale (nearly 30 sq.
km. at its maximum) that is entirely foreign to Mesopotamia.
Its   undeviating grid of equidistant streets intersecting at right
angles (at least from the Xolalpan period onward),            its   em-
phasis on regularly planned      compounds facing inward upon
enclosed courts, its mastery of dramatic effect in the arrange-
ment of long lines of temples flanking the main approaches as
one moved toward the central shrines, and, finally, the magni-
tude of effort represented by the Pyramid of the Sun and the
Pyramid of the Moon and by many other structures,             all   are
entirely without counterpart in      Mesopotamia.
      We are on more familiar ground when we turn from com-
parisons based mainly on scale to others based on function. For
many, and perhaps most, of the enclosed compounds it seems
reasonable to infer a primarily residential purpose, and the
preoccupation with religious themes in their mural decoration
may signify only the still undifferentiated character of religious,
social,   and political idioms. Like the Eanna precinct in Uruk,
the largest of the great enclosures at Teotihuacan contained
both ceremonial and residential structures (the so-called "Ciu-
dadela," but possibly there are similar enclosures around each
of the two major pyramids )    and may have served as residences
for the principal ruling families.   But what of the many smaller

                         PARISH AND POLITY                                131

compounds, which are still impressively large and lavishly dec-
orated? Are they residences for an inordinately larger priest-
hood than Mesopotamian cities ever knew? Or perhaps the
palaces of an aristocracy drawn from an immensely wider hinter-
land than at least the Protoliterate and Early Dynastic cities
ever had? Or do we exaggerate the status of their occupants,
many of whom conceivably could have been internally strati-
fied,   densely settled corporate kin groups instead of a noble
stratum with quarters for many servants? The answers to these
and     similar questions     depend on      studies     still   under way at
Teotihuacan.
    The picture also remains obscure with regard to the role
of Teotihuacan temples in the crafts.Rene Millon (n.d.) has
recently outlined an attractive but           still   tentative   argument in
favor of viewing a great compound adjoining the Pyramid of
the Moon as one of several centers of specialized workmanship
in obsidian.    More generally, it has often been noted that the
"Classic" period as a whole    is characterized by marked differ-

ences in style and pattern of circulation between ritual objects
and utensils intended only for mundane use, with the former
receiving a far higher degree of specialized care and circulating
much more widely. But these impressions remain to be system-
atized and fully understood. Perhaps, we can argue, the demand
of Teotihuacan temples for obsidian, jade, quetzal feathers, and
similar luxury products       (   not to speak of lime plaster and cotton,
which were also imperative needs of the lay population) was
directly analogous to the          demand of Protoliterate temples for
copper, precious metals, lapis lazuli, stone, and cedar wood. But
there are also suggestions of differences, which recall the less
economically engaged, more strictly acquistive character of the
later   Aztec   elites   (see above, p. 117), Teotihuacan ritual ob-
jects exhibit a high quality of style and craftsmanship, but they

do not advance in technique or experiment with the possibilities
of their material.       Nor is there any evidence of managerial ac-
tivities   directed toward the sustenance and improvement of

132                     The Evolution of Urban Society

the crafts. Characteristically, systems of numeral notation, and
possibly other kinds of glyphs as well, were             known but were
applied only in an apparently rather minor way for ritual rather
than for administrative purposes.
      As in Protoliterate Mesopotamia, the conclusion seems rela-
tively certain that political and religious systems of authority
were largely undifferentiated at Teotihuacan. Throughout the
occupation of the site the major building activity was on struc-
tures of a preponderantly ceremonial character,            and both the
lavish production of ritual goods and the general preoccupation
with religious themes tend to confirm the impression that po-
litical    leadership   was predominantly theocratic in      orientation.
Nevertheless, the sheer size of Teotihuacan, and of the still un-
known but presumably            large supporting territory under      its

influence or control, strongly suggests that the prestige of the
city as a focus of voluntary pilgrimage and offerings must have

been increasingly supplemented by superordinate controls of
a more strongly politicomilitary nature.
    Armed figures from Teotihuacan, presumably accompany-
ing a trading party rather than bent on conquest, were already
represented on an Early Classic Maya stela from the important
contemporary center of Tikal in the Peten rain forest of Guate-
mala. There      is   also evidence   from the highland Guatemalan
site of Kaminaljuyu of       the importation of such large quantities
of Teotihuacan pottery that the possibility of seizure of politi-
cal control by warriors from central Mexico must be voiced, in
spite of the very great         intervening distances across difficult
terrain.    Somewhat later, weapons began to make their appear-
ance in Teotihuacan murals. Military orders of warriors, includ-
ing those of the Eagle and Jaguar as well as others, now also
find their     way into representations— however long they may
have already been present as a           social force before receiving

artisticand theological recognition. Finally, there is evidence
that the partial abandonment of Teotihuacan before 750 a.d.

                        PARISH AND POLITY                               133

involved elements of destruction and looting, suggesting mili-
tary action, pronounced internal unrest, or both.
    Thus a further axis of comparison between Mesoamerican
sites like Teotihuacan and their homotaxial equivalents in Meso-

potamia involves internal trends leading to systematic change
rather than static characterization. In both cases the key de-
velopment was an apparently gradual rise in the power and
influence of militaristic groups, closely accompanied            by the
transformation of a solidary social organization            composed of
ascriptive segments into a hierarchical, increasingly autocratic
one. The rate of this change, to be sure, was not the same; the
designation of the period within which Teotihuacan              falls    as
"Classic" properly implies a substantial, independent aesthetic
achievement as well as considerable duration, while its Proto-
literate counterpart in    Mesopotamia emphasizes instead a more
transitory stage in a developmental sequence.      But the essentials
of the trend, culminating in the rise to power of politically
fragmented Toltec groups, on the one hand, and in the increas-
ingly sanguinary internecine warfare of Early Dynastic Sumer-
ian city-states, on the other hand, were the same in each case.
    This    assertion   of parallelisms   admittedly   is   not without
difficulties.   Detailed comparisons are obscured by an apparent
break in the continuity of occupation at          many sites in the
Valley of Mexico after the fall of Teotihuacan, with different
patterns of regional authority perhaps centering for a period
on Cholula and Xochicalco before the foundation of Tula.
Moreover, Tula itself reportedly was made up of two or more
ethnically      distinguished population strata, with at least the
politicaland religious reins of authority in the hands not of
previously urban groups but of tribalized peoples moving in-
ward from near the frontiers of cultivation. This kind of ethnic
amalgam occurs later in the relative Mesopotamian sequence
also, but it was not a feature of the first polities in which mili-

taristic elements became dominant.

134                   The Evolution of Urban Society

      In spite of these difficulties, the comparisons between Tula
and    its   Early Dynastic Mesopotamian counterparts are very
close.   We can deal with them, of course, only in the aggregate,
as they represent cumulative changes, while recognizing that
such cumulative trends almost certainly proceeded at different
rates in different centers and everywhere consisted of a complex
interplay of retarding and accelerating forces. In fact, the de-
cisive characteristic of the Toltec period        is   its   contradictory
aspect, entirely consistent with its transitional position between
the relatively stable, theocratically oriented society of the early
Classic period      and the vigorous, dedicated expansionism of
Aztec times.- Perhaps this aspect is clearest, as Armillas (1951:
29) has pointed out, in the spread of the Quetzalcoatl cult to
centers as distant as Chichen Itza in Yucatan and to the high-
land Quiche in Guatemala. The object of the cult was an
archaic, agricultural, at least formerly peaceful, deity.          But its
new social content, unlike its form, was the rationale of a war-
rior aristocracy    who, if they failed to construct a durable, po-
litically    integrated realm, nevertheless were successful as inde-
pendently organized military parties in imposing themselves
over widely scattered Mesoamerican peoples.
    The actual extent of the Toltec domain, not to speak of the
effectiveness     and continuity of whatever political control ac-
tually was exercised by the capital, is left unclear by the vague,
semilegendary references to which the historian of the Toltec
period is limited. The beginning of the Historia Tolteca-Chichi-
meca speaks of twenty towns or ethnic groups constituting the
hands and feet of "Great Tollan," and the known position of
some of these towns or groups in later times suggests that the
realm may have extended to the Gulf Coast in the modern
states of     Veracruz and Tabasco.    On the other hand, there is
always a possibility of a foreshortened time perspective in such
references, so that the identification of some localities as Toltec
may have stemmed from their temporary occupation prior to
the foundation of Tula or from later migrations of epigonal

                         PARISH AND POLITY                                   135

groups after its fall. According to the highly questionable state-
ment of Ixtlilxochitl, the Toltec realm extended "from one sea
to the other" toward the end of that dynasty's hegemony, with
its final dissolution having been caused in part by an uprising

of three principalities along the Gulf Coast.
    As   in    Teotihuacan, temples seem to have dominated the
center of Tula, and the religious motivations of its ruling groups
may well have continued as strong as they were earlier. But
the religious emphasis shifted, as Walter Krickeberg observes,
no longer deriving "its essential traits from the divine priest-
king, nor from the gods of water          and vegetation   .   .   .   but from
celestial warrior-gods"      (1964:229-30). Moreover, the symbols
of the Eagle      and Jaguar warrior societies, associated with the
sustaining of these gods through the securing of prisoners for
sacrifice,    now became a dominant motif in temple reliefs. There
are also representations of the warriors themselves,                   armed no
longer only with spear-throwers but with bows and arrows, the
latter   probably newly acquired from nomadic peoples to the
north.
   The confused and somewhat contradictory accounts of the
dynastic succession at Tula permit a variety of conflicting in-
terpretations,     of   which the   alternatives   propounded by W.
Jimenez-Moreno (1958) and Paul Kirchoff (1955) are perhaps
the most important.        The   latter   seems to be a more closely
argued, and hence generally persuasive, position. Perhaps it is
rendered more plausible still by its attribution of the ascend-
ancy of the followers of the god Tezcatlipoca only to the end
of the occupation of Tula, for the excavator of Tula has noted
the absence of a single representation of that god on structures
excavated there (Acosta 1956:107).
    Following Kirchoff's reconstruction, then, we see the author-
ity at Tula divided between a sacerdotal ruler        who was closely
identified with the god Quetzalcoatl and a temporal ruler, with
hereditary succession applying only to the latter                  office.   The
precise details of the ensuing conflict between these figures are

136                  The Evolution of Urban Society

not relevant for us here, save that they seem to reflect a schism
within the society between followers of the traditional deity
and those of Tezcatlipoca and that the latter, who succeeded
eventually in expelling Quetzalcoatl, were committed to a god
directly   bound up with the practice of war and sacrifice. But
the general situation depicted by these admittedly semilegen-
dary sources— most of which is consistent also with the Jimenez
version— clearly involves the      shift   away from sacerdotal or di-
vided leadership toward the ascendancy of militaristically           in-

clined leaders responsive to deities         more appropriate to their
outlook. It   may be noted, moreover, that at least part of the
confusion of the sources seems to arise from a continuing
tendency for both sacerdotal and temporal rulers to be closely
identified with the gods they represented or even to be regarded
as deities themselves.
   Here is a situation that, obscure though it may be in many
of its details, profitably can be compared with Early Dynastic
Mesopotamia. Perhaps        it   might be described loosely as the
onset of tendencies toward secularization in a polity previously
dominated by theocratic influences, but that description over-
looks the probability that the partisans of the         new militaristic
cults   were as deeply impelled by religious convictions as were
the followers of Quetzalcoatl.      The solution of this impasse lies
not in an impossible post hoc measure of religious intensity but
in an assessment of the social constituencies each deified pro-
tagonist represented— in one case, a theocratic elite with a wide,
passive following; in the other, corporate groups of leading
warriors seeking to consolidate their position as an aristocracy
through control of political and religious authority and through
conquest. As S. N. Eisenstadt might describe it, what was truly
distinctive of the latter    was not       a lesser degree of religious
intensity but the pursuit of autonomous political goals and the
quest for power not embedded in the structure of traditional
ascriptive groups.
   The sequence       of   development      in   Mesopotamia of a po-

                            PARISH AND POLITY                                  137

litically    based institution of kingship is one that also remains
obscure in many details but which nonetheless exhibits a basic
and striking similarity to central Mexico. Throughout most of
the Early Dynastic period the extent and character of the con-
quests of individual Sumerian city-states remain as elusive as
they do in the Toltec legends. Tales like "Enmerkar and the
Lord of Aratta," for example, hint at hostile relations between
a lord of Uruk and his counterpart in a distant mountainous
principality, recalling the        shadowy achievements and allegori-
cal milieu of Toltec conquerors. But, while retrospective, semi-
legendary accounts comparable to those dealing with Tula are
available in the form of myths            and epics, with rare exceptions
they are preserved only in late, highly redacted versions. Hence
it   is   desirable, instead, to trace      Mesopotamian developments
mainly from the evidence of contemporary titulary.
      En, or "lord," already dealt with, appears in the earliest
Protoliterate writing and, at least in Uruk, continues until the
Early Dynastic         II   period to denote both political leadership
and a religious        responsibility for control over the generative
forces in nature        and for management of the temple estate as
a god's demesne.            Subsequent    to that time, only the priestly

aspects of the office           were   retained.   The term       for king   was
lugal,     literally   "great   man" and      thus    essentially    secular    in

etymology, although the occupant of the                    office also   assumed
cult responsibilities and administrative control over the temple.
The word lugal occurs once on a text at the end of the Proto-
literate period, but whether in its more generic meaning of

"master" (as Diakonoff suggests) or as a specific indication of
kingship (as Falkenstein suggests)            is   uncertain. At any rate, it
gradually      became the general expression               for   paramount po-
litical    leadership during the Early Dynastic period and                   was
retained as the single royal title thenceforward.                  A third title,
ensi,     alternates with lugal during the Early Dynastic period,
connoting essentially the same responsibilities but perhaps ac-
knowledging some external suzerainty.                 It    is   not necessarily

138                        The Evolution of Urban Society

linked etymologically with the earlier             title, en, and may also

reflect distinctive local traditions in         some city-states. The term
continues as an assertion of at least local independence until
the time of Gudea, just prior to the Third Dynasty of Ur, whose
inscriptions suggest that          it   may have implied even then some
of the qualities as a charismatic provider of               abundance that
previously had been associated with the en. Later it declined
in   importance and came to mean an appointive city-governor.
   There are obvious parallels between this succession of titles
and the apparent division of powers between sacerdotal and
secular rulers at Tula, as well as in the ultimate hegemony of
the latter in both cases.          And there are further parallels with
respect to tendencies toward deification and toward the estab-
lishment of a principle of hereditary succession. During the
Early Dynastic period no kings seem to have been regarded
as gods during their own lifetimes, to be sure, but Lugalbanda
and Gilgamesh were posthumously elevated to this role. More-
over, there     is   no reason to assume that the frequent assertion
by rulers of divine parentage— for example, "the beloved son
of Ninhursag"— was an entirely meaningless epithet. A per-
sonal claim of divinity seems to have been made first by
Naram-Sin during the Dynasty of Agade and continued to be
sporadically reasserted by kings of the Third Dynasty of Ur.
Hereditary succession, a right also assigned to the temporal
ruler    at   Tula,   is    recorded and sanctified by the Sumerian
Kinglist.     Moreover, an epic tale about Etana, the founder of
the First Dynasty of Kish, credits him with having fulfilled
his destiny to find the "plant of birth"            and bring the institu-
tion of kingship to mankind.             Such varying indications as these
surely suggest a           common tendency to       buttress   the position
of an essentially secular authority with divine sanctions              and
powers.
     So far, I have dealt only with the transformation of essen-
tially   theocratic        authority into political rule.   But the frag-
mentary evidence has been convincingly interpreted by Thor-

                         PARISH AND POLITY                                    139

kild Jacobsen (1957)         to suggest that other kinds of political
organs also had been present earlier and underwent similar
processes of displacement as royal powers increased and be-
came institutionalized. Signs for "elder" and "assembly" already
occur on Protoliterate        texts,     and sporadic references suggest
that the poorly understood institution they represent continued
to play       an increasingly circumscribed political role until many
centuries later. Unfortunately, we know of its activities almost
entirely through literary sources— some are myths, sufficiently
remote from their         tellers   to    be projected entirely into the
world of the gods, while others are epic tales that surround a
nucleus of historical fact with semilegendary episodes con-
cerning kings of the Early Dynastic              II   and III periods. Such
sources obviously must be treated warily, but               it   is    significant
that the assembly in the myths occupies a place of predominant
importance. Sometimes said to be composed of                     all    the gods
and sometimes apparently differentiated as to age and author-
ity,    its   actions on occasion included the rendering,              and even
the execution, of judgments.             More characteristically, it met in
response to a situation of crisis and temporarily delegated ex-
traordinary powers as a war leader to one of its number.
       It   seems entirely plausible to infer the existence of assem-
blies functioning along these lines in the Protoliterate period,

at     the same time as temple communities were functioning
under their ens but prior to the establishment of                      fully con-

stituted dynastic rulers. If the assembly             was composed of the
heads of the major corporate descent groups in a particular
center,    would constitute a council of elders almost exactly
              it

like the council of calpullecs, which was the dominant political

authority among the Aztecs at the founding of Tenochtitlan in
the fourteenth century. In areas closely adjacent to the Aztec
capital such councils continued to exercise similar powers until
the time of the Spanish Conquest.
       By contrast, the situation portrayed in the Early Dynastic
epics is one in which the presumed descendants of earlier war

140                  The Evolution of Urban Society

leaders had succeeded in varying degrees in assuming a posi-
tion of permanently elevated status  and authority. The begin-
nings, at least, of the formation of an independent economic
base, in the form of the acquisition of lands by the palace,
have already been referred to. Furthermore, all the available
evidence— the circumvallation of most or all of the major towns,
the increasing emphasis on chariots and weapons in tombs
and graves, the importance of representations of activities as-
sociated with warfare on funerary and other monuments, and,
of course, direct textual references— clearly indicates the in-
creasingly serious, chronic character of the military activities
to   which the appointment of a war leader had been an initial
response.   At   least   in part   because of the greater defensive
strength of large, densely nucleated settlements, and perhaps
partly also because of the greater political control that could
be exercised over them under such circumstances, it also ap-
pears that this was a time of the transformation "des agglo-
merations centrales en veritables            'cites'"    (Falkenstein 1954:
810).
     Such a process      is   exemplified by Enmerkar, described in
the Sumerian Kinglist as "the man who built Uruk," while his
father is listed only as the "king of Eanna" (Jacobsen 1939:86).
Like Kulab, a neighboring town whose name is listed in earlier
texts   from Ur apparently         in    place of Uruk,      Eanna   subse-
quently disappeared as a political             entity,    although literary
echoes of it persisted. Presumably both, perhaps together with
unnamed smaller dependencies, had been induced or compelled
by Enmerkar to come together within a newly constituted
urban framework. Surely           in    such a situation the traditional
powers of the formerly separate assemblies would tend to
weaken collectively, while those of the king would grow more
secure.
     Yet forty years later his successor in the kingship of Uruk
was still constrained to share with an assembly his decision-
making powers concerned with warfare. Gilgamesh, although

                           PARISH AND POLITY                            141

    now holding his office by divine appointment rather than by
    an edict of the assembly, was forced to plead for the approval
    of the Elders for a    war with Kish. Having been turned down
    in this       an early literary account relates that he suc-
               effort,

    ceeded in imposing his will only after convoking an assembly
    of the young men and winning their support. The king's role,
    in other words,  depended upon a combination of charisma and
    maneuver before which the legislative organ gradually re-
    treated into passivity and then disappeared as a significant po-
    litical force.

           Alonso de Zurita provides a report of a strikingly similar
    transitional process   among the Aztecs:
    The killing of a merchant or a royal messenger was regarded as
    a justification for war. The ruler would call together all of the
    elders and the warriors to consider this course of action, informing
    them that it was desired to make war on a particular province
    and what the reason for it was. If it was for one of the indicated
    reasons, all said that this was justified and that the cause was
,   sufficient. If it was for another, lesser reason, they indicated two or

    three times that war should not be declared, and on some occasions
    the rulers ^acceded to their wishes. But if the ruler persisted and
    they ^were called together repeatedly, they said that they would
    follow his wishes, ^hat they had now informed him of their opinions
    and would disclaim further responsibility [1941:107].

         As the pomp and authority of the Aztec Court at the time
    it   was encountered by the Spaniards suggests, the form of
    this    exchange conceals the emerging content of fully consti-
    tuted royal authority. Several steps can be discerned in the
    process of its growth, perhaps beginning with Itzcoatl's        initial

    victory over the Tepanecs of Azcapotzalco         and the following
    distributionof conquered lands to provide an independent
    economic base both for the crown and for the nobility. Im-
    mediately thereafter, the Codex Ramirez reports a revision
    of the customs pertaining to the succession, with the elevation
    of the nearest brothers    and relatives of the reigning king to
    a new princely rank from which alone his successor could be

142                  The Evolution of Urban Society

chosen (by a senate which narrowed to exclude even most of
the nobility).    The decision taken       same time to burn
                                        at the

the picture histories recording the past practices and humble
origins of the Aztec elite, because "it is not suitable that every-
one should know the pictures" (Leon           Portilla     1959:11)    can
best be understood as an aspect of this same process.
     With the spreading conquests        of Aztec     armies and the
consequent further accretion of strength to the king and the
nobility at the expense of the traditional calpullec council, in-
creasing social barriers in movement, dress, and behavior were
erected not only between the nobility and the commoners but
between the king and the nobility. Duran tells of elaborate
regulations to this effect promulgated by Moctezuma I (a.d.
1440-69), and the trend culminated under Moctezuma II ( 1502-
20 ) with the widespread substitution of members of the nobility
of lineage for officials whose rank was based on service alone.
Many of the latter, including the heads of the Tenochtitlan
calpullis, reportedly were put to death in a purge that formally

completed the transition, as Paul Radin puts it, "from an elected
chief to what seems, to all intents and purposes, a king" (1920:
150).
     Given the    strikingly parallel overall pattern of the emer-
gence of kingship in these two instances,             in   spite   of the
hemisphere and 4,000 years in time that separate them,                it   is

useful to compare the characteristics of the emergent dynastic
institutions in   more detail. Let us consider first the scale and
elaboration of court life.
     Palaces belonging to the Early Dynastic II and III periods
in Mesopotamia have been partially excavated at Eridu and
Kish, each apparently covering substantially more than 100
meters in each direction of massively walled, highly compart-
mented private apartments for the ruling family and possibly
the families of other high administrators or personal servants.
Accompanying these monumental, functionally specialized resi-
dential structures were other buildings, for the most part not

                        PARISH AND POLITY                                 143

yet identified archeologically.    An account from late Early Dy-
nastic Lagash, for example, notes that "the houses of the ensi
(and) the    fields    of ensi, the houses of the        (palace) harem,
the houses of the       (palace) nursery (and)          the fields of the
(palace) nursery crowded each other side by side" (Kramer
1963:318). Thus the "palace'' in the broader sense constituted
an economic and administrative as well as residential establish-
ment of considerable size and complexity.
    In the Early Dynastic I texts from Ur, a substantial number
of specialized palace entertainers        and servants can already be
identified, including gatekeepers, cooks, stewards, cup-bearers,

servants, messengers, male and female slaves, and, since a
harem official is mentioned, presumably concubines as well. At
Shuruppak, never a large or important             political     center,   the
Early Dynastic III archive      lists    additional positions for musi-
cians, chamberlains, and butlers and numbered several hundred

people. On personnel lists kept by the Shuruppak palace, per-
haps as records of corvee service, we also learn that there were
considerable numbers of craftsmen in at least its periodic em-
ploy. Separately      grouped under their respective foremen were
masons,   potters,    reed-weavers,      clothworkers,    leatherworkers,
carpenters, smiths, stonecutters, millers, brewers,            and perhaps
others.The contemporary palace staff at Susa, even without
counting slaves, included 471 men and 482 women. With the
political unification of the   country under the Akkadians, there
was a further qualitative increase in palace staffs. We are told
of Sargon, the founder of the dynasty, that 5,400 men ate bread
before him daily.
   In terms of size and magnificence, the Mexican palaces were
perhaps even grander. That of Nezaualcoyotl               at    Texcoco    is

said to have covered eighty hectares, although             much of this
greatcompound was given over to pleasure gardens, adminis-
                      and even a private zoo. The palace of
trative offices, armories,
Moctezuma II in Tenochtitlan was much smaller, probably as
a result of urban congestion        in    that island    capital,   but   its

144                 The Evolution of Urban Society

usable area was increased by a second story, which housed the
royal apartments,    and 3,000 persons were said to be in con-
tinuous attendance upon the king. Also within this establish-
ment were administrative and judicial offices, granaries, prisons,
                             1




artisans'   workshops, quarters for the harem, and, again, a zoo,
whose denizens are said to have consumed five hundred turkeys
a day. "I will say no more than that there is nothing like it in
Spain," wrote Cortes to his emperor. As Jacques Soustelle
observes, "these are very strong words from a Spanish hidalgo
addressing himself to Charles V" (1962:25).
   What differentiates these two instances is a characteristic
feature of the economy that has already been touched upon.
In Mesopotamia, the ration lists make clear that we are dealing
with a permanent      staff of   palace retainers, presumably sup-
ported by its own corps of agricultural clients         (e.g.,   the shub-
lugals ) , by offerings from temples   (   the mashdaria texts referred
to earlier), estates, and perhaps corporate kin groups and even
individuals   whose lands lay within the general suzerainty of
the palace, and occasionally by booty. By contrast, the Mexican
palaces depended in the main on labor service recruited on a
rotation basis. Nezaualcoyotl, for example, "had divided the
country surrounding his capital into eight           districts,    each of
which was obliged to perform these duties for a given period
each year, under the supervision of a calpixqui" (p. 84).
      On the other hand, the decision by Moctezuma to limit
his   personal service to    members       of the nobility suggests      at

least the   beginnings of an erosion of this old calpulli-based
system. Moreover, suggestions of a large relative increase in
the class of "unfree" mayeques, with individual responsibilities
to their lords for tribute and service (see above, p. 115) point
in the   same direction.    Finally, the    mounting demands of the
royal court for luxuries led to the provisioning of quarters and
subsistence for craftsmen within the palace          itself as    the con-
quests of the     Triple Alliance continued;       in   some      instances
craftsmen were called from all parts of the realm to take up

                      PARISH AND POLITY                               145

what must be assumed        to   have been regular services        there.
Different in detail as these two systems          may have been, there
is   thus reason to believe that they were becoming            more and
more    closely aligned in their major institutional patterns until
the Spanish Conquest terminated the development of one of
them.
     Burial practices constitute another tangible aspect of royal
wealth and authority and provide a further interesting paral-
lelism.   The "royal tombs" of Ur are sufficiently well known not
to need extensive description. Human sacrifice was a conspicuous
feature of most of them, with up to seventy or eighty members
of the royal retinue    accompanying the chief occupant of the
tomb. Men-at-arms, ladies of the harem, musicians, chariot-
drivers and grooms with their war vehicles drawn by oxen,
servants crouched in attitudes of personal attendance— all were
present, together with large stocks of costly, beautifully worked
objects, which   today number among the principal treasures of
three of the world's great museums.
   As a result of the accidents of discovery, or the effectiveness
of post-Conquest looting,  no such tombs have yet been found
enclosing the remains of Aztec kings. But what there were
once, and what may yet be in store for future archeologists, is
suggested by a report of Moctezuma I's funeral:

Upon the death of this king he was accorded the appropriate ob-
sequies for rulers of his station, and   all   the kings and lords of the
region attended them with offerings and presents.           According to
their use  and custom they killed many slaves and retainers in the
belief that they might serve him in the after life, and they buried
him with a great part of his treasures [Duran 1867-80:1,253-54].

Behind such displays as this, and ultimately more meaningful
than the suggestions of royal wealth they supply, surely there
were basic understandings about the nature of kingship itself
that were closely similar, although their details now may be
irretrievably lost.
     The special responsibility of the royal court for military

146                     The Evolution of Urban Society

affairs— or, perhaps better, the artieulate leadership provided
by the king and his immediate entourage for the social forces
committed to military expansion as a policy— is strikingly evident
in both Mesopotamia and central Mexico. In the former, a wide

variety of supporting data might be cited. Archeologically,                 it

includes representations of the heroic figure of the king at the
head of his troops, as well as the emphasis on weaponry ( includ-
ing costly ceremonial weapons) in the "royal tombs." In histor-
ical   inscriptions     we find the king emphasizing his personal
rivalry with rulers of neighboring city-states              and personifying
his whole force in boasting of sanguinary victories that left the

bones of his enemies to the mercies of vultures and hyenas.
His special concern with the organization of the army is perhaps
less   metaphorically shown by the fact that many units of the
Bau militia are directly stated to have been mustered under his
command, while the responsibility for army personnel assign-
ments seems to have rested with his administrative assistant,
the nubanda. Further, of course, the shub-lugals and similar
units who seem to have composed the semiprofessional core of
the army were personally bound to him in a patron-client rela-
tionship. Gilgamesh, perhaps epitomizing the martial attitudes
ideally associated with kingship, seems              at    one point to   call

derisively for those who are timid or who have domestic respon-
sibilities to   return to their homes, while he will venture forth
with no more than fifty single adventurers at his side. Rejecting
conciliation,   he characteristically calls for defiance in the face
of Agga's armies         sailing   down on Uruk in their longboats:

                "Let us not submit to the house of Kish,
                  let   us smite   it   with weapons." 2


     2. Pritchard 1950: 45. For an up-to-date critical overview by a num-
ber of specialists of what has been called the "Babylonian national epic"
see Garelli 1960. This discussion implies a rather discouraging estimate of
the potentialities of the literary genre as a whole for any but the most
cautious and sophisticated attempts at historical reconstruction.

                 :




                            PARISH AND POLITY                                147

    Identical attitudes are repeatedly expressed in the Aztec
chronicles.    The frequent insistence of the king on a declaration
of war,    even over the reluctance of                his   council because of
formally inadequate pretexts, has already been referred to in
the testimony of Zurita. Although sacrificial practices may have
had a very ancient origin, the enormous extension and elabora-
tion of sacrificial cults in the later days of Aztec conquests
seems to have followed closely upon royal command. Such was
the case, for example, with the hecatombs of war prisoners—
reputedly 20,000 or  more— sacrificed by Ahuizotl over a four-
day period in 1487 at the consecration of the new Great Temple
in his capital. A particularly illuminating expression of militaris-
tic attitudes    was provided by Tlacaelel, later the highly influ-
ential   founder of a line of Aztec "prime ministers" but then a
young general prior to his accession to office,                 at the critical

moment of popular indecision within Tenochtitlan leading to
the successful uprising against Azcapotzalco and the opening of
the way to empire. In the face of moderating council not only
from the commoners but from some of the nobility                        as well,
Tlacaelel came forward to exhort the crowd in terms reminiscent
of Gilgamesh


"What is this, Mexicans? What has happened to you? Have you
been deprived of all reason? Wait, stop, and let us come to some
better understanding about this matter. Who would be such a
coward as to have us go and surrender ourselves to the people of
Azcapotzalco?" [Radin 1920:94].


   It must be stressed again, however, that the close relation-
ship of kings with military activities and with relatively auton-
omous, essentially          political,   centers of    power    in   the society
continued to be conceived in religious terms in many vital ways,
rather than falling easily under the rubric of secularization.
With the       initiative    passing to the political sector, religious
institutions    and conceptions provide          a further illustration of

148                   The Evolution of Urban Society

Steward's dictum about earlier integrative forms not merely
fossilizing    or disappearing    but,        instead,   tending to become
specialized,    dependent parts of new kinds of total configura-
tions (see above, p. 110).
    Many, perhaps most, of the ceremonies and beliefs of an
earlier era surely were retained, but they were cast into a
different context and assumed a different significance. Tlaloc,
for example, the seemingly omnipresent god of rain and vegeta-
tion who dominated Teotihuacan, at best shared the leadership
of the Aztec pantheon. Perhaps           it    is   also significant that   now
he was thought to be located on the peaks of distant mountains
and that his role was increasingly confined to that of a patron
deity only for the peasantry. Huitzilopochtli, so recently risen
that    he does not appear among the gods of the calendar,
increasingly had come to dominate the pantheon and to provide
the principal focus for the sacrificial cult.
     In Mesopotamia, Akkadian influences resulted in the addi-
tion of several    new deities and in certain syncretistic trends,
but the principal deities remained the same. Instead,
                              :                                        it   was
the attitudes attributed to them that seem to have shifted,                  al-

though, admittedly, the evidence for this change has to be
derived from later sources, so the time of its onset is uncertain.
Enlil, the "farmer," "the lord of the               plow," was increasingly
identified in epithets instead of as "the lord of all lands" or
"he who breaks the enemy land as a single reed," and most
other   members    of the   pantheon as well increasingly tended
to   be viewed not as agriculturally oriented, functionally speci-
fied, local figures   but in the aspect of celestial warriors. In the
process of being transformed into the Semitic goddess Ishtar,
even Inanna did not escape this change [Falkenstein and von
Soden 1953:32-33].
     In both areas, again, the principal temple of a town be-
came identified as the key redoubt of its political autonomy and
military resistance. In the literal transcriptions of hieroglyphs
prepared for the Spaniards, the representation of a destroyed

                        PARISH AND POLITY                                     149

or burning temple       is   taken to be equivalent to the conquest
of the      community, and      in    numerous        attestations    from the
chronicles the burning of a temple signified the                     end of   all

resistance and the victory of the Aztec god. Similarly, the loot-
ing and burning of Mesopotamian temples                    was   at least     an
important concomitant of military victory.           An inscription of
Urukagina of Lagash, for example,             complains that the men
of nearby      Umma under Lugalzagesi, culminating a long ri-
valry, had destroyed the statues of his principality's temples
and stripped them of silver and lapis lazuli.
   If destroyed temples commonly were the symbol of defeat,

they also were among the principal beneficiaries of victory.
Offerings of sacrificial victims to Aztec deities have already
been mentioned. In a Mesopotamian literary tale of the earlier
rivalry     between Uruk and the Aratta, the submission of the
latter is   symbolized by the bringing of stone and the building
of a shrine in Uruk by the people of Aratta. Records of ex voto
offerings of slaves to temples by a victorious king, as well as the
explicitly stated right of the        god to a share of the booty, are
first   attested only in the Ur III period       on the basis of present
evidence but may well have occurred much earlier.
    Lest it be thought that the emphasis on the acquisition of
precious substances for the enhancement of the cult                    was the
major strategic objective of warfare,            it    may be noted that
Entemena       of   Lagash   also    boasted of having exacted some
10,800 metric tons of grain from         Umma as an indemnification
for unsuccessful rebellion.      While this claim may be somewhat
           same ruler's subsequent admission that the men
inflated, the

of Umma had seized a storehouse containing 270 tons of grain
surely is not. Elsewhere we read of the imposition of a tribute
in grain     on Enakalli of Umma after his defeat by Eannatum
and of the unsuccessful efforts of the former's son and suc-
cessor to escape from this burden and to reclaim territory that
had been lost. In fact, the whole long history of rivalry be-
tween Lagash and Umma, extending over more than 150 years,

    150                          The Evolution of Urban Society

seems to have been based on opposing claims to fields along
the border between the two city-states. In addition, there are
references, unfortunately only in literary tales                  whose mean-
ings remain ambiguous, to the possible imposition of corvee
duties            and even military service on the populations of van-
quished towns. Whatever part the defense or gratification of
the deity may have played as a conscious motivation for war-
fare,        it    is   clear that his    human protagonists had their own
interests in             mind as well.
         Behind the             essentially identical general orientation of re-
ligious change, in the                 two cases, there were also differences
that help to illuminate the degree of overall comparison be-
tween them. Perhaps as a consequence of the distances between
major Mesoamerican centers and the difficulties of communica-
tion with exclusively                 human transport, the Aztec world view
was an apocalyptic one that recognized no universal order or
stability.          In each act of conquest Huitzilopochtli faced another
city's god in single encounter, and if the result was foreor-
dained it was at least unknowable to his human protagonists.
In Mesopotamia, by contrast, we have seen that the divine
hierarchy had already begun to be codified in Protoliterate
times and had been endlessly recopied by temple scribes even
before the major city-states had appeared on the scene as
political rivals. The cosmology, then, was self-enclosing and

stable rather than open-ended and in doubt, and the problem
of shifting political fortunes had to be reconciled with the
collective decision of the society of the accepted gods rather
than projected into an essentially unknowable realm of remote
and terrible forces. Urukagina, lamenting the fall of Lagash,
met the attendant problem of divine injustice in one fashion:

.    .   .   the   men of Umma, after Lagash had been destroyed, com-
mitted sin against Ningirsu.               The hand which was laid upon him
he       shall     cut   off.   Offense there was none in Urukagina, king of
Girsu, but as for Lugalzagesi, governor of Umma,
                                               may his goddess
Nisaba make him carry his sin upon his neck [Gadd 1962:52].

                              PARISH AND POLITY                             151

But for kings           in    the hour of victory,     particularly   as   those
victories   spread to encompass          all the world as it was com-

prehended        in the       Sumero-Akkadian pantheon, the refusal to
criticize the acts of the            gods and the pious separation between
the powers of the divine assembly and their                 own powers be-
came more difficult. So we find Gilgamesh, in an act of hubris
to which there is no parallel in pre-Classical literature, tearing
the haunch from the Bull of Heaven and throwing it in the
face of his city's goddess with the ringing taunt:

            "Could I but get thee, like unto him
             I would do unto thee" [Pritchard 1950:85].


Or again, there is a later tale that describes the anger of Naram-
Sin when, in the full flood of that Akkadian king's conquests,
the gods refused him oracles:

"Has a lion ever performed extispicy, has a wolf ever asked [advice]
from a female dream-interpreter? Like a robber I shall proceed
according to my own will" [Oppenheim 1964:226-27].

Yet the contrast with Mexico should not be overdrawn. These
were the        significant       but furthest limits of   human pride and
aspiration,      and with          their   ebb the unattainable, inviolable
status of the       Mesopotamian family of gods was restored. The
epic,   after    all,   tells     of Gilgamesh's failure in his quest.     And
Naram-Sin, having likened his attitude only to that of an ani-
mal or outlaw, also soon repented.
   In relation to            human society, on the other hand, concep-
tualizations      of dynastic         power underwent a cumulative and
irreversible      shift      as   that  power increased. Perhaps the de-
velopment of the state can best be described as fully consum-
mated when it no longer represented solely the partisan inter-
ests of militaristic social strata but began at least to claim a

position "above" contending parties. Urukagina of Lagash, for
example, phrased his responsibilities to adjudicate the con-
flicting claims of his            constituency for his indulgence and pro-
tection in terms of a covenant with the god of his city:

152                   The Evolution of Urban Society

That he deliver not up the orphan and the widow to the powerful
man, this covenant Urukagina made with Ningirsu [Jacobsen
1963:480].

This formulation obviously reflects the emergence of at least
partially   autonomous, impersonal standards of public              service,

as well as the    first    steps   toward a conception of abstract, im-
partial justice to which the entire body of citizenry was equally
subservient.
      Similarly, Zurita observes of the tecuhtli, appointed by the
king from the ranks of the nobility as the highest dignitaries of
the Aztec state, that "they were responsible for caring for and
defending the people in their charge, of defending and pro-
tecting them.     Thus these lords were appointed to serve the
general welfare as well as that of the individual to whom the
officewas assigned" (1941:86). Zurita also describes the high
standards of rectitude and incorruptibility that were expected
of Aztec judges, citing a celebrated case in which a Texcocan
judge was ordered hanged by the king for having falsified a
case in favor of a noble over a commoner (p. 103).
     As the foregoing account has hinted at several points, the
emergence of the political and economic organs of the state
cannot be understood exclusively as a series of internal proc-
esses within     even the largest urban communities. Both the
perils   and the rewards of militarism lay beyond the immedi-
ately    adjoining, more or less permanently attached and de-
pendent,    territories.    The increasing concentration of political
authority in dynastic institutions at the expense of older com-
munal and religious bodies obviously took place in a setting
in which both the perils and the rewards of militaristic con-
tention were fully and deeply understood. Successful conquest
brought political prestige in its wake, not uniformly enriching
the community but, instead, increasing the stratification within
it   and permitting the consolidation of an independent power
base by forces whose initial role had merely been that of lead-
ing elements in a          common      enterprise.   In these and    many

                     PARISH AND POLITY                                          153

other ways, the consolidation of the institutional structures of
the newly developed urban polities must be seen as an internal
adjustment to a steadily widening and sharpening context of
intercommunity, and even interregional, hostilities.
    Hence, having dealt with internal              political      developments,
we must turn to their complementary external manifestations.
Unprecedented patterns of extended                     were
                                                   territorial    control
to be found in Mesopotamia as a product of the Akkadian
conquests and in the Aztec realm on the eve of its rapid de-
struction by the Spaniards. The term "empire" is not an entirely
suitable one for these patterns in either area;              it   implies a de-
gree and durability of economic consolidation, as well as of
administrative control, for which there              is   no convincing         evi-

dence.    Many   features   we        tend to      associate      with   empires
apparently were missing or at best very poorly developed,
such as royal encouragement of a free peasantry with loyalties
directed toward   its   authority; a mobile, achievement-oriented
bureaucracy; policies directed toward the breaking-up of as-
criptive landholding units;    and the establishment of profes-
sional military units   whose fortunes were directly linked with
those of the state itself. Yet the fact of great territorial exten-
sion,   and of the taking    at       least   of   some preliminary         steps
toward empire formation,         is    undeniable.        A consideration of
the nature and extent of these steps in the two areas will
provide a broader basis for the comparison between them.
   The evidence on the Akkadian conquests, and particularly
on the organization of their realm, is very limited and often
ambiguous. Agade, the capital Sargon established, never has
been located, preventing a clear understanding from                       its   ar-

chives of the respects in which its administrative framework
differed from that of the Early Dynastic city-states. Only a
relatively modest corpus of contemporary royal inscriptions is
known, supplemented by chronicles whose recorded versions
are generally of much later authorship, and by omen texts.
And although the basic authenticity of the omen texts has been

154                    The Evolution of Urban Society

vigorously defended, they are of doubtful meaning and limited
utility    for   historical            Even the archeological
                               reconstruction.
record can provide little assistance, limited as it is to a few
palaces and private houses in towns of lesser importance and
to a much smaller and less informative group of graves than
are known for the Early Dynastic period. Accordingly, while
we are told that "the political organization of the Akkad Dy-
nasty amounted to something of a real revolution in Meso-
potamian history" (Finkelstein 1963:464), the precise extent
and character of this revolution still elude us.
   What does emerge from the available data are a congeries
of indications of changing sociopolitical patterns.          There was,
first,   a clear extension of the bounds of territorial control to
encompass not only the alluvial plain of lower Mesopotamia
but the adjacent regions of Elam, the Zagros piedmont, and
Upper Mesopotamia. During the later Early Dynastic period the
                        had consisted merely of individual
basis of political strength
city-states,     held together in fragile alliances only during brief
periods of charismatic leadership;         now a pattern was imposed
that maintained control of a much larger region in one dynastic
line for four generations. It         was presumably on the basis of
firmly established          (or repeatedly re-established)   domination
of the    Sumerian cities in the heartland of the realm that the
chain of conquests could now be extended outward. As early
as Sargon's time     was claimed to have extended "up to the
                       it

cedar forest and the silver mountains," the Amanus and Taurus
ranges, although this expedition perhaps was more a reconnais-
sance in force than an attempt at permanent incorporation of
the huge intervening territory. More doubtful, although not
entirely to be excluded, are late, somewhat allegorical claims
that there was a still further foray into the central Anatolian
plateau to champion the grievances of merchants against the
ruler of Purushkhanda.
    Also ascribed to Akkadian control, at least in later tradition,
were Dilmun (usually identified with Bahrein Island and per-

                           PARISH AND POLITY                                      155

haps the adjoining Arabian shoreline), Magan,                         in   the region
of the Gulf of      Oman, and Meluhha, variously identified but
surely farther    still.   Separated as they were from the mainland
of   Akkadian control by a hazardous voyage                     down the Persian
Gulf and possibly beyond, it is difficult to believe that at least
Meluhha was subjected to more than minor armed raids. But
a literary reference to ships from those regions which moored
at the     quays of Agade          is   supported not only by the arrival
in   Mesopotamia      at this      time of seals of Indus Valley origin
but also by the ample documentation of this overseas com-
merce—in which Dilmun may well have served as a specialized
port of trade— in business records of the Third Dynasty of Ur
not long afterward.
     Direct references to merchants are rare in the Akkadian
inscriptions; such sources as                we have naturally tend to view
the growth of the realm as an acquisition of                      power and ter-
ritory exclusively    on the initiative of its central authority. The
references which do occur suggest that long-distance trading
and tributary patterns were similarly inspired, were directed
toward the same geographical regions, and may have been
subject to a degree of             common administration. At least for
the more adequately documented late Early Dynastic period,
it   can be demonstrated that much of the intercity trade and
procurement was either subject                    to    royal   demand     or under
direct royal control.       The    official status       of the dam-gar, or mer-
chant-agents in whose hands                  it   was placed,    is   suggested by
their inclusion     on     lists   of those receiving rations       and allot-
ments of land. Moreover,                as   W.    F.   Leemans (1950:41) ob-
serves, they were organized under a single superior gal-dam-gar
official   who occupied a high place in the order of precedence
of other gal-officials and who seemingly enjoyed an especially
close relationship to the ruling family.                  However, the presence
of as many as 32 dam-gar even in a small town like Shuruppak
seems difficult to explain solely in terms of royal and religious
requirements.    And other texts record payments to a merchant

156                        The Evolution of Urban Society

by a number of persons on the eve of his departure, suggesting
that private trading accounts were beginning to be handled
by the dam-gar as an adjunct to their official position. 3 In spite
of an absence of confirmation for it in the available Akkadian
sources, a further development of this trend during the Ak-
kadian period seems highly likely. In short, while traders were
gradually becoming more differentiated and autonomous as a
group, patterns of trade probably were still closely interdigi-
tated with exactions of booty and tribute within the spreading
realm of Akkadian control.
    Sargon's pattern of conquests was essentially repeated by
his two sons, Rimush and Manishtusu, who followed him con-
secutively, and by his grandson, Naram-Sin. Collectively, their
inscriptions confirm the impression of a central emphasis on
the extension of trade and the acquisition of tribute. Repeatedly
we read of conquests whose objectives are suggested by their
geographical descriptions: the cedar forest, the silver moun-
tains,     the tin (or lead) country, the silver mine. Repeatedly
victories        were commemorated by temple           offerings    of   some
of the captured booty in copper, gold, stone,               and timber, with
suggestions of direct state support of merchants and                     com-
merce. A lament on the downfall of Agade, recalling the hal-
cyon days of the city, quite appropriately speaks of the ships
at its quays, of the flow of           widely varied goods and offerings
in   through      its    gate,   and of how this wealth rose like water
in the palace           magazines (Giiterbock 1934:31). Recalling Sar-
gon's victories over a number of Persian Gulf principalities, a
motive      is   supplied by one of his inscriptions, which claims:
"Henceforth the ships of Meluhha,              Magan and Dilmun freely
can come to anchor in the Agade harbor" (Bottero 1965:107).
     More is implied than the sporadic extortion of tribute and
imposed trade from distant regions by punitive raids. Far out
at Tell Brak, in northern Syria, a great palace built by Naram-



      3.   Igor Diakonoff, personal communication.

                             PARISH AND POLITY                                     157

Sin    is   known, one half of which must have served as the seat
of a local governor            and garrison, while the other provided a
secure collecting depot for the transshipment of commercial
or tributary goods. Moreover,Nineveh and Ashur, the major
towns     what later became Assyria, were sufficiently under
             in
the hegemony of the Akkadians for the latter to have founded
temples there; Rimush is even credited with having founded
a "city" in the region north of Nineveh. Accordingly, while
political         authority in the further reaches of the realm                  may
have tended to be              thinly    and perhaps unevenly             distributed,
it   cannot be assumed to have been asserted only at infrequent
intervals as         an aspect of the capture of booty or the forced
collection of tribute.
      A somewhat different picture emerges when we consider
the Akkadian relationship to the traditional                     Sumerian        city-

states in the heartland of their realm.                 The capital of Agade
apparently was founded in the northern part of the plain, a
region traditionally characterized more by villages than                        cities,

and many of its settlers must have been seminomadic elements
whose military strength and cohesiveness was in direct pro-
portion       to     their   tribal,    non-urban     origins.   If   a    conscious
struggle between Sumerians                 and Akkadians along ethnic lines
apparently can be ruled out by many indications of an absence
of   any recognized boundary between these groups in speech,
dress, religion, and political affiliation, nevertheless Akkadian
domination was based on hitherto neglected groups, centered
in    a     hitherto    marginal       district,   and successfully employed
techniques of domination hitherto unknown.
      We learn from their royal inscriptions, for example, of
the systematic destruction of the walls of Sumerian cities that
resisted      Akkadian onslaught, an innovation that surely                        in-

creased the difficulties of reconstituting rebellious coalitions.
This step may presuppose the effective reduction by the Ak-
kadians of local raiding and banditry, against which city walls
also      were a defense, although the sources make reference                       to

[58                         The Evolution      of   Urban Society

pacification only at the level of general rebellion.                       One of the
omens In which Sargon is mentioned speaks of his having set-
tled the sons of his palace for five Leagues                      on every side, sug-
gesting an attempt on a limited scale to create a                              new kind
of landed royal             following       among     certain     favored groups of
peasantry       to    defend         the    approaches      to   the   capital    (Gadd
1963:10).       An unprecedented emphasis on the taking of pris-
oners possibly hints            at   steps to nnily the country through the
destruction of enclaves of local resistance. This                      same objective
may have been               a   consideration        in   the    acquisition     of royal
estates like those      4
                            notarized on the Obelisk of Manishtusu, for
local   Sumerian supporters of the dynasty were among its ben-
eficiaries,     while others must have been substantially dispos-
sessed.   At least some of the major towns, including Susa and
Lagash, were additionally subject to the imposition of Akkad-
ian    garrisons,     and the higher            officials   of the realm         seem   to
have been exclusively Akkadians. Finally, the occurrence of
Urukagina's          name as a resident of Agade on the Obelisk of
Manishtusu perhaps implies the practice of forcing members
of local elites in the other city-states to reside as hostages in
the capital.
      With all these innovations, it remains to be noted that real
continuity of control was never achieved. Sargon seems to have
faced a serious, general revolt of the subject cities during the
latter part of his reign, and each of his successors in turn— his
two     sons,   Rimush and Manishtusu, apparently having been
murdered        in    palace conspiracies— could resume campaigning
along the distant frontiers only after a protracted struggle
with the cities immediately at hand. After the time of Naram-
Sin, or perhaps        even during the final years of his reign, a pre-
cipitate retreat       from claimed            frontiers virtually      encompassing
the   known world began.                   Sharkalisharri    no longer could take
the title of "King of the Four Quarters" but instead assumed
only the epithet of "King of Agade." After his death, ap-
parently also in the palace conspiracy, the further decline of

                       PARISH AND POLITY                                     159

the dynasty is evident in an obscure interregnum during which
there were four contending claimants for the throne. This was,
in short, a state    whose rulers undertook extensive conquests,
created the military means to achieve them, benefited heavily
for a time     from the resultant flow of tribute and commerce,
and made significant administrative advances in the direction
of maintaining their authority over a widely extended territory.
But their     efforts fell decisively short of full imperial control,

as the gradual decline       and demise of Akkadian suzerainty in
the face of relatively limited and uncoordinated incursions of
Gutian mountaineers indicates.
   In one particularly essential respect the extension of Aztec
conquests proceeded along similar lines to those followed by
the Akkadians almost four thousand years earlier.                    The Aztec
realm also exhibited a loosely knit quality seemingly in con-
tradiction with the immense armies it fielded against the Span-
iards   and with the impressive flow          of booty       its    capitals re-
ceived. Yet, as the inability of the Aztecs to marshall support
from among their allies and vassals during the final siege of
Tenochtitlan     shows,   the   strength     in    certain   culturally    pre-
scribed,   largely   militaristic,   terms   concealed but could not
overcome the underlying weakness              of    territorial     bonds and
the fragility of the political structure as soon as            it   passed be-
yond the bounds of the individual town.
    While Tenochtitlan had moved into the ascendant political
role by 1519, the realm had been originally constituted as a
Triple Alliance at the time of the successful uprising against
the Tepanecs of Azcapotzalco ninety years previously                       and,
at least in   formal terms, remained so until the end. Tribute
was supposed to be equally divided between Tenochtitlan and
Texcoco, with half as large a share going to Tlacopan; by the
time of the Conquest much of it was being redistributed to
the other towns only through Tenochtitlan, suggesting that the
practice had been changed. As an island citadel formerly with-
out agricultural lands at all, clearly the strategic objectives of

160                  The Evolution of Urban Society

Tenochtitlan differed from those of the Texcocan heirs of the
old Alcolhuan domain, with greater need to secure a flow of
tribute in subsistence products and with a more urgent demand
on the part of the newly emergent nobility for the conquest
of lands, their assignment as personal property,        and the reduc-
tion of their agricultural population to the status of clientage.
Not surprisingly, Texcoco was less dominated by the growth
of a military aristocracy and continued to concede a role to
commoners and merchants in governing councils. But the in-
creasing de facto control of the alliance by Tenochtitlan suc-
ceeded in submerging these differences without an open break.
Regrettably, the available evidence seems to leave in obscurity
the overall flow of goods and services within the Valley of
Mexico, including the relationship between the ultimate re-
gional distribution of products received in tribute, on the one
hand, and, on the other, the private exchange of craft for
subsistence    products.   Whatever     this   relationship   may have
been, the Alliance continued, perhaps increasingly fragile or
even empty of content in functional terms but formally intact,
until the   unprecedented    crisis   of the Spanish invasion.
   In operation, the conquests of the Alliance beyond the
limits of its original holdings apparently failed to          apply sys-
tematically even the limited techniques of control that            were
developed by the Akkadians. While the supremacy of Huit-
zilopochtli had to    be acknowledged by conquered towns and
while a cessation in the flow of tribute from them brought an
immediate threat of stern military        reprisals   accompanied by
even heavier demands for tribute in the future, local elites and
institutions generally were left entirely intact.     There are refer-
ences in the chronicles to the establishment of garrisons, but
except for those along the relatively fixed, vigorously disputed
frontier   with the Tarascan kingdom to the west, garrisons in
general seem to have been posted as additional security for
the long-distance trade-and-tribute routes rather than as in-
struments of political control over conquered populations. Ex-

                            PARISH AND POLITY                                            161

cept in the longest-subjugated districts forming the strategic
core of the empire, the appointment of loyal Aztec                               officials

as local governors, displacing native rulers into lesser                          admin-
istrative positions or         entirely    removing them, was an excep-
tional proceeding rather than                  the prevailing one. There are
apparently no references to such techniques of continuous co-
ercive interference as the taking of hostages from among mem-
bers of potentially hostile local nobilities.
      Yet.    in   spite   of this    relative     thinness        in   the density       of
political      controls    over at least the outlying conquered                        terri-

tories      and in   spite of the inordinately               heavy Aztec demands
for    goods and services        as tribute,          they were more successful
than the Akkadians in assuring continuity of control.                             It    was
not necessary, for example, for each new king to conquer the
rebellious cities constituting the heartland of his realm                              upon
his accession— perhaps          reflecting, to a degree, the effectiveness

of the       demand for thousands of sacrificial victims as a device
for    domination through            terror,   although Akkadian claims to
have slaughtered or enslaved considerable numbers of rebel-
lious      enemies apparently failed to have the same effect. A more
crucial      difference     probably lay         in    the    essential       absence     of

factions within the          Mexican      elite,      as reflected in the natural

death and orderly succession of Aztec kings in contrast to the
regicides in the .Akkadian line. Unfortunately, the stereotyped
.Akkadian victory inscriptions and the ambiguous omens and
later chronicles fail to        provide an indication of the basis for
these schisms. Finally, the rapidly developing state initiatives
in the construction of irrigation works in the Valley of                         Mexico
during the         final   pre-Conquest decades tended                   to    furnish     a
material basis for continuing political                   supremacy— at          least    of
that key geographic region as a whole,                       if   not of a particular
city or      group within it.
      It   must be remembered, however, that the Aztec regime
was cut short at the height of its powers, while the internal
weaknesses of the Akkadians are magnified for us by the at-

162                        The EvolutUm           Of    Urban Society

trition   they suffered after the reign of Naram-Sin.                                  On closer
study, one finds suggestions that similar stresses                                were devel-
oping within the Fabric of Aztec                          territorial     control         as    well.
Aztec demands,            at    least      in   the onerous and precisely codified
form found         in   (lie    Matricula dc Tributes as                it   was applied at
the time ol the arrival ol the Spaniards, clearly had                                   begun to
provoke serious unrest among subject peoples                                 unrest of which
the Spaniards were quick to lake advantage. In fact, as Bcrnal
Diaz (1960:1,           1.48)       relates, the luxurious attire,              rapacious de-
mands, and autocratic behavior of the Aztec calpixques, or
tribute-collectors,            in    Cempoala were among                  the     first   impres-
sions the Spaniards received of their future antagonists                                        upon
their arrival on         the mainland.             Moreover,       (lie      relatively rapid

population         increase of the              Aztec nobility as a result of the
extensive practice of polygyny seems certain,                                if   it   had con-
tinued for another generation or two, to have produced                                            still

more excessive demands                      for tribute,     a   centrifugal           movement
of the nobility into newly established administrative posts with
entailed    lands       away from     the capital, and the appearance of
interna] cleavages             comparable to those among the Akkadians.
     The limits of Aztec territorial control can be plotted with
substantially greater precision than those in Mesopotamia, in
the main because the limits defined tributary relationships that
the Spaniards themselves                    were keenly interested in retaining.
As Robert      11.      Barlow's (1949)                studies have       shown in             detail,

they disclose a strikingly asymmetrical process of expansion,
with the major thrusts carrying far to the south and east, while
in   other directions the frontiers remained relatively stable. In
some cases the explanation is easy; the Tarascans, for example,
bloodily repulsed attacks in the direction of Michoacan, while
the absence of settlements in the dry /one to the north ren-
dered     futile   any major expansion there. Hut elsewhere hostile
States like Tlaxcala                were allowed         to survive as enclaves close

to the heart of the realm, ostensibly to provide an opportunity

for military training                and    for the acquisition of            war prisoners

                             PARISH AND POLITY                                      163

as    sacrificial    victims,    easily    accessible      to the captal. Even
Tlatelolco, Tenochtitlan's sister-city,                 was not forcibly brought
into the realm until 1473. It              is    also   noteworthy that the con-
quest of the province of Xoconusco in 1486 led, not to any
apparent subsequent emphasis on occupying the intervening
          between this detached and distant area and the
territories

main body of the realm, but only to the securing with garrisons
of the trade route leading to              it.

      The essentially chivalric and ceremonial overtones to war-
                                             seem to have
fare during the earlier stages of Aztec expansion
been substantially replaced with more implacable and de-
structive hostilities after the time of                 Moctezuma I. However,
there was little corresponding development of a strategic con-
cern, at least in a sense comprehensible today,                          in   the con-
solidation and extension of territory. Whether a departure from
Akkadian thought and practice is thus represented is by no
means certain. We simply lack the kinds of sources in Mesopo-
tamia that might be expected to reflect discontinuities in terri-
torial control,       while the Spanish sources tend,               if   anything, to
overemphasize them in Mexico.
      Perhaps even to a greater degree than in Mesopotamia
(or     is    this   again     only   a   reflection      of    differences    in   our
sources?),       Mexican militarism was closely bound up with in-
terlocking long-distance trade and tribute patterns. Anne Chap-
man (1957:122) has argued that in most recorded instances
trade was followed by tribute, that is, after the incorporation
of a province into the realm the activities there of the power-
ful group of pochteca, or traders, came to                     an end. If really the
case,   would
         it                                            were
                       imply that later requisitions of tribute
heavy enough— even on the peripheries of Aztec military con-
trol—to eliminate        all    potential surpluses that otherwise might
have served as trading objectives. It is worth noting, however,
that there are no indications of the beginnings of a reduction
in the numbers or prosperity of the pochteca as their activities
were replaced by tributary relationships. Moreover, specialized

164                 The Evolution of Urban Society

lowland commodities like cacao sometimes were demanded as
tribute from subjugated communities even in the central high-
lands,    suggesting that there were        unrecorded processes of
tangential  and centrifugal circulation of goods alongside the
centralized, centripetal ones with which most of the Spanish
sources deal. Hence it is perhaps more likely that long-distance
trading and tributary patterns      considerably overlapped one
another. But of their close and complementary relationship to
the goals of military expansion there can be no doubt at           all.

   Recalling the less substantial tales of interventions by Ak-
kadian kings on behalf of merchants venturing beyond the
frontiers of territorial control, it is interesting to note repeated
instances in   which the mistreatment        of merchants,   or   even
simply the refusal to trade, served as the pretext for Aztec
attack.   Indeed, "the documents     make it clear that a refusal
to trade or the breaking-off of    commercial relations was con-
sidered to be tantamount to a declaration of war" (Soustelle
1962:204). Moreover, some of the pochteca entered hostile
regions in disguise, serving as spies in anticipation of subse-
quent Aztec invasion, while in other cases members of             this

group undertook the pacification of a region even without mili-
tary assistance.   Not surprisingly, we learn from Sahagun's ac-
count that a monarch      like Ahuitzotl     (1486-1502) addressed
them as "my beloved uncles" and "made them like his sons"
(1950-: Book 9, 5, 19). If in fact they had not yet acquired
many important perquisites of nobility by the time of the
Spanish Conquest, there is little reason to doubt that in some
respects their rapid rise had begun to reduce the distinction
to a purely formal one.
   For the same reason that territorial patterns of control were
of such keen interest to the Spaniards, they also meticulously
preserved Moctezuma's tribute      lists.   From them we learn, in
a far more complete and accurate fashion than is possible for
Mesopotamia in any period, of the organization of tribute as
an economic system, including the demand for the delivery

                            PARISH AND POLITY                                           165

in   the capital of specified              types    and quantities of goods              at
regulated intervals. The quantities are very impressive; the bulk
foodstuffs alone are calculated to have                         amounted to perhaps
52,800 tons, or enough for more than 360,000 people at the
estimated      mean annual consumption. Moreover, the enormous
flow of cacao beans, cloth mantles, and other goods serving as
media of exchange placed additional instruments of economic
superiority not only in the hands of the palace but in those of
the nobility and even of the capital population at large.
     Centrally redistributed through the palace, this wealth not
only strengthened the autocratic features of the political struc-
ture but also heightened class                   stratification         and urban-rural
differences. Quantitative estimates of the patterns of distribu-
tion unfortunately depend on hotly debated assumptions about
the size of the urban population and on the degree to which
Tenochtitlan retained more than its stipulated share of tribute.
However,       it   is   suggestive of the         power of the palace under
these circumstances that, according to perhaps as reasonable
an estimate as any, some 25 per cent of the cacao, 50 per cent
of the salt,    and 15-20 per cent of the maize was directly con-
sumed within that            institution.     Thus        it   is   only reasonable to
conclude, as Friedrich Katz puts                   it.   that "the      whole economy
of the     city rested      on    tribute"'      (1956:96.          106'.    Whether   this

characterization         also    applies    to     Agade       still   remains entirely
uncertain.
     If   we contrast the Akkadian and Aztec imperial systems at
a   more general level, the essential character of both as trade-
and-tribute systems, with only limited tendencies toward cen-
tralized administration, stands out immediately.                            The differences
that have been noted seem to imply a somewhat greater degree
of direct control on the part of the Akkadians, which in reality
may be no more than an artifact of differently oriented and
inadequate sources. Given the considerably more integrated
character of the great palace, temple and private estates con-
trolling    much more            of   the land in          Mesopotamia than the

166                    The Evolution of Urban Society

equivalent holdings of the nobility in Mexico, it would not be
surprising   if     there somewhat greater involvement of
                            were    a
