back to the period of its first explosive transformation into an
urban center, the Proto-Classic at about the beginning of the
Christian Era. Direct corroboration is still lacking, but it may

76                    The Evolution of Urban Society

be significant that objects of the same date recently have been
reported to occur in the silts of the intensively cultivated chin-
ampa district near Xochimilco. It is interesting to note that in
both cases the initial efforts were probably directed in the main
toward the reclamation of swampy land through drainage, a
characteristically simpler undertaking than canal irrigation with
scarce and erratic water supplies and one fully consistent with
small-scale local initiative and an absence of superordinate po-
litical control.   Yet the possibility that canal irrigation may have
been present at an even earlier time is raised by preliminary
reports of reconnaisance findings in the         Tehuacan valley of
southeastern Puebla.      It   would be a foolhardy archeologist who
would insist that no further surprises of this kind are in store
for us.
     As befits the diversity of the Mesoamerican terrain and the
rapid pace of current research there, any        summary statement
on the role of irrigation management in the formation of pre-
hispanic states has apodictic overtones that must be explicitly
denied.     The conclusion does seem warranted, however,        that
irrigation even on the limited scale of early Mesopotamia, bind-
ing together at most a small handful of communities and per-
haps helping to consolidate coersive political controls but not
requiring them, was widely scattered, dwarfed by the scale of
the polities accompanying it, and generally late in making an
appearance.  No more than in Mesopotamia, then, and in all
probability less, can we look to the managerial requirements
of irrigation as the major stimulus to the growth of the institu-
tions     of the state.   In both areas irrigation merely forms a
subsidiary part of a functionally interdependent network of
subsistence techniques, political hierarchies, and economic re-
lationships.    And our task of understanding this network will
not be advanced by isolating irrigation as the primary, inde-
pendent causative agency.
     The physical manifestations of urban settlement in Meso-
potamia and central Mexico are less central to our theme than

             SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                               77

the ecological setting in which they arose and, in any case, were
too complex       and extensive to receive detailed discussion. The
end products in both areas were true cities, hundreds            (in the
case of Teotihuacan, thousands ) of hectares of densely built-up
agglomeration of architectural components, secular and cere-
monial, public and private, planned and unplanned. For central
Mexico, our near-total ignorance of the archeological aspects
of the more important late prehispanic towns is more than offset
both by depictions of palaces and temples in surviving codices
and by the luminous impressions left by such of the Conquista-
dores as Bernal Diaz, the Anonymous Conqueror, and Hernan
Cortes himself.
   Although less adequate for the Akkadian period than for the
Early Dynastic period, on the whole the archeological record
for Mesopotamia is relatively good.        We can plot the limits of a
half-dozen or more major towns with considerable assurance;
we have detailed knowledge of several palaces, of numerous
temples, and of a large, if perhaps not fully representative, array
of private houses. In at least a few cases, notably in the district
around ancient Eshnunna in the northern part of the alluvial
plain, not only     can the full sequence of construction of these
types of structures be traced individually, but also the extent
of excavations     is   sufficient for a sense of their spatial distribu-

tion in relation to one another to be obtained as well.          But we
have no sources comparable to the Spanish accounts on which
we rely so heavily for Mesoamerica, sources which, for all their
impressionism and imprecision, alone can invest dead floor
plans with people, ceremonies, a widely extended web of social
interrelations,    and the ebb and flow of day-to-day life.
   Given these fundamental differences and the bifurcation in
the nature of our sources, a detailed comparison of urban lay-
outs and their architectural components in Mesopotamia and
Mesoamerica would be a largely futile exercise. It would also
be a misleading and unnecessary one. It is the institutions of
                        and interacted with one another that
city life as they emerged

78                The Evolution of Urban Society

constitute the appropriate units of study for comparative pur-
poses. The towns and cities that came into being in both areas
were no more than the gross outer manifestations of the totality
of this process, the containers, in the apt phrase of Lewis Mum-
ford (1960:7), within which it took place.

          Ill

                              KIN AND CLASS

ALMOST BY DEFINITION, THE GROWTH OF SOCIAL COMPLEXITY HAS
been accompanied by social stratification. If the term "class" is
used to describe objectively differentiated degrees of access to
the means of production of the society without any necessary
implications of sharply reduced mobility, class consciousness,
or overt interclass struggle, the early states characteristically
were class societies. Hence perhaps the central task in a com-
parative essay is to consider parallelisms both in emergent class
structures and in the sequence of changes by which they were
brought about.
     This is a task to which Lewis Henry Morgan first gave con-
crete historical embodiment. Perhaps deriving some of his ideas
from Sir Henry Maine, he formulated the development of the
state in terms of the failure of gentile institutions to      meet the
increasingly complex needs of society. These needs he asso-
ciatd,    first,   with the presence of agriculture and, second, with
the rise of cities:

      ... in the Upper Status [of barbarism], cities surrounded with
ring embankments,    and finally with walls of dressed stone, appear
for the    first   time in human experience. Cities of this grade imply
the existence of a stable and developed field agriculture, the pos-
session of domestic animals in flocks     and herds, of merchandise in
masses and of property in houses and lands. The city brought with
it   new demands in the art of government by creating a changed
condition of society [1963:264].

     Today, with knowledge of a long line of antecedents of both

                                     79

80                      The Evolution of Urban Society

Old and New World civilizations of which Morgan knew noth-
ing, this general           view    still   commands respect. Most students
would shift the emphasis from property as such, socially de-
fined and maintained rights to certain resources or commodities,
to the    system of         stratified social relations of   which rights       to
property were only an expression. Probably most would also
tend to question Morgan's implicit assumption that the substi-
tution of territorially defined communities for ethnically defined
ones was both a necessary and a sufficient cause for the growth
of the institution of private property. But there can                    be little
dissent with the general shift he posited               from ascriptively de-
fined groupings of persons to politically organized units based
on residence. And, substituting class stratification for property,
I, for one, still share his conviction that it was the "mainspring"
and "foundation" of political society (p. 224).
    Hence we must undertake a comparison of the nature of so-
cial stratification in early Mesopotamia and central Mexico,

with reference both to the processes by which it emerged and
to the    forms   it   ultimately assumed. Obviously,          it   is   easier to
describe the latter than to trace the former. There are important
differences between Spanish sources that recount Aztec jural
rules and behavior patterns (usually not differentiating these
two aspects of a social system ) on the one hand, and cuneiform
                                             ,



sources that for the most part fail to indicate either the jural or
institutional setting of the            narrowly focused relationships they
record, on the other. But in both cases the description of the
fully   developed systems can be based on a relative abundance
of material.   For earlier periods, by contrast, we can rely only
on records that are substantially less well understood and re-
liable,   and ultimately on the data of archeology alone.
     Accordingly,      it    is   useful to reverse the historical sequence
for the present and begin with a necessarily brief and somewhat
overgeneralized comparison of the relationship between kin-
based patterns of organization and stratified social groupings
in the    two areas at their latest point. This procedure has the

                                     KIN        AM) CLASS                                          ^]

added         virtue of        adumbrating some of the                   basi<    similarities in
structure between late Early Dynastic                            \kkadian Mesopotamia,
on the one hand, and                     late   prehispanic central              Mexico, on the
other.       On this basis we can then turn more easily to the vital
questions of the similarities                   in   processes     of    growth, whir h       jt   is

my main purpose to elicit.
    As we turn first to Mesopotamia, a cautionary word is nec< s
sary.    Sumerologists only recently have begun to turn their at-
tention to social and economic questions after a period of                                 many
years        in       which the existence            of   a   so-called    Tempelwirtschafi
was taken for granted on the basis of the pioneering but some-
what misconstrued and overgeneralized work of Father Anton
Deimel on archives from ancient Shurppak and Lagash (cf,
Schneider 1920; Deimel L931). Even without consideration                                           of

the massive philological problems confronting students of these
documents, there are important unanswered questions about
their representativeness                 and about the proper methodology for
their interpretation.              The entire body of               material needs inter-
disciplinary,            quantitively oriented restudy, as well as system-
atic comparison with the contemporary archeological data,                                     with
indirect suggestions as to socioeconomic organization provided
by historical and literary texts, and with more fragmentary doc-
umentary sources for the same period from other sites.
   Provisionally,              pending the completion               of    restudies    now un-
der way, we may begin by noting that Sumerian referential kin
terminology (terms of address occur rarely, and only irj formal
literary contexts; follows generational lines.                           Terms for "cousin"
and "aunt" seemingly are absent, but                             'father's   brother"    is   rec-

ognized,          ]
                      possibly indicating a preferential                   marriage pattern
that    is    not.      explicitly attested in the             documentary sources be-
cause        of       their   limited,    largely administrative             subject    matter.
In particular, the wide geographical spread and considerable
known time, depth of patrilateral parallel cousin marriage among

   1.   Ako Sj0bor^. personal communication.

82                            The Evolution of Urban Society

the Bedoilill and                 many groups of settled Aral) peasantry may
Suggest     (l»a(   il   is   a   pattern <>l   immense durability, which already
existed in      Sumerian limes. Robert Murphy and Leonard Kas-
dan (1959:27-28) have argued plausibly that       lends a quality      it



of '^resilience and adaptability in the face of adversity" while
still    permitting the periodic formation of great tribal coalitions
that     are vertically             integrated    through genealogical reckoning
to    common ancestors. But, though these important functional
and ecological advantages lend                       plausibility to a suggestion of

continuity, the presence of a well-developed system of Sumerian
affinal    terminology differentiates between the ancient and the
present systems.              Hence many aspects of                (he character of the
former, including the underlying question of whether or not
the agnatic sections constituting the central components of the
structure     were mainly endogamous or exogamous, still remain
obscure.
        Marriage,        in   any case, was prevailingly— and perhaps ex-
clusively,     except             for the    royal court     monogamous. To judge
from records of land sale and from historical inscriptions (both
perhaps unrepresentative in that they locus primarily on mem-
bers of the elite), descent                  was reckoned in the male line. Cases
arc     known, on the other hand,                    in   which genealogies          also in-
clude individual              women among those through whom descent
is   traced. Moreover,           women occasionally appear in land deeds
and on ration lists as heads of households (perhaps widows)
and as both the donors and recipients of ritualized food offer-
ings.     Furthermore, cases are known                   in which women carried

on long-distance trade                  in   their   own names and filled impor-
tant     administrative posts beside their husbands, for example,
Baranamtarra, the wile of the ruler Lugalanda                                in   late   Early
Dynastic Lagash.                   To judge from          ration   lists,   records of in-
heritance, and the architectural plans of contemporary private
houses, the customary urban residential unit                            was the nuclear
family.
      Traces of larger, more inclusive organizations can be dis-

                               KIN       AND CLASS                                  83

cerned that mediated certain relationships between individuals
or families, on the one hand,               and the institutions of the state,
on the other, although they are only occasionally and ambigu-
ously referred to in the specialized archives upon which we
must rely. It is only reasonable to assume that their importance
in the informal, almost              wholly unrecorded day-to-day            life   of
the  community was much greater than such references alone
would suggest. At least some of these groups seemingly were
localized and corporately held title to agricultural lands. Ad-
ministrative references to others suggest that they                       were    pri-
marily of an occupational or professional character, although
perhaps also localized in places of residence and employment.
The latter bear comparison with guilds, in that their recruit-
ment and internal structure must have followed kin lines;
moreover, they acted as corporate bodies in the fulfillment
of    certain   "external''     civic     responsibilities.

      We are indebted for the primary studies on corporate
landholding groups to Igor Diakonoff (1954),                       who has been
the first to explain satisfactorily a number of enigmatic deeds
of sale   and other records connected with the transfer of land
in Early Dynastic times.              Most of these documents, stemming
from Sippar, Adab, Eshnunna, Shuruppak, Lagash, and other
widely scattered            had long been known, but their
                           localities,

significance did not become apparent until they were studied
as a group. Now it appears that among these documents—
Diakonoff recognizes 35 or so that are of Early Dynastic date-
are a number recording purchases in which there are multiple
sellers in a corporate, although by no means equal, relation

to one another. Commonly, one or a few individuals are listed
as    "owners" of a          field   or    at   least   as   recipients   (literally,

"eaters")   of    its   price in barley, silver, or other commodities.
But    also included are references to "sons of the field"                       (this

category sometimes including women!), "brothers of the own-
ers   of the     field,"    and others who seemingly give assent                    to

the sale by their presence and who generally receive in return

SI                                  The Evolution Of Urban Society

a gift of bread, fish, milk, etc.                          Diakonoll notes that the actual
ritual    of transfer                   is   carried out       in       (he       name ol      the corporate
group as        a     whole, the "house of                          .    .    .
                                                                                  ,"   rather than that       of
the     "owners,"           while             in   one particularly                    revealing      ease   the
"owners" are               Further             characterized                 as   "men       elected    by the
house     of.    .    .
                           ."   Incidentally,             the numbers                   of   individuals in-
volved     in        these          transactions can                be relatively large; in one
example         that       dales             From   the    Akkadian period 600                         men    of
Marad were feasted by Manishtusu for two days in connection
with a purchase of land.    1




      Unfortunately, such restricted and laconic notations of sale
(particularly since                 1
                                         they were recorded from the point of view
of the purchaser) can give us very little insight into the internal
structure and authority systems of the corporate                                              1
                                                                                                  groups     who
were the sellers. The Fact that a eonsiderable number of texts
are known which record the sale of small, privately held sub-
sistence plots strongly                         suggests that even outside the ambit
of the great state              1
                                        institutions the organization of the agricul-
tural    population into kin-oriented groupings was incomplete.
Moreover, the documents Diakonoff has collected betray sub-
stantial differences in at least the                       1
                                                                formal relationships between
the "owners"              e>r   principal           representatives                    and   their followers.
All the foregoing hints at an institution that probably varied
locally in      form and importance, nowhere represented the ex-
clusive    mode   community organization, and was more or
                           of
less rapidly being eroded away by changing social conditions

such as the concentration of landholdings. This theme will be
returned to presently.
      Among the archives of the state institutions and private
estates in Lagash and elsewhere there are references of a differ-
ent sort to units, implicitly based, at least in part,                                            on kin affili-
ations, into         which their male constituents were grouped. For
certain purposes, particularly in connection with personnel lists
specifying the distribution of rations, the affiliation of individ-
uals with these larger units                          on the apparent basis of descent

                          KIN AND CLASS                              85

is   carefully specified. The absence of references to landholdings
in these instances      may, of course, be only    a   reflection of the
special purposes of the documents rather than of the character-
istics   of the groups themselves. On the other hand, while many
of the groups are named after animals (snakes, donkeys, etc.)
                d
or gods (lu- ENKI), a number of others are descriptively en-
titled    with the names of professions (silversmiths, carpenters,
leatherworkers, heralds, etc.) (Gelb 1957:251-52). Perhaps these
groups can be collectively entitled im-ru-a, lineages or clans,
whether composed of craftsmen or agriculturists. As early as the
time of the Shuruppak documents (near the beginning of Early
Dynastic III)       we hear of 539 dumu-dumu grouped in seven
im-ru, with the functions of each servant in the palace being
assigned on the basis of his lineage. In the time of Gudea, about
2200 B.C., we find that energetic ruler of Lagash calling up his
population behind the emblems of their im-ru-a to perform spe-
cialized services in connection with the rebuilding of the temple
of Ningirsu.
     Having recognized the existence of lineage or clan modes of
organization, not only in landholding but also in craft and pro-
fessional groupings,     it is   not unreasonable to suppose that kin
affiliation   played an important role even in many cases where
it is   not attested in what are, after all, mainly highly condensed
compilations for administrative purposes. For example, in the
militias of the     Early Dynastic city-states, craftsmen and other
occupational specialists were mustered in platoons under their
regular foremen, with platoons in turn formed into companies
under the leadership of palace officials. Now, while there is no
evidence that the units were composed of individuals related
by descent or that their leadership was internally sanctioned
rather than superimposed as a stratum of minor officials, it must
be remembered that what was important to the muster-roll
clerks was not the degree of internal kin affiliation characteriz-
ing these units but their specialized functions and their cohesive-
ness for military purposes. Hence the absence of such evidence

86                       The Evolution of Urban Society

means virtually nothing. It would have been only natural for
the palace to treat the heads of these groups as administratively
defined "foremen," with 50 per cent higher rations than their
crews,     rather     than   as   ascriptively   defined   "headmen." But,
again,    it   is   simply not shown that they were so regarded        in-

ternally.

      How far are we justified in reconstructing a system of kin
organization from such ambiguous and fragmentary evidence?
The specialized Sumerologist has the responsibility of remain-
ing close to his sources. The task of the comparatively oriented
anthropologist, on the other hand, is to place them in a more
generalized framework— taking for granted that the framework
will involve interpretive errors but also taking for granted that
the cumulative advance of his field depends upon the genera-
tion of testable hypotheses and their progressive refinement. In
these terms, it is not the lacunae in the data but their consist-
ency that is most impressive. Clearly, there were groupings of
nuclear families into ascriptive units organized at least in part
along lines of descent. Such groups in some (and perhaps in
most) cases corporately held title to agricultural lands. They
also played a role in the organization of the crafts, of corvee
labor called up by the state for certain purposes, and probably
of the army.          Such widely manifested functions suggest that
lineage groupings had not become merely vestigial by late Early
Dynastic and Akkadian times but, instead, were still both power-
ful   and important. The absence of more numerous references
to    them is fully and satisfactorily explained by the particular,
limited purposes for    which the existing texts were recorded.
      Turning to central Mexico, we find ramifying organizations
based on both kinship and residence that were essentially sim-
ilar to what has       been traced in Mesopotamia. Given the nature
of our sources in this case, there is no difficulty in establishing
at least the basic structure         and activities of the more inclusive
units,   the so-called       "calpullis." Although the complexities of

their    changing relationship to the primary institutions of the

                           KIN AND CLASS                              87

state     remain   in dispute   and although there arc fewer      possi-
bilities for quantitative studies    than in Mesopotamia, the Span-
ish accounts       have the inestimable virtue of having quite nat-
urally described calpullis as part of the warp and woof of the
entire institutional setting.
   The bulk of the commoner population, at least in towns
whose lands had not been appropriated by conquest, seem to
have resided in nuclear family units. While polygyny was pres-
ent, the available references to     it   are very largely restricted to
the nobility— for whom Friedrich Katz (1956:122) argues that
it   created the special problem of a disproportionate population
increase in their class. The status of women apparently was in
decline at the time of the Conquest but yet remained relatively
high in that rights to inherit land and to exercise certain pro-
fessions     were still retained. In this respect, as in many others,
close parallels with late Early Dynastic         and Akkadian Meso-
potamia are obvious.
    As in Mesopotamia, our primary interest centers on the
more inclusive units into which such households were grouped.
While debate continues over the precise nature of the calpullis,
the trend of all more recent research supports the conclusion
that they were localized endogamous lineages that under most
circumstances maintained their own lands and temples and
that,     particularly in urbanized, politically organized    commu-
nities,    also exercised a variety of other functions.      Even the
Spaniards were not entirely consistent in their translation of the
word. Usually they spoke of calpullis as "barrios" or quarters,
emphasizing the aspect of these groups as zones of contiguous
residence. But on other occasions they spoke of them as "line-
ages" and defined their leaders as "elder kinsmen." In fact,
Zurita, one of the most penetrating of early Spanish observers,
often translates the term by both words together. In any event,
officers were chosen by election from the group, although gen-
erally from the  same family.
     Lands corporately owned by the calpullis were apportioned

88                    The Evolution of Urban Society

both for the house plots of their members and for cultivation
by the individual families. In the event that cultivation was not
continued or families       moved away, the plots reverted to the
officers of the calpulli,   who either reassigned them to new fam-
ilies   without lands or directed their cultivation in common to
maintain tribute quotas or for similar purposes. Except under
these circumstances, however, there        is   good evidence that re-
distributive mechanisms were not systematically applied for the
purpose of equalizing wealth within the group. Gross variation
is   reported— by a factor of ten or more even within single com-
munities—in the size of calpulli lands allocated to individual
families. Moreover, some calpulli members either had somehow

lost their holdings or had always lacked        land entirely, occasion-
ally    being forced into slavery or emigration as a        result.   The
source of these differences is not clear, since lands could not be
sold by calpulli members holding usufruct rights to them.             Still,

as M. Acosta Saignes (1945:16) has noted, there are occasional
reports of the sale of land with the approval of calpulli officers,
as well as of land being privately owned by merchants,            which
must indicate that land could be alienated by corporate action
under some circumstances.
     Alluding to their fluid combination of features of both class
and     clan, Eric   Wolf has persuasively called attention to the
resemblance between calpullis and what have been called

"conical clans," kinship units   which bind their members with com-
mon familial ties but which distribute wealth, social standing, and
power most unequally among the members of the pseudo-family.
Such kin units trace their descent back to an original ancestor, real
or fictitious; but, at the same time, they regularly favor his lineal
descendants over the junior or 'cadet' lines in regulating access to
social,   economic, or political prerogatives [1959:1361.

If the    paradigm applies to calpullis, it may also apply to the
Sumerian im-ru-a, although in the latter case no evidence is
available on whether or not the group    was endogamous. And
what is even more interesting is that the resemblances between

                           KIN AND CLASS                                       8<)


these two concrete    1
                          instances   do   not    stop with their stratified
internal arrangements but go on to include                   many of their re-
lationships with other institutions in their respective societies
as well.
      Consider some of the other features and                  activities of cal-
pullis.   They served with their own emblems and leadership as
the core of the Aztec armies under the control of officers ap-
pointed by the palace. Such was the case also in the early
Sumerian city-states. As a closely related feature, not attested
in the     Sumerian instance but possibly only absent because of
the particular limitations of the cuneiform sources, the cal-
pullis also assumed responsibility for the training of their

young men for war in a special establishment maintained for
that purpose.      Directly comparable to the situation that has
been described in ancient Sumer, calpullis frequently special-
ized in certain crafts and professions, providing a characteristic
"guild"-like aspect to craft production. Ixtlilxochitl speaks, for
example, of the more than thirty crafts practiced by the inhab-
itants of Tenochtitlan,     each with its own quarter— a view whose
exclusiveness, to be sure, is challenged by the testimony of other
authorities. Unfortunately, there is no direct testimony on what
proportion of these specialized members of calpullis also main-
tained subsistence plots and thus were at least part-time farmers
as well. However, one indication that most of them were essen-
tially full-time specialists   comes from descriptions by the Con-
quistadores of the extraordinary daily markets in great centers
like Tlatelolco.   Moreover, at least in the case of craftsmen em-
ployed on behalf of the royal court, they were supplied with
slaves to    meet their subsistence needs or were directly provi-
sioned from the royal stores of tribute.                If   the inference that
regular participation in the market was the general rule not only
for   merchants but also for craftsmen             is   correct, then in this

respect, as with respect to       market         activities    generally, there

was    at least a formal difference         from the practice          in   early

Mesopotamia.

90                   The Evolution of Urban Society

     The calpullis were, we may assume, a traditional means of
organizing social relationships, with particular reference to sub-
sistence resources, residence,     and profession, a means which
long antedated not only the arrival of the Aztecs in central
Mexico but probably their Chichimec and Toltec predecessors
as well. Possibly they are already implied by the numerous en-
closed "palace"    compounds     that are    known    at   Teotihuacan,
each seemingly composed of several priyate apartments opening
on a central court. Moreover, it is interesting to note that there
are suggestions at Teotihuacan of localized concentrations of
obsidian and pottery wastes within that "Classic" period           city,

suggesting that the congruence of craft production with kin
and residential units may have emerged as the prevailing pat-
tern by that time.
     Since our central concern     is   the growth of the state, the
diversification and stratification within calpullis is perhaps of
less interest than the ways in which they were articulated with

the growing needs of the political institutions characterizing
the Aztec realm. Service in the army, already mentioned,              is

among these articulations. Given the particular pattern of ex-
pansion that the Aztecs maintained— an essentially predatory
process involving the forced exaction of tribute from conquered
towns with few compensating benefits from pacification, im-
proved administration, or even capital improvements designed
to   enhance the tributary base— the strength and cohesiveness
                               As the economy of the capital
of the army obviously was vital.
came to be supported increasingly— some even argue primarily
—by receipts of tribute from subjugated enemies, the military
duties of the calpulli, at least in the eyes of the state, undoubt-
edly began to overshadow their purely productive functions.
But, before the expansion of the realm began to provide ex-
ternal sources of tribute, the institutions of the state depended
very largely on "internal" surpluses made available through the
calpulli system itself.
     The intricacies of this internal tributary system, as well as

                              KIN AND CLASS                               91

differencesbetween the interpretations of various authorities,
need not concern us. The basic features of the system, at a level
of generality suitable for comparison with            Mesopotamia, were
identical whether applied to calpulli or to subject towns; hence
Zurita's succinct description of the system as           it   applied to the
latter     can serve for the former also:

       Tribute commonly was paid in maize, peppers, beans and cotton,
and     fields   were designated
                              for this purpose by each town. The
rulers kept a  number of slaves, who guarded and cultivated these
fields with the aid of the townspeople. People whose towns did not

have tributary lands set aside also came and assisted in this task,
but otherwise they cultivated their own lands and did not travel
elsewhere. Firewood, water, and household service also were given
to the lords as tribute.       Craftsmen gave tribute   in that   which was
their specialty. Tribute was never apportioned by heads, but instead
each town and craft was told what it must give and then assigned
this    amount among its members and brought it at the appointed
time.
       Tribute was not paid according to the value of either fields or
estates,    but in crops and other products. All was produced by
communal labor, save the tribute of the craftsmen, fishermen, hunters,
and those who gave fruit and pottery [1941:146, 152].

       In essence, then, this is a system based on labor service, al-
though in urban groups not directly engaged in agriculture the
labor may have found its major expression in the production of
commodities.        Its   characteristic   form was the setting-aside of
fields     within local communities for the cultivation of which
those      communities were collectively responsible and whose
entire harvest      was to be delivered to the state. Obviously, the
need for central accounting was at a minimum under the sys-
tem, and the apparatus of direct state control did not extend
further into the body politic than the traditional leaders or rep-
resentatives of the local communities. And the latter, as we have
seen, continued to be defined on the basis not only of localized
residence and corporate control of land but also of real or fictive
kinship.

92                         The Evolution of Urban Society

      Assuming that these basic, most widespread elements com-
prised the antecedent form of the tribute system, the great ex-
pansion of the Aztec realm               in the fifteenth       century led to   its

                    As a result of the appearance of new ad-
partial modification.
ministrative problems of unprecedented complexity, a special-
ized group of officials           (if   hardly a bureaucracy         in   the fully
developed sense) were appointed and charged with the                           col-
lection of tribute.         At least in the surviving documentary              evi-

dence, only then do we find the beginnings of a trend toward
supplementing the demand for labor service on lands reserved
for that        purpose with a demand for specified quantities of
foodstuffs,       raw     materials,    or   locally   manufactured products.
But, even with this apparent innovation, insofar as the state
was concerned, the lowest level of responsibility recognized
for furnishing tribute was not the individual citizen but the
local community and its representatives as a corporate body.
    It is important to note that labor service, whether in tribute,

in building, or in personal attendance upon members of the
political and religious elites, did not represent an innovation

but merely an extension of the existing practice within                        cal-

pullis.       The testimony of Zurita again will serve as an                  illus-

tration   :




      The     calpullec   were a numerous group, and comprised almost
all   of those    who paid tribute to the supreme ruler. Each calpulli
also cultivated a field for the sustenance of             its   principal or head,
and gave him service in proportion to the number of people in the
ward. This was in recompense for the care he took of them, and
for his expenditure on the annual meeting held in his house in
support of the general welfare. Tribute to the calpulli head was
not paid upon command of the supreme lord, nor as an obligation,
but because it was regarded as their most ancient custom. This was
independent of the tribute paid to the supreme ruler [p. 142].

      Two further, seemingly contradictory, points remain to be
made about the effects of the Mexican tribute system on the
relationships between the state institutions               and the substratum

                            KIN AND CLASS                               93

of calpullis.    The first is that, at least lor the cities forming the
Triple Alliance, whose population were the beneficiaries of re-
distributed tribute collected from the increasingly large            num-
ber of subjugated towns, the system in time must have tended
to corrode the internal    autonomy and cohesiveness of the cal-
pullis     and to generate new patterns of organization and new
loyalties     directly   linking the population with the state.       For
example, the state itself undertook the distribution to the pop-
ulace of the tribute       it   had received in excess of its other re-
quirements, the state provided          gifts ofcommodities and land
to   its   victorious soldiery, the state   assumed the responsibility
for meeting the needs of the poor from             its   own reserves, and
the state underwrote the costs of many festivals. Moreover, the
availability of redistributed tribute surely must have increased
the stratification within calpullis to some extent, and the in-
creasing emphasis on military activities would have tended to
bring forward patterns of organization in which the traditional
leadership of calpullis could play only a very subordinate role.
Thus the sharp division between political patterns of organiza-
tion at the upper levels and solidary kin communities comprising
the great bulk of the population at the lower levels must have
tended to blur and disappear more or less rapidly during the
final   decades of Aztec rule.
     The opposing, or at any rate qualifying, point is that the
extent and rapidity of this process of "politicization" should not
be overdrawn. It would have taken place mainly in the handful
of major urban centers with substantial tribute to redistribute,
and even there the basic loyalities of the population, like by far
the greater part of their day-to-day activities, must have con-
tinued to be framed in terms of traditional alliances of kinship
and residence. Elsewhere, as the extraordinary durability of
"closed corporate" communities throughout Middle America
after the Conquest suggests, the effects of newly imposed pat-
terns of political control must have been relatively slight and
certainly transient. Bandelier's        and Morgan's view that Aztec

94                     The Evolution of Urban Society

organization remained only "social" and not "political," that at
best it was a military democracy founded upon gentile institu-
tions (Morgan 1963:220), on the whole has been set aside by

more recent students as a distortion of the evidence. But, while
those early writers failed to perceive the dynamism and signifi-
cance of some newly emergent Aztec institutions, their char-
acterization   is   perhaps still very close to the realities of every-
day life for all but a very small elite.
   Thus we find that traditional, localized groupings, composed
of related nuclear families,  were the elementary units upon
which the states of Early Dynastic Mesopotamia and late pre-
hispanic central Mexico were erected. These units in both cases
seem to have taken the form of "conical clans," in which the de-
gree of relationship to a real or fictive common ancestor served
as a basis for internal tendencies toward stratification. Probably
they were of high antiquity, considerably antedating the onset
of civilized life by any definition, and there seems no reason to
question Paul KirchofFs assertion that they represented "the
condition sine qua non" for the formation of complex, flexible
hierarchies of economic and social differentiation that character-
ized the growth of the state itself (1959:268). At the same time,
however, they survived the superimposition of            new political
relationships for a considerable time, retaining loyalties          and
forms of internal organization that were rooted in kin relation-
ships, while    adapting to the needs of the state through the
elaboration of a new series of specialized functions. Among the
specialized functions, three in particular         may be mentioned:
(1) serving as units for military training and service; (2) pro-
viding a corporate framework for the development, employ-
ment, and retention of the        skills   and attitudes of specialized
craftsmanship; and (3) serving as units of labor management
for state projects and services.
     Turning from cohesive bonds based on real or            fictive kin

affiliations within social segments,       we must consider the growth
of differentiated, hierarchical principles of organization affect-

                          KIN AND CLASS                                     95

ing the society at large. What          is   our evidence for the develop-
ment of social stratification? What forms did it take in our
respective areas? Can we identify a common structure of strati-
fication   beneath the welter of divergent local features? Of
course, this    problem   is    complicated by the fact that            we are
dealing with relatively "primitive," undifferentiated systems in
which social stratification did not develop as an autonomous,
distinctive feature but     was "embedded" in multifunctional in-
stitutions   embracing political and religious components as well.
But I believe it remains a valid analytical entity, and without
such   entities essays in      comparison like this one could consist
only of contrasting social systems as descriptively integrated
wholes— and hence would be foredoomed.
   To begin with early Mesopotamia, the available evidence
takes a succession of forms which influence the interpretations
that can be made of it. In the late Ubaid period, apparently the
"take-off" point for the        Urban Revolution,       it   consists   almost
exclusively of reports from excavations in cemeteries, for ex-
ample, more than two hundred graves excavated at Eridu, as
well as others at     Ur and         al-Ubaid. Differentiation in grave
wealth cannot necessarily be linked directly to differences in
status, at least in the   absence of converging lines of inference
from other evidence.      It    is   therefore fortunate that the broad
trend toward increasing differentiation disclosed by later graves
from Khafajah, Kish, Jemdet Nasr, Shuruppak, and, above all,
Ur can be at first supplemented and confirmed, and ultimately
overshadowed, by textual and archeological evidence on aspects
of social differentiation other than those associated with mor-
tuary practices.
   In the late Ubaid period significant differentiation in grave
wealth was almost entirely absent. Normal grave furniture con-
sisted of one or more pottery vessels placed near the feet, with,
in some cases, the substitution of stone vessels for those of clay
and the occasional addition of pottery figurines and of decora-
tive bands of beads on the clothing of the deceased. In the

96                   The Evolution of Urban Society

Warka and Protoliterate periods greater variation begins to be
apparent. Stone maceheads, a copper spear-point, and greater
numbers of stone vessels are attested. About one-third of the
25 graves beneath the floors of late Protoliterate private houses
at   Khafajah were accompanied by stone bowls, and two con-
tained somewhat larger (although still modest) accumulations,
including a few well-made vessels of copper, lead, and stone,
as well as the usual pottery.
     A much larger number of graves of roughly Protoliterate
date have been excavated at Ur, although unfortunately the
chronological placement of many of them         is    somewhat doubt-
ful. Of the 340 or so that have been described, less than 10 per

cent contain only pottery, while 61 contain one or two simple
lead cups or other metal objects. Only two graves of this large
series suggest substantial concentrations of wealth,      and in both
cases the accompanying pottery implies a somewhat later date
than the excavator attributes to them. Both contain beads and
ornaments of carnelian and lapis lazuli, a few copper and lead
bowls and other utensils, considerable numbers of stone vessels,
and, of course, pottery.    On the assumption that they may be
assigned only to the very end of the Protoliterate period at the
earliest,   they suggest the beginnings of a trend toward increas-
ing differentiation but certainly do not indicate that processes
                       had as yet proceeded very far.
of social stratification
    With the advent of writing and representational art in the
Protoliterate period, the picture can be somewhat sharpened
and amplified. Signs already appear for "slave girl" among the
earliest Protoliterate tablets,   while that for "male slave" seem-
ingly occurs slightly later.   The term for "slave" is a derivative
from an expression for "foreign country," perhaps suggesting
that the institution originated either in the taking of war cap-
tives or in the impressment of seminomadic groups who drifted

into the settlements after their herds fell    below an acceptable
minimum for subsistence. Bound "war captives" apparently are
shown on a celebrated seal impression from Uruk, although

                            KIN AND CLASS                                97

it   may be significant that male slaves appear not only later but
also in far smaller numbers than do female ones. Possibly the
means for the retention and effective employment of male cap-
tives had not yet been worked out, so that they were generally

killed.    Unfortunately, the functional basis for the institution of
slavery at the time cannot be determined from the poorly under-
stood texts. Nor are we justified in uncritically inferring that the
complex, fully crystallized patterns of the late Early Dynastic
period were already present merely on the basis of the occur-
rence of the terms.
     Other contemporary gradations of status are even less clear.
There are imposing representations of priests and "king"-like
figures,   but in general they create more questions than they
answer:       What portion of the conceptual continuum between
mythopoeic thought and          "reality"   do they portray?    Do they
illustrate "events" or rituals?     And,    if   mainly rituals, as seems
likely,    do the apparent importance and specialized            roles   of
individuals within that context necessarily reflect their general
status as well?    At any event, since we must postpone the dis-
cussion of specific political and religious functions until the
following chapter,     it   can be noted here only that representa-
tional art possibly does reflect      some of the attributes and ac-
tivities of   new elites that would not be known from the available
reports of cemeteries in spite of the fairly large            number of
graves that have been excavated.
   As a perhaps significant bit of negative evidence, it may be
noted that the terms lu, "full, free citizen," and mash-en-kak,
perhaps "commoner of subordinate status," other major com-
ponents of Mesopotamian society in historic times, do not occur
in   any presently known documents before the Early Dynastic
period. In spite of the presence of terms for "slave," in other
words, there is still no unequivocal evidence for the emergence
of a fully developed system of class distinctions at least until
the onset of the Early Dynastic period.
     By late Early Dynastic times there is much fuller and less

98                   The Evolution of Urban Society

ambiguous evidence to suggest the existence of just such a sys-
tem. It can best be documented, of course, from contemporary
written records, but to rely on them alone would overemphasize
the contrasts with earlier periods for which they were not avail-
able, thus perhaps also overstressing the disjunctive aspects of
change during the Early Dynastic period. So           let   us consider
first the   archeological evidence.
     Architectural exposures sufficiently large to provide a mean-
ingful picture of differentiation in private domestic architecture
occur only in the Diyala area east of modern Baghdad. To judge
from ancient Eshnunna, the larger houses lay along the main
roads through the settlement and often occupied 200 square
meters or more of floor area. The greater number of houses, on
the other hand, were considerably smaller and seem to have
been compressed into the interiors of the "blocks" formed by
the main streets and the establishments adjoining them, having
access to the arterial roads only by means of twisting, narrow
alleys. As a result, many of the smaller houses lack the charac-
teristic enclosed court of Mesopotamia houses in general and

do not exceed 50 square meters of total area. There is inde-
pendent evidence in the associated small finds, in one case
consisting of a valuable hoard, that the large houses were oc-
cupied by persons of greater wealth as well as superior status.
Significantly,   the largest dwelling was apparently that of a
merchant, for opening on the street from the residence behind
was a display room with tiers of bins and receptacles.
   The impression of differentiation is confirmed and amplified
by a study of tomb furniture. One of the clearest indices to
wealth is the presence of copper, as well as more precious
metals. In part, the increasing quantities of copper found in
Early Dynastic graves may reflect only an enlargement in sup-
plies reaching the    lowland cities, but the previously unparal-
leled     concentrations of metal that    appear in a few graves
nonetheless must indicate a correspondingly increased range of
differentiation in wealth.   And while copper becomes "le metal

                             KIN AND CLASS                               99

d'echange par excellence" by the Early Dynastic                 III   period
(Lambert 1953:208), on the whole it remained of so high a
value that ordinary craftsmen and even minor bureaucrats were
limited to at most a few implements of this material for which
they were at pains to keep an accounting. The bulk of the
peasantry may not have benefited from the increasing supplies
at   all,   for none of the utilitarian copper implements connected
with agriculture that have been recovered so far apparently
was made earlier than the Akkadian period. In other words,
copper implements and vessels (to say nothing of gold or
silver) qualitatively increase the implication of wealth for the

burial assemblages in        which they occur, as opposed to those
in   which they are lacking.
     In the Early Dynastic I period, there already was greater
variation in the kind and amount of accompanying grave goods
than had occurred previously. At Kish, for example, burial
equipment for the ordinary grave still consisted of a few large
spouted       jars   and other pottery   vessels,   with no weapons or
ornaments; but an unspecified, presumably small, number of
graves contained copper daggers, lances, axes, sling missiles,
stone and copper vessels, copper mirrors and toilet articles,
and the like. Although not representing great concentrations
of wealth when compared with the royal tombs, the luxury
character of many of the burial offerings is evident. There are
copper stands or trellis supports, for example, which are found
exclusively in association with stone vessels in some of the
wealthier       burials.   At contemporary rates of exchange, the
weight of copper wire in the trellises would have been sufficient
to purchase a field large enough to provide a modest livelihood,
yet each of the stone vessels found in a support could stand
unaided.
     A somewhat later development roughly corresponds with
the late Early Dynastic II and III periods.            It is   known most
spectacularly from the so-called "Royal Cemetery" at Ur, al-
though contemporary finds at Kish and Khafajah confirm the

100                       The Evolution of Urban Society

same general pattern and provide some Imm id reds of additional
graves as examples. At Ur, 588 burials have been described that
were not connected with "royal tombs." Of them, about one-
eighth lacked metal or stone objects of any kind, while an addi-
tional 751        graves, although they yielded no offerings suitable
for dating, must be roughly coeval with them.              Here we see the
remains      of    a    peasantry presumably maintaining        itself   only
slightly above the margins of subsistence, physically associated

with an urban center but having acquired few of the tangible
symbols of its wealth or technological progress.
     On the other hand,             about twenty seemingly non-"royal"
graves contain a substantial wealth of offerings: personal orna-
ments of gold and silver, large numbers of well-made stone and
copper vessels, beads of gold and lapis lazuli, gold bowls, gold-
and silver-mounted daggers, quantities of bronze tools and
weapons, etc. Below this extreme, but intergrading with it to
form a relatively smooth curve of distribution, were consider-
ably more numerous graves that, on the average, contained
several copper and bronze tools and utensils (mirrors, strainers,
razors, bowls, axes) in addition to pottery, an assortment which
Sir Leonard Woolley (1934,2:164)             somewhat offhandedly char-
acterizes as "typical middle class." In         all,   434 of the graves at
Ur have some metal and 167 have objects of gold and silver, a
very high proportion of the 588 clearly datable graves and a
respectable proportion of the total even if all the undated graves
are assumed to be contemporary.
     In sum, insofar as grave goods reflect the general distribu-
tion of wealth, there          is   evidence for a decisive increase in
social     differentiation in       the cities during the course of the
Early Dynastic period. It did not take the form of a numerous
elite that    was sharply cut off from an undifferentiated mass
of artisans and peasantry. Instead, it appears that the resources
of   the    royal      family frequently were     only slightly superior
to those of a          few great private houses and that in the main

                                KIN AND CLASS                                          10]

urban centers the              latter,   in   turn,       graded     off   gradually    to
various degrees of impoverishment.
     It   is   interesting to      contrast        this   concentration of wealth
at Ur with the situation obtaining in the contemporary, nearby
site of al-Ubaid. Of 94 recorded burials there, only 18 contained

any metal        at   all,   only 4 contained more than a single metal
object, only 1 contained objects of precious metal,                        and no grave
contained more than 3 metal objects. Al-Ubaid, it would seem,
was a rural dependency of the capital at Ur, with much of its
wealth drained off to support urban specialists and adminis-
trators.

     Whether this was generally the case with the rural popula-
tion—and, indeed, how much of the population lived in outlying,
dependent villages— is a question that cannot be answered, in
view of the exclusive concern of Mesopotamian archeology here-
tofore with the greater aesthetic appeal, and greater promise of
finding texts, in the cities. Large numbers of villages do occur
in the northern part of the alluvium, but that region,                          Akkad,
differs    both culturally and ecologically from the region of
Sumer in which most of the classical Sumerian city-states were
located.       There are textual references               to   temporary structures
near the       fields   that    were occupied by Sumerian agricultural
workers during the harvest season, and it                       is   at least possible

that    many small settlements like al-Ubaid were consolidated
into larger,      more defensible urban centers                    either just before
or during the Early Dynastic period. On the other hand, several
centuries       later    than    the     Early      Dynastic period,         the   little

Sumerian kingdom of Lagash                    is   reported to have comprised
some 25 towns and 40 or more villages and hamlets within
a 1,600 square kilometer area. If so, something of the same
pattern may have persisted from Protoliterate or earlier times
right through and beyond the initial impulses toward urbaniza-
tion.

     The conclusion from the archeological evidence that late

102                  The Evolution of Urban Society

Early Dynastic society was a stratified, class system is confirmed
and amplified by the contemporary written records. At least
its   quantitative characteristics can be best understood     by a
study of differences in ownership or control of land, but the
Shuruppak and Lagash archives     also provide information on
some of the duties, perquisites, and relative positions of the
various strata.
      At the bottom of the social hierachy were slaves, individuals
who could be bought and sold and who seemingly were owned
in small    numbers even by some ordinary artisans, agricultur-
alists,   and minor administrators. Their economic role was a
much more significant one, however, in connection with great
estates   and temples, of which the Bau archive furnishes so
richly documented an example. In the Bau community of some
1,200 persons, there were from 250 to 300 slaves, of whom the
overwhelming proportion were women. One tablet alone lists
205 slave girls and their children who probably were employed
in a centralized weaving establishment like       one known arche-
ologically at the site of ancient     Eshnunna; other women are
known to have been engaged in milling, brewing, cooking, and
similar interior operations permitting close supervision.     Male
slaves generally are referred to as igi-nu-du, "the blind ones,"
and apparently were employed in gardening operations. Al-
though there are no direct references to the blinding of war
prisoners to prevent their escape, it is a possibility that at least
remains open.
      While it has sometimes been maintained that slavery as an
institution   was   of minor, almost insignificant, importance in
ancient Mesopotamia, there are two respects in which this
view must be contradicted. In the first place, even if the gross
proportion of slaves was relatively small,      we have just noted
that their    distribution   throughout the economy was highly
uneven. In the Bau archive, representing a great estate or
temple, perhaps one-sixth of all resources available above the
subsistence level were devoted to the production of wool and

                                KIN     AND CLASS                                    103

thread.          Moreover,     slaves   working under semi-industrialized
conditions played a preponderant part in this process, and the
sale or exchange of this commodity not only played an import-
ant part in the local redistributive              economy but presumably
also served as the basis for long-distance trade in luxuries           and
vital      raw materials like metal.          In a sense then, there was a
strategic concentration of slaves in precisely those institutions
which characterized Mesopotamian urban society as distin-
guished from preurban society, so to characterize the insti-
tution          as   insignificant,   accordingly      would misrepresent             its

importance as a factor in development.
       A second argument for the strategic importance of slavery
has recently been persuasively elaborated by Moses                                Finley
(    1964 ) His essential point is that the data from the Old World,
            .




both Near Eastern and Classical, does not reflect a polarization
of society into slaves            and   free citizens but, instead, a              wide
spectrum of alternative               possibilities.   Legal,        social,   political,

and economic criteria of dependence or subservience may over-
lap and contradict one another, but there was a cumulative
movement until Classical times toward more and more sharply
defining and isolating a dependent stratum of foreigners at the
bottom of the            social hierarchy. In fact,       it    is    only with this
development that the abstract contrast of "slavery" with "free-
dom" emerged at all. 2
   The implication of Finley 's analysis for our present problem
is    that it is perhaps inapropos to reserve the term "slavery" for
the group I have just discussed, on the implicit assumption that
it    is   sharply contrasted with a         much larger "free" population.
Instead, there were various social impediments                        and conditions
of servitude, of which slavery was merely the most extreme, and
the role of an inferior and in some respects unfree agricultural
class      was surely far more important than the numbers of nar-

    2. A "freed" slave, the term meaning literally that it was "returned to
itsmother," was first mentioned in Urukagina's time, at the end of the
Early Dynastic period (Edzard 1965: 80).

104                  The Evolution of Urban Society

rowly defined "slaves" alone would suggest. Seen in this light,
the controversy between Soviet economic historians characteriz-
ing early state society as "slave" society and Western specialists
insisting   on the relatively small numbers of slaves in some
respects    becomes more a matter of nomenclature than of
substance.
   The      so-called "shub-lugals,"   of   whom there were about
eighty in the Bau community organized in groups under over-
seers or foremen, are     an example of a group with a reduced
status    and degree of freedom. The term has been variously
translated as "subjects of the king" or merely as "subjects of a
master," but in any case their clientage is apparent from their
duties. In various texts they are reported as laboring in         gangs
by the day on demesne lands            of the   Bau temple or     estate,

pulling ships, digging irrigation canals, and serving as a nucleus
of the city militia     (perhaps specialized slingers or archers)
under the direct command of the palace administration.              Two
muster rolls that have been preserved make it clear that upon
the death of a shub-lugal he was succeeded by a near relative,
who assumed his same duties under the same overseer. By the
time of the Bau archive at about the end of the Early Dynastic
period, shub-lugals were     among many groups who received a
subsistence ration during four months of the year in return for
labor service. The shub-lugals also were allotted small plots of
prebendal land from holdings of the temple or           estate.   There
are indications that further control over the group was main-
tained by the periodic reallocation of the plots, even though
their size indicates that many of them would have been inade-
quate for subsistence purposes.
   There are other groups that basically resemble the shub-
lugals,   although differing in their economic position and appar-
ent degree of clientage.    The uku-ush, who perhaps served as
heavily    armed shield- and spear-bearing units in the phalanx
formations of the army, also served as overseers for the shub-
lugals    on labor assignments but were bound by approximately

                              KIN AND CLASS                                   105

the same conditions of service.   More ambiguous are the posi-
tions    of engarsand sag-apins. Engars have been described
variously as "clients" and "free peasants," but in any case both
titles   can at least be assigned somewhat higher positions in the
social        hierarchy;   they conducted or supervised               agricultural
operations on behalf of the estate or temple, supplied cadres
for the militia,       and received both         rations    and allotments of
prebendal land. None of these groups could be bought or
sold,    it   must be stressed, although the clientage of a number
of shub-lugals in          Lagash may have been involuntarily trans-
ferred from the city ruler Lugalanda to his successor, Urukagina.
    Clearly, there         was not    a single status of clientage but a
series of       perhaps overlapping ones based on distinctions that
are not yet apparent. And it is admittedly dangerous to gener-
alize from the limited        and selective archival sources at present
available, particularly in           view of   their disproportionate         em-
phasis on the larger ( especially temple and palace ) estates with
scribes in their employ and special managerial problems for
which permanent accounts were almost a necessity. If Diakon-
off's   estimate (above, p. 65)        is   correct, as    much as two-thirds
of the population in late Early Dynastic times                   still   was not
directly       dependent on manorial units at all but was organized
instead in corporate kin communities. However,                   it   does seem
reasonable to conclude that at least on agricultural estates the
labor force consisted primarily of this semifree gurush class,
whom I. J. Gelb has likened to Greek metoikoi, Roman glebae
adscript!, and English serfs. 3

    Even on lands apparently not falling within the bounds of
great temples  and estates, there are suggestions that small
private plots were not held in alodial tenure but were subject
to certain forms of entailment.             They could be sold and trans-
ferred, as       we know from many examples at Shuruppak, but
nevertheless they stood in some relationship to a superordinate

    3. Gelb 1964. But cf. Gelb 1965: 240-41, where the closeness of the
comparison is reconsidered.

106                     The Evolution of Urban Society

institution— probably the        administrative establishment of the
city ruler.        Plows and even seed corn were provided by       this

central authority, a practice that apparently can be traced back
as far as Protoliterate times on the basis of a tablet of that date
from Tell Uqair. The notarization of a dub-sar-gan               (field
scribe), who must have been a representative of this establish-
ment, was an integral part of every purchase contract. More-
over,   it   may be noted that sales occur in rigid multiples of 2.5
iku (0.88 hectare).     One might suspect on this basis that sales
were not entirely at the discretion of the individual owners
but were subject to a degree of superordinate control that the
documents took for granted and therefore do not mention.
      Large-scale private acquisitions of land have already been
mentioned. Perhaps the earliest example known is the so-called
"Blau Monument," long regarded as a forgery prior to the dis-
covery of pictographic Protoliterate writing in secure archeolog-
ical contexts.       The purchase of 250 or more hectares by one
Du-si and of at least 114 hectares by Lu-pad, a high official of
Umma, are later, better understood examples, while the acqui-
sitions in four districts that are recorded by one       Akkadian king
on the "Obelisk of Manishtusu" total 2,300 hectares and those
by Enhegal of Lagash amounted to about 1,000 hectares. Most
if not all such purchases seem to have been made by members

of ruling families or high officials, and the documents recording
them are appropriately described as "Sammelurkunden"; that
is,   they are records not of the simple transfer of integrated
large holdings but of the assembling of such holdings out of
many separately owned, small parcels.
      Thus the implication of an ongoing process of concentration
of landownership in the hands of state officials during at least
the later Early Dynastic          and Akkadian periods cannot be
doubted. In the case of the lands Manishtusu purchased, to be
sure,   they were redistributed to relatives and political sup-
porters rather than being directly worked by their new owner.
But that      is   unlikely to have been the case even with royal

                              KIN   AND CLASS                          107

acquisitions before the wide conquests of the Akkadian period,
and the king's correspondingly increased responsibilities for the
defense of distant frontiers. And archives of a considerable num-
ber of Akkadian estates, privately owned and yet often employ-
ing on rations up to several hundred dependent agricultural
workers and their families, make            it   clear that the   trend in
general was not toward redistribution but toward the growth
of large, directly       managed holdings.
   Of a still larger order of magnitude than the acquisitions
         were the estates already in the hands of the ruling
just cited

officials of the   palace and temple. The Bau archive is one of
these,   and   in fact   is   the main source and prototype of Anton
Deimel's reconstruction of an all-embracing Tempehvirtschaft.
Now, as we have seen, Deimel's conclusion that units similar
to the Bau temple virtually monopolized the available agricul-
tural land has been shown to be untenable. Moreover, current
studies even cast into some doubt his interpretation of the Bau
community as subordinated in any significant way to the service
of a particular god or a temple hierarchy. 4 But Deimel's calcu-
lations of the total size of the establishment, about 65 square
kilometers of arable land under the direction of an administra-
tive official responsible to the wife of the          Lagash city ruler,
nevertheless seem entirely reasonable. Although much less is
known of them, similar records of large landholdings can be
traced back into the Protoliterate period; a fragmentary tablet
from Jemdet Nasr accounts for 1,828 hectares and may have
originally contained a         much larger total.
   Of course, the management of a manorial estate of this great
size could not be fully centralized irrespective of whether it
was conducted in religious or in secular terms. As we have seen,
some of the estate lands were cultivated directly on its behalf
by shub-lugals; on the basis of known proportions for a very
small part of its area, the demesne lands might amount to about
one-fourth of the total. Another, larger portion consisted of the

    4.   John Hadley, personal communication.

108                  The Evolution of Urban Society

prebendal lands allotted to members of the Bau community,
the harvest from which presumably          was devoted very largely
to their    own subsistence. By far the largest of such allotments
was an area of some 348 hectares that also was cultivated on
behalf of the city ruler and his wife by the shub-lugals, but,
while other high officials also received generous amounts of
land, most allotments were very small. Still a third portion con-
sisted of rent lands, which were farmed on a share-crop basis,
again largely by members of the Bau community, and which
constitute almost half of the lands whose relative proportions
can be accounted for.
     Even the share-crop lands were         centrally   supplied with
seed, draft animals, equipment,      and specialized personnel for
plowing.     Moreover, accounts of receipts and disbursements
suggest that about thirty storehouses were centrally managed—
in   one of which alone the presence of 9,450 tons of barley is
recorded.    Hence the Bau administration should not be con-
strued as a political structure superimposed on a pattern of
atomistically conducted agricultural operations merely to facil-
itate the passive collection of taxes or tribute. It     was, in fact,
an oikos in the classic Weberian sense, an authoritarian super-
household in which a remarkably differentiated labor force
of clients undertook to provide their lords with goods               and
services.   Although little is known in detail of the earlier devel-
opment of this      integrated, consumption-oriented economy,          it

may be noted that the distribution of rations was already ac-
counted for, presumably in exchange for labor services, as early
as late Protoliterate times.
     Drawing together the many diverse         strands   in   this   dis-

cussion of social stratification in early Mesopotamia,        I   believe
we can trace the emergence of a fully developed class society
by no    later than the   end   of the Early Dynastic period.         Its

origins, prior to the   appearance of cuneiform documents, can
be followed only      indirectly, in the   gradual emergence of a
difference between richly furnished tombs, on the one hand,

                         KIN AND CLASS                            109

and the much more numerous graves of a relatively impover-
ished peasantry, on the other. Subsequently, however,         we can
                                                    more and
establish the internal gradations within this society
more clearly from written sources. The system of stratification
was, of course, closely articulated with systems of political and
military powers   and prerogatives, but those relationships must
be reserved for consideration in the following chapter. Here our
major concern is the economic basis of stratification, particularly
as defined in terms of degrees of servitude and access to land.
   Standing at the pinnacle of Mesopotamian society were
small numbers of princely families        who seem to have been
vigorously extending their control of land by purchase during
the later Early Dynastic and Akkadian periods. There has been
a tendency at times to define the role of such families somewhat
too narrowly in terms of their administrative duties. Leo Oppen-
heim, for example (while admittedly addressing his remarks in
the main to a somewhat later period), recently has broadly
characterized Mesopotamian society as notably lacking in the
elements of a military aristocracy and even of "any non-economic
status stratification"   (1964:74-75).   Were this really the case,
the absence of these features would represent an important
contrast with Aztec society in central Mexico. But        I   think   it

can be replied that      we simply lack the kinds of sources in
Mesopotamia— at least until long after the Early Dynastic period
—that might be expected to refer in any way to special behavi-
oral characteristics   and prerogatives setting off the elite from
the mass of the population.    The emphasis on official functions
in existing records is no more than a reflection of the fact that
the overwhelming majority of these records          are   themselves
narrowly administrative in function. We may deplore the ab-
sence of interpretive descriptions by visiting interlopers who,
like the Spaniards, tried to   record all they saw. But a proper
comparison of Mesopotamian with Aztec society requires that
we take their absence fully into account.
   At any rate, ruling families in Mesopotamia seem to have

110                     The Evolution of Urban Society

headed semi-integrated manorial estates that varied greatly in
size.    Their labor force, dependent       in   varying degrees on the
distribution of rations, allotments of land,         and other forms of
clientage, also included a small but significant proportion of
persons employed under repressive, closely controlled condi-
tions of outright slavery. Yet, in spite of the proliferation          and
increasing importance of these class-oriented forms of organiza-
tion, there still existed kin-based communities both outside and

within the manorial establishments, and, while such communi-
ties    were declining in the relative amount of land under their
corporate control, it is likely that they still had very large areas
at their disposal.

       This was, in short, a complex, changing amalgam of older
forms of social organization and new ones. But it is important
to   remember that the older, kin-based            institutions   were not
merely pushed aside by patron-client relationships, to decay
slowly along the neglected margins of the latter. As in the case
of the continuing role of kin ties in the administration of army
and labor service, clientage, and the crafts, the older forms at
least at times were readapted         and retained as important struc-
tural features. As Julian Steward observes, this is only common
and natural; "simple forms, such as those represented by the
family or band, do not wholly disappear when a more complex
stage of development         is   reached, nor do they merely survive
fossil-like,   as the    concepts of folkways and mores formerly
assumed.       They gradually become modified             as   specialized,
dependent parts of new kinds of total configurations" ( 1955:51 ).
       For several reasons, the prehispanic Mexican system of
social stratification can     be much more briefly treated than can
that of the early Sumerians. It is, in the first place, better known,
having been studied and debated since the early days of the
discipline     by   a succession of leading anthropolgists.        Second,
because of the availability of Spanish descriptions of Aztec
society at the height of its        power and prosperity, the lengthy
processes of inference required to reconstruct an integrated

                            KIN   AND CLASS                                       HI
system of Stimerian stratification from unrelated fragments of
archeological data, land deeds, and bookkeeping entries can be
vastly simplified.      And,   third, there   is   simply    less    information
with which to trace the development of the institution through
its   long incipient stages than in the case of Mesopotamia.
      Although we know of burials at Teotihuacan ranging from
simple, unceremonious inclusions in construction                    fill   to    mod-
erately     well-endowed tombs and of a corresponding variation
in    domestic architecture, the accidents of archeological                       dis-

covery have provided us with no later burial and architectural
sequences from which quantitative evidence might be obtained
on the extent of        social differentiation      in    successive periods.
Equally important, there are no Mexican parallels for the
voluminous Mesopotamian economic records, from which                               at
least certain conclusions relevant to social organization                   can be
drawn     as   early as the Protoliterate period            and which shed
increasing light on the        many centuries that followed. Taking
into account these differences in the documentation for the two
areas,   we can only describe the Aztec system as the Spaniards
encountered it, briefly noting short-term developmental trends
toward                  which the traditional accounts of the
            statification to

growth of the Aztec realm    refer. Even on this limited basis,

there are striking and fundamental similarities to Mesopotamia
that are immediately apparent.
      Recent discussions of land tenure by Alfonso Caso (1963)
and Paul Kirchoff (1954) provide essentially similar overviews
that for the sake of brevity may be followed closely. At the
apex of the Aztec social pyramid stood the polygynous royal
household,     its   line of divinely   descended Tlatoanis marrying
daughters of the leading chieftains of the realm to produce in
time a largely endogamous nobility sharply differentiated from
the rest of the population in wealth, education, diet, dress, and
other    prerogatives.     While these    pillis,    or    members          of    the
nobility,    comprised the upper echelons of the                political        and
military administration, they were lords, as Zurita says (1941:

112                      The Evolution of Urban Society

90-91 ), " by virtue not of dominion or command, but of lineage."
Large numbers of them— 600, according to Cortes (1952:96),
as well as their servants and followers— were constantly in
attendance upon the royal court, where they were maintained
with support from the state treasury.
      In addition to an impressive flow of tribute from subjugated
towns, a subject to which we must return subsequently in con-
nection with the emergence of political and military authority,
there were great estates at the king's disposal comparable to
those    in    early    Mesopotamia. Apparently a distinction was
recognized between patrimonial lands, which belonged pri-
vately to the king as a result of inheritance or conquest,                and
entailed lands set aside for the maintenance of administrative
personnel and other specific purposes. Except that this distinc-
tion illustrates nuances of administrative usage that                would be
preserved for us in the interpretive reports of a Spanish chron-
icler   but not in the deed prepared by a Sumerian               clerk,   it   is

not of great importance for understanding the economic basis
for class stratificationand the royal power. Both categories
certainly were very large. Moctezuma I is alleged to have
held some thirty-two towns and twenty-six estates for his
private benefit, and it is reported that the three kings of the
Triple Alliance reserved for their own use at times as much as
one-third of the huge extent of conquered territories. Still other
state lands apparently were given over to temples              and schools
and cultivated by tenants or were set aside for the support of
garrisons and war expenditures.
   Private lands were also held by the nobility. In some cases
they were apparently subject to various forms of entail, and they
reverted to the crown in the event of the death of an owner
without       heirs.   However, they were subject         to sale,    and the
produce from them could be appropriated by their noble owners
without the deduction of a share as royal tribute.
   The source of all such private lands, it should be observed,
was the successful conquest of neighboring territories. In the

                                KIN AND CLASS                                 113

first   recorded instance, after the            fall   of Azcapot/aleo in    1430
before the combined forces of the Triple Alliance, Diego Duran
(1867-80:        1,   79-80)    tells    us that the largest    and best    fields

were     first   taken by the crown, that two plots of land were
then given to each of the nobles                who had pressed the war
against the wishes of the                 common people, and that for the
latter only one plot was set aside for                 each calpulli. Paul Radin
(1920:147) has argued that this award of lands to the nobility
was an innovation, but, even if not, it thenceforward assumed
special significance because of the almost continuously success-
ful expansionistic thrusts               upon which the Aztec subsequently
embarked.        It    served to        strengthen the hand of the military
orders in their struggle for ascendancy over the traditional
calpulli leadership          and to provide an economic basis for the
formation of a noble class that was distinguished from lower
social orders         by more than transient charismatic qualities and
self -proclaimed superiority of lineage.

    In addition to an aristocracy of lineage there was an                    aris-

tocracy of service,          made up in the main of commoners who
had distinguished themselves in warfare. Although beneficiaries
of royal favor during the early, rapid growth of the realm, they
were    later repressed         and excluded       as the nobility of lineage
continued to grow in number during a period when the frontiers
tended to become            stabilized. Also of         an intermediate    status,

although rising in wealth and influence rather than declining
like the nobility of service, were corporate groups of merchants.

Since they were engaged exclusively in long-distance trade,
largely on behalf of the ruler and the nobility, they were closely
involved in the expansion of the Aztec state. Accordingly, we
must postpone           a   discussion of their role and position until
the following chapter.
   Below these groups a large part (in most regions the major
part) of the population   was grouped in calpullis, as we have
seen earlier— localized clans or lineages that were highly strati-
fied internally, that          held corporate     title to   agricultural lands,

114                 The Evolution of Urban Society

and that also served as a basis for the organization of many of
the crafts and professions. There seems to have been a minimum
of twenty calpullis, and probably there were several times that
number, with recognized territories in Tenochtitlan at the time
of the Spanish Conquest,     and there is some evidence that the
calpullis were ranked among themselves from highest to lowest.

    As the persistence of     vertically   oriented   (i.e.,   stratified)

kin-based social groupings across the growing horizontal barrier
between nobles and commoners       implies, this was a society
embarked upon fundamental change and hence not easily sum-
marized in terms of unifying organizational principles. Even
in its ceremonies, M. Acosta Saignes (1946:196-97) has docu-

mented the effects of these essentially contradictory develop-
ments, with kin-based modes of organization and those reflecting
the class superiority of the nobility alternately coexisting amic-
ably and confronting one another in mock battles.
      Some scholars, like Arturo Monzon (1949:29), argue from
the vital part that the calpulli undoubtedly continued to play
that stratification remained so closely intertwined with kinship
that we should not speak of social classes. However, the distinc-
tion between a stratified society and a class society seems to be
an obscure and not particularly significant one— so long,                 at

least, as   there is agreement that the direction of development
in Aztec society was    toward the latter. Classes and clans need
not be polar, mutually exclusive concepts, and            it   is   in   the
general nature of social change that it arises from the competi-
tive coexistence   and ultimate resolution of such seeming con-
tradictions.
   Below the "plebeian" population of macehuales organized
in calpullis   stood the mayeques,    who cultivated the private
lands of the nobility and who (like the client populations on
Mesopotamian agricultural estates) have been likened to serfs
on medieval     fiefs. Probably for the most part having been

earlier settlers on the lands to which they became attached, they

could be sold with those lands but not separated from them.

                           KIN     AND CLASS                             115

Unlike the "free" population of commoners organized in cal-
pullis,    who as we have seen owed tribute to the state, the
mayeques owed tribute and labor services only to the noble
owner of the land they occupied. Their only obligations to the
state,    suggesting the very limited extent of their participation
in it, lay in the wartime performance of military service and in
their subjugation to       its   criminal jurisdiction rather than that
of the local lord.
    The queston      of    the size    of   the   mayeque population      is

obviously an interesting and important one, since              it   bears on
the extent of private landholdings and on the degree to which
the calpulli system       may have begun to decline in at least its
economic importance before the arrival of the Spaniards. Direct,
unequivocal data are unfortunately not available. Calculations
based on the imposition of tribute on previously exempt classes
of the indigenous population after the             Conquest do seem to
suggest, however, that in parts of central Mexico the mayeques
were very numerous and may even have outnumbered the
population of the calpullis (Cook and Borah 1963).
    Presumably mayeques also tended                to   be organized into
localized,   endogamous calpullis, or at least once had been so.
Both the periodic breaking-up of private lands through pur-
chase and the formation of new mayeque groups out of impov-
erished families and refugees would have reduced the relative
importance of kin ties among them and substituted more flex-
ible,    open-ended organizational forms. Their way of life as a
whole, however, received little attention from the early chron-
iclers    and is not well known. According to one source, which
describes the depression of these groups to the lowest margins
of subsistence, tribute     payments to the lord were handled as
individual and not corporate responsibilities, with those               who
failed to meet the requirements being sold into slavery. This
practice also would have hastened the decay of corporate kin
organizations among them.
    Slaves constituted a bottom stratum in the society, and, as

116                        The Evolution of Urban Society

in     early        Mesopotamia,     their      absolute        number was seemingly
not large. Recruitment              is   said to have depended mainly on im-
pressment of criminals, on defaulting debtors, on sell-sale during
times of famine, and, in                  some        eases,    on their requisition as
tribute.       It   differed from the classical Western concept of slavery
as     an unlimited condition              ol   depersonalization and servitude
and constituted instead a soeial category whose status was only
somewhat more impaired than that of the mayeques and sim-
ilar    groups. Slaves are reported to have been engaged, along-
side other workers, in the cultivation of private lands. However,
