[]

FIRST PEOPLES
IN A NEW WORLD

Colonizing Ice Age America

David J. Meltzer

[images]

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS

Berkeley   Los Angeles   London

THE PUBLISHER GRATEFULLY ACKNOWLEDGES THE GENEROUS SUPPORT OF THE
GENERAL ENDOWMENT FUND OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS FOUNDATION

 

University of California Press, one of the most distinguished university
presses in the United States, enriches lives around the world by
advancing scholarship in the humanities, social sciences, and natural
sciences. its activities are supported by the uC press Foundation and by
philanthropic contributions from individuals and institutions. For more
information, visit www.ucpress.edu.

University of California press
Berkeley and Los Angeles, California

University of California press, Ltd.
London, England

© 2009 by the Regents of the University of California

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-publication Data

Meltzer, David J.
First peoples in a new world : colonizing ice age America / David J.
Meltzer.

   p. cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 978-0-520-25052-9 (cloth : alk. paper).

1. Paleo-Indians—North America. 2. Glacial epoch—North America.

3. North America—Antiquities. I. Title.

377.9.M45    2009

970.01—dc22

2008035901

Manufactured in the United States of America
16  15  14  13  12  11  10  09  10
9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of
ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992 (R 1997) (Permanence of Paper).

Cover illustration: Above: A biface from the deGraffenreid Clovis cache,
Texas. (Photograph courtesy of J. David Kilby, used with permission of
Mark Mullins.) Below: The Meander glacier flowing out of the
Borchgrevink Mountains toward the Ross sea, northern victoria Land,
Antarctica. (Photograph courtesy of Steve Emslie.)

To Florence Garner Meltzer,
who arranged for her fifteen-year-old son to
spend the summer excavating at a Paleoindian site,
and thereby started him on a career

CONTENTS

Preface

Acknowledgments

1. Overture

On Dates and Dating

2. The Landscape of Colonization: Glaciers, Climates, and Environments
of Ice Age North America

The Younger Dryas: It Came from Outer Space?

3. From Paleoliths to Paleoindians

A Mammoth Fraud in Science

4. The Pre-Clovis Controversy and Its Resolution

A Visit to Monte Verde

5. Non-archaeological Answers to Archaeological Questions

And Then There Was Kennewick

6. American Origins: The Search for Consensus

Looking for Clovis in All the Wrong Places

7. What Do You Do When No One's Been There Before?

8. Clovis Adaptations and Pleistocene Extinctions

Is Overkill Dead?

9. Settling In: Late Paleoindians and the Waning Ice Age

Back to Folsom

10. When Past and Present Collide

Further Reading

Notes

References

Index

Plates appear following page

PREFACE

An Albuquerque Journal reporter was on the phone. “Have you heard of the
recent discoveries at Pendejo Cave here in New Mexico?” he asked and
then added, laughing, “Do you know what ’Pendejo’ means in Spanish? Our
readers sure do!” I had heard. I did know. And what I said
next—foolishly, in retrospect—nearly got me pummeled one night in a
hotel bar in Brazil by Scotty MacNeish: excavator of Pendejo Cave, grand
old man of archaeology…and former Golden Gloves boxing champion.

The fight was about a discovery as profound—or trivial—as fingerprints.
Not just any fingerprints: MacNeish came out of Pendejo Cave and
announced he'd found human fingerprints that were upwards of 37,000
years old, instantly tripling the then oldest accepted antiquity for the
arrival of humans in the New World (the Clovis archaeological presence,
dated to nearly 11,500 years ago). When the reporter asked what I
thought of MacNeish's claim, I replied, “You're not going to convince me
until you've fingerprinted the crew.”

Granted, it was a flip response. But I thought the point reasonable. To
persuade an extremely skeptical archaeological community to accept this
unparalleled discovery, MacNeish would have to demonstrate those
fingerprints were just as old as advertised, and not odd clay globs his
excavators had inadvertently imprinted and later mistook for
archaeological specimens. Extraordinary claims require extraordinary
proof. I thought I was being helpful. MacNeish thought otherwise. It
surely didn't help that my response led to his Pendejo Cave claim being
named one of that year's Albuquerque Journal Cowchip Award winners (I
don't think I need to explain why the Cowchip is not a coveted award).

When we bumped into each other in that bar a year later—ironically, we'd
both been invited to Brazil to examine another purportedly ancient
site—MacNeish swore furiously at me for accusing his crew of faking
evidence. Faking evidence!? Only after fifteen minutes of very fast
talking, spent just beyond the distance I guessed he could still throw a
punch at age seventy-five, was I able to convince him that wasn't my
point at all. I am not sure he ever believed me. I know he never forgave
me. But he did send me a reprint of the article he published on the
Pendejo Cave fingerprints, and even autographed it: “Finally got it
published,” he scrawled across the top, “in spite of you.”

Fair enough.

I framed the reprint, and it's prominently displayed in my
office—perfect witness to the heat that's generated in the search for
America's first peoples.

Not that this is anything new. Questions about the origins, antiquity,
and adaptations of the first Americans, although easily asked, have
proven extraordinarily difficult to answer, and have been contentious
since first posed in modern form in the 1860s. Those questions are still
the focus of research today, albeit using vastly different theoretical,
analytical, and archaeological tools; involving a far wider range of
contributing disciplines; and producing a stream of publications that in
the last several decades has become a raging academic torrent. The
intervening century and a half has witnessed multiple site discoveries,
conceptual breakthroughs, pivotal moments that have propelled and guided
research, and cycles of bitter controversy and grudging, short-lived
periods of peace. We've learned a great deal.

Still, in just the last dozen years much of what we knew—or thought we
knew—about the peopling of the Americas has been turned on its head by
new discoveries, new analyses, and new controversies, all of which cut
across multiple disciplinary lines. The biggest difference? Before, we
spoke of the possibility of a pre-Clovis presence in the New World in
hypothetical terms; now it is a reality, and it's a whole new
archaeological world as a result. In the scramble to right ourselves,
many ideas—some controversial, others outlandish—are being tried on for
size. It's the natural course of affairs in scientific change, and no
cause for alarm. Yet.

So much has changed that my previous book on the topic, Search for the
First Americans, published in 1993, is now woefully out of date (more
embarrassing: used copies are now selling for one dollar on the Web, and
the press that published it has folded; these two facts, I choose to
believe, are unrelated). At the time I wrote Search for the First
Americans, geneticists were only just beginning to peer into corners of
the human genome to use DNA to trace our collective ancestry; the
excavation and analysis of the Monte Verde site in Chile—then one of
several candidates for great antiquity in the New World, and not the
first among all—was just being wrapped up; Pleistocene geologists had
only glimpsed the complexity of the causes as well as the climatic and
ecological consequences of the Ice Age (Pleistocene), especially the
frenetic changes at its end, which were occurring just as the first
Americans were radiating out across the continent; and the now infamous
Kennewick skeleton still lay buried in the banks of the Columbia River,
yet to make its 60 Minutes debut with Leslie Stahl or become the
centerpiece of a costly lawsuit that exposed deep rifts within the
archaeological community, and especially between those who study the
past and those—Native Americans—who are its living descendants. These
and a gaggle of other developments have wrought a sea change in our
approach to and understanding of the first Americans. It's time for a
fresh look.

This book was originally intended as a second edition of Search for the
First Americans, but my attempt to gently insert new material, delete
stale parts, and patch up original but still-serviceable bits proved
impossible, and I soon gave up the effort. I had underestimated just how
much had changed—including my own thinking on many of these matters. So
I instead tore down each of the original chapters to their foundation
timbers, discarded unwanted parts (and even one unwanted chapter), added
several new chapters, and then rebuilt the whole from the ground up to
reflect all the changes in evidence, emphasis, and thinking. The basic
framework remains, and some of the load-bearing elements of a chapter,
if judged sufficiently robust, were allowed to stay, along with stories
that were just too good not to retell. Much of the new material is based
on articles I've published in recent years in a variety of scholarly
journals and books, and road tested in my classes, so it has been
through the wringer of peer review from colleagues and—perhaps a more
stringent test—has had to pass muster with my students, undergraduate
and graduate alike. The result is the book before you: more than twice
as long, far wider in range, more detailed in coverage than Search for
the First Americans, and because it supersedes and replaces the earlier
volume, deserving of a new title: First Peoples in a New World:
Colonizing Ice Age America.

WHAT THIS VOLUME IS…

First Peoples in a New World is my effort to explain the twists and
turns of the search for the first Americans, the controversy that has
long enveloped it, and what we've learned of who they were, when and
from where they came, and how they colonized what was then, truly, a New
World. Although I am an archaeologist, I am by nature eclectic in my
approach to scientific problems, and have spent a fair amount of time on
search and seizure missions behind interdisciplinary lines looking for
help from geneticists, geologists, linguists, and physical
anthropologists in answering stubborn archaeological questions. And
there are few questions more stubborn or that lend themselves so readily
to an interdisciplinary solution as the peopling of the Americas. First
Peoples in a New World is thus not just a synthesis of the intellectual
history and current state of the archaeological understanding of the
peopling of the Americas, it's also a close look at the evidence being
brought to bear by non-archaeologists to this problem—and an effort to
see whether we can all get along.

In fact, this book centers around two interlocking themes. The first is
what we know of the first Americans—about who they were, where they came
from, when we think they arrived, how many early migratory pulses there
may have been, and by which route(s) they came to the Americas. It's
also about the climatic and ecological conditions of the Ice Age terrain
they traveled and the diverse landscapes they encountered, their
adaptive responses to the challenges of colonizing an uninhabited and
unfamiliar world, the speed with which these pedestrian hunter-gatherers
moved across their new world, their effect on the native animals of the
Americas—and whether they had a hand in the extinction of some
thirty-five genera of Pleistocene mammals. Finally, it is about the
evolutionary processes and pathways they blazed, and the long-term
consequences of their prehistory.

The other theme is about how we know what we know about the first
Americans. It is about the methods archaeologists, geologists,
linguists, physical anthropologists, and geneticists are bringing to
bear on the problem of origins, antiquity, and adaptations (my
non-archaeological colleagues will, I hope, forgive my trespassing).
Because these approaches yield very different kinds of evidence, they
are not easily reconciled, nor do the practitioners in each field sing
in harmony. Hence, it is important to understand how they (we) arrive at
our conclusions, and just how reliable those conclusions might be.

Admittedly, talking about how we know what we know is not nearly as
satisfying as talking about what we know, but it's vital all the same,
especially in light of how this topic is often portrayed in the popular
media. Our contentiousness encourages journalists, science writers, and
filmmakers to pitch a story of the peopling of the Americas around
colorful characters, raging controversy, and outrageous theories—we
don't lack for any of these—especially if it involves that hackneyed
theme of an iconoclastic scholarly David fighting the establishment
Goliath to prove the revolutionary idea that (fill in the blank) proves
everything science has ever thought was wrong. The headlines fairly leap
from page and screen: “American Indians were not the first ones here!”
“Siberian hunter claims extinct Ice Age bears still alive!” And, for
conspiracy buffs, “The suppressed story of the people who discovered the
New World.” One doesn't have to make these up: the last is the subtitle
of a just-released book.

Those of us in the business are not without sin. We feed the beast,
holding press conferences to announce the discovery of the (latest)
oldest site in the Americas, make claims on camera that would never pass
muster in the professional journals, or give flip comments to reporters
about our colleagues’ discoveries (like, say, “Fingerprint the crew”)
that stoke the fires of controversy. Indeed, as I was writing this book,
a group of geologists and archaeologists launched a press campaign
proclaiming that a comet blasted the earth in the late Pleistocene, an
unwelcome ET that wreaked havoc on global climates, destroyed North
America's megafauna, and devastated Paleoindian populations. They might
be right, but it's customary in science to build the case and publish
the evidence before issuing the press release about the conclusions.

However entertaining the often-gossipy popular accounts of this
controversy—especially when it's not your ox being gored—they rarely
provide accurate or complete details of the science behind it all, or
its results. Having long been a participant in the pre-Clovis
controversy, and particularly its tipping point at Monte Verde, I can
easily see that commentary on it by individuals who view it from the
outside bears only a passing resemblance to what I saw actually
happening. In fact, not only do these err on what happened publicly, but
they also naturally miss much of what went on behind the scenes, and
those who put dialogue in our mouths to recreate events are usually
completely wrong.

Moreover, there is the inescapable fact that beneath all the tabloid
talk, there are legitimate scientific and substantive reasons why we
disagree about issues, why the same archaeological (or linguistic, or
genetic, or skeletal) evidence can and often is viewed very differently
by different investigators, and why there is ambiguity and disputed
interpretation. Challenging though it may be at times, to truly
understand the peopling of the Americas requires probing deeply into how
this knowledge is created, shaped, and put to use. Only with that
understanding is it possible to appreciate, despite evidence converging
from so many diverse fields, why questions about the first Americans are
among the most contentious in anthropology, and may remain so.

Finally, and though it may go without saying, I confess I am not without
sin. My voice has long contributed to the din over the origins and
antiquity and adaptations of the first Americans, and I have been
directly involved in disputes over key pre-Clovis sites, in contesting
the claim the Americas were colonized from Ice Age Europe, in debating
the role of Paleoindians in the extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna,
and in seeking to understand how hunter-gatherers met the challenges of
moving across and adapting to the vast, unknown, diverse, and changing
landscapes of Pleistocene North America

I have had my own ox gored.

I will nonetheless do my best to present the different sides of a
disputed issue, but the reader is forewarned. Caveat lector.

…AND WHAT THIS VOLUME IS NOT

This book is not about the Ice Age peopling or Paleoindian archaeology
of the entire New World: it's mostly about North America. This is so for
several reasons, not least that Pleistocene glaciation, climates, and
environments play out in very different ways in the Northern and
Southern hemispheres, and so, too, the archaeological records are
dissimilar. Even using the term pre-Clovis in South America is a
misnomer since Clovis fluted points, strictly speaking, only reach as
far south as Panama. Covering the entire hemisphere would double the
size of an already large book, and is unnecessary in any case since
there are several volumes that ably cover the South American ground,
leaving me free to concentrate on North America, which is the region of
my own archaeological field research and expertise.

That said, the South American record is not ignored. I examine
hemisphere-wide evidence from language, teeth, genes, and crania
relevant to questions of the peopling of North America, as well as the
South American sites that figure prominently in the pre-Clovis debate.
The latter are archaeologically relevant since the ancestors of the
first South Americans must have come via North America; we haven't a
shred of evidence to indicate South America was peopled directly by
ocean crossing. If the oldest accepted sites in the New World are in the
Southern Hemisphere—as is the case at the moment—then there must be ones
older still in the Northern Hemisphere. Only, we've not found them
yet—or at least not agreed we've found them.

I wrote this book for the general reader and not my archaeological
colleagues, who've perhaps heard quite enough from me on this subject
already. The difference is largely a matter of style rather than
substance, but also of coverage. The constraints of space and the
demands of the narrative forbade me from mentioning every important
site, researcher, argument, or claim (sometimes, I confess, I was glad
of it). Accordingly, rather than provide encyclopedic, site-by-site
lists of what was found where—the sort of thing only an archaeologist
could love—I instead highlight finds that help illustrate broad
archaeological patterns and adaptive processes. I provide details as
needed, but there's too good a story to be told here to become bogged
down in archaeological minutiae. To further ease the narrative for my
intended readers, I have gone against all my scholarly instincts and
omitted citations from the text. But I cannot fully shed my obligation
to give credit (or blame) for ideas and discoveries. Thus, I have
embedded endnotes throughout the book that provide citations to source
material, along with occasional follow-up comments.¹

Many voices will be heard here, save for an obvious one: those of the
descendants of the first peoples, American Indians. I do not omit
discussion of their traditional origin narratives out of either
disinterest or disdain, or because I think American Indians are
unrelated to the first peoples in America. I don't. Rather, it is
because my expertise lies elsewhere. Even so, I am acutely aware that
questions of the Pleistocene peopling of the Americas bear on
contemporary issues of Native American identity and ancestry, and of
“ownership” of the past and present. It's not a rhetorical question to
ask, as Vine Deloria has, if American Indians had “barely unpacked
before Columbus came knocking on the door,” will people doubt their
claims to the land and its resources? And I am sympathetic to the anger
provoked among Native groups by speculations by some archaeologists and
physical anthropologists that the Americas were originally peopled from
Europe, or not by ancestral Native Americans. Such claims cannot be made
lightly nor without unimpeachable evidence, though as will be seen, they
have been.

I also recognize that Native American views of their origins are not
always consonant with those of archaeology. In some cases—as, for
example, Deloria's piercing Red Earth, White Lies—they furiously condemn
it. There are archaeologists who agree: we need to downplay “solid
archaeological dogma such as the Bering Land Bridge migration route to
the Americas,” they say.² Here's my view: the past is large enough to
accommodate many different uses (as Robert McGhee put it), and I am
content to co-exist.

But more important, I won't be shy about casting a critical scientific
eye on what archaeologists and anthropologists know and don't know about
the peopling of the Americas. After all, it's only dogma if it's left
unexamined. That won't happen here.

Finally, a comment on my use of the terms colonization and New World. I
well understand the baggage that comes with both: colonization conjures
painful images of the displacement and destruction of indigenous peoples
and culture in America after 1492. The word itself is rooted even
deeper, in the settlements established in territories conquered by the
legions of the Roman Empire (from the Latin coloniae³). However, in the
2,000 years since the Romans, and in the centuries since European global
expansion, “colonize” has acquired a much broader and more neutral
meaning in the sciences to refer to the dispersal of a population or
species, and its settlement in a different place. It is in this
unencumbered ecological sense that the word is used here, and often
interchangeably with peopling or migration.

The term New World was, of course, one applied by Europeans to the
Americas.⁴ At the tail end of the fifteenth century, the American
continent was new. To them. It was hardly new to the Native Americans
who were here to greet them, for they were the descendants of peoples
who had been living here for millennia. Yet, to speak of the Ice Age
colonization of the New World is unquestionably appropriate in this
context, for when the first people reached America more than 12,500
years ago, this truly was a New World. In fact, as we shall see, Ice Age
America was new in more ways than just a world uninhabited.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Blake Edgar, acquisitions editor for the University of California Press,
has my thanks for asking—just as my previous volume with the University
of California Press (Folsom, 2006) was rolling off the presses—whether I
had another book in the offing. Here ’tis.

Blake, as well as Wendy Ashmore, Tom Dillehay, Donald Grayson, Torrey
Rick, and David Hurst Thomas read the entire manuscript, and provided
detailed and helpful comments. Daniel Mann and Stephen Zegura, geologist
and geneticist, respectively, provided constructive, detailed critiques
of chapters 2 (Mann), and 5 and 6 (Zegura), thereby saving me possible
embarrassment in venturing into disciplines not my own. I am extremely
grateful for the help of all, and hereby absolve them of blame for any
lingering errors.

As with all my work, I've been able to rely on friends and colleagues
who've kindly answered questions (or asked pointed ones), given advice,
supplied references or unpublished manuscripts, or otherwise rendered
aid along the way. For that I'd like to thank Michael Adler, Tony Baker,
Douglas Bamforth, Lewis Binford, Deborah Bolnick, Michael Cannon, Tom
Dillehay, Arthur Dyke, Sunday Eiselt, Michael Gramly, Donald Grayson,
Michael Hammer, Vance Holliday, Karl Hutchings, Brian Kemp, Jeffrey
Long, Dan Mann, Daniel Moermann, Connie Mulligan, James O'Connell, Nick
Patterson, Torrey Rick, Theodore Schurr, Vin Steponaitis, Noreen Tuross,
Richard Waitt, Cathy Whitlock, and Don Yeager.

For providing photographs or help with other illustrations, I am
grateful to Jim Adovasio, Tony Baker, Alex Barker, Charlotte Beck,
Michael Collins, Deborah Confer, Judith Cooper, Joseph Dent, Tom
Dillehay, Boyce Driskell, Steve Emslie, Michael Gramly, Eugene Hattori,
Louis Jacobs, George Jones, David Kilby, Jason LaBelle, Anne Meltzer,
Ethan Meltzer, Jeff Rasic, Richard Reanier, Torrey Rick, Richard Rose,
Mark Stiger, Lawrence Straus, Renee Walker, Fred Wendorf, David Willers,
David Wilson, Michael Wilson, Tom Wolff, and David Yesner. I am
particularly indebted to Katherine Monigal, who put her considerable
artistic and computer talents to work on many of the figures in the
book, and thereby saved me from having to get over my loathing of Adobe
Photoshop (Adobe Illustrator and I still remain on quite good terms).

Several years ago I was fortunate to participate in a series of
fascinating National Science Foundation-sponsored conferences organized
by John Moore and Bill Durham that brought together archaeologists,
geneticists, linguists, and social anthropologists to explore issues
related to the colonization of new landscapes—and not just the Americas,
but also Australia and the islands of Oceania. These sessions and my
fellow participants contributed immeasurably to my thinking about these
matters.

This book was written in the spring of 2007 while I was on a Research
Fellowship Leave from Southern Methodist University, for which I am most
grateful. My archaeological fieldwork and historical research touched on
here have been supported by grants from the National Science Foundation,
the Potts and Sibley Foundation, and especially (over the last decade)
by the Quest Archaeological Research Fund, generously established at SMU
by Joseph and Ruth Cramer.

In the fall of 1992, when I was writing Search for the First Americans,
my children were four and six years old. And so I wrote at my university
office to avoid the wonderful and welcome distractions of home. The
children have since flown the nest for their own universities far away.
And so I wrote First Peoples in my son's room—now converted to an
office. But I miss those wonderful distractions that used to be home.
Shadow the dog tried his best to fill the void, but it was just not the
same.

David J. Meltzer
Dallas, Texas, January 2008

1

OVERTURE

It was the final act in the prehistoric settlement of the earth. As we
envision it, sometime before 12,500 years ago, a band of hardy Stone Age
hunter-gatherers headed east across the vast steppe of northern Asia and
Siberia, into the region of what is now the Bering Sea but was then
grassy plain. Without realizing they were leaving one hemisphere for
another, they slipped across the unmarked border separating the Old
World from the New. From there they moved south, skirting past vast
glaciers, and one day found themselves in a warmer, greener, and
infinitely trackless land no human had ever seen before. It was a world
rich in plants and animals that became ever more exotic as they moved
south. It was a world where great beasts lumbered past on their way to
extinction, where climates were frigidly cold and extraordinarily mild.
In this New World, massive ice sheets extended to the far horizons, the
Bering Sea was dry land, the Great Lakes had not yet been born, and the
ancestral Great Salt Lake was about to die.

They made prehistory, those latter-day Asians who, by jumping
continents, became the first Americans. Theirs was a colonization the
likes and scale of which was virtually unique in the lifetime of our
species, and one that would never be repeated. But they were surely
unaware of what they had achieved, at least initially: Alaska looked
little different from their Siberian homeland, and there were hardly any
barriers separating the two. Even so, that relatively unassuming event,
the move eastward from Siberia into Alaska and the turn south that
followed, was one of the colonizing triumphs of modern humans, and
became one of the great questions and enduring controversies of American
archaeology. Those first Americans could little imagine our intense
interest in their accomplishment thousands of years later, and would
almost certainly be puzzled—if not bemused—at how seemingly
inconsequential details of their coming sparked a wide-ranging, bitter,
and long-playing controversy, ranking among the greatest in anthropology
and entangling many other sciences.

[images]

FIGURE 1.
Map of the Western Hemisphere, showing the extent of glacial ice at the
Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) 18,000 years ago, the approximate position of
the coastline at the time, and some of the key early sites,
archaeological and otherwise, hemisphere-wide.

Here are the bare and (mostly) noncontroversial facts of the case. The
first Americans came during the Pleistocene or Ice Age, a time when the
earth appeared vastly different than it does today. Tilts and wobbles in
the earth's spin, axis, and orbit had altered the amount of incoming
solar radiation, cooling Northern Hemisphere climates and triggering
cycles of worldwide glacial growth. Two immense ice sheets up to three
kilometers high, the Laurentide and Cordilleran, expanded to blanket
Canada and reach into the northern United States (while smaller glaciers
capped the high mountains of western North America).

As the vast ice sheets rose, global sea levels fell approximately 120
meters, since much of the rain and snow that came down over the land
froze into glacial ice and failed to return to the oceans. Rivers cut
deep to meet seas that were then hundreds of kilometers beyond modern
shorelines (Figure 1). Lower ocean levels exposed shallow continental
shelf, including that beneath the Bering Sea, thereby forming a land
bridge—Beringia—that connected Asia and America (which are today
separated by at least ninety kilometers of cold and rough Arctic
waters). When Beringia existed, it was possible to walk from Siberia to
Alaska. Of course, once people made it to Alaska, those same glaciers
presented a formidable barrier to movement further south—depending, that
is, on precisely when they arrived in this far corner of the continent.

These ice sheets changed North America's topography, climate, and
environment in still more profound ways. It was colder, of course,
during the Ice Age, but paradoxically winters across much of the land
were warmer. And the jet stream, displaced southward by the continental
ice sheets, brought rainfall and freshwater lakes to what is now western
desert and plains, while today's Great Lakes were then mere soft spots
in bedrock beneath millions of tons of glacial ice grinding slowly
overhead.

A whole zoo of giant mammals (megafauna, we call them) soon to become
extinct roamed this land. There were multi-ton American
elephants—several species of mammoth and the mastodon—ground sloths
taller than giraffes and weighing nearly three tons, camels, horses, and
two dozen more herbivores including the glyptodont, a slow-moving mammal
encased in a turtle-like shell and bearing an uncanny resemblance to a
1966 Volkswagen Beetle—or at least a submersible one with an armored
tail. Feeding on these herbivores was a gang of formidable predators:
huge lions, saber-toothed cats, and giant bears. All of these mammals
were part of richly mixed animal communities of Arctic species that
browsed and grazed alongside animals of the forests and plains.

But this was no fixed stage. From 18,000 years ago, at the frigid depths
of the most recent glacial episode—the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) it's
called—until 10,000 years ago when the Pleistocene came to an end (and
the earth entered the Holocene or Recent geological period), the
climate, environment, landscapes, and surrounding seascapes of North
America were changing. Many changes happened so slowly as to be
imperceptible on a human scale; others possibly were not. Certainly,
however, the world of the first Americans was unlike anything
experienced by any human being on this continent since.

Once they got to America, these colonists and their descendants lived in
utter isolation from their distant kin scattered across the planet. Over
the next dozen or so millennia, in both the Old World and the New,
agriculture was invented, human populations grew to the millions, cities
and empires rose and fell, and yet no humans on either side of the
Atlantic or Pacific oceans was aware of the others’ existence, let alone
knew of their doings.

It would not be until Europeans started venturing west across the
Atlantic that humanity's global encircling was finally complete. Peoples
of the Old World and the New first encountered one another in a remote
corner of northeast Canada around AD 1000.¹ But that initial contact
between Norse and American Indians was brief, often violent, and mostly
served to thwart the Vikings’ colonizing dreams and drive them back to
Greenland and Iceland. It had none of the profound, long-term
consequences that followed Columbus's splashing ashore on a Caribbean
island that October day of 1492.

Europeans, of course, were profoundly puzzled by what they soon realized
was far more than a series of islands, but instead a continent and
peoples about whom the Bible—then the primary historical source for
earth and human history—said absolutely nothing. We can presume Native
Americans were just as perplexed by these strange-looking men, but their
initial reactions went largely unrecorded by them or contemporary
Europeans. Over the next several centuries, Europeans sought to answer
questions about who the American Indians were, where they had come from,
when they had arrived in the Americas, and by what route. The idea that
they must be related to some historically known group—say, the Lost
Tribes of Israel—held sway until the mid-nineteenth century, when it
became clear that wherever their origins, they had arrived well before
any historically recorded moment. The answer would have to be found in
the ground in the artifacts, bones, and sites left behind from a far
more ancient time.

But how ancient would prove a matter of much dispute. In 1927, and after
centuries of speculation and more than fifty years of intense
archaeological debate, a discovery at the Folsom site in New Mexico
finally demonstrated the first Americans had arrived at least by Ice Age
times. The smoking gun?—a distinctive, fluted spear point found embedded
between the ribs of an extinct Pleistocene bison. A hunter had killed
that Ice Age beast (see Plate 1).

A half-dozen years later, outside the town of Clovis (also in New
Mexico), larger, less finely made, and apparently still older fluted
spear points than those at Folsom were found—this time alongside the
skeletal remains of mammoth. As best matters could then be determined,
these were the traces of the most distant ancestors of Native Americans.
Paleoindians, they were named, to recognize their great antiquity and
their ancestry to American Indians.

But were these the very first Americans, and if so, just when had they
arrived? A more precise measure of their antiquity would have to wait on
chemist Willard Libby's Nobel Prize-winning development of radiocarbon
dating in the 1950s. By the early 1960s, that technique showed that the
Folsom occupation was at least 10,800 years old, while Clovis dated to
almost 11,500 radiocarbon years before the present (BP).² This was
relatively new by Old World standards—humans had lived there for
millions of years—but it was certainly old by New World standards.

Better still, the Clovis radiocarbon ages apparently affirmed the
suspicion this archaeological culture represented the first Americans,
for the dates coincided beautifully with the retreat of North America's
vast continental glaciers that, it was widely believed, had long
obstructed travel to the south and forced any would-be first Americans
to cool their heels in Alaska.

As those glaciers retreated, an “ice-free” corridor opened between them
(around 12,000 years ago) along the eastern flanks of the Rocky
Mountains, forming a passageway for travel into unglaciated,
lower-latitude North America. Emerging from the southern end of the
corridor onto the northern plains fast on the heels of its opening, the
first Americans radiated across the length and breadth of North

America with apparently breathtaking speed, spreading Clovis and
Clovis-like arti-facts across North America within a matter of
centuries. Nor did they stop at the border: their descendants evidently
continued racing south, arriving in Tierra del Fuego within 1,000 years
of leaving Alaska (having developed en route artifacts that were no
longer recognizably Clovis). It's an astonishing act of colonization,
especially given it took our species more than 100,000 years just to
reach the western edge of Beringia.

Indeed, the possibility that Clovis groups traversed North America in
what may have been barely 500 years is all the more striking given that
North America was then in the midst of geologically rapid climatic and
environmental change. Yet, Clovis groups seemingly handled the challenge
of adapting to this unfamiliar, ecologically diverse, and changing
landscape with ease. Their toolkit, including its signature fluted
points, is remarkably uniform across the continent. That lack of
variability is taken as testimony to the rapidity of their dispersal
(that is, it happened so quickly there was hardly time for new point
styles to emerge).

That some of those points were found embedded in the skeletons of
mammoth and bison suggested an answer to the question of how
Paleoindians had moved so quickly and effortlessly: they were apparently
big-game hunters, whose pursuit of now-extinct animals pulled them
across the continent. Some took the argument a step further: it was
their relentless slaughter that drove the Pleistocene megafauna to
extinction.

ON DATES AND DATING

Throughout this book, time is denoted in years before present,
abbreviated simply as BP. In regard to deep geological time, as with the
onset of glaciation 2.5 million years ago, little need be said by way of
qualification. Such ages are, at best, well-rounded estimates derived by
a variety of geochemical dating methods, and are certainly accurate at
the scale of hundreds of thousands of years, which is sufficient for our
purposes. However, when attention turns to the last 50,000 years, the
period of particular interest here, we seek more precise chronological
control.

For that span, radiocarbon dating is the method of choice. It works off
a straightforward decay principle (illustrated in Figure 2): when cosmic
ray neutrons bombard the earth's upper atmosphere, they react with
nitrogen (¹⁴N) to drive off a proton to form radioactive carbon or
radiocarbon (¹⁴C), one of several isotopes (isotope = same element,
different mass) of carbon. Radiocarbon has the same chemical structure
as elemental carbon (¹²C), but a heavier mass (maintaining nitrogen's
atomic mass of 14). And like ¹²C, radiocarbon combines with oxygen to
form carbon dioxide (CO₂), which is then absorbed by plants via
photosynthesis, and which moves up the food chain into the animals that
feed on those plants.

[images]

FIGURE 2.
The radiocarbon process in schematic form (see text for a fuller
explanation).

When a plant or animal dies, its supply of ¹⁴C is no longer being
replenished, and the resident ¹⁴C slowly begins to revert back to ¹⁴N,
and in this decay process releases a radioactive emission (beta
particle). Immediately after death, ¹⁴C decay produces roughly 15 beta
emissions/gram/minute. After 5,730 years, half of the ¹⁴C is gone, and
the decay process yields roughly 7.5 beta emissions/gram/minute. That
lapsed period is called a half-life. After another 5,730 years have
passed (that is, 11,460 years after the organism died), another half of
the original ¹⁴C is now gone (we are down to 25% remaining), and the
decay process yields roughly 3.75 beta emissions/gm/minute. And so on.

Thus, by measuring the amount of radiocarbon still present in a sample,
one can determine the approximate date that the organism died. By
consensus, all radiocarbon ages are expressed as years before present,
present being arbitrarily set at 1950, the year the first successful
dates were reported by Willard Libby, the chemist who invented the
technique (for which he received a Nobel Prize). We set all our
radiocarbon clocks to years before 1950 to avoid the confusion that
would follow when comparing the ages of different samples whose
radioactivity was measured at different times (e.g., 1950 vs. 2000).

Radioactivity is a statistically random process. When it's measured, the
result is an estimate of the average amount of ¹⁴C in the sample, with
an accompanying standard deviation to show the estimated error (the true
value should fall within one standard deviation 68% of the time). A date
of 10,130 ± 60 BP means that the estimated age of the sample based on
the mean of the emissions was 10,130 years, and the chances are two out
of three that the true age lies between 10,070 and 10,190 BP.

Theoretically, radiocarbon decay takes place until all the ¹⁴C is gone
from a sample—and that takes about ten half-lives. In principle we
should be able to date material that old, but problems of preservation,
the difficulty of detecting the tiniest amounts of ¹⁴C, and the
potential for contamination of ancient samples, put the present reliable
upper limit of radiocarbon dating at about 50,000 years.

In terms of detection, measuring the amount of ¹⁴C in a sample can be
done in one of two ways: the conventional decay-counting method is to
prepare a sample as a liquid or a gas, put it in a radioactive counter,
and wait for beta emissions to happen. Older samples with less ¹⁴C
obviously have fewer and more widely spaced beta emissions, and
obtaining a statistically reliable count of them can take days, weeks,
and sometimes months.

The alternative technique, Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) dating,
uses particle accelerators to count ¹⁴C atoms directly by sending a
sample at high speeds around a circular or oval particle accelerator.
The lighter ¹²C atoms can take the tight turns; the heavier ¹⁴C atoms
can't and fly off the molecular racetrack and crash into a strategically
placed mass spectrometer, which counts the number of atoms. AMS dating
takes only minutes or hours, not days or weeks, and standard errors are
often less than fifty years. Best of all, because atoms are counted
directly, large samples are no longer necessary. Prior to the advent of
AMS dating, approximately 5 grams of carbon were required; now, it is on
the order of 1 milligram. That's the difference between needing the
entire limb bone of a bison, as opposed to the single tooth of a rodent.

Since AMS dating became available in the 1980s, it has greatly expanded
our ability to date sites. But radiocarbon dating is not without
complications, especially because the amount of radiocarbon in the
atmosphere and ocean has varied over time. In effect, we cannot assume
that all plants and animals over time started with the same amount. That
variation is driven by how much radiocarbon is produced in the upper
atmosphere, which is largely a function of changing amounts of neutrons
bombarding the atmosphere at a given time (blame the sun for that), and
changes in the relative amount of CO₂ stored in the atmosphere versus
the ocean. Speed up or slow down how much CO₂ is squirreled away in the
deep ocean, and one's radiocarbon-dated sample might have higher (or
lower) amounts of ¹⁴C—not because the sample is younger (or older), but
because when it formed, the atmosphere had more (or less) ¹⁴C to absorb.

To control for this variation, radiocarbon measurements are calibrated
against objects whose ages are precisely known, such as the growth rings
of a tree. Simplifying a bit: a tree adds one ring every year, and since
most years differ from one to the next in rainfall and temperature, the
rings are often different widths (wide and light colored if it's a good
growth year, dark and narrow if not). The ring pattern becomes a
fingerprint for a particular period in time. And like fingerprints, no
two periods are exactly alike. By pushing the tree ring pattern back in
time—thanks to some well-preserved and long-lived trees from the
American Southwest, Ireland, and Germany (along with well-preserved wood
specimens from archaeological sites)—a tree ring sequence has been
compiled for the last 12,410 years.

By radiocarbon dating a specific tree ring of known age, one can measure
how far the radiocarbon age diverges from the true age, making it
possible to calibrate the radiocarbon result to bring it into line with
a calendar age. When one sees an age listed as “cal BP,” one is in the
presence of a calibrated age.³

Unfortunately, the period of greatest interest to the study of the first
Americans—the late Pleistocene—was also a window of geological time
during which there were unusually rapid changes in ocean circulation
(for reasons explained in Chapter 2), causing atmospheric ¹⁴C to yo-yo.
As a result, the radiocarbon clock at times ran too fast or too slow,
and so a single radiocarbon age from this time period often corresponds
to more than one calibrated age.⁴

[images]

Because calibrating radiocarbon ages for this time period is neither
straightforward nor certain,⁵ calibrated ages are not used here;
instead, all ages are given in radiocarbon years BP. Although this can
mean a slight loss of chronological precision, that won't particularly
matter since I am, for the most part, speaking of ages in general. At
some point in the future, calibration of radiocarbon ages in this window
of time will be more precise, and then we can make the switch. Until
then, using radiocarbon years BP has the ancillary benefit of making
them comparable to the vast bulk of the literature on the Pleistocene
and on the first Americans, and so will cause less confusion for those
who wish to look into that literature.

One can, of course, convert the radiocarbon years given here to
calibrated years. Readers can try this at home, either using web-based
programs such as CALIB (http://calib.qub.ac.uk/calib/), or by
downloading calibration share-ware such as OxCal
(http://c14.arch.ox.ac.uk/oxcal.php). I provide in the accompanying
table a set of radiocarbon-to-calendar age calibrations at 500-year
intervals (with one exception) covering the period from 18,000-7400 BP.
These were calculated using OxCal 3.10.⁶ These are just rough cuts and
imply a more straightforward relationship between radiocarbon and
calendar years than actually exists. Real calibration is a complicated
and messy business, especially for the late Pleistocene.

EARLIER THAN WE THOUGHT?

The idea the first Americans were highly mobile, wide-ranging, big-game
hunters, whose arrival was tied to the final rhythms of Pleistocene
glaciation, made perfect sense. For a time. But there were always
nagging doubts, not least the persistent claims of a pre-Clovis presence
in the Americas. As more archaeologists took to the field in the 1960s
and 1970s, perhaps driven (more than they might care to admit) by the
chance of finding America's oldest site, every field season promised a
pre-Clovis contender. Some were heralded with great fanfare: the
legendary Louis Leakey, fresh from his triumph at Olduvai Gorge, flew to
California to proclaim the Calico site to be middle Pleistocene in age
(several hundred thousand years old). Unfortunately, its supposed
artifacts—pulled from massive gravel mudflow deposits—proved
indistinguishable from the millions of naturally broken stones the
site's excavators burrowed through and tossed aside in great piles,
still visible on final approach to Los Angeles International airport.

Other pre-Clovis claims were made by lesser mortals, but in all cases
the result was the same: a purportedly ancient site burst on the scene
with great promise, only to quickly tumble down what I came to call the
pre-Clovis credibility decay curve, wherein the more that was learned
about a site—for example, that its supposed artifacts were likely
naturally flaked stone, or that the dating technique was experimental
and unreliable, or that its deposits were so hopelessly mixed that the
allegedly ancient artifacts were found alongside discarded beer cans—the
fewer the archaeologists there were willing to believe it.

Dozens, even scores of sites failed to withstand critical scrutiny.
There were so many false alarms archaeologists grew skeptical, even
cynical, about the possibility of pre-Clovis. And we have long
memories—it's part of our business, after all. The response may not have
been commendable, but it was certainly understandable, particularly in
light of the fact that once artifacts are out of the ground, they can
never again be seen in their original context. In effect, we “destroy”
aspects of our data in the process of recovering it, and because our
sites cannot be grown in a petri dish in a lab, replication and
confirmation of a controversial claim is no easy task and independent
experiments to check results are nigh on impossible (archaeology may not
be a ‘hard’ science, though it can be a difficult one all the same).

Pre-Clovis proponents cried foul, claiming the demands made of their
sites and evidence were unfair, their work chronically underfunded, and
their task overdemanding. Critics replied with a sneer that those same
demands were met easily enough at Africa's and Australia's earliest
sites, and perhaps the proponents’ eagerness to find pre-Clovis sites
marked a basic flaw in the motivational structure of American academia.
Bystanders wisely kept their heads down and declared neutrality. Opinion
quickly outran and outweighed the meager facts, and in science
disagreement moves in quickly to fill the void between fact and opinion.
So controversy grew.

All of this was testimony, cynics smirked, that academic battles are so
ferocious because the stakes are so low.

The cynics are partly right. Knowing that the first Americans may have
arrived 14,250 years ago, as suggested by artifacts deep within
Meadowcroft Rockshelter, Pennsylvania, only tells us American prehistory
is a couple of thousand years older than we used to think. In the grand
scheme of the last 6 million years of human evolutionary history, that
hardly matters. People could have arrived in the Americas tens of
thousands of years earlier still, and it would not radically alter our
understanding of human evolution (though if they came here hundreds of
thousands of years ago, the ante is upped considerably—but the odds that
happened are vanishingly small).

Nonetheless, there is more here than an academic turf war. Hanging in
the balance is an understanding of when, how, how fast, and under what
conditions hunter-gatherers can colonize a rich and empty continent;
insight into the population and biological history of New World peoples;
a gauge of the speed with which the descendants of the first Americans
domesticated a cornucopia of plants (some as early as 10,000 years ago)
and became the builders of the complex civilizations here when Europeans
arrived; a better and more precise calibration of the rates of genetic,
linguistic, and skeletal change in populations over that time; and most
unexpectedly, a deeper understanding of the often-tragic historical
events that unfolded in the wake of the Europeans’ arrival on the shores
of what they mistakenly, if self-righteously, proclaimed a New World.

As the peopling controversy deepened, support for pre-Clovis got a boost
from an unexpected quarter. Starting in the late 1980s, molecular
biologists and human geneticists began to piece together histories of
modern American Indians from their mitochondrial DNA (which is inherited
mother to child) and from DNA in the non-recombining portion of the Y
chromosome (inherited father to son). By determining the genetic
distance between modern Asians and Native Americans, and assuming that
distance marks the time elapsed since they were once part of the same
gene pool, geneticists have a molecular clock by which they can reckon
the moment the ancestors of these groups split from one another. By some
estimates, it was upwards of 40,000 years ago.

The linguists spoke up as well. There were an estimated 1,000 American
Indian languages spoken in historic times. If all those evolved from a
single ancestral tongue, they argued, then the time elapsed since those
first speakers arrived in the New World might be as much as 50,000
years. The Clovis chronology, one linguist proclaimed, was simply in
“the wrong ballpark.” Although geneticists and linguists were happy to
go where right-thinking archaeologists feared to tread, they could not
prove the existence of pre-Clovis. Neither genes nor languages can be
dated: only archaeological materials can.

Then the site of Monte Verde, Chile, excavated and analyzed by Tom
Dillehay, came along. Monte Verde is an extraordinary locality, and what
makes it so is that soon after this creek-side spot was abandoned, the
remains left behind were submerged and ultimately buried in waterlogged
peat, thereby stalling the usual decay processes and preserving a
stunning array of organic items rarely seen archaeologically. These
included wooden artifacts; planks used in hut construction; burned,
broken, and split mastodon bones and ivory, along with pieces of its
meat and hide, some still stuck to the wood timbers, the apparent
remnants of coverings that once draped over the huts; and Juncus reed
string wrapped around wooden stakes (Figure 3). There were also human
footprints; a wide range of plants, some exotic, others charred, still
others apparently well chewed, as well as a complement of stone
artifacts. All of which dated to 12,500 years ago.

At Dillehay's invitation, a group of Paleoindian experts visited Monte
Verde in January 1997, having studied in advance the 1,000 pages of his
massive, soon-to-be-published second and final volume on the site. We
came away convinced of its pre-Clovis antiquity. This was news even the
New York Times deemed fit to print.

Although just 1,000 years older than Clovis, Monte Verde's distance
(approximately 16,000 km) from the Beringian entryway and its decidedly
non-Clovis look, raises a flurry of questions about who the first
Americans were, where they came from, what triggered their migration,
when they crossed Beringia, how they came south from Alaska (given the
ice-free corridor would not be open until after they had arrived in
South America), whether Monte Verde and Clovis represent parts of the
same colonizing pulse, how many migratory pulses there were to America
in Pleistocene times, how and how fast the first Americans traversed the
continent, and why (at the moment at least) the oldest site in the New
World is about as far from Beringia as one can reach, with no sites in
between as old or older.

[images]

FIGURE 3.
Two of the more than eighty “tent stakes” found at the Monte Verde site.
These stakes have flattened heads from being pounded into the ground,
were set behind timbers hewn from a different kind of wood, and had
wrappings of string made from a third type of plant (Juncus reed).
(Photograph courtesy of Tom Dillehay.)

The good news is we have plenty of answers to all these questions. The
bad news is we cannot tell which answers are right. But I'll try to sift
through what we know and don't, and what we can say or not.

TRACING FIRST PEOPLES

The chapters that follow explore the origins, antiquity, and adaptations
of the first Americans. When they arrived, which at the very least was
by 12,500 years ago, the world was still in the grip of an Ice Age, and
North America was a vastly different place than it is today. Chapter 2
sets that stage. It explores the causes of Ice Ages in the intricate
links between changes in the earth's orbit, solar radiation, ocean
circulation and salinity, and greenhouse gasses such as carbon dioxide
(CO₂), and their consequences, not least of which were the immense ice
sheets of higher-latitude North America (as well as at higher elevations
in lower latitudes). These were glaciers large enough to have bulldozed
landscapes, changed the course of rivers (including the Missouri and
Mississippi), altered atmospheric circulation (creating the paradox of
Ice Age winters that in places were no colder and possibly even warmer
than those of the present), and frozen so much water on land that sea
levels fell worldwide, creating land bridges across which people could
walk from one hemisphere to another.

South of the vast continental ice sheets and beyond their immediate
refrigerating effects, North America experienced climates and
environments unlike any at present, comprised of complex plant and
animal communities that were changing dramatically, or in some cases
heading toward extinction. The first Americans were there to witness and
experience some of those changes, as well as the end of the Ice Age,
which refused to die quietly but instead went out in a rush of
floodwaters of Noachian proportions and one brief, if failed attempt to
reassert its glacial dominance.

But just when did the first Americans arrive? During the most recent
glacial cycle, or earlier still? The next few chapters range widely over
the efforts, historical and contemporary, archaeological and
non-archaeological, to establish the origins and antiquity of the first
Americans. This is a problem that's been around, as detailed in Chapter
3, for well over a century, and has been disputed almost from the very
moment it was first posed. The initial round of controversy was
prolonged in part because archaeology itself was in its adolescence; it
hadn't well-established methods and techniques for finding, evaluating,
or reliably determining the age of ancient artifacts or sites; and it
was being tugged in different directions by practitioners who wanted to
craft the discipline in their own images.

Demonstrating people had arrived in the Americas by Ice Age times came
only after better chronological markers were established, and when a
particular kind of site was discovered, namely a kill site—as at
Folsom—in which the prey was an extinct Pleistocene animal. If the
animal lived during the Ice Age, then so did the people who killed it.
This enabled a site's antiquity to be assessed in the ground, a
necessity in those pre-radiocarbon dating years. That demonstration at
Folsom also taught archaeologists what to look for and how to look for
Pleistocene-age sites. Soon dozens more such sites were found, including
Clovis, which not only helped paint a picture of North American
Paleoindians, but also had the more subtle consequence of creating
expectations that guided much of the archaeological research into the
Paleoindian period over the ensuing decades.

One of those expectations—that Clovis sites were oldest and therefore
represented the first Americans—quickly became fact, and as Chapter 4
shows, sparked a decades-long effort to prove otherwise. The criteria
for demonstrating a pre-Clovis presence were straightforward in
principle—one needed unmistakable artifacts in a secure geological
context with reliable ages from radiocarbon or some other dating
technique—but they proved extraordinarily difficult to meet in practice.
Nature was partly to blame: it has the mischievous ability to break
stone and bone in ways that neatly mimic primitive human artifacts. But
we archaeologists shoulder part of the blame for not recognizing
nature's deviousness, or for using unproven dating techniques, or for
misreading geological circumstances. Even so, much was learned in the
decades of contentious debate over pre-Clovis and how best to meet the
standards of proof—which were finally met at Monte Verde in 1997.

How resolution came about was in some ways reminiscent of events that
took place seventy years earlier at Folsom—including the venerable
tradition of a site visit by outside experts—but in important ways, the
events were very different, not least in the way that Monte Verde gave
fewer clues of how to find sites like it. But it has certainly
redirected where we look. In Monte Verde's wake, archaeological
attention has shifted to the coast as a possible entry route, which was
available for passage well before the ice-free corridor opened. It has
also redoubled efforts to find sites of comparable age here in North
America, but so far these have proven elusive. It leaves us wondering:
why are pre-Clovis sites so hard to find, and how do they relate to
Clovis? Are they different parts of the same colonizing pulse into the
New World?

Archaeology speaks directly to questions of when and where, and
sometimes how, the first people came to the Americas, but struggles
mightily with the question of who these people were, in tracing their
population histories (forward or backward) or in ascertaining their
relationship to contemporary American Indians. It is no easy task to
measure the historical affinity between groups widely separated in space
and time from the manner in which they crafted their stone tools.
Accordingly, Chapter 5 turns to DNA, language, teeth, and skeletal
remains to attempt to fill the gap between the most ancient and modern
Native Americans. By grouping together similarities in the words and
grammar of many hundreds of native languages, and by examining the
diversity and patterning in mitochondrial and Y chromosome DNA, it
should in principle be possible to unravel the complex relationships
among American Indians, and then go the next step to infer the number
and timing (using molecular clocks or inferences about rates of language
change) of their ancestors’ migration(s) to the New World.

Assuming, that is, there is an unbroken chain from the present back into
the past, and that modern Native Americans are descendants of the first
Americans, a matter that's now hotly disputed by some physical
anthropologists. They see among rare ancient human skeletal remains
skulls that do not resemble the crania of American Indians—the most
famous (infamous) being Kennewick, which after its discovery was
described at a press conference by the arcane term “Caucasoid,” which on
the notepads of the assembled reporters quickly morphed into
“Caucasian.” Could the Americas have originally been peopled by
Europeans? Were ancestors of American Indians not the discoverers of
America, but later arrivals? These are not innocent academic questions,
but ones that inevitably take on a political character with real-life
implications for modern-day American Indians. Even so, a couple of
archaeologists blithely leaped on that bandwagon, and proclaimed that
Solutreans from Stone Age Europe had paddled the iceberg-choked
Pleistocene North Atlantic and landed on the east coast of North America
several thousand years before Clovis. But are there traces of non-Asian
ancestry in genes or language? How reliable are skulls for tracing the
origins of populations? Just what do crania tell us about
“race”—whatever that loaded term implies? That's why Chapter 5 aims to
detail how all these methods work, what they can and cannot reveal, and
the reliability of the conclusions drawn from them.

That chapter also shows that compounding the evidence and methods being
brought to bear on the peopling of the Americas has in no small measure
compounded the controversy. Now, instead of archaeologists arguing with
one another—as we still do, even in these post-Monte Verde
days—linguists, physical anthropologists, and geneticists are haggling
among themselves, and all of us with one another. There's a good reason
for that, as explored in Chapter 6: linguists, physical anthropologists,
and geneticists speak with no more unanimity on this question than
archaeologists, nor is it easy to reconcile such radically different
kinds of evidence. Each of these disciplines approaches the central
questions from very different angles. Linguists and geneticists view the
peopling of the Americas backward from the present, through the
languages or DNA of living American Indians. Archaeologists and physical
anthropologists, working with ancient sites and skeletal remains, come
from the opposite direction.

Naturally, there are advantages and disadvantages to each, and
significant differences in data and method, such that linking modern
languages or genes with Pleistocene archaeological or skeletal remains
proves no easy task—not that we haven't tried. We have many scenarios
for the number, relative timing, and antiquity of migrations to America.
Although there is no consensus among them, we have begun to answer
questions about who the first Americans were and where they came from,
and can perhaps narrow down the window of time within which the
migration (migrations?) occurred, and what our best chance is of more
precisely resolving such questions. Even so, controversy remains.

Of course, the search for the first Americans is not just about origins
and antiquity—it's also about adaptations. Once here, they apparently
colonized the length and breadth of the hemisphere in less than a
millennium. That's a stunning achievement for any human group, but
especially for hunter-gatherers in a novel and changing setting.
Chapters 7 through 9 look into how it is they moved so far so fast, what
life was like in Ice Age America for the new arrivals, and what adaptive
strategies keyed their successful colonization of a continent as diverse
and dynamic as late Pleistocene North America.

Central to these issues is the matter of adapting to a new land,
considered in detail in Chapter 7. As these bygone Siberians moved south
into an ever-more-exotic New World, they surely possessed a general
knowledge of animals and plants, but were increasingly encountering ones
they had never seen before. Which would feed them, clothe them, cure
them, or kill them? There was no one to greet them or provide helpful
advice about, say, rattlesnakes or poisonous plants. Nor were there
signposts at the gateway to America as there are today (tongue-in-cheek)
in downtown Barrow, Alaska, pointing the way to New York City or
Ayachucho, Peru.

Colonists in new landscapes face great risks, especially early on when
their numbers are low and they know little of the availability,
abundance, and distribution of plant and animal foods, or of how severe
local climates might be, or of where (and what) potential dangers might
lurk. To reduce that risk, it would have been to their advantage to
learn about their new world as quickly as possible, a strong incentive
to range widely and rapidly. Yet, doing so would have meant moving away
from other people.

The first Americans are often stereotyped as manly hunters, Pleistocene
versions of the mountain men and fur traders who boldly ventured across
the American West in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. But if the
goal was not merely to exploit but also to explore, adapt, and settle,
“early man” would not get very far without early woman, and without
producing early children. And when those children came of age, they
needed spouses. Where were those to be found? Within their immediate
band, or among distant kin who'd split off to find their own way? And
how could or did groups maintain longdistance contacts with others with
whom they could exchange information, resources, and mates, and do so
over a vast and uncharted landscape with few known landmarks, across
which they and others were possibly moving rapidly?

We have only recently begun to model the processes of colonization.
Central to seeing if those models work is an understanding of the
archaeological record and what it reveals of Paleoindian adaptations,
the subject of Chapter 8. The first Americans surely hunted more than
gathered: their long Arctic traverse from Asia to America had few other
options. Those habits continued as they moved south of the ice sheets,
where Clovis Paleoindians took down mammoth, mastodon, and giant bison.

But just how often were they out hunting big game, or better, how often
were they successful at it? So successful they drove the Pleistocene
megafauna to extinction? By 10,800 years BP, soon after Clovis groups
appeared, that extraordinary assortment of large mammals (some
thirty-five genera all together) had disappeared, vanishing in a
geological instant from a world where they had thrived for tens and
hundreds of thousands of years. Paleoindians are charged with killing—or
more properly, overkilling—the Pleistocene megafauna, a wholesale
slaughter routinely invoked today by conservationists as a grim homily
of human destruction.

Yet, if Paleoindians are guilty as charged, then they behaved unlike any
other hunter-gatherer groups known before or since, and then artfully
covered up virtually all evidence of their wrongdoing. It is possible,
of course, that we've not found their kill sites, or that we do not know
what members of our own species are wont to do on a rich, virgin
landscape teeming with game never before hunted by wily human predators.
Perhaps the rules that govern hunter-gatherers in other times and places
do not apply here. The first Americans were unique in many ways; this
may be another.

Of course, those extinctions also coincided with the end of the
Pleistocene. The sweeping climatic and ecological changes that marked
that transition are just as likely (maybe even more likely) to be
responsible for this massive extinction event. But if that's so, more
questions remain: why did horses disappear from North America at the end
of the Pleistocene, and yet flourish when reintroduced by the Spanish in
the early 1500s? And isn't it odd that the plants that comprised the
diet of the giant ground sloths are common today outside the very
southwestern caves these now-extinct animals once frequented? These are
good questions for which we have, as yet, no good answers.

What is certain is that during Paleoindian times, climates were warming,
glaciers worldwide were in full retreat, sea levels were rising, plants
and animals were shifting their ranges (or going extinct), and the end
of the Ice Age was just over the horizon. But around 11,000 years ago,
the world's climates took a sharp turn. According to one prevailing
theory, when the retreating Laurentide ice sheet uncovered the St.
Lawrence seaway that apparently diverted glacial meltwater—which to that
point mostly drained down the Mississippi River into the Gulf of
Mexico—into the North Atlantic. Flushing very cold, very fresh water
directly into the northern ocean upset circulation patterns in the
Atlantic and triggered a nearly instantaneous climatic response: the
Northern Hemisphere was plunged back into near-glacial conditions that
lasted a thousand years. The Younger Dryas, as it's called, was no Ice
Age rerun, since by then many of the conditions that had put the earth
under Pleistocene ice had changed. Even so, the sudden polar freeze of
the Younger Dryas is blamed for the “fragmentation of Clovis culture”
and even the extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna: it wasn't
Pleistocene Overkill. It was Pleistocene Overchill. Or not.

Regardless, the Younger Dryas set the stage on which the final
millennium of colonization was played out. It was during this time, as
discussed in Chapter 9, that the Paleoindian descendants of wide-ranging
and highly mobile Clovis groups began to settle in different regions. As
they did, they developed distinctive adaptations: lifeways in the
mountainous and semi-arid Great Basin soon became very different from
those on the grasslands of the Great Plains, or in the rich forests of
eastern North America.

This settling in inevitably severed ties among populations, and over the
next ten millennia, their descendants developed new dialects and
languages, along with distinctive genetic lineages, cultures, and
material culture. Evolutionary pathways diverged and converged as
populations sporadically reconnected (peaceably or not) and exchanged
genes, words, or artifacts. By the time Europeans arrived, some 400
generations of intermittent isolation, migration, and gene flow had
passed, and the descendants of what may have been a single band of
colonists was now many hundreds of separate peoples, cultures, and
languages, whose histories were hopelessly entangled in complex skeins.

All shared, however, a Pleistocene ancestry, and it was nearly their
undoing—as explored in Chapter 10. For when more than 12,000 years of
isolation ended in 1492 and the peoples of the Old and New worlds came
into contact, the consequences were profound, not least in the
devastating impact of repeated waves of Old World epidemic disease on
American Indians. The worst was smallpox, and against it—as well as
against measles, influenza, plague, and other contagions—Native
Americans had little, if any, immunity. Mortality rates may have spiked
at over 90% in native populations and, in so doing, arguably altered the
course of American history. But to understand why American Indians were
so extraordinarily vulnerable to introduced infectious diseases, and
harbored none of their own (which could have slowed the colonization of
the Americas by Europeans), the answer must be sought deep in their
prehistory.

And something more: American archaeology has changed dramatically in the
last decade, not least because of events well outside the shelter of
academia where we've long cloistered ourselves. Federal legislation—the
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA)—aimed at
righting the often egregious wrongs of history, mandated that skeletal
remains held in museums and universities receiving federal funding
(that's just about all of them) must be returned if requested to the
American Indian tribes that are biologically or culturally affiliated.
It's easy enough to identify affiliation if the remains come from sites
of no great antiquity, where there is clear continuity from past to
present. The task is immeasurably harder when attempting to identify
specific tribal descendants of the first Americans. That has sparked
plenty of fights about how or even whether ancient skeletal remains can
be linked with modern peoples. Legally they can be, ethically they
should be, but scientifically they can't be (at the moment anyway). And
so at times, as with Kennewick, it's gotten ugly.

But there have been positive steps, too, often made far from the harsh
partisan limelight: archaeologists and Native Americans have become
increasingly more aware and appreciative of the other's perspectives.
And all sides now recognize that questions about the peopling of the
Americas matter, and can matter deeply—even if for very different
reasons among different constituencies.

Getting the answers to those questions is a long story, and to start the
telling requires returning, ever so briefly, to where it all began.

GETTING TO BERINGIA ON TIME

The deep roots of human prehistory reach back to Africa, and a long
evolutionary line of early hominids. When our very earliest hominid
ancestors become recognizable about 6 million years ago (we cannot call
them humans just yet), they were barely refined apes, and certainly were
not in possession of the adaptive abilities necessary to venture into
the far north, let alone make their way to Siberia and then on to
America.

The first groups to do that were members of the genus Homo, of which
there are various species that first appeared nearly 2 million years
ago. Within a few hundred thousand years of their emergence, they had
mastered fire and learned to build shelters, which enabled them to
establish beachheads in colder climes outside Africa, even with the
astonishingly primitive stone tools that mark the Lower and Middle
Paleolithic cultural periods. Homo erectus and its evolutionary kin
ranged widely over temperate Eurasia and lived during glacial times, yet
do not appear to have expanded in any significant numbers into northern
latitudes, at least not until a few hundred thousand years ago when they
and their descendants occupied Pleistocene Europe. By then they were
clothed, revealed by the fact that body lice (which feed on the body but
live in clothing) have made their evolutionary appearance.⁷ Still, there
were limits to humanity's range. They spanned the distance from western
Europe to China, yet few (if any) descendants of this first wave to
leave Africa made it to the far northern or eastern regions of Asia or
Siberia, nor were they ever within striking distance of the Americas.

It was, instead, descendants of the second major wave out of Africa who,
bearing a more sophisticated stone tool technology (not to mention
increasingly elaborate artifacts of bone and ivory), pushed into Europe
and all the way across Asia. These were our earliest direct ancestors,
the first modern humans—Homo sapiens—that, based on genetic and
archaeological evidence, arose in Africa nearly 200,000 years ago, and
from which they subsequently dispersed.

The degree to which these early moderns are related to the descendants
of the first wave of humans who left Africa, such as Europe's
Neanderthals, has for many years been hotly debated. Because they
briefly co-existed on the same landscapes—the one using vintage Middle
Paleolithic stone tools, the other the more elaborate Upper Paleolithic
technology—some paleoanthropologists insist we are descended from a
genetic mix of Neanderthals and early moderns. That claim has steadily
lost adherents over the years, precipitously so after ancient DNA
extracted from Neanderthal skeletal remains showed a genomic sequence
very different from that of living humans. Based on the molecular clock,
it is estimated Homo neanderthalensis and Homo sapiens went their
separate ways over 500,000 years ago (which is to say, they are both
descendants of a deep common ancestor, but we trace our evolution via
the Homo sapiens line).⁸

Once Homo sapiens struck out on their own, they scarcely stopped. It is
this species that first traveled beyond temperate Eurasia to colonize
the distant corners of the globe, including Australia and the Americas,
the last of the habitable continents of prehistory. Although brainy,
innovative, and highly adept hunter-gatherers, getting to America was no
easy journey even for Homo sapiens, not with Siberia in between and
especially not during harsh, full-glacial times. As archaeologist Ted
Goebel observes, it appears no one was in Siberia (even southern
Siberia) during the LGM, and understandably so. Climates were cold and
harsh though, ironically, glacial ice was no barrier: virtually all of
central and western Siberia was ice free, even during the LGM.⁹

Not that there is evidence humans had reached Siberia much before then.
There are only a few archaeological sites north of 55°N latitude and
east of 80°E longitude (near present-day Novosibirsk) that possibly
predate the LGM. And the oldest of these, Nepa I in central Siberia,
which dates to 35,000 years ago, and Yana RHS in northern Siberia near
the Laptev Sea, dated to 27,000 BP, are both still many thousand
kilometers shy of the western edge of Beringia, the New World's entry
point.

Humans more or less permanently colonized far northeastern Asia only
after 18,000 BP. By then, they had reoccupied the Lena and Aldan river
basins and left behind a number of sites, including Dyuktai Cave,
occupied as early as 14,000 years ago, where bifacial knives, blades,
scrapers, and points were found with a range of animal remains,
including mammoth, bison, musk ox, horse, reindeer, and moose. Even
then, they were still several thousand kilometers away and well shy of
the latitude of Beringia, which is mostly north of 60°N, about the
latitude of Seward, Alaska (Figure 4).

Over late Pleistocene time, humans moved further north and east, and
finally approached the gateway to America. Archaeologist John Hoffecker
and paleoecologist Scott Elias suggest that improved stone tool
technology, more efficiently insulated clothing, and a post-glacial
expansion of trees (to provide wood for hearth fires) likely aided that
expansion. But humans were still sparse on the ground. Their presence is
well documented and securely dated only at the sites of Berelekh on the
Indigirka River close to the Arctic Coast (at 70°N latitude), and at
Ushki in central Kamchatka. These two localities were relatively late in
the grand scheme of prehistory: they are no more than about 14,000 and
11,300 years old, respectively. Importantly, they contain artifact
types—including the distinctive Chindadn point—we will soon see on the
Alaskan side of Beringia.

Otherwise, it has so far proven difficult to pinpoint archaeologically
when and from where in Siberia the earliest Americans originated. Could
it be that they did not come this way at all? More on this later
(Chapter 6), when we confront a bold daylight attempt to rob Siberia of
its role as the jumping off point for the colonization of the New World.

Taken at face value, it appears that far northeastern Siberia and
Beringia were not occupied by humans until as late as 14,000 years ago.
But let's not leap to that conclusion just yet. The Siberian
archaeological record on the whole is sparse, and gets even more so as
one approaches the Bering Land Bridge. The timing of the peopling of
Siberia will not be known until Siberia is peopled by more
archaeologists. Given the archaeological near invisibility of what must
have been small and highly mobile human populations, the vast area to be
searched for their sites, and the relatively limited archaeological work
that's been done to date, this negative evidence is sure not to endure.

[images]

FIGURE 4.
Map of the extent of Beringia at the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), showing
the location of early Siberian and Alaskan archaeological sites
discussed in the text.

But prehistory in this region (or in the Americas) will likely not go
too far back. No Neanderthals or any other earlier (non-sapiens) form of
human has ever been found in far northeast Asia and Siberia, let alone
in the New World. One should never say never in archaeology, but at this
point, it seems exceedingly unlikely that premodern humans made it to
the Americas, though that hasn't stopped speculation on this score—or
claims from sites like Calico (California) or Old Crow (Canada) that the
first Americans arrived some 200,000 to 350,000 or more years ago.

Of course, if such claims of deep antiquity (or European ancestry) are
right, then our hard-won understanding of human evolution is badly
wrong. But there's no need to rush a textbook rewrite just yet. More
likely, such claims are simply flawed. We have long assumed, and have no
reason to doubt, the Americas were colonized by anatomically modern
humans, coming by way of Asia and bearing an Upper Paleolithic artifact
technology, and arriving at some time during the latter stages of the
Ice Age.

But what kind of place was this New World?

2

THE LANDSCAPE OF
COLONIZATION

Glaciers, Climates, and Environments
of Ice Age North America

In late June 1838, Charles Darwin set off on a geological mission to
Scotland to examine the famous Parallel Roads of Glen Roy, several long,
paired terraces that extended down both sides of this narrow mountain
valley at matching elevations. Local legend pegged these as hunting
paths of ancient Celtic warriors.¹ Geologists doubted that explanation,
but were mystified all the same.

It was “admitted by everyone,” Darwin later wrote, “that no other cause,
except water acting for some period on the steep side of the mountains,
could have traced those lines.”² Yet, how could water have been raised
to this elevation on land? Some surmised a lake had once filled the
valley (Loch Roy, it was called), and that its water level had dropped
over time. But this was an open-ended valley: where was the barrier that
dammed the water to form the lake? Nature had to have built and
destroyed several dams at successive periods, each at least a mile wide
and minimally a thousand feet high, in order to form the several
terraces. However, no evidence of any dams could be found.

Perhaps, Darwin suspected, instead of a dam pushing the water up into
the land, the land itself had once been down in the water. He'd recently
returned from a five-year voyage around the world on the H.M.S. Beagle,
where on the earthquake-prone Chilean coast, he'd seen unmistakable
evidence of a succession of wave-cut beaches that had formed as the land
rose (episodically and sometimes violently) from the sea. He was certain
the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy had been cut by a similar process, and
were testimony Scotland had once been submerged, but had since risen
from the sea.

Yet, as Darwin walked the Parallel Roads, he did not find a single
seashell from those ostensibly wave-cut marine beaches. The quarrymen
who worked in the area assured him they hadn't seen any shells either.
Perhaps it was just a matter of poor preservation: not all the terraces
on the South American coast were littered with seashells either.
Besides, there was other evidence that helped convince him Scotland had
emerged from the sea. Erratic boulders, so named because they were found
far from outcrops of that rock type, were sprinkled throughout the upper
reaches of Glen Roy. One giant granite boulder was perched 2,200 feet
above sea level, yet it could only have come from a granite outcrop 6
miles away and nearly a thousand feet lower. Darwin knew no “rush of
water so impetuous” that could wash a boulder that far and high up a
steep mountainside. Surely its present perch was once closer to the sea,
and the granite block had been deposited at a time when climates were
much cooler, and icebergs could have rafted it here from its bedrock
source.

Darwin spent a week tramping around Glen Roy, experiencing nature
“looking as happy” as he felt. He then returned home and straightaway
prepared a long paper, “Observations on the Parallel Roads of Glen
Roy…with an attempt to prove they are of marine origin,” which was
published the next year in the Philosophical Transactions of London's
Royal Society.³

Yet, scarcely two years later, Darwin was scrambling to defend his
theory of the origin of the Parallel Roads. And he continued to do so
for another two decades, though he was fighting a rearguard action and
knew it. Finally he gave up, admitting to his friend and geological
mentor Charles Lyell that he'd been “smashed to atoms about Glen Roy,”
his paper “one long gigantic blunder.”⁴ It was—one of the few gaffes
Darwin made in an otherwise brilliant scientific career. But this one
was understandable.

For Darwin in 1838 was unaware another geological agency was involved.
Vast ice sheets—far larger than the mountain glaciers he knew—had once
covered much of the Northern Hemisphere, northern Scotland included. His
ignorance is no surprise. In those days, no one knew the extent, complex
history, and role of glaciation in shaping the landscape, let alone that
meltwater lakes could form behind dams of glacial ice and carve parallel
terraces into valley walls, or that erratic boulders could easily be
plucked and moved great distances by glaciers (ironically, Darwin
supposed it was mountain glaciers reaching the sea during cooler periods
that had released the floating ice that had rafted all those erratics).

Fully understanding the role of glacial ice and the history of
glaciation on the planet—and for that matter, its role in the early
peopling of the Americas and the adaptive challenges it posed for the
first Americans—first required opening one's eyes to the geological
signs that ice was once far more extensive than the glaciers that still
sat atop Europe's alpine peaks.

STARTING AT THE TOP

Chamois hunters in the Swiss Alps were long familiar with the glaciers
that perched high atop their mountains, and well understood that as
these giant tongues of ice slid forward and back, they left telltale
evidence of their movement. After all, they were living at the tail end
of the Little Ice Age, a several-centuries-long (ca. AD 1550-1850)
return to cooler conditions that activated many of the Alps glaciers (in
a grim and indirect way, humans may be responsible for this episode of
global cooling⁵ as Chapter 10 explains). In the 1830s, Swiss geologist
Jean de Charpentier began to record those signs: the smoothed and
striated bedrock that ice had overridden, the piles of gravelly debris
that had been pushed along and piled up (tills and moraines, we now call
them), and the boulders that the ice had plucked from high peaks and
transported dozens of kilometers down valley (erratics).

De Charpentier read from these signs that alpine glaciers had once
extended over a much larger area, and in the summer of 1836, he showed
those features to a fellow scientist there on holiday. Louis Agassiz was
quite taken by what he saw, and though he'd won his scientific
reputation as a fossil fish expert, he possessed a creative mind and
realized what de Charpentier had not: many of these same features—albeit
on a vastly larger scale—were present at lower altitudes in Europe's
high latitudes.⁶

That included immense gravel deposits previously identified as
water-laid diluvium by Oxford geologist William Buckland, which he
attributed to “a transient deluge, affecting universally,
simultaneously, and at no very distant period, the entire surface of our
planet.” When? Five or six thousand years ago by his estimate. The
diluvium was not just from any old flood: it was from Noah's.⁷ Granted,
this deposit lacked the remains of humans who had perished in the flood,
and in retrospect Buckland's Cambridge counterpart Adam Sedgwick
admitted that should have given pause. Even so, Buckland found their
absence not so hard to explain: in Noah's time, humans lived only in the
“Asiatic” region. Their remains did not belong in floodwater deposits of
northern latitudes.

Yet, in a classic argument by analogy, Agassiz reasoned otherwise. Since
the diluvium on the low-lying plains of northern Europe was the same,
albeit far more extensive, than the tills and moraines produced by
glaciers at high altitude, then the tills and moraines across Great
Britain and northern Europe surely had a glacial origin as well. Those
glaciers, however, had long since vanished. Yet, they must have been,
from the size and extent of their traces, of almost unfathomable size,
and existed during a time of global cold. “Since I saw the glaciers,”
Agassiz crowed, “I am quite of a snowy humor, and will have the whole
surface of the earth covered with ice.”⁸

A rhetorical flourish, to be sure: the earth's surface was not entirely
buried in ice back then. Still, in the main, Agassiz got it right. It
was a bold, inferential leap that surprised de Charpentier and launched
Agassiz, who was ambitious and charismatic (as de Charpentier was not),
into the scientific limelight.

Agassiz's Ice Age was soon linked with Lyell's Pleistocene, a geological
period defined independently by percentages of fossil shells of extinct
species, but which seemed to coincide perfectly with glaciation.
Buckland proved a willing convert, happily abandoning a Noachian flood
for ice. Darwin too “gave up the ghost” of his marine subsidence theory
once he was shown the traces of the glacier that had blocked Glen Roy
and dammed the lake that cut those Parallel Roads.

The Ice Age soon jumped the Atlantic, when traces of continental ice
sheets were spotted by paleontologist Timothy Abbott Conrad in 1839 in
western New York. By the 1870s, American geologists realized that fossil
plant layers sandwiched between sheets of glacial till, and the
differential weathering of moraines, were clues there had been multiple
episodes of ice advance and retreat. The Glacial Division of the United
States Geological Survey (USGS), under the aegis of Thomas Chamberlin,
spent the last decades of the nineteenth and first decades of the
twentieth centuries mapping those separate episodes. By 1915, four
distinct glacial stages, separated by long interglacials (warm,
relatively ice-free periods), were recognized: from oldest to youngest,
Nebraskan (followed by the Aftonian interglacial), Kansan (Yarmouth
interglacial), Illinoian, (Sangamon interglacial), and Wisconsin
(Holocene interglacial), the stages named for the states where their
traces were especially well expressed.

Although Chamberlin believed he knew how many glacial episodes there
were, he was certain he didn't know what caused them. He suspected the
amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere played a role. Decades
earlier James Croll had supposed it had something to do with changes in
the shape of the earth's orbit and the wobble of its axis affecting the
amount of heat received on earth. Chamberlin saw fatal flaws in both
hypotheses, though perhaps their main flaw was being too far ahead of
their time. But even as he wrote, Milutin Milankovitch, a Serbian
mathematician and one-time concrete engineer, was laying the groundwork
for resolving the cause of the Ice Ages and, in so doing, rendering the
four-stage model of Pleistocene glaciation obsolete.

A NEWTONIAN COTILLION

Milankovitch had initially set himself the ambitious goal of creating a
mathematical model of the world's climates. Well-meaning colleagues
tried to dissuade him: who needs a model, when weather stations around
the globe provide actual data? Milankovitch paid them no mind. With a
model, he could predict—even retrodict—variation in climate across
space, and perhaps even through time.

Driving the earth's climates, Milankovitch reasoned, was incoming solar
radiation or insolation. Insolation varies by latitude and season, as
the relative position of the earth and the sun shift over the annual
cycle. It also varies over much longer time spans since, as Croll
surmised, the earth's orbit is jostled by the gravitational tug of the
sun and the other planets in a complex Newtonian cotillion. That alters
the eccentricity, or departure, of our orbit from a near-perfect circle
to more of an ellipse; it changes the tilt, or obliquity, of the earth
relative to its plane of travel; and, it triggers the precession of the
equinox, shifting the time of the year when the earth is closest to
(perihelion) or most distant from (aphelion) the sun. All these changes
occur in predictable cycles. Eccentricity varies over a 100,000-year
period; the earth's tilt swings in 41,000-year cycles between 21.8° and
24.4° (during the most recent glacial episode it was 22.95°; it is
23.45° at present); the full precession circuit takes approximately
23,000 years (at the moment, perihelion occurs during Northern
Hemisphere winters; 10,000 years ago, it was opposite).

These predictable cycles have, at least in principle, predictable
results: they determine the total amount of insolation received in
different seasons at different latitudes. So, for example, tilt the
Northern Hemisphere just 1° away from the sun, and it reduces insolation
by 3% to 4%, thereby cooling winters and summers. Similar effects come
with changes in precession and eccentricity, though in the latter the
climatic consequences are subtle indeed: reshaping the earth's orbit
accounts for, at most, a 0.3% variation in insolation. Still, combined
and compounded, these three orbital-forcing functions (as climatologists
call them), can cause dramatic swings in insolation—upwards of 20%.

Long before computers made such calculations easier, Milankovitch
calculated orbitally driven insolation changes by season and by latitude
over long periods of earth history. The effort took years, though he
worked steadily at it—even while a prisoner of war in Hungary during
World War I (nowadays, one can instantly download the last 5 million
years of orbital insolation changes from the Internet). When
Milankovitch's work appeared after the war, it caught the eye of
Wladimir Koppen, who saw that changing insolation might be the key to
understanding glaciation. The link, he realized, lay in insolation
received at high latitudes in summer since that determined how much of
the previous winter's snow melted away. If it all vanished, it would be
difficult to build an ice sheet, for glaciers are created and fed by
snow that, by slightly melting, condensing, and recrystallizing, becomes
ice. When summer insolation is reduced and temperatures cool, snow from
the previous winter stays frozen on the ground (firn, it's called). The
next winter, more snow falls, and if it does not melt away the following
summer, the firn/snowbank grows larger. As it grows, the underlying
layers of firn become steadily denser until ultimately they turn into
ice as the mass above thickens.

Once the ice reaches a critical thickness, it begins to move a few
centimeters to a few meters a day, either by internally deforming, or by
sliding along on a slurry of water, gravel, and mud. Assuming
temperatures remain cool, the ice can advance considerable distances
from its zone of accumulation close to the poles or high in the
mountains (see Plate 2). Massive, continental-scale ice sheets are
primarily a Northern Hemisphere phenomenon since glaciers need land on
which to grow—80% of the Southern Hemisphere is under water.
Accordingly, the only ice sheet of consequence in the Southern
Hemisphere is and was atop Antarctica, though there were relatively
small glaciers high in the Andes and in Patagonia.

When the ice front reaches a latitude or elevation where temperatures
are warmer, melting (ablation) overcomes the accumulation of ice, and
the glacier stops in its tracks. Warm up the climate even more, and the
glacier is forced to retreat. Where the glacier pauses for a time, it
deposits a gravelly end moraine, marking a moment of geological time
when climate was relatively stable and accumulation and ablation
temporarily balanced one another.

For the most part, glaciers advance and retreat slowly: gravity and the
sheer mass of the ice see to that. And it is often an uneven,
stutter-step process of moving and pausing. However, in times of rapid
climate change—especially global warming—glaciers can move quickly, even
visibly, over the course of a few months or years. Not surprisingly,
given the recent warming of the planet, most of the world's glaciers are
currently in rapid and headlong retreat (which is not good news for many
reasons, though with one very thin silver lining: melting glaciers have
exposed a wondrous array of animals, plants, and people and their
artifacts, preserved long frozen beneath the ice⁹).

ANSWERS FROM THE OOZE

At the behest of Koppen, Milankovitch ultimately pushed his insolation
calculations back hundreds of thousands of years, and identified dozens
of periods in the past when Northern Hemisphere summer insolation should
have favored glacial advance. Yet, geologists had found evidence for
only four such episodes. Either his model or the geologists’ data were
flawed. But which? An answer to this terrestrial puzzle first emerged in
an unlikely place: the deep ocean floor.

Two different forms (isotopes) of oxygen bond with hydrogen to form
water—one is the garden variety ^(l6)O, and the other is the heavier
isotope ^(l8)O. (An isotope is a variant of a specific element
possessing the same number of protons but differing in the number of
neutrons, and hence has a different mass and slightly different physical
properties). When water vapor from the ocean reaches the clouds, it
contains a greater proportion of ^(l6)O because these lighter water
molecules evaporate more readily; the heavier ^(l8)O is left behind.
During nonglacial periods, rain or snow over land is returned to the
ocean, and thus there is a relatively constant ^(l8)O to ^(l6)O ratio in
ocean water. However, reduce insolation, cool summer temperatures, and
freeze that precipitation in glaciers and prevent its return to the sea,
and the ocean becomes progressively depleted in the lighter ^(l6)O
molecules. Thus, the ratio of ^(l8)O to ^(l6)O in the ocean reveals how
much ^(l6)O is locked up on land, and so provides a proxy for times of
glaciation.

So how do we know ^(l8)O:^(l6)O ratios at different times in the past?
Tiny planktonic animals, foraminifera such as Globigerina bulloides,
precipitate calcareous shells that record the proportion of
^(l8)O:^(l6)O in the seawater at the time they formed.¹⁰ After the
foraminifera die, their shells drift to the sea floor and become part of
the millions of years of mud that has accumulated on the ocean bottom.
Over the past half century, geologists have extracted these shells from
the mud and analyzed their isotopic composition (8^(l8)O, measured in
parts per million [%o] relative to a standard). The result is a lengthy
record of changing ocean oxygen isotope ratios, and hence a history of
ice on land. The details of that record have since been greatly enhanced
by cores drilled through the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets (and in
thousands of smaller mountain glaciers), which yield a remarkably
precise record that reaches back hundreds of thousands and even millions
of years of oxygen isotopic composition (δ^(l8)O); greenhouse gases such
as methane (CH₄) and carbon dioxide (CO₂); and even traces of
terrestrial dust, volcanic ash, pollen, and sea salt wafting about the
atmosphere.^(ll)

The cores from sea and ice reveal there were at least ten major
glacial-interglacial episodes (of varying intensity) over the last
million years, and perhaps twenty over the entire Ice Age, the start of
which is now fairly firmly dated to about 2.6 million years ago.
Agassiz's Ice Age and Lyell's Pleistocene, tightly bound since the
1840s, have had to go their separate ways since the Pleistocene—as
formally defined by the International Commission on Stratigraphy using
criteria other than glaciation—began only l.8l million years ago and
thus, strictly speaking, covers only the later part of the Ice Age. And
therein are the distant drums of battle brewing, for those of us who
work in this time period are determined to reunite the two for reasons
historical and otherwise. In the fall of 2006, the International Union
for Quaternary Research demanded the International Commission on
Stratigraphy reconnect the Pleistocene and the Ice Age, warning that
their failure to do so would be considered a “unilateral and hostile”
action. We demanded “nothing less than control over our period of
geological time.”¹² We Pleistocene types are a feisty lot.

Yet, if there were approximately twenty glacial episodes over the
Pleistocene, why had geologists found evidence of only four? Lay the
blame squarely on the geological record. The bulldozing action of later
glacial advances removed nearly all vestiges of earlier ones. Even
today, knowing there were more advances has not made finding them any
easier: only traces of two more have been spotted (geologists have now
also realized that glaciation isn't solely a function of Milankovitch
forcing^(l3)).

Our present landscape was shaped primarily by the most recent of those,
the Wisconsin—we can still use that name—which is subdivided as follows:

1.  Early Wisconsin, a cooler period marking the onset of this last
    major glacial episode (80,000-65,000 BP; designated as Marine
    Isotope Stage 4 [MIS 4]);
2.  Middle Wisconsin, a relatively warmer period, with glaciers present
    on the land but much reduced (65,000-35,000 BP [MIS 3]);
3.  Late Wisconsin, a period of expanded glaciers (35,000-10,000 BP [MIS
    2]), with ice volume reaching its maximum, and sea levels—though not
    necessarily temperatures—falling to their minimum at l8,000 BP,
    referred to as the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). By virtue of this
    being the last episode of Pleistocene glaciation, it is by far the
    best known.
4.  Holocene, the present interglacial (l0,000 BP-present [MIS l]),
    which we are in today.

The landscape, climate, and environment of the Pleistocene was very
different than that of the Holocene. The details follow, but here are
some broad themes to bear in mind. For one, the Pleistocene was not
merely the modern world plus a few giant glaciers here and there. Its
massive ice sheets changed the geography of land and seas (opening and
closing routes to America in the process), as well as altered climates
and environments in profound ways.

But it wasn't simply a matter of being colder and wetter (or drier) for
long stretches of time. The Pleistocene was marked by cycles of climate
change taking place on varying time scales, some at a stately hundred
thousand-year rhythm, others running their course in millennia,
centuries, or even decades (Figure 5). Transitions between those shorter
cycles could be jumpy, with large and often-abrupt climate changes
occurring in centuries or less. As a result, even though many
Pleistocene plants and animals are familiar to our modern eyes, because
they had to cope with a more-or-less constantly changing world, they
were often joined in biotic communities that looked very different—not
only from those of the present, but also over the millennia of the
Pleistocene. Change, not stability, was their norm, save for those times
when climates were at their coldest (as during the LGM) or warmest—which
is why the climate and environment of the last few thousand years is
quite tame by Pleistocene standards.¹⁴

[images]

FIGURE 5.
Patterns and trends in Pleistocene climate and environment, 450,000
years ago to present and 50,000 years ago to present (all dates are in
calibrated years BP).

The upper graph shows the period from 450,000 years ago to the present,
and the trends over time—from top to bottom—of insolation, sea level,
and atmospheric carbon dioxide. Insolation, as calculated for summers at
60^(o)N latitude (in Watts/meter²), is a significant—but not the
sole—driver behind glaciation, with peaks roughly corresponding to
glacial episodes. Global sea level presents something of a mirror image
of the amount of glacial ice on land, varying from high stands that
approximate the present to periods when global oceans were 120 ± 10 m
below the present level, the latter depths reached during the Last
Glacial Maximum (LGM). Atmospheric carbon dioxide, as measured in air
bubbles trapped in the Antarctic ice sheet, ranged over that span
between a low of 185 parts per million (ppm) to a pre-Industrial
Revolution high of 290 ppm. The current figure of 385 ppm is well off
the scale of this graph. (Adapted from Labeyrie et al. 2003:37;
Overpeck, Whitlock, and Huntley 2003:83.)

The lower graph provides a close-up look at the last 50,000 years.
Visible over that time in average annual air temperature (as inferred
from 8¹⁸O measured in the Greenland ice sheet) are the temperature lows
during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) and Younger Dryas (YD), and the
substantial warming that followed both periods. Also apparent are the
wide swings of global temperatures throughout the Pleistocene, which
narrowed significantly during the Holocene. The curves for dust and
methane, also measured from the Greenland ice sheet, show the
unmistakable signal of the Younger Dryas, when newly emerging
peatlands—a significant source of methane—froze over, and the cold, dry,
and windy conditions blew dust across Greenland. Likewise, the sea level
curve (derived from the western Pacific) shows the two pulses of rapid
sea level rise on either side of the Younger Dryas, as well as the
flattening of the curve—that is, no significant change in global
seas—during that period. Finally, atmospheric carbon dioxide began to
increase after the LGM, and continued to do so through the YD, after
which it stabilized for much of the Holocene, until more recent times.
(Adapted from Liu et. al 2004; Oldfield and Alverson 2003:2; and Raynaud
et al. 2003:22.)

How much of a challenge Pleistocene climate change would have posed for
people depends on when they arrived, and how such changes affected
resources vital to them. That the first Americans were adaptively light
on their feet (they must have been: they made it here) was a very good
thing as they moved out across this diverse and dynamic continent. This
was especially true as the Pleistocene came to an end, for it went out
with a bang (as we'll see, some take this literally), at a time when the
first Americans were stretching their legs across the country. It was a
challenging stage on which this human play was performed.

AN ICY STAGE

The first Americans arrived during the latter part of the Pleistocene,
almost assuredly within the Wisconsin period. When in the Wisconsin is
another matter. Most archaeologists put it in Late Wisconsin time;
others push for a Middle or even Early Wisconsin appearance; a very few
lobby for a pre-Wisconsin arrival. Unless radically new evidence is
forthcoming, this last possibility seems remote. Playing the odds, our
attention here focuses on the glacial geology, climate, and environment
of the Late Wisconsin.

Late Wisconsin North America would be virtually unrecognizable today.
Much of Canada and the northernmost United States were buried beneath an
ice sheet comprised of three separate ice masses, the Laurentide,
Cordilleran, and Innuitian. Little need be said of the small Innuitian
ice sheet, save that it covered the islands of northernmost Canada
(above 75°N) and spanned the gap between North America and Greenland.
The other two were much larger, combining to cover about 15.8 million
km² (the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets today extend over
approximately 15.4 million km²), and accounting for more than a third of
the approximately 42.5 million km² of glacial ice covering the LGM
earth.¹⁵ The Laurentide and Cordilleran played prominent roles in North
America's Pleistocene climate, environment, and peopling.

The Laurentide, the larger by far, formed from the coalescence of
glaciers flowing out from eastern Baffin Island, the Keewatin Uplands
west of Hudson Bay, and Labrador. As the Laurentide expanded, it buried
much of eastern and central North America, from above the Arctic Circle
down to mid-Ohio (75°N to 40°N), and from the Atlantic coast to the
eastern flank of the Rocky Mountains (64°W to 120°W). At the LGM, the
Laurentide covered approximately 13.4 million km² and in places reached
3-4 kilometers in height (for comparison, the combined Antarctic ice
sheets cover about 13.6 million km² and at their highest point in East
Antarctica top out at just over 4.2 kilometers).

The Cordilleran ice sheet in the west was similarly a glacial composite,
but of glaciers that originated in high elevation ranges of northwestern
North America: ice expanded from the Alaska, Chugach, and St. Elias
mountains in southeast Alaska, down the Coast Range of Canada, but also
from the Rocky Mountains. When these fully coalesced, the Cordilleran
covered an area of approximately 2.4 million km² and stretched from
north of Anchorage, Alaska, to south of Seattle, Washington, blanketing
much of the Yukon Territory and nearly all of British Columbia. The ice
reached a thickness of 2.5 kilometers, overwhelming all but the highest
summits, and flowed out into the Pacific Ocean.

South of the Laurentide and Cordilleran, isolated alpine glaciers formed
on the Cascade, Sierra Nevada, and Rocky Mountain ranges, and on smaller
ranges in places such as the Great Basin. The extent of these glaciers
depended on topography, temperature, and moisture: northerly areas
closer to the coast had more and more extensive alpine glaciation, while
areas to the south and farther inland had glaciers only at the highest
elevations. Thus, in the northern Cascades, glaciers descended to about
1,600 meters above sea level, whereas in the southern Sierra Nevada and
Rocky Mountain ranges, glaciers formed only above approximately 3,000
meters in elevation. The impact of these relatively small and
topographically restricted glaciers was insignificant—trivial, even—when
measured against their continental-scale brethren.

COMINGS AND GOINGS

The Late Wisconsin Laurentide ice sheet began expanding some
30,000-27,000 years ago, according to Arthur Dyke,¹⁶ reaching the
northern United States by about 26,000 BP. It reached its maximum
southern extent at different times in different places: east of the
Great Lakes region, the ice made it as far south as it would get very
early—by roughly 21,000 BP—weaving a line from Georges Bank off Cape
Cod, along southern Long Island, across northern New Jersey and
Pennsylvania, and traversing Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, whence it then
turned sharply to the north up into Wisconsin. It toed that line for
several thousand years. West of there, the Laurentide did not reach its
maximum until about 14,000 BP.

Cordilleran ice probably began advancing no earlier than about 27,000
BP, with the expansion of ice in the high valleys of the Coast Range,
and some 2,000-3,000 years later in the mountain ranges of southeast
Alaska and interior northwest Canada.¹⁷ As these glaciers spread out of
their high valleys and coalesced, they initially moved west to the
Pacific, approaching Vancouver Island by about 24,000 years ago. By
20,000 BP, the Cordilleran ice sheet had filled the lower-lying Fraser
Plateau of south-central British Columbia, and by about 17,000 years ago
had flowed south of Canada. It continued to expand in all directions,
and by about 16,000 BP had reached its maximum extent along much of the
Canadian coast, though it did not reach its southern extent in Montana,
Idaho, and Washington until approximately 14,000 years ago.

Not surprisingly, these ice sheets had a profound influence on the
topography of North America. Their advance disrupted and rerouted
drainages, even reversing the flow of the Mississippi River, which in
pre-glacial times exited North America via what's now Hudson's Bay. In
retreat, they left behind moraines and other glacial landforms and
lake-dotted landscapes (10,000 just by Minnesota's count), and in
meltwater floods carried sediment that, when dry, was airlifted and
deposited across large regions of interior North America (loess).
Naturally, they had a significant impact on climate, which of course
influenced the distribution of plant and animal species. Finally, this
massive ice buildup helped set the stage for crossing over to the New
World.

OCEANS AND SHELVES

Let's look first at what it meant for crossings: ice sheets the size of
the Laurentide, Cordilleran, and their LGM counterparts require water.
Nearly all of it must come from the oceans, where 97% of the planet's
approximately 1.5 x 10⁹ km³ of water is stored. It's a zero-sum game.
Building glaciers on land lowers sea level; melt the ice, and the seas
rise again. That process is known as glacial eustasy, and it's ongoing:
sea levels are currently rising, though at the subtle rate of 1-2
millimeters per year. (Of course, if the current melting of the
Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets accelerates, so, too, will the rate
of sea level rise, with potentially catastrophic consequences: between
them, these two ice sheets hold the equivalent of a whopping 60 meters
of global seas. Low-lying island nations in the Pacific have good reason
to be deeply concerned about global warming).¹⁸

During the LGM, roughly 5.2% of the world's water was frozen on land
(about half in the Laurentide alone). That was enough to draw down
global seas 120 ± 10 meters below their present level.¹⁹ Shallow
continental shelf became dry land, resulting in about 8% more land
during the LGM than today. Small wonder the bones and teeth of mammals
such as mammoth and mastodon are found in dredging the Atlantic floor:
it's not because they swam out there. Since the Atlantic coastline was
shifted hundreds of kilometers east of its present position, rivers had
to extend further and cut deeper to reach distant Pleistocene oceans
(today, their now-drowned channels are visible in bathymetric charts of
coastal waters). The continental shelf on the Pacific side is much
narrower, but in LGM times was still almost 50 kilometers beyond its
present position. But it is to the far northern Pacific where our
attention is drawn.

Today, Siberia and Alaska are separated by the Bering Strait, which even
at its narrowest is still about 100 kilometers across. Seas only had to
fall just over 50 meters for the continental shelf beneath the Bering
and Chukchi Seas to become dry land. When sea levels were at their LGM
minimum, a land bridge roughly 1,000 kilometers wide connected Asia and
America. The Bering Land Bridge—or Beringia, which includes the portions
of Siberia and Alaska it links—emerged in late Wisconsin times
approximately 27,000 years ago, and was passable until severed by rising
postglacial seas about 11,000 years ago. But from then until 10,000 BP,
the breach was still narrow enough to readily freeze (and allow walking
across) in winter. Soon thereafter, Pacific mollusks reappeared in the
Chukchi Sea, an unmistakable sign the west-east Bering Land Bridge had
once again become the south-north Bering Strait.²⁰

Beringia was a vast, flat, ice-free, almost featureless highway
trafficked by plants, animals, and people for millennia. That the same
mammals inhabited Siberia and Alaska testifies to the ease of travel
back and forth: only Siberia's woolly rhinoceros and a few Alaskan
species (including the giant short-faced bear), failed to make the
cross-Beringia commute. Traversable though Beringia was, hospitable it
may not have been. From the absence of evidence for trees or lakes, and
the presence of extensive sand dunes, loess, tracts of permafrost, and
ice-wedge casts, it appears that the LGM climate was significantly drier
and colder than at present (with precipitation estimated to have been
40%-75% lower, and average air temperatures lower by 7°F-11°F).

Still, the rich record of animal bones recovered from Alaska—sluicing
for gold produces fossil wealth, too—bespeaks an abundant animal
community. It was dominated, Dale Guthrie shows, by large grazers such
as mammoth, horse, bison, saiga (an antelope), and musk ox, and their
predators, the Pleistocene lion, saber-toothed cat, and giant
short-faced bear. So many animals were present that Guthrie envisions
LGM Beringia looking much like the African savanna with its vast game
herds, though obviously one that was a great deal colder and drier. The
Mammoth Steppe, he calls it.²¹

Once raised, the Mammoth Steppe notion was instantly criticized. Not by
Guthrie's fellow paleontologists, but by palynologists studying the
vegetation of Pleistocene Beringia. Their evidence, recorded in
pollen-bearing sediments, pointed to a landscape shrouded in sparse,
tundra-like vegetation. It was, they supposed, more polar desert than
rich grassland, more polar Sahara than savanna. This contradictory
testimony—lots of animals, which apparently thrived on no visible means
of support—came to be known as the “Productivity Paradox.” Yet, the
burden of proof, Guthrie insisted, must be on the palynologists:
Beringia had too many grazers for too long to have been as barren as
they said.²²

They're still arguing, for Guthrie has never demonstrated how abundant
animals were (it's not an easy task), while palynologists have never
resolved how much they can generalize about the Beringian landscape
vegetation from their pollen cores. But reconciliation may be on the
horizon. Sophisticated analyses of pollen records by Patricia Anderson
and colleagues have shown that while LGM Beringia was indeed more tundra
than steppe, it was a tundra unlike that in the Arctic today. Its
productivity was much higher, and it included plenty of grasses for
grazers.²³ Humans on this landscape may not have found many plants to
eat, but there would have been animals to hunt as they made their way
across from Siberia.

PLEISTOCENE PROMENADES

If migrating from Siberia to Alaska was relatively easy, traveling south
to the Lower Forty-eight may not have been. The Laurentide and
Cordilleran ice sheets grew toward each other, and for thousands of
years around the time of the LGM, they coalesced along a nearly 2,000
kilometer stretch of western Canada (roughly today's British
Columbia-Alberta border). Just how thoroughgoing a barrier the ice
sheets formed is apparent in studies of ancient DNA from fossil bison
and brown bears, which reveal an absence of gene flow between
populations in Alaska and those south of the ice for much of the time
between 25,000 and 13,000 years ago. Out along the coast during the LGM,
Cordilleran ice flowed onto the Pacific Ocean's continental shelf, and
along much of its length reached the Pleistocene sea, potentially
blocking any coastal end runs.

People coming to America thus could have had an uninterrupted stroll
from Siberia to Texas, if they arrived after Beringia emerged but before
glacial ice had completely buried the landscape, or if they came after
ice retreat but before Beringia was drowned. At times in between, it
would have been a two-step shuffle: first to Alaska and later—after ice
retreat—from Alaska to midlatitude North America. In either case, there
was a choice of routes: through the continental interior along the
eastern edge of the Rocky Mountains, or down along the Pacific coast
(Figure 6). Timing, however, was everything.

[images]

FIGURE 6.
Maps showing the position of retreating Cordilleran and Laurentide
glacial ice at 13,000 BP, 12,000 BP, 11,500 BP, and 10,500 BP; the
opening of the ice-free corridor; and the filling and draining of
proglacial lakes. (Adapted from Dyke 2004 by David Willers.)

The interior route was effectively blocked by glacial expansion as early
as about 28,000 years ago, and remained so until late glacial times.
Yet, even after the Laurentide and Cordilleran glaciers retreated and an
ice-free corridor began to open between them—which it did, zipperlike,
from its northern and southern ends—the newly deglaciated terrain must
have been an impenetrable mess. Low-lying areas would have been
inundated by meltwater lakes and mud flats. The higher, drier terrain
may have been traversable, but was likely inhospitable, at least while
cold katabatic winds drained off nearby ice sheets. It was centuries or
more—perhaps not until approximately 12,000 BP—that the land was fully
restocked with plants and animals, and became a habitable passageway for
human colonizers.²⁴

A coastal route was open before about 23,000 years ago but was
impassable during the LGM, as glaciers in the northern Gulf of Alaska
blocked the route south. Were it possible to get around that
barrier—either on foot or afloat—a trip down the LGM coast would still
have challenged the hardiest Pleistocene pioneers. Travel would have
been impeded by icebergs, sea ice, and glacier fronts hundreds of
kilometers across, deeply crevassed, and with edges that calved into the
ocean (see Plate 3). There were irregularly spaced segments of coast
unburdened by Cordilleran ice even during the LGM, and though these may
have provided safe refuge for plants and animals,²⁵ such areas would
have been walled by ice and assuredly cold and harsh. It would have been
risky for LGM travelers coming down the coast to count on finding such
unpredictable landings. Better to travel once the ice had begun to
retreat. But when was that?

Deglaciation of the coast was complex and took place at different times.
Still, long reaches of the outer coast were ice free between 16,000 and
14,500 BP. Glacial ice blocked portions of the coast after that, but by
13,400 years ago those glaciers had retreated, and the coast was clear
from Alaska to Washington State. The plants and animals necessary to
human survival soon took root on land.²⁶

But a caveat: our dates for the timing and availability of the different
routes can change. Forty years ago, for example, the interior route was
said to be closed from 27,000 to 12,000 BP; but then thirty and twenty
years ago, the ice-free corridor was thought to have been open for much
of Wisconsin time; ten years ago the pendulum of opinion swung back in
the other direction, and once again the interior route was thought
closed or otherwise impassable for much of the late Pleistocene (where
matters now stand). This swinging to and fro was because of the
continued radiocarbon and other chronological dating of glacial features
and new interpretations that followed. It's a useful caution, suggesting
as it does that although our current dates for the opening of interior
and coastal routes might seem secure (and supported by DNA evidence),
additional evidence on the timing of glacial advance and retreat and the
environments along each route can change all that.

Regardless, once the first Americans got south of the North American ice
sheets, glacial ice would not impact their movements until they reached
the high Andes or the high latitudes of South America.

FORECASTING BACKWARD: A LOOK AT PLEISTOCENE CLIMATES

The climate that greeted the first Americans depends on when they got
here, for climates were changing into, through, and out of the LGM.²⁷
Helping drive those changes were the ice sheets themselves, for these
were mountain-sized weathermakers capable of diverting jet streams and
air masses, influencing local climates as well as more distant land and
sea surface temperatures (indirectly further altering air mass movement
and behavior), and producing large anomalies in the earth's radiation
balance and albedo (glaciers reflect more of the sun's energy back into
space, compounding cooling).²⁸

Overall, average annual air temperatures across the LGM globe were
9°F-12°F cooler than today. No surprise there: this was the Ice Age.
However, the degree of cooling depended on location: it was only 5°F-9°F
cooler in the tropics, 18°F-22°F cooler in areas closer to the ice
sheets, and 37°F-41°F colder directly atop an ice sheet, were any human
foragers hardy enough to venture atop one.²⁹

In North America, an anticyclone (winds that rotate clockwise about a
center of high pressure) developed over the Laurentide and Cordilleran
ice sheets, and cold, katabatic winds flowed off the ice. Along their
front, these produced a dry, periglacial band up to 200 kilometers wide,
which left behind traces of permafrost such as ice-wedge casts, relict
pingos (ice-mounded earth, since collapsed), and the scars of patterned
ground. This would not have been a particularly hospitable place for
people: annual air temperatures in permafrost regions average a chilly
21°F.

Yet, further south, temperatures might not have been so cold, nor were
seasonal swings as pronounced as today. Winters, in fact, may have been
relatively warmer. Here's why: today in North America, especially across
its broad interior, we experience a continental climate marked by
bitterly cold winters. These are a consequence of frigid Arctic air
masses that sweep down from northern Canada and reach deep into the
southern United States, plunging temperatures all the way. But cold air
is low-lying air, and during glacial times would have been trapped in
the Arctic behind the looming 3-4 kilometer-high Laurentide ice sheet,
largely unable to penetrate midlatitude North America. Excluding that
air mass dampened seasonal temperature swings, with the result that LGM
climates were more equable than today, with cooler summers but
relatively warmer winters.

Precipitation patterns during LGM times were likewise very different: it
was wetter in some places, drier in others, and varied in different ways
seasonally. Credit the ice sheet once more: it split the westerly jet
stream into branches that flowed along its northern and southern edges.
The northern, weaker branch brought relatively dry air across Alaska,
where LGM climates were only a few degrees cooler than present. By the
time the jet stream bent around to reach New England and the North
Atlantic, it was feeding in cold arctic air, producing climatic
conditions that were wetter than present, as storms formed along the
border of glacial ice and ocean.

Further south it was not as cold or as wet. The presence of the ice
sheet, coupled with the influx of Caribbean air (extending northward to
a latitude of 40°N), strengthened westerly flow and pumped Pacific air
into the Upper Midwest in summer, the air drying as it traveled eastward
over the Rocky Mountains. Drier conditions also marked much of the
southeast. Polar waters expanded south, cooling sea surface temperatures
in the Atlantic 3°F-6°F (temperatures off coastal New England were as
much as 25°F cooler than today). Cooler oceans give up less water to
evaporation, reducing moisture available for precipitation on land.
Florida was especially hard hit, suffering a steep decline in LGM
rainfall.³⁰

On the opposite side of the continent, the southern-shifted branch of
the jet stream deflected moist Pacific air on a more southeasterly
track, which brought onshore a strong flow of cool, moist air and rain
to what is now the arid/semiarid Great Basin and American Southwest.
Rain, of course, meant cloud cover, and that coupled with cooler
temperatures lowered evaporation. By one estimate LGM precipitation was
twice what it is at present, and evaporation about 25% less. Regardless
of the exact figures, the result was lakes on the land: 25,000 dotted
the Southern High Plains of Texas alone. Pluvial lakes, we call these to
signify their formation under climate conditions wetter than today.

The largest of the LGM's pluvial lakes were in the Great Basin, and the
greatest of them all was Lake Bonneville, which covered nearly 52,000
km² of northeastern Utah; it was about the size of present-day Lake
Michigan. Today we see only its remnants: the Bonneville “salt flats”
(the floor of the ancient lake); prominent wave-cut beaches (more
parallel roads) etched into places such as the Wasatch Mountains east of
Salt Lake City (Figure 7); and the Great Salt, Utah, and Sevier lakes,
the puddles Bonneville left behind after it evaporated (which together
represent no more than 6% of their ancestral lake). This vast inland sea
hit its high water mark—a depth of about 372 meters—around 15,000 BP,³¹
but the lake would have stayed higher longer had it not catastrophically
drained following a breach in its sidewall. Ultimately it stabilized,
and its later Pleistocene history is similar to that of other Great
Basin pluvial lakes, such as Lake Lahontan and Mono Lake. All together,
the Pleistocene Great Basin had about eleven times more water on its
floor, and would have provided habitats for a wide variety of plants,
animals, and people—were they in the neighborhood.

While the desert bloomed during the LGM, the rainy Pacific Northwest was
much drier, owing to prevailing easterlies. Nevertheless, this was a
time of catastrophic flooding in the Northwest, though for reasons that
had nothing to do with precipitation. Instead, blame glacial ice. When
Cordilleran ice reached its maximum extent, it dammed the Clark Fork of
the Columbia River, forming proglacial Lake Missoula. With a volume of
about 2,500 km³ (the size of lakes Erie and Ontario combined) and as
much as 650 meters deep, Lake Missoula drowned the valleys of northwest
Montana and etched a series of Glen Roy-like terraces into its mountains
(travelers tip: when visiting Missoula, Montana, be sure to look up at
the hillsides).

[images]

FIGURE 7.
The power of water: a wave-cut notch on the side of Fort Rock Cave in
the northern Great Basin, Oregon. The pluvial lake that once filled this
now desert area and eroded that notch was relatively small by Great
Basin standards. (Photograph by George T. Jones, courtesy of Charlotte
Beck.)

Lake Missoula existed from 15,700 to 13,500 BP. But the water was held
in check by glacial ice, a massive but notoriously unstable dam that was
no match for the tremendous pressure exerted by the lake water rising up
behind it. Repeatedly, the water bored a tunnel through the base of the
dam, burst through, and reached full flood within a few hours (helped by
the relatively warmer water rushing through and enlarging the tunnel),
then stopped flowing when pressure from the overlying ice squeezed the
tunnel shut. Overall, the Lake Missoula ‘spigot’ was opened some 90
times over the lake's existence, though at progressively shallower lake
levels as the ice dam thinned.³² At its flooding peak, Lake Missoula
waters burst out across Idaho and into Washington (Figure 8),
discharging at -30 million meters³/second—the Amazon River, in
comparison, can barely muster 200,000 meters³/second—reaching the
Pacific Ocean within a few days.

The floods carved islands in the loess, rafted 100-ton boulders like
corks, and tore deep gashes in the bedrock, one of which—the tandem of
Lower and Upper Grand Coulee, is nearly 80 kilometers long, as much as 7
kilometers wide, and nearly 300 meters deep. When Lake Missoula's waters
plunged back into the Columbia River in central Washington, they created
waterfalls that in places were twice the height and width of Niagara
Falls. The sight and sound of one of the Missoula floods must have been
awesome, were anyone on the ground to see it, hear it—and survive it.³³

[images]

FIGURE 8.
Map of glacial Lake Missoula and the Channeled Scablands of the Pacific
Northwest (arrows between these areas denote the exit path of the lake
water). The digital elevation model (DEM) on the lower right shows the
topographic scars left on the landscape of central Washington (just west
of George, WA) as the floodwaters of Lake Missoula reached the Columbia
and tore gashes into weak areas of bedrock, creating brief but
spectacular waterfalls, which are now Potholes and Frenchman Springs
coulees. The photograph on the lower left was taken from what would have
been the lip of the waterfall at Frenchman Springs Coulee (near the dot
on the DEM), looking toward the Columbia River. For scale, there is a
full-sized white pickup truck (circled) on the floor of the coulee more
than 100 m below where the photograph was taken. (Photograph by David J.
Meltzer; map and DEM by Judith R. Cooper.)

ENVIRONMENTS WITHOUT ANALOGUE

Late Wisconsin plant and animal communities are well known from some
areas, less so in others. But in all cases, they were arranged very
differently than they are today: it's because of the effects of the ice
sheets once again. Nowadays, plant and animal distributions in eastern
North America are largely determined by factors such as seasonal
temperature and growing season. The northern and southern boundaries of
the boreal forest across Canada, for instance, roughly mark the average
positions of summer and winter Arctic air (respectively). Beyond the
one-hundredth meridian, in semiarid and arid western North America,
moisture plays the more dominant role in shaping ecological communities
(though at high elevations, temperature reasserts its importance). But
bring on continental glaciers and change the climate ground rules, and
plant and animal communities change dramatically.

Importantly, they did not merely shift south en masse in response to
advancing ice, but instead these communities came apart: individual
species set off on their own and at their own pace, moving (or not)
depending on their specific climatic and ecological tolerances. Some
went far: during the LGM, spruce trees grew in Louisiana and Florida,
while arctic caribou grazed in northern Alabama.

The northern species that migrated south did not run roughshod over
temperate species already present, but instead were integrated with them
in diverse communities often far richer than those of today. Living in
Peccary Cave (Arkansas) and Cheek Bend Cave (Tennessee) during the
Pleistocene, for example, were several species that now live far apart:
among them, Microtus xanthognathus (the taiga or Yellow-cheeked vole),
which today never strays south of the Canada-United States border;
Geomys bursarius (the Plains pocket gopher), which today inhabits
western prairie and plains; and Dasypus bellus (the beautiful
armadillo), an extinct animal that, like its modern counterpart,
inhabited subtropical regions. These species could co-exist because LGM
climates were equable: summers south of the ice were cool enough to
support northern species, while winters were not so very cold that they
drove southern species away.

In the mountain west, much of the shifting of species’ ranges was
according to altitude rather than latitude. Plants and animals that are
today confined by heat and aridity to higher elevations, during glacial
times were able to migrate downslope in response to cooler temperatures
and greater moisture at lower elevations. The consequences of that shift
are dramatically illustrated in the Great Basin, with its long, high,
spiny mountain ranges separated by low valleys. The elevation difference
between valley floor and mountaintop can be as much as several thousand
meters. Today, it's a difficult trick for many animals adapted to the
cool climate and alpine vegetation of the high peaks to scramble down
and across the harsh desert lowland—think Death Valley—and scamper up
into an adjacent mountain range, even in the cool of winter. And, yet,
many of the same species (small mammals mostly) occupy adjacent
mountains, suggesting to ecologist James Brown these isolated “islands”
were connected during the cooler and wetter Pleistocene when intervening
lowlands were more habitable and enabled easier passage. Subsequent work
by Brown, zooarchaeologist Donald Grayson, and others showed—by
documenting species common to separate mountaintops—that was mostly the
case, though the details vary by species.³⁴

All this shifting and integration of plants and animals made for
Pleistocene biotic communities that lacked modern analogues. Although
that's partly because those communities also contained many now-extinct
animals, even those species still present today occurred during the
Pleistocene in numbers and distributions that differed from the present.
Complicated as it was, painting a picture of the LGM landscape is best
done with broad brush strokes.

Along the southern edge of the ice sheet, from New England to Montana,
and south along the summit of the Appalachians, there was a
discontinuous treeless zone of tundra plants and animals—arctic and
alpine beetles included—intermingled with southern and prairie forms.
South of the treeless zone over much of eastern and central North
America was a diverse forest, dominated by spruce in the northern
Midwest and pine in the northeast.

Still further south in North America, forests increasingly included oak,
ash, and hickory, and other temperate and deciduous elements. In these,
cold-loving shrews, lemmings, and voles lived alongside warm-loving
armadillos and tapirs, chipmunks and ground squirrels. Naturally, the
ratio of cold-to warm-loving species decreased as annual temperatures
increased from north to south. These forests were also the domain of a
variety of now-extinct large mammals, such as mastodon, sloth, and
mammoth, whose browsing and grazing were in part responsible for these
Pleistocene forests being much more open than the dense and closed
forests of the historic period.³⁵

In the Pacific Northwest, areas along the ice margin were dry and
largely treeless, while further south, an open parkland of spruce and
lodgepole pine grew in the unglaciated portions of the Puget lowland.
This setting supported a mix of animals, in this instance denizens of
alpine tundra, subalpine coniferous forest, and grassland species.

In the far west and southwest, snow lines and tree lines dipped—nearly
1,000 meters in places—below their present altitude. In the Great Basin,
bristlecone and limber pine grew in places where in today's hotter and
drier climates only desert scrub (e.g., creosote) can survive. On the
Colorado Plateau, complex forests developed as species of pine, spruce,
hemlock, and fir shifted downslope. In the deserts of the Southwest,
pinon-juniper forests shrouded much of the landscape, intermingled with
sagebrush, with jackrabbits and pocket gophers scrambling about in the
open woodland.

On the plains and prairie of the midcontinent, a mixed spruce/pine
forest pushed west from the Great Lakes into the eastern plains. How far
it extended, and at what times (its front moved) is unknown, partly for
want of sites of the proper age. Likely, however, the grassland/forest
boundary was further west than it is today: greater LGM precipitation on
the plains would have enabled trees to grow in areas now too dry for
their survival. Still, the plains then—as the plains now—was largely
open grassland.

It's no easy task to get excited about what kinds of grasses were
present on that landscape, but it is worth brief notice, because not all
grasses are alike. There are the warm-season types that grow in the
summer, and cool-season forms that undergo their growth in the fall,
winter, and spring. Which type is in an area is driven primarily by
summer temperature and precipitation, but also by atmospheric CO₂:
warm-season forms are more common in southerly areas, cool-season in
higher elevation and northerly areas. During glacial times, cool-season
forms should have been more widespread, yet may not have been. Knowing
their distribution over the last few millennia of the Pleistocene is
potentially quite important because warm-season grasses contain potent
anti-herbivory toxins, possibly bad news for Pleistocene mammals that
may have grazed on those, especially since some of those mammals soon
went extinct.

MEGAFAUNAL MENAGERIE

Thirty-five genera of mammals ultimately vanished from the North
American Pleistocene landscape (see Table 2). It's a stunning loss, made
all the more so because the roster of the disappeared is a spectacular
zoo of mostly (though not entirely) very large animals—megafauna—of
highly diverse adaptations and habitats, and for which humans are a
prime suspect in their demise.³⁶

The tally includes four species of mammoth, animals that stood upwards
of 4 meters at the shoulder, weighed nearly 4,500 kilograms (5 tons),
and carried massive ivory tusks (overgrown incisors, really) that
sometimes reached lengths of 4.5 meters. Mammoth herds grazed the vast
grasslands of Pleistocene North America, Europe, and Asia, and some of
their freeze-dried carcasses have been unearthed in Siberia and Alaska
(Figure 9), where in the last century, their flesh was fed to dog teams
(none of the dogs were reportedly worse off for the experience). More
food, this time for thought: bits of ancient DNA have been successfully
recovered from tissue and bones of the woolly mammoth (Mammuthus
primigenius).³⁷ Although fragmentary, these reveal that the mammoth
genome is virtually identical to that of African elephants. It's too
early to bet the ranch on the chances of cloning a mammoth inside an
elephant.

In the same taxonomic order (Proboscidea), but a different family than
the mammoth and elephant, was the American mastodon (Mammut americanum).
These were shorter (up to 3 meters at the shoulder) and stockier than
the mammoth, and were likely relatively solitary animals that dined on
twigs and cones of conifers and other browse in forests, where their
bones have been unearthed for centuries. One very early find was
presented to Cotton Mather who, evidently worse at human anatomy than he
was at identifying witches in seventeenth-century Salem (Massachusetts),
mistook mastodon bones as proof of the Biblical passage, “There were
giants in the earth in those days.” Right size, wrong animal.

Also on the list: four genera of giant ground sloths (see Plate 4). The
smallest of these was about the size of a modern black bear; the
largest, Eremotherium, reached a length of 5.5 meters (tall giraffes top
out at under 5 meters), and probably weighed 2,700 kilograms (3 tons).
Then there was Megalonyx jeffersonii, named for Thomas Jefferson, who
first mistook this “animal of the clawed kind” as a giant carnivore
three times larger than the modern lion (the Latinized term Megalonyx
comes from the Greek as “great claw”). It was, in fact, the smallest of
the ground sloths but still about the size of a modern black bear (the
sloths’ modern, distant relatives, the tree sloths of South America,
might weigh 9 kilograms soaking wet).

[images]

FIGURE 9.
Dima, the freeze-dried baby woolly mammoth—note the hair around the
ankles—shortly after emerging from the permafrost in 1977 on a terrace
of the Kirgiliakh River, a tributary of the Kolyma River in Siberia.
Dima was perhaps just 4 months old when he walked into and was entrapped
in a muddy pit. Ultimately, he sank deep into the mud, slowly starved
(preserved in his stomach were bits of plant detritus and sediment),
then died from inhaling sediment into his lungs. (Photograph courtesy of
David M. Hopkins.)

Then there was the glyptodont, a mammal encased in a turtle-like shell
with massive limbs and an armored tail and skull. Stretching nearly 3
meters in length, 1.5 meters in height, and weighing upwards of a ton,
this cumbersome animal appears to have lived along lakes, streams, and
marshes, and may have been semi-aquatic. Rounding out the mammalian
herbivore list were horses and three genera of camel (one of which
looked like a large version of a dromedary; the other two were more like
present-day llamas); pronghorn; musk ox (the latter including a genus
longer limbed and able to live in warmer climes than the modern musk
ox); multiple genera of peccaries, deer, and tapir; and assorted bit
players such as Harrington's mountain goat, the Aztlan rabbit, and the
giant beaver (Castoroides ohioensis), which weighed over 90 kilograms
and packed incisors 20 centimeters long (judging by its teeth, this was
no dam builder, but nonetheless frequented lakes and ponds).

TABLE 2 Extinct mammalian genera and species of North America

[images]

[images]

NOTE: Animals listed in bold type are ones for which there is secure
archaeological evidence they were preyed upon by human hunters.
Taxonomic data from E. Anderson 1984; Grayson 2007; Kurten and Anderson
1980. Information on archaeological occurrences from Frison 1991;
Grayson and Meltzer 2002.

^(a)Other members of the genus survived outside of North America

Preying on these herbivores were some formidable carnivores, including
the giant short-faced bear (Arctodus), long limbed and 33% larger than
the largest living carnivore, the Alaskan brown bear. Arctodus was
likely omnivorous, but may have fed on bison and other large grazers.
Also on the carnivore list was a large dog (the dhole), the short-faced
skunk (larger and more carnivorous than its modern relative), and
several species of big cats, including the most spectacular carnivore of
all, the saber-toothed cat.

The saber-toothed cat, aptly named Smilodon fatalis (who says
taxonomists have no sense of humor?), had 15-centimenter (6 in)-long
upper canines, which were saw-toothed front to back and dagger thick
side to side. This lion-sized predator probably fed on young mammoth or
other slow-footed herbivores, its sword-like teeth used to slash the
throat or abdomen of its prey to produce suffocation, heavy bleeding,
and death. The saber-toothed cat had short, powerful legs: it was not
built to run fast or far, but was probably an ambush hunter. Thousands
of its remains have been found in Los Angeles's La Brea tar pits,
suggesting .Smilodon haunted the area, waiting for prey to become mired
in the tar pits. Studies of .Smilodon teeth indicate they rarely gnawed
on or cracked open the bones of their prey, which explains why their
abandoned kills attracted scavengers such as the dire wolf (Canis
dirus), which seemingly made a career out of cleaning up saber-toothed
cat leftovers.

A common feature of most of these extinct animals was their large size:
virtually all, with the exception of the rabbit Aztlanolagus and the
diminutive pronghorn, had an adult body weight of at least 50 kilograms
(100 lbs), and in the elephant-sized animals, of many tons. There were
by some estimates over 100 million of these aircraft carriers of the
animal kingdom inhabiting the diverse landscape of Pleistocene North
America. Some of those genera were evolutionarily homegrown (such as the
horse and camel), many had been in the Americas hundreds of thousands if
not millions of years, and all had weathered multiple
glacial-interglacial cycles. Yet, by 10,800 BP, all were extinct—which
is not to say that all went extinct at that moment, for current evidence
indicates only half of the thirty-five genera had survived until then.

Even so, because their disappearance appears to coincide roughly with
two very distinctive events—people coming in and the Pleistocene going
out—disentangling what caused these extinctions has proven no easy task,
and is a matter hotly debated. Whether humans were to blame is taken up
in Chapter 8 when the archaeological record of Clovis hunters is
examined; here, let's stay with the climatic and ecological changes
wrought by the end of the Pleistocene.

A WARMING WORLD

We officially mark that end at 10,000 BP. That particular date is
arbitrary and was mostly chosen, as geologist David Hopkins cheerfully
admitted, because it's a nice, round number. In fact, the changes that
signaled the beginning of the end of the Ice Age began earlier, and the
end—at least in northerly areas—came later.

Around 16,000 years ago, the first hints global climates were changing
appeared. Higher summer insolation (those orbital cycles never stop)
began steadily warming the Northern Hemisphere. Winter snow and ice were
no longer staying frozen through the summer, and glaciers slowly started
to melt. It was the Antarctic glaciers and those in the midlatitudes
that began retreating earliest (around 14,500 years ago). Deglaciation
did not begin in earnest in the Northern Hemisphere for another
millennium or so, and it would take some 10,000 years: it's not easy to
melt 54,000,000 km³ of ice.³⁸

Sometime after 14,500 BP, the Laurentide and Cordilleran ice sheets
began to pull back, though with occasional, brief re-advances of ice
lobes and even-briefer surges (the latter are triggered by the slippery
internal mechanics of glaciers³⁹). By 13,000 years ago the Laurentide
had decreased in area by about 25%, and in volume by about 50%: it
thinned more rapidly than it shrank. By 11,000 BP, glacial ice had
abandoned New England for Quebec, opening the St. Lawrence Seaway, an
event that may have had profound climatic consequences (of which, much
more below). By 10,000 BP, the Laurentide was half its former self, and
had vanished from western Canada and the upper Midwest. By 7700 BP, it
made its last stand over Hudson Bay, then split in two (an event also
with climatic consequences). By 5,000 years ago, its surviving remnants
huddled over northern Quebec and on Baffin Island.⁴⁰

On the other side of the continent, Cordilleran ice lingered for a brief
time at its maximum position after 14,000 BP, then departed Seattle and
the Puget lowland. It melted more rapidly than the Laurentide, and by
10,000 BP had nearly vanished, save in the mountains of southeast Alaska
and at high spots on the Coast Range. Robert Fulton and colleagues
suspect its fast-disappearing act was the result of geography: the bulk
of the ice sheet rested in the low-lying region between the Coast Range
and Rocky Mountains. Once post-LGM warming slowed and then stopped the
replenishing flow of ice down from those mountains, the low-lying ice
sheet was doomed. The interior portion, isolated and starved, was unable
to retreat gracefully and wasted in place. On the Pacific side, coastal
ice rapidly calved into the sea.

As ice sheets withered, meltwater returned to the oceans. Much of the
Laurentide drained down the Mississippi River into the Gulf of Mexico,
swelling the river far wider and deeper than any historically known
flood and presenting a formidable challenge for crossings. And it was
choked with sediment and flanked by extensive mud flats, which when
dried and scoured by winds fanned aloft chokingly thick clouds of
fine-grained sediment (silt) that fell onto the surrounding uplands. In
places, these loess deposits are 40-50 meters thick.⁴¹

Of course, once those waters returned to the ocean, sea levels began to
rise, flooding river valleys and trenches carved by glaciers that once
had extended to Pleistocene shores, and creating large estuaries (such
as the Chesapeake Bay) and deep fjords (such as the port of Seattle). By
one estimate, some 110 meters’ worth of sea level was returned to the
oceans from 16,000 to 6,000 years ago (modern sea levels were reached
around 4000 BP, the timing varying by area). That's an average of 1.1
meters per century, fast by modern standards—the seas are rising today
at the rate of 10-20 centimeters per century. But rates and averages
mean little here, at least in terms of glacial and climatic history, for
they mask the fact that this overall, upward trend was mostly slow and
steady, but occasionally punctuated by pulses of very rapid sea level
rise (two major pulses occurred at 16,000 and 12,500 BP).⁴²

Had human colonizers come down the coast sometime after 16,000 BP, they
likely would not have noticed the rising seas—water levels weren't
coming up that fast. Surely, however, they would have encountered the
milky deltas formed at the mouths of sediment-choked rivers draining
interior ice fields. It likely took several centuries before these
rivers ceased muddying tide pools and choking off near-shore
environments.

Rising sea levels, of course, must have drowned many early sites that
were once located close to the coast—but it did not necessarily drown
all of them. For as sea levels were rising, so, too, were portions of
the newly deglaciated coast of Alaska and British Columbia: when freed
from beneath their weighty ice burden, they rose upward (a phenomenon
geologists call isostatic rebound⁴³). What goes down, must come up. And
because this is also a tectonically active area, occasionally the land
comes up very quickly indeed. All that's good news for archaeology
because along the Pacific northwest coast, where we might hope to find
evidence of early colonizers making their way south, segments of the
Pleistocene shoreline on which they may have walked are now well above
sea level. Finding the sites that might be on them in an area now
covered in lush temperate rain forest is a challenge, but not an
impossible one (Chapter 4).⁴⁴

COLD WATER AND HOT AIR

Rising seas did more than just swallow coastline; they also drove
climate on land by toying with one of the principal controls on the
earth's thermostat: carbon dioxide. As Wallace Broecker explains,⁴⁵ the
world's oceans—particularly the Atlantic—contain a grand system of
watery “conveyor belts” that distribute and equilibrate global heat
between the equator and poles. Lurking less than 1 kilometer below the
waves of the Atlantic, a current of warm, salty water (the Gulf Stream)
flows north from the tropics along the North American east coast. As it
approaches the vicinity of Iceland and Greenland, strong winds sweep the
surface water aside, and the newly arrived and now-exposed warm
equatorial waters rise and cool (by about 8°C), and in so doing release
water vapor and heat that presently bring wet, mild winters to western
Europe. Those erstwhile tropical waters are now colder, saltier, and
denser than when they arrived, and so they slowly sink back into the
abyss. There, the deep water rides a southbound belt of the conveyor:
its next destination, the southern ocean. Meridional overturning
circulation is its official name, but the process is known more
colloquially as thermohaline circulation, and it moves with astonishing
power: below the relative calm of the Atlantic surface are currents with
a flow equal to 100 Amazon Rivers.⁴⁶

Thermohaline circulation operates very efficiently nowadays because of
the large temperature difference between the equator and poles that
provides its energy, and because of the relative salinity of the North
Atlantic, which is critical to the density-driven sinking that drives
deep water formation.⁴⁷ But if there were a large injection of
freshwater into the northern gears of the conveyor from, say, a melting
ice sheet (an experiment nature has performed multiple times), the seas
can freeze in winter (saltwater has a lower freezing point). And if
frozen, the surface water will fail to sink, and when that happens
thermohaline circulation slows to a halt or simply collapses.⁴⁸

When that happened in the late Pleistocene—the Younger Dryas, it's
called, for a tundra flower (Dryas octopetala) that flourished in Europe
during this time—there were direct and geologically instantaneous
climatic consequences. Across the northern hemisphere, especially
downwind of the now-frozen North Atlantic, temperatures plummeted: the
Greenland ice cores record an average annual air temperature during the
Younger Dryas of about -52T. But the effects of the Younger Dryas were
felt elsewhere as they rippled through Earth's climate system, and at a
moment when the first Americans were dispersing across the continent
(more on this below, and in Chapter 9).⁴⁹

Switching thermohaline circulation on and off also influences global
climates in a less obvious but no less consequential way, for the oceans
harbor vast amounts of carbon dioxide, CO₂, a greenhouse gas that looms
large in our story of past climate (and, not inconsequentially, future
climate). Although CO₂ resides in both atmosphere and ocean, it's not
shared in equal measure: the oceans contain sixty times more CO₂. Much
of that CO₂ is stored deep in the abyss, where it can be sequestered for
thousands of years (and so effectively the U.S. Department of Energy is
pursuing the possibility of injecting excess anthropogenic CO₂ into the
deep ocean—a sort of CO₂ government witness protection program). Thus,
the amount of CO₂ in the atmosphere at a given time is strongly
influenced by how much is absorbed into the ocean and/or
photosynthesized by phytoplankton, and then sent to the deep. That, in
turn, depends on a host of factors, the most relevant to our purposes
being changes in deep water formation, which of course are tied to
changing thermohaline circulation.⁵⁰

Why does that matter to climate, or even to archaeology? Because
atmospheric CO₂ falls when thermohaline circulation stalls, and rises
when the conveyor re-starts. And with each increase of approximately 70
parts per million (ppm) of atmospheric CO₂, global temperatures rise
about 1°C(1.8°F). Over the last million years or so, CO₂ levels overall
have moved only within a narrow range: between 180 and 290 ppm. The
lower end marks cooler, glacial periods, the higher end the warmer,
interglacial periods. The efficiency with which the earth's climate
system has locked down that range is in no small measure why the very
recent, rapid rise in atmospheric CO₂ to its current level of about 385
ppm is cause for great concern.⁵¹

Not surprisingly, turning the thermohaline circulation switch off and on
also wreaks havoc on radiocarbon dating, since doing so also scrambles
the ratio of atmospheric:ocean radiocarbon, making the radiocarbon clock
sometimes run too slow (because of a decline in atmosphere's ¹⁴C:¹²C
ratio), or too fast (because of a rise in the atmosphere's ¹⁴C:¹²C
ratio).⁵² It's little wonder that radiocarbon dating sites of the first
Americans that were occupied during the Younger Dryas is complicated
(Chapter 1).

Thermohaline circulation remained weak (and atmospheric CO₂ levels flat)
following the initial pulse of meltwater (16,000 BP), perhaps because
waters of the North Atlantic stayed cool, and the overall temperature
difference between equator and pole remained relatively small. But as
the planet warmed, and especially following the second major pulse of
meltwater pulse (at 12,500 BP), thermohaline circulation strengthened
(oceanographer Peter Clark and colleagues suggest that was the result of
the melting of the Antarctic ice cap, which sent freshwater flooding
north from the Southern Hemisphere, thereby jump-starting North Atlantic
deep water formation).⁵³

Stronger thermohaline circulation sped widespread warming—the
Bølling-Allerød warm period, it's called—and an increase in atmospheric
CO₂.⁵⁴ This further hastened the demise of North American ice sheets,
and as their climate-modifying effects steadily diminished, the southern
branch of the jet stream and the winter storm track shifted north, and
the glacial anticyclone began to weaken. Swamps and peatlands formed on
newly deglaciated landscapes, which helped cause a spike in another
greenhouse gas—methane (prior to the modern era, swamp gas was the major
source of methane).⁵⁵

Correspondingly, there was on land a “major reorganization” of biota in
response to such changes.⁵⁶ Northern areas once in tundra were replaced
by spruce forest, while spruce-dominated woodlands in turn became
hardwood-dominated forest (in the Midwest), or pine and birch forest
(the Northeast and New England). Further south, deciduous trees (maple,
oak, and beech) expanded their numbers. Throughout, the amount of tree
cover generally increased, and yet was still marked by species
associations that lack modern analogues.

This process played out in complicated ways across space and through
time because plants and animals left their Pleistocene communities the
same way they had entered: it was every species for itself, finding
their own ways to new ranges and habitats (or, in some cases, to
extinction), their speed and direction tied to their individual
tolerance limits, dispersal abilities, interspecies competition,
location during the LGM (oak trees were already lurking in low numbers
in protected settings in North Dakota, for example, ready to spring
forth—metaphorically speaking—when climates improved), the availability
of suitable habitats, and a variety of other factors. Had the process
been recorded in time-lapse photography and then viewed at high speed,
it would have resembled a “Keystone Kops” routine, a free-for-all of
species shuffling in different directions at different rates at
different times to colonize new habitats.

Estimates vary, but some shuffled faster than others. Most tree species
moved 100-500 meters per year, but some pines virtually sprinted across
the landscape at upwards of 3,000 meters per year.⁵⁷ In some cases
vegetation was almost able to keep pace with climate change, lagging
behind by only a century or so. But then, Sitka spruce in the Pacific
Northwest is still expanding west in response to deglaciation. Animal
species, also moving at their own individual paces, presumably kept up
with climate and vegetation change, but again depending on the species:
some small mammals are still adjusting to postglacial climatic
conditions. The central point stands, however: conditions were, as
Daniel Mann describes them, a “biogeographic free-for-all.”⁵⁸

What of humans? Were these changes happening fast enough they would have
been detectable to them? The Pleistocene came to a screeching halt on a
geological time scale, but would grandparents have noticed a difference
they could tell their grandchildren? Knowing just how fast climate and
environment changed could help us better understand the challenges faced
by newly arrived colonists on this unfamiliar landscape (Chapter 7)

THE PLEISTOCENE'S LAST STAND

Not all glacial meltwater returned to the sea. Some from the Laurentide
filled bedrock depressions left exposed by the retreating ice, creating
in the Upper Midwest a land of lakes. All together, there are hundreds
of thousands, including the five Great Lakes, the earliest versions of
which appear about 14,000 years ago. The waters of these lakes would
initially have been lifeless, turbid, and very cold, perhaps hovering
just above freezing. If humans were in the area, it would have been to
hunt game; fishing had to wait on the natural post-glacial stocking.⁵⁹

Great as the Great Lakes are—and combined, they contain 22,700 km³ of
water—they are little more than kiddy pools compared to the now-vanished
glacial Lake Agassiz. This vast freshwater lake formed in the wake of
the Laurentide ice retreat, first appearing around 11,700 years ago (its
basin was ice-filled before then). At its maximum the lake covered
840,000 km² (which included much of western and central Canada, and a
prong that reached down to the far northeastern corner of South Dakota),
contained some 163,000 km³ of water, and drowned low-lying regions
beneath more than 770 meters of icy water. Over its 4,000-year life
span, Lake Agassiz rose and fell, but overall it was a downward trend as
water made its way back to the sea. The water exited via different
routes, as ice retreated and opened different outlet channels. Early on,
the water went south down the Mississippi River into the Gulf of Mexico.
Later it flowed east into the Lake Superior basin and out through the
St. Lawrence Valley into the North Atlantic. After that, water moved
northwest into the Arctic Ocean via the Athabasca and Mackenzie valleys,
then east again down the St. Lawrence; finally, a dying pulse went north
into Hudson's Bay and out into the North Atlantic.⁶⁰

Ultimately, most of Lake Agassiz drained into the sea, though it left
behind an arc of remnant lakes in western Canada, including Great Bear
Lake, Great Slave Lake, Lake Athabasca, and Lake Winnipeg. Few humans
would have paddled Lake Agassiz or fished its shores, but Lake Agassiz
looms large in our story since for a couple of geologically brief
moments, it played a singularly important role in Late Glacial climate,
and possibly in Paleoindian adaptations.

When Lake Agassiz's water drained south, down the Mississippi River into
the Gulf of Mexico, the earth's climate paid it no mind. But by 11,000
BP, the Laurentide ice sheet had retreated just far enough that a
drainage outlet opened across what is now the northern Great Lakes and
Upper Midwest. Lake Agassiz's waters suddenly flowed east rather than
south, down to the newly opened St. Lawrence lowlands and out into the
North Atlantic (the Mississippi continued to flow, though much
diminished).

At that moment, Lake Agassiz's drainage was rerouted and some 9,500 km³
of very cold, very fresh water was flushed into the North Atlantic,
shutting down thermohaline circulation and plunging the Northern
Hemisphere back into near glacial conditions for the next thousand
years.

Although there is considerable evidence that a shutdown in thermohaline
circulation caused the Younger Dryas, there is also considerable
controversy over what caused that shutdown. The problem? There ought to
be geological evidence of Lake Agassiz's eastward drainage—an outlet
channel, perhaps, or flood debris dating to 11,000 BP. But it hasn't
been found. Without it, several alternative ideas have been proposed to
account for why thermohaline circulation suddenly stopped—most
controversially, that it was caused by an extra-terrestrial impact.⁶¹

Leaving aside matters of cause, let's consider the Younger Dryas
consequences. Most important, this was no mere LGM rerun, for by then
the climatic influence of the North American ice sheet was much reduced,
atmospheric CO₂ had climbed to nearly interglacial levels (approaching
265 ppm compared to -190 ppm at the LGM), and summer and winter
insolation was higher and lower (respectively) than at any time in the
preceding 70,000 years. To be sure, it grew chilly in the higher
latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, with temperatures in Greenland
falling 27T in only decades. That's cold, but hardly the 41T plunge that
marked the LGM. Younger Dryas climates were different in another
important respect: because of the seasonal difference in insolation,
this was a time of strong annual arcs between cold, harsh winters, and
summers not nearly as cold as in LGM times.⁷⁵

THE YOUNGER DRYAS: IT CAME FROM OUTER SPACE?

In 2001 the Mammoth Trumpet, a newsletter for a lay audience on
happenings in Paleoindian studies, carried an unusually long, highly
technical article declaring there'd been a Pleistocene doomsday. A
supernova-caused neutron bombardment centered over the Great Lakes had
fried the earth 12,500 years ago, Richard Firestone and William Topping
announced.⁶² That nuclear catastrophe heated the atmosphere to over
1,800°F, and radiated plants and animals at the equivalent dose of “a
5-megawatt reactor for more than 100 seconds.” Megafauna died en masse
because they were—as the authors reported on the good authority of the
Saturday Evening Post—especially susceptible to radiation. The explosion
purportedly rearranged maize genes, readying the plant for human
domestication; gouged out the Carolina Bays (oval depressions in the
coastal southeastern states); and so spiked atmospheric radiocarbon
concentrations that ages on Paleoindian sites were thrown off by up to
40,000 years.

The claim was so far out literally and figuratively—we'd been using
radiocarbon dating since 1950 and no one had noticed a 40,000 year
error?—it was met with bemusement, or simply ignored. Only two
scientists—experts in radiocarbon dating—bothered to reply. They
concluded Firestone and Topping's claims were “at best, highly
problematical and, at worst, difficult to take seriously.”⁶³ Few did.

Later, when Firestone and others published The Cycle of Cosmic
Catastrophes: How a Stone-Age Comet Changed the Course of World
Culture,⁶⁴ the supernova had become multiple comets that had struck the
earth repeatedly, with apocalyptic results. Maybe so, but the book was
long on anecdote, short on evidence, weak on fact, and jumped to more
than a few bizarre conclusions (extraterrestrial events caused variation
in human skin color and blood types?). The scientific community's
response: cold. But the book got a warm reception among (as Amazon.com
reported) those who also purchased The End of Days: Armageddon and
Prophecies of the Return and Forbidden History: Prehistoric
Technologies, Extraterrestrial Intervention, and the Suppressed Origins
of Civilization.

Usually when an idea slips into the pseudoscientific netherworld, it
rarely returns. But this one did. E-mails started flying in the spring
of 2007, with word of a symposium at the annual meeting of the properly
scientific American Geophysical Union (AGU). There, oceanographer James
Kennett—who has sterling scientific credentials—joined with Firestone
and others to present evidence that a comet had struck the earth 11,000
years ago, and to outline its consequences—not least, that it was now
blamed for triggering the Younger Dryas. In announcing the symposium,
Kennett admitted there had been missteps in the past. This time, he
said, it would be a different ball game.

Perhaps, but it began familiarly enough. The newly constituted team held
a press conference at the AGU meeting, and over the following weeks, the
supposed Pleistocene extraterrestrial catastrophe was hyped as fact from
FOX News to the Economist. You can even watch their press conference on
YouTube. The staid National Science Foundation, which that spring
awarded Kennett and Luann Becker $53,000 to test the ET impact idea,
issued a press release on the team's conclusions before the team had
even completed their research, let alone presented their hypothesis and
evidence in enough detail for evaluation and testing by others (turning
the usual procedure of releasing scientific results upside down).⁶⁵

It's unfair to blame scientists for how their words, however carefully
crafted, are hijacked and sensationalized: caution doesn't make
headlines or sell magazines. Still, when phrases such as “the entire
continent was on fire” are spoken,⁶⁶ the fault is not entirely with the
journalists. It's important to admit, as well, that scientists are not
immune from the lure of public acclaim, or fail to recognize it's the
public that ultimately supports our endeavors, and as such is entitled
to know what we're up to. Yet, extraordinary claims require
extraordinary proof, especially when the extraordinary is
extraterrestrial.

To be sure, invoking ET impacts to explain earthly events is not
unprecedented. In the 1980s, it was announced dinosaurs were destroyed
by an asteroid that hit earth 65 million years ago. But skeptics became
convinced only after there was independent confirmation of an impact's
telltale signs: the finding of high levels of iridium (an element rare
on earth) and quartz grains scarred by impact shock in rocks of that
age, and the discovery of the “smoking gun”—the impact crater
(Chicxulub, off the tip of Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula).⁶⁷ That an
asteroid had collided with earth was beyond dispute. Even so, how the
asteroid killed off the dinosaurs—or if it did—is still contested. The
lesson: we must keep a firewall between two distinct questions: Is there
indisputable geological evidence of an impact? If there is, then what
were its consequences?

The first scientific publication on a late Pleistocene ET impact
appeared in the fall of 2007. Much of the argument and evidence were
familiar to readers of The Cycle of Cosmic Catastrophes, though some of
that book's more colorful claims had been quietly locked away. Firestone
and his twenty-five co-authors drew attention to a Younger Dryas-age
“carbon-rich black layer” (the Black Mat) found at Clovis sites in North
America,⁶⁸ which reportedly contains high levels of iridium (though in
far lower amounts than in 65-million-year-old rock), metallic grains
high in titanium, glass-like carbon studded with nanodiamonds,
fullerenes high in extraterrestrial helium, and soot and charcoal—the
last from the intense wildfires ostensibly ignited by the blast.
Evidently, Europe caught fire, too: the authors report a charcoal-rich
layer at Lommel, Belgium, and imply such are widespread on the Continent
(for the record, Europe did not experience the kind of
Pleistocene-ending extinctions seen in North America).⁶⁹

Firestone and colleagues could not identify an impact crater, though by
their reckoning, the comet must have been more than 4 kilometers in
diameter, large enough to make a substantial dent in the earth's surface
(about 50 km wide, by one estimate). Perhaps, they say, it hit the
Laurentide ice sheet, which cushioned the blow and prevented cratering,
or maybe it disintegrated in the atmosphere before hitting the surface.
Perhaps its exploding debris caused the “enigmatic” depressions reported
beneath Hudson Bay or even the Carolina Bays. Of course, Hudson Bay was
still buried beneath ice at that time, which by their logic should have
prevented cratering, and no meteoritic material has ever been recovered
from the Carolina Bays, nor are all the bays the same age or date to the
geological moment of the supposed impact.⁷⁰

There's not been enough time for geologists and impact scientists to
assess the merits of the case, but early reviews have been harsh. Impact
specialist Christian Koeberl finds the whole scenario “contrived,” since
“their data don't agree with anything we know about impacts.” But what
of the iridium and other ET indicators? Geochemist Paolo Gabrielli,
whose analysis of the Greenland ice core was cited as evidence of a
large increase in iridium during the Younger Dryas, reported his data
showed no such thing, while impact geologist David Kring is likewise
skeptical, since iridium can be concentrated by algae (which happens to
be a principal constituent of the Black Mat), and the reported levels of
titanium and nanodiamonds embedded in melted carbon “make no sense to
him.”⁷¹ They don't make sense to Nicholas Pintar and Scott Ishman
either, since the identified ET elements cannot all come from the same
type of extraterrestrial body: some (magnetic grains) require iron-rich
meteorites, for example, others a stony meteorite, while still others
(carbon spherules) suggest a carbon-rich source. If something did hit
the earth, they say, it must have been a “Frankenstein” of an ET.

And could an explosion over North America set Europe afire? Thermal
radiation, Pintar and Ishman point out, is zero below the horizon. But
even leaving Europe out of it, there are tens of thousands of lakes in
the Upper Midwest near the proposed ground zero. Since the impact
ostensibly caused horrific wildfires, these lakes—where charcoal, soot,
pollen, and other airborne particles settle and preserve—ought to have
recorded the debris of a soot-filled atmosphere. Odd, then, that
palynologists examining late Pleistocene-age sediments from thousands of
lakes have not noticed traces of the inferno. Could it be they didn't
look for it, or didn't know what to look for? That's unlikely: they
often examine charcoal in sediments cores to help understand fire
history. No matter. Several teams are returning to their field sites and
stored sediment cores to look for a soot/charcoal spike at the time of
the purported impact.

Until these and other studies are completed, it's best not to get ahead
of ourselves exploring the consequences of an impact that may never have
happened. But Firestone and colleagues cannot resist the urge. This
impact, they proclaim, “explains three of the highest-debated
controversies of recent decades”: the cause of the Younger Dryas, the
extinction of the Pleistocene fauna, and the precipitous decline of
post-Clovis human populations.⁷²

It's hard to see the last of these as controversial, since there's no
evidence there was a population collapse immediately following Clovis
times.⁷³ On the Great Plains, where the archaeological record is well
documented and dated, Folsom groups follow Clovis, and their populations
seem to have boomed (Chapter 9). So, too, invoking an ET impact to
explain extinctions is another case of a solution in search of a
problem. It's not been shown that Pleistocene extinctions were
simultaneous, or even coincided with the supposed impact (Chapter 8). If
they were and did, then why didn't this apparently global conflagration
burn out far more of life on earth, compounded as the fires were by
“increased deadly UV radiation,” greater “chemical toxicity,” and
“diminished photosynthesis”?⁷⁴ This is not a rhetorical question.

As for the Younger Dryas, Firestone and colleagues believe that when the
comet hit (or exploded above) the Laurentide ice sheet, it instantly
melted or broke off large portions of glacial ice, releasing freshwater
and icebergs into the North Atlantic, thereby—as in the currently
accepted explanation—weakening thermohaline circulation and causing
abrupt cooling. Once again, they're asking a great deal of what they
must admit is geologically invisible.

There's no doubt that the past sometimes requires creative leaps to
comprehend, and this certainly is a creative idea. But there needs to be
much more evidence in order to make the Younger Dryas extraterrestrial
impact a leap of science, and not a leap of faith.

During the Younger Dryas, northern hemisphere glaciers stopped
retreating and in places even began to re-advance. There was a sharp
decline (from 680 to 460 parts per billion) in atmospheric methane as
peatlands froze over, and increases in the amount of dust and salt from
higher winds and greater storminess over Northern Hemisphere lands and
seas occurred. It was a time of fi erce nor'easters in the North
Atlantic.⁷⁶

But such changes were not true of the rest of the hemisphere (and
possibly not of the southern hemisphere, including Antarctica which
apparently warmed at this time). Across North America, Younger Dryas
climates varied. In the northernmost United States Younger Dryas
temperatures were cooler than present, with a drop of about 9°F being
about the maximum. It was drier as well—in places. Yet, in the
southeastern United States, the Younger Dryas was relatively warmer and
wetter also, a result of thermohaline circulation shutdown, which left
warm, tropical waters stalled off the Atlantic coast. Further west, much
of the interior of midlatitude North America stayed relatively warm and
temperate, since cold, arctic air was still mostly trapped north of the
remnant ice sheet, and warm, Caribbean air was able to penetrate
northward and amplify the insolation-driven highs of summer. Younger
Dryas climatic conditions had “no modern equivalent in North America.”⁷⁷

Plants and animals that had been busy responding to Bølling-Allerød
warming scrambled to adjust to Younger Dryas reversal. Cold- and
dry-adapted sedges abruptly returned to prominence in northern areas;
spruce trees that had migrated north now turned south, while pine trees
expanded west from New England into the southern Great Lakes region, and
with astonishing speed for something rooted to the ground: nearly 300
kilometers in little more than a century. In high elevations of the
Rockies, tundra and timberline shifted downslope, along with cold-loving
trees such as Engelmann spruce and bristlecone pine.⁷⁸

The most dramatic vegetation changes occurred in the more northern and
higher-elevation areas. Yet, across North America, distinctive, albeit
short-lived vegetation communities emerged during the Younger Dryas.
That was presumably true of Younger Dryas mammalian communities as well,
though their fossil record is not as precisely known.

However distinctive, these communities would not last more than a
millennium, and would dissolve when the Younger Dryas came to an abrupt
end.⁷⁹ Ironically, the Younger Dryas may have been the instrument of its
own demise. The colder temperatures it brought to the Upper Midwest,
coupled with lake-effect snows from nearby Lake Agassiz (think Buffalo,
New York, in winter), triggered the re-advance of a glacial lobe that by
10,000 BP had pushed far enough south that Lake Agassiz's eastern outlet
once again was blocked. Lake Agassiz's meltwater once more drained down
the Mississippi to the Gulf of Mexico, or north into the Arctic Ocean.
With that, thermohaline circulation was re-established, this time for
good, and the Younger Dryas came to an end: above the Greenland ice
sheet, temperatures shot up 15°F in a matter of a decade, while global
methane amounts rose by 50% in a century as the world's wetlands
expanded.⁸⁰

Live by the ice, die by the ice. It's hard not to agree with Broecker
that the Younger Dryas—if indeed caused by a freshwater flood that
sucker punched thermohaline circulation—was a “freak event.”⁸¹ That,
coupled with its occurrence amid an unusual combination of solar
insolation, ice sheet extent, and greenhouse gas concentrations,
triggered complex climatic and biotic responses, and lead inescapably to
this next conclusion: the Younger Dryas was unique in the annals of
glacial history. It has traditionally been thought the events ending
this last glacial cycle were no different than those ending previous
glacial cycles. That's now doubtful, but that's good news: it might help
explain why many of the Pleistocene mammals, which so successfully had
survived previous glacial-interglacial cycles, succumbed to this one.

The climatic and ecological changes of the Younger Dryas were the most
dramatic millennial-scale changes recorded since the LGM.⁸² Yet, viewed
over a longer time frame, the Younger Dryas was merely a detour en route
to the much more profound changes that occurred as the earth switched
from glacial (Pleistocene) to interglacial (Holocene) mode. That switch
was marked most obviously by the virtual disappearance of the great ice
sheets, which unleashed the polar air masses and repositioned the jet
stream; by substantially higher sea levels; and of course, by a much
warmer world as air temperature and its fellow travelers, atmospheric
CO₂ and methane, rose quickly after the Younger Dryas.

Such changes triggered the wholesale rearrangement of biotic
communities, which included mass extinctions (which were complete by
about 10,800 BP). At the close of the Younger Dryas, eastern North
America supported a complex mosaic of boreal and deciduous forest: think
plaid. Yet, the modern environment is one of latitudinal stripes: a
Canada-to-Florida road trip passes through tundra, boreal, mixed
conifer/ hardwood, temperate deciduous, and southern pine forests, a
pattern that reflects increasing temperature as well as the seasonal
positions of the arctic air mass that had been effectively excluded from
North America during the Pleistocene. Changing from Pleistocene plaids
to Holocene stripes took several thousand years, but was largely
finished by 5,000 years ago.

On the plains, as precipitation went the way of the northward-shifting
jet stream, lake levels fell, forests contracted, and grasslands
expanded in all directions, even into the Upper Midwest. By early
Holocene times, it came to resemble the plains of Hollywood stereotype:
a sea of grass, on which vast herds of bison grazed. Bison had been on
the plains all along, but had to share the grasslands with mammoths,
horses, camels, and other large grazers. Once those were extinct, bison
had the plains to themselves, and as a result, their numbers skyrocketed
(competitive release, it's called), an explosion fueled in part by the
increasing expanse of warm-season C₄ grasses, which bison love (there's
a reason one of the most widespread of these grasses is named buffalo
grass).

Further west in Early Holocene times, alpine and boreal species began
their march upslope, replaced down below by species better able to
tolerate increasingly warmer and drier conditions (in the Southwest),
and warmer and wetter conditions (in the Northwest). The process was
relatively drawn out, and of course involved a reshuffling of the
vegetation deck: the vertical zones characteristic of modern times would
not form up for several thousand years, depending on the area. But soon
enough, harsh desert filled in the low-lying, intermountain valleys of
the southwest and Great Basin, forever stranding on mountaintops those
mammals that in cooler and wetter times had been able to scurry from
peak to peak.

The Pleistocene would not end, however, without one final death rattle.
As the Laurentide ice sheet steadily shrank, Lake Agassiz followed it
north. By 7700 BP, it had ballooned to enormous size, having joined Lake
Ojibway, and was held in check by a horseshoe-shaped dam of remnant
Laurentide ice hovering just south of Hudson Bay. As all ice dams do,
this one eventually failed, and what was left of the world's largest
freshwater lake flooded into Hudson Bay, out Hudson Strait, and into the
North Atlantic via the Labrador Current. An estimated 163,000 km³ of
freshwater was flushed into the North Atlantic. That's seven times the
volume of all five Great Lakes put together, and seventeen times more
water than the trifling 9,500 km³ that triggered the Younger Dryas. This
was a flood worthy of Noah's; the Reverend Buckland would have been
thrilled.

Yet, the climatic cooling that followed this last flood—termed the 8200
BP event (for its calibrated calendar age)—was a mere blip compared to
the Younger Dryas, dropping temperatures in Greenland only about 10°F
for about a century or so.⁸³ Why was it so climatically inconsequential?
Perhaps, as Dyke suggests, such is the difference between releasing
freshwater directly into the North Atlantic, where it could T-bone the
thermohaline conveyor (the Younger Dryas scenario), compared to sending
it through more northerly, already-cold and less-saline waters, thereby
diminishing its impact on arrival. The very largest of the large
post-glacial superfloods, Richard Alley observes, is one that didn't
stick.⁸⁴

People living in North America at the time may scarcely have noticed the
8200 BP event. Besides, their ancestors had experienced climatic and
environmental diversity and change of much greater magnitude, such as
the Younger Dryas and perhaps even the Last Glacial Maximum. But that
depends on just when those ancestors first arrived, and how fast they
moved through this new land.

3

FROM PALEOLITHS TO
PALEOINDIANS

In the fall of 1781, the governor of Virginia received a letter from the
secretary of the French Legation, inquiring about the political
institutions, natural history, and native peoples of his state. Times
being what they were (hostile British forces were advancing on the
governor's home) his answer was postponed until the following summer,
after Cornwallis had surrendered at Yorktown and the governor had
retired from office. “Great question has arisen,” Thomas Jefferson then
replied in his now-classic Notes on the State of Virginia, “from whence
came those aboriginal inhabitants of America.” For that matter, who were
they, and when had they arrived?¹

These questions were deeply unsettling to a nation that viewed the past
through a biblical lens, and which well realized American Indians were
not mentioned in the chronicles of Moses. Still, on the presumption of
monogenesis, the idea that “all the varieties of the human race were
descended from a single pair, and that after the flood the earth was
indebted solely to the ark of Noah for the replenishment of man and
beast,”² American Indian origins were sought among historically known or
imagined groups, among them wandering Egyptians, Phoenicians, Mongols,
Welsh, Hindus (those other Indians), survivors of the Lost Continents of
Mu or Atlantis, and the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel. The possibility that
American Indians were Israelites had two great virtues: it explained who
the Indians were, and where the Israelites had been lost all those
years.

Yet few capable thinkers, and Jefferson was an extraordinarily capable
thinker, paid these any mind. Diverse as the Native Americans were,
Jefferson realized they shared a common ancestry. Judging by their
appearance, he supposed their ancestral homeland must have been eastern
Asia. That being the case, how had they reached the New World? The
answer, anticipated in the late sixteenth century by the Jesuit Jose de
Acosta, was that they came by land, possibly via northern Asia and
northwestern North America. But it was not until 200 years later that
Jefferson was able to report that “the late discoveries of Captain Cook,
coasting from Kamchatka to California, have proved that, if the two
continents of Asia and America be separated at all, it is only by a
narrow streight [sic].”³

Having found an easy migration route from the Old World to the New still
left unsettled the question of when that migration had taken place.
Jefferson had his suspicions. Native Americans spoke a Babel of
languages (few of which were mutually intelligible or bore any
resemblance to an ancestral Asian language), they did not all look
alike—the usual stereotypes notwithstanding—and they had diverse
cultural practices, all of which implied a long period of divergence
from what was assumed to be a common ancestor. Could this variability
have arisen in the biblically allotted 6,000 years? Jefferson was
doubtful: such linguistic, physical, and cultural divergence from a
common source seemingly required “an immense course of time; perhaps not
less than many people give to the age of the earth.”⁴

As old as the earth? Jefferson's political enemies howled, accused him
of heresy, and branded him an atheist. The earth itself could turn out
to be very old, perhaps tens of thousands of years old as astronomers
and geologists were already insisting, but Jefferson's critics demanded
human history go no earlier than the 6,000 years allotted in the
scriptures. And it didn't.

At least not for another seventy-two years.

THE DISCOVERY OF DEEP TIME

Before 1859, the Bible was history, chronology, and ethnography all
rolled into one: it was a detailed and sacred account of human genealogy
and lifeways from Adam and Eve on down. Compiled by people who had
either been present or had access to a supernatural informant, it linked
modern life back to the very creation of heaven and earth. Well, almost
to the Creation.⁵

By the late seventeenth century, scientists such as Isaac Newton began
lobbying for more time, at least for earth history. They knew from
physical evidence the earth had to be more than 6,000 years old, but not
daring to reject Genesis entirely, they placated themselves by treating
the first days of Creation as allegorical only, supposing that Moses was
simply “accommodating his words to the gross conceptions of the vulgar,”
as Newton put it, and that the Biblical chronology “relates only to the
human race.” This was an argument easy to make. After all, as Edmund
Halley (of comet fame) observed, if the sun was created only on the
fourth day, how could the time before then be measured in “days” in the
literal twenty-four-hour sense?⁶

So geologists got busy. From the strange fossils brought to light by
exploring expeditions and the rapacious mining that fueled the
Industrial Revolution, Georges Cuvier and others revivified the
wonderfully exotic plant and animal life of earlier periods of earth
history. The most recent of those earlier periods was inhabited by
fossil elephants, including North America's mastodon and mammoth. Cuvier
had it on the good authority of American Indians—“nomadic peoples who
move ceaselessly around the continent in all directions” and thus were
in a good position to know—that these “creatures no longer existed.”⁷

The “unconsolidated…layers of the earth” in which the fossils of these
animals were found lay close to the surface, in what appeared to be sand
and gravel laid down by water—Buckland's diluvium. It would be several
decades before those deposits were recognized as the residue of
once-vast continental ice sheets (Chapter 2) and, in turn, linked with
Lyell's Pleistocene. Nonetheless, even by the early 1800s, Cuvier
realized these were not truly ancient deposits, for there were still
more primitive fossil elephants and other animals in deeper layers of
the earth. He concluded that earth's history was one of multiple periods
of creation of different kinds of animals, each of which came to a
cataclysmic end. The animals of the diluvium represented merely “the
last or one of the last catastrophes of the globe.” But if these animals
were not old in geological time, they were assuredly from the pre-modern
world. The Bible made no mention of mammoths.⁸

Accordingly, no one was looking for human remains alongside mammoth
fossils in Pleistocene deposits, nor expected to find any. This was a
period unknown to human history, beyond range of the Mosaic chronicles,
and thus a baseline against which human antiquity could be measured. The
uncoupling of earth history from human history was a splendid compromise
in a world fast becoming inconceivably old: humanity's best hope for
divine origins and its own uniqueness in the animal kingdom lay in the
affirmation of the Bible. Here, fortunately, Genesis and geology seemed
to agree: humans were the most recent creation, or so it seemed on good
authority.⁹

Still, through the first half of the nineteenth century, human remains
were found alongside Cuvier's extinct animals at an increasing number of
sites. But why accept those finds at face value?¹⁰ Most came from
continental Europe and especially France, and for this reason
immediately lost credibility with the more theologically conservative
British who, since the French Revolution, had suspected the French of
atheism and harbored a lingering distrust of their latter-day
Enlightenment notions. Much of the evidence came from excavations by
provincial amateurs who were looked upon, in John Lubbock's charitable
Victorian parlance, as mere “enthusiasts.”¹¹ They were hardly a
trustworthy source of evidence on such a momentous question. No
scientist was going to reject long-held beliefs on their say-so.

Compounding resistance, the bulk of finds were made in caves, settings
regularly churned by burrowing animals that mix deposits of different
ages. Caves are ill suited to demonstrating whether artifacts found
alongside animal bones were the same age, or just accidentally
associated. When the “Red Lady” of Paviland, an ocher-covered human
skeleton, was found in a cave with the remains of a mammoth, it was all
too easy for the Reverend Buckland to explain (with a knowing wink) that
a nearby Roman camp site threw “much light on the character and
[antiquity] of the woman under consideration.” Ocher apparently wasn't
the only reason Buckland supposed the Lady of Paviland was red (as it
happens, she was no lady either, but an Upper Paleolithic male, now
radiocarbon dated to slightly over 26,000 BP).¹²

Finally, none of the evidence fit prevailing expectations of human
history based on the Bible or geology, and thus there was no compelling
reason to accept it. This isn't dogmatic; it's good science: one doesn't
reject a long-established worldview without compelling reason. As Lyell
later confessed, “I can only plead that a discovery which seems to
contradict the general tenor of previous investigations is naturally
received with much hesitation.”¹³ Only when the counterevidence becomes
too weighty to ignore does the model of the world get reassessed and, if
needed, rejected.

That reassessment began in the summer of 1858 at Brixham Cave in
southwestern England where, beneath a nearly impenetrable layer, a crack
team of excavators under the supervision of Britain's finest geologists
(Charles Lyell among them) had uncovered stone tools in direct
association with Pleistocene fossils. Either the team had failed to
observe that stone tools had been mixed in from higher, younger deposits
and had botched the excavation (a conclusion no one was keen to admit),
or the theologically disconcerting was true: humans had occupied Brixham
Cave during the Pleistocene, alongside now-extinct animals, and thus had
an ancestry that predated biblically recorded history.

Brixham Cave's revelations prompted another look at the long-standing
claims of Jacques Boucher de Perthes, who for decades had been
collecting stone tools and Pleistocene fossils in the Somme Valley of
northwest France. Until that moment, he'd been mostly ignored because
many of the “artifacts” he illustrated were clearly not artifacts at
all, and what genuine evidence he did have was embedded in arcane
theories that had long since been rejected. Charles Darwin was hardly
alone in reading Boucher de Perthes’ work and concluding “the whole was
rubbish.”¹⁴

Yet, some of the stone tools Boucher de Perthes illustrated looked a
great deal like those from Brixham Cave and, better, had come from
floodplain deposits, which are less prone to the mixing of deposits that
occurs in caves. A procession of geologists and antiquarians made the
pilgrimage to see Boucher de Perthes and his sites and collections,
including Joseph Prestwich and John Evans, who in April 1859 witnessed
and photographed a handaxe in situ at a locality in Amiens.

At a meeting of London's Royal Society a few weeks after their return,
Prestwich read a paper on the glacial age and stratigraphy of the Somme
Valley gravels, and Evans spoke extemporaneously on the stone artifacts
found in them. Listening to them, Evans recalled, “were a good many
geological nobs…Sir C. Lyell, Murchison, Huxley…Faraday, Wheatstone,
Babbage, etc. so [we] had a distinguished audience.” That's an
understatement. The audience included not only the geological elite
(Lyell, Thomas Henry Huxley, Roderick Murchison), but also one of the
greatest experimental scientists of all time (Michael Faraday); the
inventor of the stereoscope and a pioneer researcher in acoustics,
electricity, and telegraphy (Charles Wheatstone); and one of the trio
who revolutionized English mathematics in the nineteenth century and a
dabbler in crypt-analysis, probability theory, geophysics, astronomy,
and computing machines (Charles Babbage). It might not have been
possible to gather in one place a more influential group of scientists
in all of England. The question of a deep human antiquity was out of the
closet and on center stage, and the favorable reception their audience
accorded Prestwich and Evans (“Our assertions as to the findings of the
weapons seemed to be believed”¹⁵) immeasurably helped the cause.

In the summer of 1859, Charles Lyell himself, foremost among those who
had long challenged all claims of great human antiquity, made the
pilgrimage to Abbeville. He too returned from France a convert,
announcing, “I am fully prepared to corroborate the conclusions which
have been recently laid before the Royal Society…. I believe the
antiquity of the Abbeville and Amiens flint instruments to be great
indeed if compared to the times of history and tradition.”¹⁶ Humans had
seen Agassiz's glaciers and preyed on Cuvier's fauna.

Only months before, the idea of a deep human antiquity had been the
dubious claim of provincial amateurs. Now, it was almost universally
accepted fact. As one contemporary joked, people were no longer
insisting “it was not true” or that “it was contrary to religion,” but
that “it was all known before.”¹⁷

The Paleolithic, or Stone Age, occupants of Brixham Cave and the Somme
Valley predated history, and lived at a distant time “when man shared
the possession of Europe with the Mammoth, the Cave bear, the
Woolly-haired rhinoceros, and other extinct animals,” using “rude yet
venerable weapons” of stone, as John Lubbock put it.¹⁸ This was a human
past about which the Bible said absolutely nothing, and which suddenly
rendered it obsolete as the story of humanity's past. The Paleolithic
would be knowable only through its silent artifacts and skeletal
remains. To investigate that past required a new discipline of
prehistory, with its own body of theory and methods, kin to geology and
not sacred history.

As dozens more Paleolithic sites were found across Europe, humanity's
roots were pushed back ever deeper in time: hundreds of thousands of
years, some suggested, perhaps millions of years, others supposed. What
had transpired over that span was poorly known, testament to the vast
“chasm which separates the flint folks from ourselves.” Julia Wedgwood,
Darwin's niece, saw “something dreary in the indefinite lengthening of a
savage and blood-stained past,”¹⁹ but however dreary or theologically
unnerving, those rude artifacts were nonetheless vivid testimony of the
savage depths from which humanity had climbed. They became for many
Victorians a triumphant demonstration of social progress.

The demonstration of a deep human antiquity came at virtually the same
moment as Darwin published his Origin of Species, which laid out the
theory of evolution by natural selection. Although the two had
independent origins, they soon and ever after were linked. The Origin
had no more to say about the evolution of the human species from our
animal forebears than the understated one-liner, “Light will be thrown
on the origin of man and his history.” But everyone knew what that
meant: ancient human ancestors and ultimately a pedigree shared with
other primates. One could scarcely accept the implications of Darwin's
views of human evolution without the deep past that prehistory provided.
Darwin well recognized that, and a decade later when he finally tackled
the topic of human evolution, he knew precisely where to start: “The
high antiquity of man has recently been demonstrated by the labors of a
host of eminent men, beginning with M. Boucher de Perthes; and this is
the indispensable basis for understanding his origin. I shall,
therefore, take this conclusion for granted.”²⁰ It was rubbish no more.

And that's when the search began on the other side of the Atlantic.

THE RISE AND FALL OF THE AMERICAN PALEOLITHIC

The discovery of the European Paleolithic fired American scientific
imaginations: why couldn't American prehistory be just as old? After
all, the geology of the two continents seemed so very similar. But
archaeologists quickly realized that here in America there were no
deeply stratified river valleys or caves with human artifacts
indiscriminately mixed with Pleistocene fauna.²¹

No matter, they soon had another inspiration: if artifacts were ancient,
they ought to look the part, so ones similar to the tools of Paleolithic
Europe must be the same age. The catalyst for these studies was Charles
Conrad Abbott, a New Jersey physician (and coincidentally, nephew of
Timothy Abbott Conrad, who first found traces of the Ice Age in
America). By all accounts—including his own—Abbott had a dreadful
bedside manner and was unable to earn a living as a physician. But a
living had to be made, for although he came from a prominent,
land-holding family, his was not a wealthy branch of the family tree.
Abbott made a half-hearted stab at farming and the occasional odd job to
help support himself and his family, but his livelihood came to revolve
around authoring popular books on the natural history and archaeology of
the Trenton area. Abbott soon realized the artifacts he was finding near
his Trenton home appeared to be as “rude” as those of the European
Paleolithic (Figure 10). Better still, some came from geological
deposits that hinted of considerable antiquity, and perhaps they were
even Pleistocene in age.

We now know, based on archaeological work done at the Abbott farm since,
the artifacts he was finding were not very old at all, and certainly not
glacial in age. But Abbott didn't know that, nor did most of his peers.
In February 1877, Harvard University geologist Nathaniel Shaler studied
the Trenton ground with Abbott and pronounced the artifact-bearing
gravels to have been deposited during the Ice Age. In his diary that
night, Abbott recorded his triumph: “I have discovered glacial man in
America”²² (emphasis in the original).

[images]

FIGURE 10.
Charles Abbott searching for paleoliths in the Trenton gravels, New
Jersey, ca. 1880s. (Photograph courtesy of the Peabody Museum, Harvard
University. © Harvard University, Peabody Museum 2004.24.31046.)

Heady stuff, this, and it inspired Abbott's compatriots. Harvard
archaeologist Frederic Ward Putnam hired a local man to walk the freshly
dug railroad right-of-ways and sewer trenches of Trenton watching for
more “Paleolithic” artifacts. As Abbott's work in the Delaware Valley
gained prominence, so, too, did the American Paleolithic. Throughout the
1880s, reports came in of other paleoliths from the eastern seaboard
into the Upper Midwest. Some were found under geological circumstances
that suggested a Pleistocene antiquity, but even in the absence of
secure geological evidence, these artifacts so readily mimicked European
paleoliths of undeniable antiquity, they must be as old. As Reverend
George Frederick Wright, an Oberlin College theologian and geologist,
put it, in Paleolithic times, as today, American fashions followed the
Paris line.²³

By the end of the 1880s, Abbott and his colleagues possessed the proof
they needed that the first Americans had arrived thousands of years ago,
when northern latitudes lay shrouded in glacial ice. The American
Paleolithic spawned a formidable literature of symposia, feature
articles, and books. Abbott was lionized here and abroad as “America's
Boucher de Perthes.” Everyone believed the first Americans had arrived
in the Pleistocene; the only question remaining was how much further
back in time that prehistory extended. It had to be deep, Abbott
insisted, for were it only 10,000 years old, he would be “compelled to
crowd several momentous facts in American archaeology into a
comparatively brief space of time.”²⁴

But the consensus surrounding the American Paleolithic proved
short-lived. Scarcely a year later, it was under withering fire from
USGS geologists and archaeologists at the Smithsonian Institution's
Bureau of Ethnology (later, the Bureau of American Ethnology, or BAE).
By late 1889, the archaeological community was humming with rumors that
BAE archaeologist William Henry Holmes's excavations at a prehistoric
stone quarry along Piney Branch Creek in Washington, D.C. (Figure 11),
were set to demolish the conceptual foundations of the American
Paleolithic.

[images]

FIGURE 11.
William Henry Holmes sitting in “an ocean of paleoliths” at the Piney
Branch quarry, in Washington, D.C., ca. 1890. Holmes was only kidding
about those being paleoliths. He used the cobbles and workshop debris
from Piney Branch to show that the “primitive-looking” and supposedly
ancient artifacts of the American Paleolithic were mere quarry refuse.
(Photograph courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution Libraries,
Washington, D.C.)

At the Piney Branch site (which, astonishingly, remains intact just a
few miles north of the White House), prehistoric groups found quartzite
cobbles suitable for making their artifacts. Scattered across the site
surface were the debris of tool manufacture, ranging from cobbles with
just a few flakes struck from them, to nearly finished items that had
broken or otherwise been rejected in the final stages of preparation.
Many of the rejects bore an uncanny resemblance to Paleolithic
artifacts. Holmes had an aha! moment: the manufacturing sequence at
Piney Branch mimicked the long evolution of stone toolmaking from
primitive to refined. Thus, just as the most ancient stone tools were
little more than barely sharpened cobbles, so, too, were stone tools in
the early stages of manufacture. That being the case, he reasoned, an
artifact jettisoned prematurely during manufacture would naturally
resemble a primitive stone tool, even if it was scarcely a few hundred
years old.

In late January 1890, Holmes hurled his opening salvo in the American
Anthropologist: artifact form had no inherent chronological
significance.²⁵ Proponents of an American Paleolithic were mistaking
primitiveness for antiquity, failing to realize their artifacts were
merely manufacturing failures. An artifact's age, he insisted, must be
determined by its geological context—and not because it happened to look
like one illustrated by Boucher de Perthes or John Evans. That included
Abbott's Trenton paleoliths, which to Holmes's eye looked very much like
manufacturing failures. Still, at that moment, he was feeling
charitable, and he wasn't suggesting the Trenton specimens were recent
in age. Not yet, anyway.

Word soon reached Abbott of Holmes's paper, and he dashed off a letter
to Henry Henshaw, editor of the American Anthropologist, requesting a
copy. He got one, along with an invitation. Would Abbott like to come to
Piney Branch, preferably immediately? “It seems to me,” Henshaw wrote,
“that you would be particularly interested in the matter since you have
done so much work at Trenton, and a visit here just now could not fail
to prove instructive. Mr. Holmes would be very glad to see you, and we
will all do what we can to make your visit pleasant and instructive.”²⁶

“Instructive,” Henshaw said. Twice. But Abbott wasn't looking for
instruction. He was looking for confirmation. But he went to Washington
anyway, and toured Piney Branch with Holmes in early 1890. A smug Holmes
later recalled that

on parting Abbott said, “I have learned more arch[aeology] in three
hours than ever before in three months.” This I was content to think of
as a pleasant compliment but from my subsequent studies and increased
wisdom I concluded that he probably meant what he said.²⁷

If Abbott indeed said that, he hardly meant it, for he left Washington
unswayed. As he later wrote, Holmes may well have been correct in his
archaeological interpretation of Piney Branch, but Abbott failed to see
that the story at Piney Branch had any relevance to either Trenton or
the larger question of human antiquity in America. After all, Holmes's
“so-called failures” were “not identical with the true American
Paleolithic implements of the Delaware River Valley,” which were found
in what Abbott deemed undisturbed Pleistocene glacial deposits. Even if
geologists did quibble over their precise age, Abbott was sure “no
verbal jugglery” could make the Trenton gravels that much younger.²⁸ If
Holmes aimed to reject Trenton as a Paleolithic site, he would have to
go to Trenton.

The lines were drawn in the sand (and gravel). The Great Paleolithic War
began.

Holmes spent the next several years examining the alleged Paleolithic
sites in eastern North America, including Trenton.²⁹ In each case,
Holmes solemnly proclaimed that mistakes had been made. All alleged
paleoliths were manufacturing failures having no appreciable antiquity,
and were merely the debris of historically known Native Americans. None,
in his view, were Pleistocene in age, and those allegedly found in
glacial deposits must have fallen down rodent burrows or cracks in the
earth, and fortuitously settled in those older deposits (Figure 12). And
if the specimens were actually in situ in “Pleistocene” gravels, Holmes
could say, on the supreme authority of the USGS's Thomas Chamberlin and
WJ McGee, that those gravels were not Pleistocene age at all.

[images]

FIGURE 12.
Two perspectives on the Newcomerstown, Ohio, “paleolith.” Left, G. F.
Wright's (1890) composite of the Newcomerstown paleolith alongside a
European paleolithic biface (reduced to one-half size) from Amiens,
France. Right, Holmes's (1893b) depiction of the Newcomerstown specimen
alongside “four ordinary rejects.” Holmes left it to the reader to
decide which of the five specimens was from Newcomerstown, and which
were quarry rejects.

Abbott was furious. If the critics were correct, why were only
primitive-looking specimens found in gravel deposits, and not the more
refined artifacts of the American Indians? If these were quarry rejects,
where was the flake debris resulting from their fashioning? And who were
these self-styled “expert geologists” to lecture him about the Trenton
gravels? None had spent a fraction of the time he had walking the banks
of the Delaware, and assuredly could not have greater knowledge of its
geology than he possessed. “I lay a claim to a smattering of
gravel-ology,” Abbott declared in Science, and if “up pops some
‘authority’ and declaims the possibility that the ground was washed from
beneath the big stone and the implement slipped in. Well, we can go on
supposing till the crack o'doom, but as to proof, that is another
matter.”³⁰

Perhaps. But as Holmes snorted in reply two weeks later, demonstrating
that artifacts were truly found in glacial gravels required the skills
of “competent and reputable observers of geological phenomena.” That
Holmes believed no glacial-aged artifacts had yet been found made it
quite clear he did not consider Abbott's claims to “gravel-ology” equal
to competence. A testy Abbott immediately fired back with doggerel
virtually guaranteed to offend the humorless Holmes:³¹

The stone are inspected,

And Holmes cries “rejected,

They're nothing but Indian chips”

He glanced at the ground,

Truth, fancied he found,

And homeward to Washington skips.

They got there by

chance He saw at a glance

And turned up his nose at the series;

“They've no other history,

I've solved the whole mystery,

And to argue the point only wearies.”

But the gravel is old,

At least so I'm told;

“Halt, halt!” cries out WJ [McGee],

“It may be very recent,

And it isn't quite decent,

For me not to have my own way.”

So dear WJ

There is no more to say,

Because you will never agree

That anything's truth

But what issues, forsooth,

From Holmes or the brain of McGee.

Holmes was not amused (though the editor must have been, since it was
highly unusual for Science to publish verse). The American Paleolithic,
he snarled, was little more than the blunders and misconceptions of
“amateurs” with little scientific understanding of stone toolmaking, let
alone of geological age and context. If Abbott still didn't get the
message, Holmes spelled it out in a lengthy, sharply pointed critique,
which asked the decidedly nonrhetorical question, “Are there traces of
man in the Trenton gravels?” Holmes's answer was “No.”³² And then the
controversy turned ugly.

In the fall of 1892, USGS and BAE scientists attacked George Frederick
Wright's just-published Man and the Glacial Period. Wright's wrongs were
obvious enough: he had spoken in favor of the American Paleolithic; he
had challenged one of Chamberlin's (and by extension the entire USGS
Glacial Division's) intellectual monuments—the demonstration there had
been multiple glacial events; and, worst of all, he had put those
heresies in a book written for a general audience. Wright's critics,
orchestrated by Chamberlin, set out to destroy his credibility as a
glacial geologist, as an archaeologist, and especially as a public
spokesman for science. They launched a barrage of vicious reviews of Man
and the Glacial Period, which were unprecedented in number and savagery.
“No one,” Chamberlin thundered, “is entitled to speak on behalf of
science who does not really command it.” WJ McGee, a one-time staunch
supporter of the American Paleolithic but by now a zealous convert, was
especially bloodthirsty, labeling Wright's work absurdly fallacious,
unscientific, and an “offense to the nostrils,” then dismissing him as
“a betinseled charlatan whose potions are poison. Would that science
might be well rid of such harpies.”³³

The maliciousness of the attacks appalled Wright's colleagues, as well
as many who hardly knew him or his work. To Wright's allies, the
near-simultaneous appearance of the reviews and their “sameness of tone”
smelled of a conspiracy. They were right. It was. Yet, the assault on
Wright was more than just personal. It was a thinly veiled proprietary
dispute in which BAE and USGS scientists sought to impose their vision
of archaeology and geology on those fields, and contrast their brand of
science against those, such as Wright and Abbott, they deemed rank
amateurs.

Because the BAE and USGS scientists were richly funded and backed by the
power of the federal government, at a time when the government dominated
American science (the balance of scientific research and power would
shift to universities only in the twentieth century), the atmosphere was
charged with accusations that arrogant, heavy-handed federal scientists
were conspiring to crush state and local practitioners. Those
accusations reached Capitol Hill in 1893, when Congress was deciding the
annual budgetary fate of the USGS and BAE. Neither agency could afford
such bad press, since their appropriations were already threatened by
the economic fallout from the Panic of 1893. Paleolithic proponents got
a measure of revenge: the BAE and USGS budgets were slashed.

After savaging each other in meetings and in print, the warring parties
suspended hostilities in late 1893, though more from battle fatigue than
by truce, for both sides had hardened beyond compromise or retreat. They
met again in the summer of 1897 in Toronto at a joint meeting of the
American and British Associations for the Advancement of Science. There,
Paleolithic proponents suffered a devastating blow: Putnam handed Sir
John Evans a set of Trenton artifacts. With barely a glance, the dean of
Stone Age archaeology dismissed the lot as not Paleolithic at all.
Putnam desperately tried to change Evans's mind and undo the damage, but
failed. Critics gloated. Proponents were badly shaken. Only the faithful
remained undaunted. A bitter Abbott blamed Putnam for the “unfortunate
Toronto business.”³⁵

A MAMMOTH FRAUD IN SCIENCE

The boldface headlines of the September 8, 1894, Philadelphia Inquirer
nearly screamed aloud: “DR. HILBORNE CRESSON TAKES HIS OWN LIFE.” As the
paper indelicately put it, Cresson “blew his brains out in a park in New
York City.” He had gone insane, the Inquirer reported, his mind
disordered as a “result of scientific study” and the “too close
application of esoteric principles.”

Cresson was an archaeologist.

He began his career an expatriate student of art and archaeology at the
ficole des Beaux Arts and ficole d’Anthropologie in Paris in the 1870s.
Apparently, he had a talent for recreating prehistoric art. He returned
to the United States in 1880 and began collecting artifacts and
excavating around Philadelphia. By 1887 he'd attracted the attention of
Frederic Ward Putnam, who hired Cresson as an archaeological field
assistant.

In December 1889, Cresson appeared in Putnam's office bearing a whelk
(Busycon) shell pendant, on which was engraved the figure ofa mammoth
(Figure 13). Cresson reported he'd dug up the specimen as a schoolboy
years earlier near Holly Oak, Delaware. Putnam, a staunch champion of
the American Paleolithic, would have instantly understood the pendant's
significance: if the mammoth had been engraved from life, it would be a
tidy solution to the question of human antiquity in the New World, and
would show that Paleolithic Americans had created works of art to rival
in age and beauty those of Paleolithic Europe. How timely that Cresson
should appear with a specimen that could tip the balance of the Great
Paleolithic War, which Putnam knew was looming on the horizon.

[images]

FIGURE 13.
The Holly Oak pendant (Delaware), and as drawn by W. C. Sturtevant. Note
that there is ample room on the shell for feet; that they are not shown
was one of the hints that the mammoth image was made from a book, and
not from real life. (Adapted from Griffin et al. 1988.)

Even so, one searches Putnam's papers in vain for the happy announcement
his cherished beliefs had been vindicated by this remarkable evidence.
At Cresson's request, Putnam showed the Holly Oak pendant at the
February 1890 meeting of the Boston Society of Natural History, yet was
ever after silent about it. But Putnam left behind a telling clue of his
opinion: a photograph of the Holly Oak pendant alongside a drawing of
the La Madeleine mammoth, which had been engraved on a segment of
mammoth tusk that was discovered by Eduoard Lartet in 1865 in the
Dordogne region of France.

Any good archaeologist, and Putnam was a good archaeologist, would have
instantly seen the similarities between the Holly Oak and La Madeleine
engravings. To be sure, in Putnam's day there were few mammoth
depictions known from Europe, and none from America. Possibly, he may
have concluded the similarity between the two merely reflected the fact
both depicted mammoths, as opposed to both depicting the same mammoth
(nowadays we know of thousands of European Paleolithic depictions of
mammoth—still none from America—and those depictions vary greatly, as
one might expect).

Putnam's suspicions might have been further aroused when Cresson
reported his discovery had been made in 1864, conveniently predating La
Madeleine's by a year, and claimed that his French tutor, allegedly
involved in the Holly Oak discovery, had been a student of Lartet's.
Cresson never satisfactorily explained why it took him twenty-five years
to reveal the pendant's presence.

Cresson suggested to Putnam that he look at Charles Rau's book, Early
Man in Europe, to see how well the Holly Oak mammoth resembled the
mammoth skeleton it illustrated. In doing so, Putnam would have seen
that the book also provided an illustration of the La Madeleine
engraving, one that differs from better reproductions of the original in
ways strikingly similar to Holly Oak: the contours of the back and tusks
and trunk can be overlaid; they have the same orientation and overall
posture, especially the leg positions; they treat the feet in a similar
way. Most mammoths are shown with bulbous feet, but the La Madeleine
feet are cut off by a break in the original specimen, and the Holly Oak
feet terminate in precisely the same way, despite the fact that there is
ample room on the shell where feet could have been engraved. Putnam,
almost certainly suspecting the Holly Oak pendant was a fraud, quietly
ignored it.

For that matter, there was hardly any mention of the pendant in the
thousands of pages published during the Great Paleolithic War. That
silence was more damning than even the rare voice condemning the
pendant, that of archaeologist Henry Mercer who, busy peddling his own
mastodon-engraved forgery, sneered that Holly Oak was a fraud and
Cresson a liar. Since the archaeological community in those days was so
very small, its members must have known of the pendant. One can safely
surmise they doubted its authenticity, and were just too polite to say
anything about it. And why bother? Everyone knew the story.

Unfortunately, that story died with its participants, though the pendant
itself survived in obscurity in a drawer at the Smithsonian Institution,
only to emerge in 1976 on the cover of Science.³⁴ An accompanying
article by John Kraft and Ronald Thomas reported that geological work in
and around what is now Claymont, Delaware, revealed deposits that were
at least 10,000-40,000 years old. They asserted, in the absence of any
evidence that the pendant actually came from those deposits, it must be
just as old, thereby making it “definite evidence of association of
early American man with the woolly mammoth” and the only known example
of North American Paleoindian art.

The Science cover caught the eye of Bill Sturtevant, a curator at the
Smithsonian, who was instantly reminded of the La Madeleine mammoth.
When he read the pendant came from Delaware, not the Dordogne, he
straightaway suspected fraud. Knowing of my interests in Paleoindians
and the history of American archaeology, he asked me to help
investigate.

We quickly established there were concerns about unrelated but equally
suspicious archaeological discoveries of Cresson's that, like Holly Oak,
could never be field checked. We learned, too, Cresson was not trusted
by his peers, and for good reason. In late 1891, Cresson was working in
Ohio on Putnam's archaeological field crew when his supervisor, Warren
Moorehead, caught him stealing artifacts from the excavations and
shipping them to his home to Philadelphia. Cresson was fired on the
spot.

Reading the details of Cresson's pilfering in Moorehead's diary, I was
reminded of a comment made to me a few months earlier by James B.
Griffin, one of the deans of American archaeology. Griffin thought it
odd that the Holly Oak pendant, ignoring its engraved mammoth, bore such
a striking resemblance to shell pendants found in Fort Ancient period
sites, which generally postdate AD 1000. In virtually the same moment, I
remembered that prior to revealing the existence of the pendant in 1889,
Cresson had worked for Putnam on Fort Ancient-age sites and museum
collections. What better way to pass off a forgery than to carve a
mammoth on a genuine archaeological specimen stolen from a collection
that at least looked old, but in the late nineteenth century could not
be independently dated?

Of course, in the late twentieth century it could be, and when
accelerator radiocarbon dating came on line, we submitted a tiny
fragment of the pendant's shell. While we waited for the dating results,
Smithsonian archaeologist Bruce Smith organized a pool to guess the
pendant's age. The resulting radiocarbon age, when calibrated, came to
approximately AD 875 (with a one standard deviation range of AD
760-990). Our prediction of its age was off by just a couple of
centuries, probably attributable to the margin of error in dating marine
shell; more precise calibration would require knowing where the shell
came from in order to account for the local carbon reservoir, but on
this point the trail is cold.

No matter. The Holly Oak pendant was engraved from looking at an image
in a book, and not at a live mammoth. Bruce Smith won the pool.

Archaeology, not being a hard science but a difficult one all the same,
rarely yields the kind of unequivocal results obtained in the Holly Oak
case. When it does, it is gratifying—regardless of whether one happens
to be right or wrong. But let's be honest: most of us want to be right.
Science is like that. After we published the radiocarbon date on the
shell, many colleagues claimed they had known all along the Holly Oak
pendant was a fake. Science is like that, too.

Cresson had been desperate to place his name on the rolls of American
science, and evidently believed that if he made a discovery so wonderful
that it resolved the most bitter dispute then facing American
archaeology, the archaeological world would beat a path to his door. The
flaw in that strategy is that spectacular finds cannot be made on
command, unless one is blindly ambitious and utterly dishonest. So it
was that a stolen Fort Ancient shell pendant in the hands of a skilled
artist schooled in French prehistory and with an illustration of the La
Madeleine engraving in a book in front of him, became for a moment the
first American Paleolithic art object. But only for a moment.

Whether it was the disgrace of being summarily fired, or the dismissal
of his pendant (more by stony silence than public censure), or some
other event that started Cresson on his downward spiral into insanity,
we will never know. But perhaps Cresson knew. Among the items in his
pockets at the time of his suicide was a note in his handwriting that he
feared he was “suspected of counterfeiting and that Secret Service
detectives were continually on his track.”

Nevertheless, the active search for the deep past continued, though
following that pivotal summer, no more claims were made on behalf of
American paleoliths. However, the new century brought a new kind of
evidence to center stage.

NEANDERTHALS IN AMERICA?

In December 1899, Putnam's hired hand in Trenton found a human femur
(upper leg bone) deep in what appeared to be Pleistocene-age gravels at
Trenton. Hope for a Pleistocene human antiquity was renewed, but Putnam
was worried. “We must not make any blunder about it,” he warned, and for
good reason. Government critics quickly scorned the fast-traveling news
of the find. Putnam turned the femur over to Ales Hrdlicka, a young
physician turned physical anthropologist, whom he hoped would show that
the bone had some antiquity. But Hrdlicka was none too impressed by the
specimen, which looked no different from femurs of recent American
Indians. Perhaps, he supposed, the geology of the site might shed light
on its age. Wright had examined the geology, and thought the specimen's
Pleistocene age was so clear that there was scarcely anything to
discuss. Wright, however, was hopelessly optimistic. By then, the
Trenton gravels had such geological notoriety that any agreement on
their age was impossible.³⁶

The Trenton femur proved to be the first of many human skeletal parts
found over the next twenty-five years in apparent Pleistocene-age
deposits. Over that period, Hrdlicka would emerge—after 1903 in the
employ of Holmes at the Smithsonian—to challenge each and every claim,
“like Horatio at the land bridge between Asia and North America, mowing
down with deadly precision all would-be geologically ancient invaders of
the New World,” as one of his contemporaries put it.³⁷

Hrdlicka's position was this: if the earliest Americans had arrived in
the Pleistocene, they should look like a Pleistocene-age fossil
human—like Neanderthals, say, and not like the American Indians who
inhabited the region. In structure this was no more than Abbott's
argument (if it's old, it should look primitive) applied to skeletons.
But there was one significant difference: the argument worked for
Hrdlicka. He was fast becoming the premier physical anthropologist of
his day, and few could challenge his considerable knowledge of human
variability and evolution. To claim a human skeleton was Pleistocene in
age, one had to play by Hrdlicka's rules. So were there Neanderthals in
America?

On a farm along the Missouri River just outside Lansing, Kansas, in
February 1902, brothers Michael and Joseph Concannon were digging a
tunnel to store fruit and vegetables on their father's farm. Seventy
feet into the hillside and twenty feet beneath the surface, they
shoveled into two human skeletons. The bones were pushed aside—there was
a tunnel to be dug—but after a few months, word of their discovery
reached the City Public Museum in nearby Kansas City.

The museum's curator visited the Concannon farm, and seeing that the
bones came from under a layer of apparent glacial loess, he alerted
geologists Warren Upham and Newton Winchell of the Minnesota Historical
Society, who rushed to Lansing. The two men were stunned by what they
saw: Pleistocene loess atop the bones. Within days, Upham prepared a
paper announcing that Lansing proved a human presence in the New World
prior to the last episode of ice advance in North America: in round
numbers, perhaps 30,000 years before the present.

To his friend Wright, Upham happily chirped that Lansing vindicated the
claims made in Man and the Glacial Period, then sent his hastily written
paper to Chamberlin and Holmes, inviting “verification or correction of
our view.”³⁸ Verification, naturally, was what Upham preferred and
briefly thought he had. Chamberlin and Holmes (and later Hrdlicka)
visited Lansing, and soon afterward Upham heard rumors they had endorsed
the site's great antiquity—rumors Upham vigorously fanned.

But the rumors were false. Unbeknownst to Upham, even before Chamberlin
left for Lansing, he was already grousing about Upham's “fundamental
untrustworthiness.” Chamberlin's mood hardly improved at the site, where
he concluded Upham—his former USGS employee—had badly misread the
stratigraphy and geology. Back in Chicago, Chamberlin blistered Upham in
a string of letters, lecturing him on the attributes of loess,
scientific ethics (like Wright, Upham had “gone public” with his claims
about Lansing), and even ominously accused him of “direct
falsification.”³⁹

Battle lines were drawn once more: Upham, Winchell, and Wright fighting
for a Pleistocene age for the loess overlying the skeleton, with
Chamberlin and Bohumil Shimek, the Midwest's leading loess expert,
dismissing the Lansing deposit as neither true loess nor Pleistocene in
age. Holmes and Hrdlicka joined Chamberlin, chiming in that the Lansing
skulls were no different than crania of American Indians of the region,
and surely no more than a few hundred or a few thousand years old. To
Abbott watching from the sidelines, it all recalled “the merry old days
of earnest work…[and] the controversial days that embittered me.”⁴⁰ Just
like in the old days, neither proponents nor critics backed down.

Scarcely four years later and 195 kilometers up the Missouri River, the
exercise was repeated. At the Gilder Mound, just outside Omaha,
Nebraska, human crania—Neanderthal-looking to some—were plucked from
apparent Pleistocene loess. Eight years later, attention shifted to the
tar pits of Rancho La Brea, where a human skull was extracted from the
asphalt ooze along with bones of an extinct (Pleistocene) condor. Two
years after that (1916), it was Vero, Florida, where human remains
rolled out of sand deposits yielding the bones of extinct mammoth and
sloth. Nearly a decade later, it was a similar story at Melbourne,
Florida.

In each case, a swarm of archaeologists and geologists descended on the
site to inspect the skeletal remains and their geological context,
Hrdlicka usually leading the charge (Figure 14). Testifying to the
duration of the dispute, there was now a second generation of
participants. Literally, a second generation: geologist Rollin
Chamberlin visited Vero in the place of his father, Thomas.

[images]

FIGURE 14.
Aleš Hrdli[images]ka examining the stratigraphy in the Gilder Mound,
Nebraska, January 1907. (Photograph by E. Barbour, courtesy of the
Nebraska State Museum.)

There were the usual disagreements over whether the human skeletal
remains at each site were in primary context, or contemporary with the
apparently ancient loess or extinct mammal-bearing deposits in which
they were found. Hrdlicka took a cue from Holmes: since human beings
bury their dead and because bone is so easily broken and moved in the
earth, the odds were that any bone in ancient deposits came from later
times. “Perhaps,” paleontologist Oliver Hay tartly replied, “we get a
clue here to the reason why civilized people nail up their dead in good
strong boxes.”⁴¹

Besides, Hrdlicka continued, even granting human remains had not moved
in the ground, what assurance was that of their great age? Geologists’
opinions were utterly divided. The Lansing and Gilder Mound specimens
were either in true loess or not in true loess, and thus either
Pleistocene or post-Pleistocene in age, while the Vero and Melbourne
fauna was either Pleistocene or post-Pleistocene in age—it all depended
on which geologist one heeded.

Hrdli[images]ka naturally followed the Chamberlins, but his true
allegiance was to the bones. What did they have to say? Only if they
spoke of an anatomically distinct pre-modern human could they be
Pleistocene in age, never mind the geology. But they said no such thing.

Chamberlin (senior) was disappointed in Hrdli[images]ka's low opinion of
geological testimony, but no more so than in many of his geologist
colleagues. In fact, the irreconcilability of interpretations soured
relations all around. Anthropologists and archaeologists bickered among
themselves over what a Pleistocene-aged human should look like, then
argued with paleontologists about the timing of mammal extinctions.
Paleontologists wrangled with geologists about where to draw the line
between Pleistocene and post-Pleistocene formations. Geologists fought
each other over the number, timing, and evidences of glacial history.
Even linguists got in the act, clucking with disapproval at everyone's
failure to provide them sufficient time to evolve the great diversity of
native North American languages (Chapter 5).

Once again, the situation reached an angry impasse. Holmes darkly
pronounced the evidence from Vero “dangerous to the cause of science.”
Journalist Robert Gilder, who had found the Nebraska “Neanderthals,”
called Hrdli[images]ka a “liar.”⁴²

So it went. Over the decades, scores of purportedly Pleistocene-age
sites were championed, some with stone tools, others with human skeletal
remains, but all were suspect, and all faced withering criticism from
Holmes, Hrdli[images]ka, and others. In this wide-open field, there were
few rules of engagement, and the dispute exposed deep rifts over what
constituted legitimate proof of human antiquity. At its worst, Frank
Roberts darkly admitted, “the question of early man in America [became]
virtually taboo, and no anthropologist, or for that matter geologist or
paleontologist, desirous of a successful career would tempt the fate of
ostracism by intimating that he had discovered indications of a
respectable antiquity for the Indian.” Archaeologist Nels Nelson advised
his colleagues to “lie low for the present.” Shrewd advice and many,
such as Alfred Kidder, followed it: we “comforted ourselves,” he later
confessed, “by working in the satisfactorily clear atmosphere of the
late periods.”⁴³ Ironically, the key to resolving the dispute had, since
1908, quietly lain exposed in an arroyo in New Mexico.

IN THE BELLY OF THE BEAST

On August 27, 1908, torrential rains fell on Johnson Mesa in a remote
corner of northeastern New Mexico. The thunderstorm broke in early
evening, yielding a beautiful sunset, but then, unusually, fired up
again. After dark, from a ranch just below the mesa, a frantic phone
call went out to Sarah Rooke, the local telephone operator: the Dry
Cimarron River was rising fast. Everyone downstream in the town of
Folsom needed to head to higher ground. From her switchboard, Rooke
began calling the townspeople. Many heeded the warning. Others could not
be saved, including Sarah Rooke, who stayed at her post sounding the
alarm until the floodwaters tore her small operator's shed from its
foundations and washed it away. Her body was found in a field the next
spring, buried in mud.⁴⁴ The flood forever changed the town of Folsom.
So, too, American archaeology.

Sometime after the flood, George McJunkin, the foreman on the Crowfoot
Ranch below Johnson Mesa, went out to check his cattle and fences, and
came across a new and deeply incised portion of Wild Horse Arroyo, a
tributary of the Dry Cimarron. Looking down, he noticed bones jutting
out near the base of the arroyo. Most cowboys would have passed them by:
bones are hardly an uncommon sight in ranch country. But by all
accounts, McJunkin was no ordinary cowboy. Born a slave in pre-Civil War
Texas, he was befriended at an early age by his plantation owner (Jack
McJunkin), who taught him to read and supplied him with books. In his
teens, George moved to Midland, taking a ranching job using the McJunkin
name. By the time he was in his twenties, he was working on the Crowfoot
Ranch.

Precisely what McJunkin, a self-taught naturalist, thought of the bones
in the bottom of Wild Horse Arroyo is not known. But they obviously
piqued his curiosity, for he told others about them. One was Carl
Schwachheim, the blacksmith in nearby Raton, who had built a fountain in
front of his home using the antler racks of two bull elk that had become
entangled in a mortal contest. McJunkin had passed by the fountain, saw
that its builder was a kindred spirit, and on trips to Raton would stop
in to talk to Schwachheim—at some point, he must have described the
bones in Wild Horse Arroyo.

Schwachheim did not visit the Folsom site until December 1922 (after
McJunkin died). He and Raton banker Fred Howarth collected a few of the
bones, which they took to the then Colorado Museum of Natural History in
Denver. Jesse Figgins, the director, turned the bones over to the
museum's paleontologist, Harold Cook, who identified them as being from
an extinct species of bison. Figgins and Cook visited the site in March
1926 and decided to excavate, with the aim of acquiring a bison skeleton
for museum display. They were not looking for, nor did they expect to
find, any archaeological remains.

Still, they were well aware of the human antiquity controversy. Cook was
the discoverer and namesake of Hesperopithecus haroldcookii, a fossil he
had found in the early 1920s near his family ranch in western Nebraska,
which was identified as a pre-Pleistocene form said to resemble what was
then the oldest-known human ancestor, Homo erectus (Java Man, as it was
then known).⁴⁵ Sadly for Cook's hopes of taxonomic immortality (Cook
Man?), Hesperopithecus proved on closer inspection to be a fossil pig
that had become extinct millions of years before our ancestors appeared
on the plains of Africa. But Cook paid that little mind—the tooth might
well be from a fossil pig, but he was convinced some of the bones found
with it had been broken by humans. Ever the optimist, Cook was sure
humans had been in America a very long time.

He saw further evidence of that at the site of Lone Wolf Creek, in
Colorado City, Texas. Figgins had hired workers there in 1924 to extract
the bones of an extinct bison for display (Figure 15). Unfortunately,
they made a mess of the task, lopping off the ends of bones to make them
fit packing crates, rather than just getting larger crates. Worse,
Figgins learned only afterward that three artifacts had been found with
the bison. The artifacts were neither left in place nor photographed;
one was missing. The following spring, Figgins dispatched Cook to the
site to assess the geology, and even though the evidence was long out of
the ground (and badly mangled), Cook still confidently concluded that
Lone Wolf Creek provided “good, dependable definite evidence of human
artifacts in the Pleistocene in America,” perhaps as much as 350,000
years old.⁴⁶

That was a daring claim at a time when most were unwilling to push human
antiquity in America back to 10,000 years ago. But because of the
sloppiness of the discovery, there was little reason for confidence in
Lone Wolf Creek, no matter how vigorously Cook tried to promote it. And
he tried very hard indeed. But that hardly convinced skeptics like
Holmes, who immediately asked about Cook's scientific reliability. The
answer from Cook's old mentor was none too flattering: “Harold has a
somewhat optimistic temperament, and I find it necessary to discount his
geological conclusions more or less.” Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka did as
well.⁴⁷

[images]

FIGURE 15.
H. D. Boyes and Nelson Vaughn at their excavations at the Lone Wolf
Creek site, Texas, 1924. Note the bison remains in place. (Photograph
courtesy of the Heart of West Texas Museum.)

Cook persisted. In a broadside attack on Hrdli[images]ka published the
next year, Cook invoked Lone Wolf Creek and Hesperopithecus to bolster
his claim of a Pleistocene or even earlier human presence in the New
World. In Hrdli[images]ka's angry eyes, Cook's latest paper was just
“another head of the hydra,”⁴⁸ and he moved swiftly to decapitate it.
But like a hydra, new heads kept popping up.

In early 1927, Cook was called to a gravel quarry in Frederick,
Oklahoma, following a report of mammoth and other extinct mammal bones
found alongside grinding stones in apparent Pleistocene gravels.
“Strangely enough,” Cook remarked, “these implements show a degree of
culture closely comparable with that of the nomadic modern Plains
Indians.”⁴⁹ He assessed the geology and concluded the site was about
365,000 years old. But as at Lone Wolf Creek, crucial details of what
was found, and where, rested on the unreliable testimony of an
inexperienced collector. Worse, an independent assessment of the site's
geology concluded the deposits were “not necessarily more than 10,000
years old, and might be somewhat younger.”⁵⁰ That was followed by a
searing critique of the archaeology that ridiculed the absurdity of
Pleistocene-age grinding stones (even today, such are rare).

Yet, Cook and Figgins paid the skeptics little mind, writing that
Hesperopithecus, Lone Wolf Creek, and now Frederick pushed human
antiquity back “by hundreds of thousands of years.”⁵¹ By then, however,
few were taking them or their sites very seriously. It was in this
harshly skeptical climate that their Folsom work emerged.

Schwachheim was hired by Figgins to excavate at Folsom, and began in May
1926. By early July, he was down to the level of the bison bones, and in
mid-July, an artifact was found. This was no “rude” paleolith, but a
delicately made spear point with a distinctive central groove or flute.
Unfortunately, the point was out of the ground before he spotted it, so
whether it was associated with the bison bones was uncertain. Notified
in Denver, Figgins instructed Schwachheim to watch “for human remains
and then in no circumstances, remove them, but let me know at once.”⁵²
He wanted to inspect the remains in place. The remainder of the summer,
Figgins waited anxiously for word. None came.

Nonetheless, he and Cook were convinced this was another Pleistocene
archaeological site. That fall they wrote matching papers for Natural
History magazine that, as Figgins boasted to Oliver Hay at the
Smithsonian, were “a deliberate attempt to arouse Dr. Hrdli[images]ka
and stir up all the venom there is in him.” As Figgins explained,
“Everyone seems to think Hrdli[images]ka will attack [and if he] tears a
chunk of hide off my back…there is nothing to prevent my removing three
upper and two lower incisors, black one eye and gouge the other, after I
have laid his hide across a barbed wire fence. I am daring the whole
miserable caboodle of them.”⁵³

Brave words, and they inspired Hay to march down the hall to
Hrdli[images]ka's office to arrange “a showdown” with Figgins in
Washington. When Hay reported what he'd done, Figgins backpedaled fast,
declaring it would be much better if Cook went to Washington to “be the
[sacrificial] goat.” In the end, Figgins checked his faltering bravado
and boarded a train for Washington. By the time he arrived at
Hrdli[images]ka's office, he was in a fearful lather. Yet, much to his
astonishment and relief, Hrdli[images]ka was courteous, “extremely
pleased” to see the Folsom point Figgins carried with him, and even
offered some advice: if additional points appeared during the coming
excavation season, they should be left in place and telegrams should be
sent around the country inviting “outside scientists” to come and
examine them in the ground.⁵⁴

Good advice, Figgins thought, and he left with newfound respect for
Hrdli[images]ka. What he didn't appreciate, however, were
Hrdli[images]ka's motives for offering that advice. Hrdli[images]ka
didn't trust Figgins or Cook for a moment, and would not be convinced by
anything they said about Folsom's age, or any possible association of
artifacts with extinct animals. He wanted others called in to judge the
evidence.

Schwachheim resumed excavating at Folsom in the spring of 1927. In late
August, he uncovered a Folsom point, this time firmly in place between a
pair of bison ribs. Figgins was alerted, and immediately broadcast
telegrams around the country announcing, “Another arrowhead found in
position with bison remains at Folsom, New Mexico. Can you personally
examine find.” Schwachheim was commanded to guard the point night and
day until the visiting dignitaries arrived. He dutifully awaited the
parade of “Scientists, Anthropologists, Archaeologists, Zoologists, or
other bugs.”⁵⁵

It began a few days later with the arrival of Figgins, paleontologist
Barnum Brown of the American Museum of Natural History, and
archaeologists Alfred Kidder of the Carnegie Institution of Washington
and Frank Roberts, a young colleague of Hrdli[images]ka's at the
Smithsonian (Hrdli[images]ka was invited, but was in Alaska at the time;
Holmes by then had retired) (Figure 16). All agreed this was no
accidental association of artifact and bone: human hunters had killed
this now-extinct Pleistocene bison. Here, finally, was proof in those
pre-radiocarbon days of an Ice Age human presence.⁵⁶

That certainty, however, gave way to uncertainty about the site's
absolute age, since the taxonomy and timing of bison extinction were
still not altogether clear. Even so, within weeks Kidder announced
publicly what he'd always hoped for privately: the first Americans had
arrived some 15,000-20,000 years ago (now he could rebut those who
claimed the Americas hadn't been occupied long enough for its
civilizations to have developed on their own). The announcement,
subsequently elaborated by Brown and Roberts, electrified the scientific
community.

Brown, in fact, was so taken by what he saw that he returned to Folsom
in 1928 to expand the excavation. That July, when fluted points were
again found alongside bison remains, telegrams were once more broadcast
across the country, and in response, the find was seen by several of
“the best men in the country,”⁵⁷ including some of a new breed of USGS
geologists who mapped the region, and who independently affirmed
Folsom's late Pleistocene antiquity (based on my own investigations at
Folsom seventy years later, which involved extensive radiocarbon dating,
I can report their age estimates were off by only a couple thousand
years: that's quite an achievement, given they had no techniques for
absolute age dating⁵⁸).

[images]

FIGURE 16.
Carl Schwachheim (left) and Barnum Brown posing with the first in situ
Folsom point, September 4, 1927. The point is the one shown in close-up
in Plate 1 of this book. (Photograph courtesy of American Museum of
Natural History.)

The decades spent searching for paleoliths or pre-sapiens fossils were
over. In retrospect, that effort seemed strangely misguided. Folsom was
late Pleistocene in age, but it looked nothing like what anyone expected
a Pleistocene human occupation to look like.

HISTORICAL HOMILIES

Proponents of a great human antiquity in the Americas, recalling with
fondness Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka apparently getting their comeuppance
at Folsom, see in this history a vindication of their belief that
critics hinder the recognition of bona fide early sites and retard the
progress of science. That's a serious charge, but it needn't be taken
too seriously. Historian of science David Hull observes that “the least
productive scientists tend to behave the most admirably, while those who
make the greatest contributions just as frequently behave the most
deplorably.”⁵⁹ Without question, Chamberlin, Holmes, and Hrdli[images]ka
often behaved deplorably: they were merciless in attack and engaged in
no small amount of behind-the-scenes skullduggery.

Nevertheless, far from hamstringing inquiry, these critics actually sped
it along toward resolution. Their tough questions and criticisms
crystallized debate on stone tool technology (the means of making
tools), the relationship between tool form and age, human evolution,
glacial geology, and dating techniques—critical issues all. Much was
learned in the half century of dispute, not least what a solution to the
human antiquity controversy had to look like. The swift acceptance of
Folsom attests to that.

Besides, look at the sites the critics rejected. Today, Trenton,
Newcomerstown, Lansing, Gilder Mound, Vero, and all the other allegedly
Pleistocene sites are significant because of the battles fought there,
not because of the great age of their archaeological remains. None of
them were what they were claimed to be. Skepticism about a Pleistocene
human presence was not arbitrary, but rather forged in the face of
repeated cases that failed to withstand critical scrutiny (circumstances
that will arise again).

The antiquity of the Folsom site, like that of Brixham Cave before it,
was based on artifacts in close association with the remains of an
extinct Pleistocene animal, the only secure means then available for
telling time. That made Folsom unlike virtually every previous
contender, where it had been impossible to demonstrate that the
artifacts (or human skeletal remains) had been deposited at the same
time as the Pleistocene-aged deposits or fauna with which they were
found.

Equally important, Folsom was a kill site that would ultimately yield
the remains of nearly three dozen bison and almost as many points.
Consequently, its excavation provided several opportunities for
scientific visitors to witness newly discovered points in place. Site
visits to evaluate claims of great antiquity had been common since the
1890s. Yet, they were not always successful nor, for that matter,
welcome. After a joint visit to Trenton in the late summer of 1897,
Abbott griped, “I cannot say, looking back over the past four days, that
I have enjoyed it. There is too much assumption of extra-carefulness, as
they call it, which is simply a lot of childish twaddle. They cannot
grasp the subject in its entirety and see the facts…. They may all be
very eminent men, but it took me a good deal less time to learn that we
had here evidences of man's antiquity.”⁶⁰

Those earlier site visits were often exercises in incompatibility, never
achieving consensus and serving largely to highlight differences in
interpretation. This was hardly surprising: archaeological methods and
techniques in those years were uneven, many discoveries were made under
dubious conditions, training was spottier, more amateurs were in the
mix, there was considerable disagreement about how to recognize
Pleistocene-age deposits, the criteria for evaluating evidence were less
explicit, and a site's age had to be assessed in the field after careful
examination of the stratigraphy and geology, artifact context, and the
nature of the associated remains. At Trenton, Lansing, Gilder, and Vero,
proponents and critics visited the sites, looked at the very same
evidence, but came away with radically different views of what it meant.
The 1927 visit to Folsom, where everyone agreed on what they were
seeing, was the exception far more than the rule. But then by 1927,
archaeology, geology, and vertebrate paleontology had become more
professional sciences.

It was not inevitable that resolution of the human antiquity controversy
would occur at Folsom, only that a site such as Folsom was needed, where
the association of points and extinct animals was indisputable and could
be repeatedly witnessed. That's critical, for the evidence at Folsom was
seen—on Hrdli[images]ka's good advice—by members of the scientific
elite.

Historian of science Martin Rudwick has shown that controversy in
science, or at least nontrivial controversy, is not resolved by
consensus across the community.⁶¹ Rather, resolution is brought about by
a core elite within the field who are recognized as experts, even if
they are not particularly involved in the research within that area.
These elite scientists regard themselves, and are regarded by others, as
competent arbiters of the fundamental questions of a discipline: for
example, the antiquity of people in America.

That Kidder examined Folsom, then publicly announced his acceptance of
the evidence, carried enormous weight, for in the 1920s, he was at the
height of his considerable power and influence (like Lyell in the
1860s). He was not being immodest when he explained to Figgins that “as
an archaeologist, I am of course not competent to pass either upon the
paleontological or the geological evidences of antiquity, but I have
paid great attention for many years to questions of deposition and
association. On these points I am able to judge, and I was entirely
convinced of the contemporaneous association of the artifact which you
so wisely had left ‘in situ’ and the bones of the bison.”⁶²

Wise, indeed. Figgins, of course, had done so in order to convince two
more members of the elite: Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka. We know their
opinions mattered, and not just because they thought so. Cook and
Figgins thought so, too. In every paper they wrote, they wrote for—or
rather, against—the Smithsonian duo. They recognized, however much they
disliked the idea, that it was only “right and proper [that Holmes and
Hrdli[images]ka] should not take without question such basic evidence as
may seem necessary to establish a given fact beyond reasonable
question.”⁶³

Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka did accept the evidence from Folsom, though
on their own terms. When asked directly, the eight-one-year-old Holmes
understandably replied he was finally content to leave judgment to
others (the old lion passed away a half-dozen years later).
Hrdli[images]ka quietly probed for weaknesses in the Folsom case, but
did so more out of habit than hope, for he respected Kidder's authority
in such matters. It was not true, as one paleontologist teased, that
Hrdli[images]ka would not accept that the Folsom bison were speared by
humans unless he had “fired the arrow himself.”⁶⁴ But Hrdli[images]ka
did want to know who was there when the “arrow” was unearthed. When
later confronted on the larger question of human antiquity in America
some years later, Hrdli[images]ka stuck close to his original script:
there was still no evidence of a pre-sapiens skeleton in America. In
that, he was correct.

Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka for decades had been the scourge of claims
for a deep human antiquity. That they said nothing about Folsom spoke
volumes. No mea culpa was offered, but then no one expected them to
admit to being wrong for so long.

But if Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka lost the war over a Pleistocene human
antiquity in America, it was not because Cook and Figgins won the battle
at Folsom. Much like the situation at Brixham Cave, there was a sharp
divide between those who made the discoveries (Boucher de Perthes; Cook
and Figgins), and those who were called upon to judge their significance
(Evans, Lyell, and Prestwich; Brown, Kidder, and Roberts). In both
instances, the opinions of the discoverers were largely ignored because
of their propensity to make absurd claims about what they'd found.
Figgins understood their place, privately admitting “our opinions are
valueless.”⁶⁵ He was not being humble; he was being honest. At a time
when virtually all archaeologists were skeptical of a Pleistocene
presence in the Americas, he and Cook were campaigning for several
spectacularly weak cases. Nelson lectured Figgins that if everything he
and Cook said were true, “we shall have to revise our entire world view
regarding the origin, the development, and the spread of human
culture.”⁶⁶ Nelson was not ready to do that. Few were.

Even worse, it wasn't obvious to Cook and Figgins, as it was to everyone
else, that Folsom was the pick of the litter. In fact, Cook judged
Folsom the “weakest and least conclusive of our localities,” and
Frederick the strongest.⁶⁷ That they couldn't properly evaluate their
own evidence destroyed any remaining shreds of their credibility.

Cook and Figgins fell victim to what's been called the Matthew Effect:
“for whosoever hath, to him shall be given…but whosoever hath not, from
him shall be taken away even that he hath.” Hrdli[images]ka's reputation
may have been roughed up by Folsom, but only slightly, and he continued
to be a sought-after authority regarding human antiquity in the
Americas. Not all scientists are created equal; some are more equal than
others. And inequality is most visible during episodes of controversy,
when the stakes are highest. In the end, and despite their crucial role
in the discovery at Folsom, neither Cook nor Figgins was asked to
interpret the meaning of what he had found, nor given the opportunity to
participate in any of the half-dozen major symposia devoted to human
antiquity that followed in the next decade, let alone receive the
acclaim for his contributions. Unfair, perhaps, but at least there were
these kind, albeit private words to Figgins from the ever-gracious
Alfred Kidder: “Anthropology owes you a very great deal for having
handled this material so carefully and so intelligently, and I think the
researches of yourself and Dr. Cook will go far towards opening a new
era in the study of the question of Pleistocene man in the New World.”⁶⁸
They did.

A MAMMOTH BARRIER

The Folsom find did not result in an antiquity comparable to the remote
ages of Paleolithic Europe. But by 1927, it was obvious American
prehistory did not extend that far back. Nonetheless, Folsom did show
that the first Americans arrived at least by the end of the Pleistocene.
They were not Paleolithic peoples, but assuming them to be ancestors of
modern American Indians, they came to be called Paleoindians.

The Folsom find also taught archaeologists how to look for Paleoindian
sites. The strategy was simple: look in arroyo channels or ancient lake
beds, or track down reports of large and easily spotted bones of extinct
Pleistocene mammals (Figure 17), then carefully comb those localities
for any associated human artifacts. So it was that Clovis came to light.
A road crew, mining gravel from an old pond near Clovis, New Mexico, had
struck immense fossils bones. Word of their discovery reached Edgar B.
Howard of Philadelphia's Academy of Natural Sciences, who began
excavations there in the summer of 1933, and soon uncovered mammoth
bones alongside fluted points that were longer, broader, and less finely
made than Folsom points (Chapter 8). These “generalized Folsoms” soon
became known as Clovis points.

Naturally, how archaeologists looked for Paleoindian sites predisposed
what they found: almost all of the nearly two dozen found in the decade
after the Folsom discovery were kill sites with bones of extinct animals
and artifacts. “Boneless” Paleoindian sites were rare.⁶⁹ Not fully
realizing how much this pattern was biased by their search strategies,
archaeologists saw in the many sites littered with bones of bison and
mammoth the testimony that Paleoindians were top predators, who
specialized in the killing of big game. An inspiring vision of gutsy
hunters, holding a trumpeting and mortally wounded animal at bay, came
to embody North American Paleoindians, and often established
expectations of Paleoindian sites in areas environmentally and
climatically different from the Great Plains, where virtually all the
iconic kill sites had been found. Steven Simms, who works in the Great
Basin, gives voice to many when he complains of “stereotypes of
[Paleoindian] lifeways applied uncritically from the Plains.”⁷⁰ Big-game
hunting makes for good copy, but the appearance masks a different
reality (Chapter 8).

[images]

FIGURE 17.
A bison tibia (the larger of the two lower leg bones) exposed on the
wind-swept floor of a now dry Pleistocene lakebed in far west Texas.
Spotting bones eroding out in this manner led to the discovery of many
Paleoindian kill sites, particularly during the 1930s Dust Bowl.
(Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

Sites with Folsom points soon proved to be limited in their distribution
to the western plains, but Clovis points were more widespread—across the
continent, in fact. They were also found in deposits below Folsom
points, evidence the Clovis archaeological complex was older than
Folsom. How much older would only be learned a couple of decades later,
following the advent of radiocarbon dating (it would also become clear
that by Folsom times, there were many other archaeological complexes in
other parts of the continent, as detailed in Chapter 9).

But were Clovis groups the first Americans, or had people arrived
earlier still? In the aftermath of the Clovis discovery, archaeologists
sought traces of more ancient Americans, and soon found themselves again
at loggerheads over the question of antiquity. As early as 1953, Alex
Krieger warned his colleagues that having overthrown the
Holmes-Hrdli[images]ka “dogma,” they were now in danger of replacing it
with another. The first Americans would be permitted a late Pleistocene
entry, but he feared that 10,000 years was fast becoming the new
“allowed antiquity.”⁷¹

Yet, in 1953 he tallied a half-dozen sites that “may and probably do”
break that barrier. In 1964 he upped the total to fifty sites in North
and South America that he thought pointed to a human presence predating
Clovis. Not all sites were likely genuine, as Krieger well appreciated.
But what impressed him most was how many sites looked old. As he saw it,
where there's smoke there's fire. The sites on his list included some
with radiocarbon ages ranging from 21,000 to more than 38,000 BP. Others
had bones of extinct animals that appeared split, burned, or broken by
human hands. And then there were the Malakoff heads—giant sandstone
boulders from deep in a Texas gravel quarry that had crude “faces”
carved into them, looking like enormous versions of Mr. Potato Head
toys. Krieger even tossed in several American Paleolithic sites, Trenton
included, for they “cannot all be set aside as insignificant.”⁷²

In fact, many of the sites on Krieger's list recalled the American
Paleolithic, for they contained crude stone or bone artifacts. Krieger
insisted he was not making Abbott's mistake of equating artifact form
with age, merely raising the possibility of a “pre-projectile
(pre-Clovis) point stage.” Perhaps. But few were eager to follow Krieger
out on his speculative limb. Others were busy sawing it off behind him.

The same year Krieger published his pre-Clovis compendium (1964), C.
Vance Haynes reported the first secure radiocarbon ages for a half-dozen
Clovis sites (including the type site). Their ages fell in a very narrow
slice of time, between 11,500 and 11,000 BP.⁷³ None were more than
12,000 years old, and none yielded evidence of a precursor or pre-Clovis
population, despite having underlying sediments of the right age, and
with ecological conditions that should have been favorable to
occupation—had people been present in the area.

But if there was no pre-Clovis, how might one explain the “apparently
sudden appearance” of Clovis over much of North America 11,500 years
ago? Geology provided a clue. By the late 1950s, there were a raft of
radiocarbon ages available on the timing of deglaciation, and in them
Haynes spotted a striking concordance between the geological and
archaeological records. It appeared that 12,000 years ago the ice-free
corridor had opened, linking Alaska with the rest of the continental
United States for the first time in 15,000 years. Was it mere
coincidence Clovis appeared south of the ice sheet at this moment?

It all made perfect sense: the land bridge connecting Siberia and Alaska
only emerged during glacial cycles, but once migrants reached Alaska,
ice sheets had blocked their path south. Either the first Americans came
before the Late Wisconsin ice advance, in which case they had to contend
with crossing the open Bering Sea, or they came later and walked across
the land bridge, then cooled their heels in Alaska waiting for the
Cordilleran and Laurentide ice to retreat. The splendid chronological
correlation between the disappearance of the ice and the appearance of
Clovis surely favored the latter hypothesis.

The way Haynes saw it, Clovis progenitors probably were in Alaska some
12,500 years ago, moved out across the Arctic slope soon thereafter, and
then down the ice-free corridor fast on the heels of its opening. The
migration from Siberia into northwestern North America might have taken
1,500 years altogether, but once south of the glaciers, Clovis groups
could have spread rapidly east and west, colonizing the entire continent
in fewer than 1,000 years.

For Haynes the pieces were falling neatly into place. For Krieger, his
worst fears were coming to pass (Figure 18). The notion that Clovis was
one of the older occupations of North America was steadily losing ground
to the idea that it was the oldest occupation in North America.

Still, in 1964 Haynes saw “good indications” there were people in
America before 12,000 years ago. He just didn't think they were related
to Clovis, or perhaps there were just very few of them. But by 1969, he
was losing enthusiasm for the idea of pre-Clovis.⁷⁴ His newly found
skepticism was understandable. In the intervening years, he had learned
the hard way that sites too good to be true often weren't.

Tule Springs, located near Las Vegas, Nevada, had everything going for
it: genuine artifacts, bones of Pleistocene megafauna seemingly broken
by human hands, and a radiocarbon date of 28,000 BP. Anxious to learn
more of this occupation, a team of archaeologists, paleoecologists, and
geologists embarked on an ambitious excavation program, overseen by a
blue-ribbon panel of scientists. Almost immediately Haynes, the site
geologist, noticed that the “hearths” at Tule Springs were nothing more
than organically blackened deposits. That was welcome news, solving as
it did a longstanding puzzle: if these were hearths, why were they full
of unburned snail shells? Then the curious fracturing of the megafaunal
bones turned out to be restricted to remains found in the spring vents,
and likely had been broken by the frantic trampling of animals trapped
in those quicksand-like sediments, and not by human hands. Their
“burning” was merely groundwater staining. The only indisputable
artifacts at Tule Springs were from deposits much younger than 12,000
years old.⁷⁵ Tule Springs was not pre-Clovis. Still, neither Haynes nor
anyone else categorically rejected the possibility of an older human
presence in the Americas. Just so, the seeds of skepticism were sown.

[images]

FIGURE 18.
C. Vance Haynes and Alex Krieger examining specimens at the 1970 Calico
Conference. (Photograph courtesy of David J. Wilson.)

At the outset of the Great Paleolithic War, Charles Abbott had expressed
the fervent hope that “the ‘doubting Thomases’ [would] be fewer by the
year 2000.”⁷⁶ As it turns out, Abbott finally got something right. But
it was no easy road getting there.

4

THE PRE-CLOVIS
CONTROVERSY AND ITS
RESOLUTION

In the late 1980s, about the time the pre-Clovis dispute in America was
nearing a boil, archaeologist Jack Harris visited my university,
bringing with him the just-excavated artifacts from the Senga site in
Zaire (now Democratic Republic of Congo). Judging by the animal bones
found with them, he inferred the specimens were more than 2.3 million
years old—making them nearly 100,000 years older than any previously
known artifacts from Africa, and thus the earliest human tools ever
found. At the end of a brief talk about his excavations at Senga, Harris
laid the specimens on the table.

It is surprisingly humbling to see a human culture starter set, even if
it is several hundred shattered quartz flakes, most no more than 2
centimeters long and all utterly nondescript, even by forgiving Lower
Paleolithic standards. But what I really noticed was the silence. No one
in that audience of mostly Old World archaeologists asked Jack how sure
he was of the artifacts’ age, whether their geological context was
secure, or why he was certain they were even artifacts—questions I was
asking myself. After all, I'd been in rooms where artifacts on display
from the pre-Clovis age sites of Monte Verde, Chile, and Meadowcroft
Rockshelter, Pennsylvania, dated to 12,500 and 14,250 BP, respectively,
triggered noisy debate.

So why does Senga, plunging the birth of cultural behavior 100,000 years
deeper into the past—almost to the doorstep of the Pliocene—scarcely
elicit a murmur of skepticism, while sites just 1,000 years older than
Clovis come under withering fire? Senga helps redefine what makes us
human. Monte Verde and Meadowcroft only tell us American prehistory
began slightly earlier than we thought.

I asked my colleague, South African archaeologist Garth Sampson, why
Senga was so readily accepted. He tried not to be condescending: “My
dear fellow,” he said, “because it's obvious Senga is just what Jack
says it is.”

Yes. Well. That was helpful. But explain that to Tom Dillehay or James
Adovasio, both highly competent archaeologists, each of whom had assured
us that the pre-Clovis-age occupations at Monte Verde and Meadowcroft
were just what they said they were. Why wouldn't we take their word for
it?¹

Why did controversy over antiquity persist in the face of mounting
evidence from fields as diverse as linguistics, genetics, and physical
anthropology—as well as archaeology? Why did it remain unresolved in the
face of a regular crop of purportedly ancient assemblages and
archaeological sites, and an almost annual harvest of books and papers
on the topic? Why, indeed, all the fuss?

Some blamed this state of affairs on critics either secretly envious or
so hopelessly biased they attack even legitimate pre-Clovis claims—Niede
Guidon believes that “when you are the first to discover something,
people want to kill you because you disturbed the placid waters of the
lake”. The result, Guidon claims, is a “Kafkaesque” situation in which
there are good archaeologists (with Clovis sites), and bad ones (those,
like herself, with pre-Clovis sites).²

Yet, were I selecting Kafka metaphors, it would not be his dark classic
The Trial, but his lesser-known Metamorphosis, in which a perfectly
promising human being turns into a cockroach. Virtually every field
season over the last several decades brought a new contender for the
pre-Clovis crown. Each was initially heralded with great fanfare, but
soon started rolling down the slippery slope of the pre-Clovis
credibility decay curve.

The problems varied, but the outcome was inevitably the same. Most
pre-Clovis claims had a shelf-life of about a decade: better than fish
and house guests, but ultimately they, too, began to stink.

Recall that in 1964 Alex Krieger had identified fifty pre-Clovis sites
in the New World. By 1976 Scotty MacNeish had tallied just thirty-five;
in 1988 Richard Morlan had found only five.³ The sites on their lists
are almost completely different. Supporters of pre-Clovis put a positive
spin on these wholesale losses: by 1976, they say, MacNeish had at his
disposal a wealth of new and improved sites unavailable to Krieger.
Naturally, he would use these weapons in the battle over the antiquity
of the first Americans. Maybe so. But then thirty-one of MacNeish's
sites failed to make Morlan's list. Critics read a different message: if
90% of what was considered the best pre-Clovis claims in 1964 failed to
survive until 1976, and if nearly the identical percentage from 1976
failed to make the 1988 list, why put much faith in any sites on any
list?

There is one very good reason: whether the first Americans came here
before Clovis times and whether we have detected their traces are
independent issues. The fact many sites have been proposed but none
accepted only tells us none of those sites is acceptable. It does not
prove humans were absent from the Americas in pre-Clovis times. And no
matter how many sites fail, that does not reduce the odds of finding one
that might pass. Still, and not surprisingly, that decades-long failure
meant few archaeologists were willing to accept a pre-Clovis claim at
face value. We grew skeptical, cynical, even insulting: Paul Martin (not
an archaeologist, but with his own Clovis-first agenda to push⁴) likened
the pre-Clovis search to the quest for Bigfoot, as though there were
sound reasons why pre-Clovis could not exist. There aren't. But then
there's no reason it has to either. Whether it does or not is strictly a
question of evidence.

PASSING THE TEST

Although there has been considerable and largely fruitless speculation
over what a pre-Clovis site ought to look like, just as there was a
century earlier over how an American Paleolithic might appear, one
conclusion seems inescapable: we are not looking for—and from what we
know of human evolution do not expect to find—Senga-like artifacts here
in the Americas. To be sure, in some places “primitive-looking”
artifacts were made even in the recent past (it is often a sign of a
dearth of suitable toolmaking stone), but overall we should see the
relatively complex tools and features that characterize those of other
sites produced by anatomically modern humans (Homo sapiens), who spanned
the globe over the last 100,000 years. Beyond that, however, we cannot
be much more specific predicting the look of a pre-Clovis toolkit.

What we can expect—demand, even—of a pre-Clovis site are (1) undeniable
traces of humans, either their artifacts or skeletal remains, in (2)
undisturbed geological deposits in proper stratigraphic position, which
are (3) accompanied by indisputable radiometric ages (speared bison no
longer suffice). These are no more than evolved versions of criteria
Ales Hrdlicka first proposed in 1907, and no less than what was finally
met at Folsom in 1927.⁵ On their face, they are not difficult criteria
to meet, nor any different than the ones used in Africa to identify the
earliest (and often the most ambiguous) traces of human culture.

Still, as the changes between Krieger, MacNeish, and Morlan's lists
plainly show, these criteria have proven extraordinarily difficult to
meet, so much so that pre-Clovis proponents have cried foul.⁶ The
criteria, they charge, are unfairly applied and unduly rigid. They
insist that if broadly applied, we would be left wondering whether
anyone occupied North America in Clovis time. Are the criteria so
perversely narrow they blind archaeologists from seeing legitimate
evidence? A closer look is in order.

The first criterion (and often the most troublesome), requires the
presence of artifacts or human skeletal remains. The latter have not
figured prominently in the pre-Clovis dispute, simply because few
Pleistocene-age human remains have been found in North or South America,
and none is significantly older than 11,500 BP (as we'll see in Chapter
5, skeletal remains are central to the most controversial questions
about who the first Americans were). Artifacts are another story.

Artifacts come in a myriad of materials, but most commonly only those
made of stone, and to a lesser degree bone, survive the rough passage of
time. Almost certainly the earliest Americans fashioned artifacts of
wood, antler, shell, and the like (but not ceramics—those came later),
but those materials are quick to decompose, and are seldom preserved or
recovered archaeologically.

An artifact is an object made, modified, or otherwise used by humans.
Oftentimes, fashioning an object for use renders it easy to spot as the
product of human hands: turning a chert cobble into a finely crafted
spear point, or carving a piece of mammoth rib into a socket wrench. No
recognition problems here.

But at other times, objects are hardly modified, and even after use show
little sign of having been made by human hands—like a round river cobble
employed briefly to smash open bone for marrow, but which left few
traces of that action. And to complicate matters, nature can modify
stone and bone in ways that mimic the action of human hands. Grinding
glacial ice and roaring rivers, for example, can break stone or bone
into forms that resemble rough-hewn artifacts, such as choppers or
scrapers. Here it becomes much harder to tell whether an object was made
or used by people.

Such ambiguous cases require close scrutiny of context: where was the
object found and with what? An otherwise nondescript, round river cobble
found in a site high above a river, alongside charred and broken animal
bones, a charcoal-laden hearth, and a dozen broken spear points all in
fine-grained loess, is likely an artifact. Find that cobble in the river
bed, amid millions like it, and even if it were an artifact, one would
be hard-pressed to prove it. Worse, in that river bed there would be
naturally broken cobbles that looked more like artifacts than that round
cobble. Where artifact look-alikes grade imperceptibly into broken
cobbles bearing no resemblance to artifacts, and then into unbroken
cobbles, the context bespeaks a natural origin for all. Seems simple
enough.

TROUBLE IN THE HILLS

The Calico Hills site is located in the hills high above Pleistocene
pluvial Lake Manix, in what is now the Mojave Desert near Yermo,
California. In the 1960s, Ruth “Dee” Simpson found stone artifacts
scattered about its surface; some were obviously recent, others looked
“Paleolithic” (shades of Charles Abbott).

Louis Leakey, fresh from his triumphant discovery of 2-million-year-old
hominids at Olduvai Gorge, in Tanzania, was invited to Calico in May
1963. When he saw the site, and what appeared to be artifacts in place
deep in a bulldozer pit, he was instantly convinced this was a spot to
find ancient Americans. “Dee, dig here,” is what he said.⁷ “Here” turned
out to be smack in the middle of a pre-Wisconsin-age alluvial fan, a
dense mass of gravel and sand (Figure 19) originally deposited by moving
water. Its age was initially estimated at more than 100,000 years old;
it's now thought to be twice that old. Excavations plunged into the fan,
and soon recovered “uniquely different” artifacts. Leakey returned in
the spring of 1965, and in front of the anxious excavation crews,
examined stones they had cherry-picked from the rubble. He judged at
least twenty-five of the specimens to be humanly made. “Leakey's luck,”
it seemed, had struck again.⁸

[images]

FIGURE 19.
Excavations in Master Pit 2 at the Calico site, ca. 1968. The untold
number of naturally broken rocks jutting from the sidewalls convey why
it has proven impossible to demonstrate that humans were present at this
site in early Pleistocene times. (Photograph courtesy of David J.
Wilson.)

That was enough to entice the National Geographic Society to fund
fieldwork at Calico to the tune of $100,000 (no small change in those
days), but with strings attached: they funded Vance Haynes and others to
visit and evaluate the site's artifacts and geology. When the visitors
saw that “artifacts” were being plucked from amid hundreds of thousands
of broken stones occurring naturally in the fan, they urged all
specimens be saved, whether thought to be artifacts or not. They were.

Excavations continued at Calico, and as the pile of rocks tossed aside
as non-artifacts grew to cover several acres, so did the number of
Calico “artifacts” (at last count over 11,400 pieces). No surprise
there: where nature breaks millions of rocks (as it can in a
fast-flowing river), a small percentage will resemble crude artifacts.
Were these found in an otherwise indisputable archaeological context,
they might be accepted as artifacts. But found as these were in the
Calico alluvial fan—a giant, natural gravel crusher—Haynes suspected
none were humanly made, but instead were naturally produced geofacts,
formed as the rocks tumbled downstream from sources in the Calico
mountains.

Haynes's criticisms sparked a lively discussion over the minutiae of
flaked stone: did the Calico specimens possess attributes unequivocally
made by human hands? Caliper-wielding critics compared known artifacts
with naturally broken stones, identified the essential criteria that
differentiate the two, and then applied those to the Calico specimens.
The specimens proved to be more like naturally fractured stones than
humanly fashioned ones.

Proponents insisted that other attributes of the stones bespoke their
human origin. Only, they reached that conclusion after discarding all
the rocks that did not look like artifacts. Naturally, the ones they
kept looked humanly made and had attributes of artifacts. But that only
means they were consistent in their sorting criteria, and not that those
specimens were flaked by people.

Calico, in the words of Nicholas Toth—who studies Africa's earliest
stone tools—represents a worst-case setting for documenting a human
presence. Against a backdrop of all those naturally broken cobbles, is
there reason to suppose any were artificially fractured?⁹ And if they
were, how could they possibly be reliably identified?

Leakey organized an international conference and site visit at Calico in
1970, hoping it would be the American equivalent of the British
geologists’ visits to examine Boucher de Perthes’ collections and sites
in 1859 (naturally, the Cambridge-trained Leakey would think of the
landmark European site visit rather than Folsom). Leakey had “no doubt,
whatsoever!” about Calico's antiquity, but he failed to carry the day.
His wife Mary—an accomplished archaeologist in her own right—later
bluntly wrote that no one at the conference “really cared to get up and
make a strong outright condemnation of the evidence, because it would
have been equivalent to saying that Louis had lost his capacity to think
scientifically—which, I fear, was perfectly true.”¹⁰ Indeed, there's
reason to wonder whether Calico would have been taken seriously by
anyone, were it not for his ringing endorsement.

In the end, Calico's best hope for pre-Clovis legitimacy vanished when a
semicircular “hearth,” found deep in the excavations, proved not to be
one: the stones comprising the feature hadn't been subjected to heat in
as much as 400,000 years, if ever. It was instead a natural rock scatter
that, friend and foe admit, only looked hearthlike after surrounding
gravel was removed. A small core of loyalists remain convinced of
Calico's antiquity, but otherwise no one considers it an ancient
archaeological site.

“Leakey's luck” finally ran out in the California desert, a couple of
hours down the road from Las Vegas, where dreams are daily made, and
lost, on luck.

STENO'S LEGACY

No matter how sophisticated archaeological techniques have become, we
still rely on one developed centuries earlier: stratigraphy. In 1669
Niels Steensen (better known by his Latin pen name, Nicolaus Steno)
formulated the first principle of stratigraphy: namely, that in an
undisturbed deposit of strata or layers in the earth, the order of
deposition is from bottom to top, and therefore the layers below (and
any fossils or artifacts within them) are older than those above.
Stratigraphy can be relatively uncomplicated, even where layers were cut
through or are cross-bedded, but problems can arise.

In an ideal stratigraphic circumstance artifacts found in, say, Late
Wisconsin-age loess, would presumably be Late Wisconsin in age. Yet, in
the real world, both natural processes (such as burrowing animals,
shrinking and swelling of soils, erosion, and redeposition) and human
action (our tendency to bury the dead) mix the deposits in which
archaeological remains are found. Younger artifacts can easily intrude
into older strata, falsely implying they are just as old. Sometimes the
reverse occurs (Figure 20). Because of our very-human tendency to pick
up curious fossils and even artifacts, older materials can be added to
younger sites (fluted points and Paleozoic crinoids have been found in
prehistoric Pueblos, but those sites are neither Pleistocene nor
Paleozoic in age).

[images]

FIGURE 20.
An example of the complications of stratigraphy, Dry Cimarron Valley,
New Mexico. Deposit 1 was laid down gradually by river overflow. At
times deposition slowed, vegetation grew on the land, and created soil
horizons (for example, the horizontal black band under the Deposit 1
label), which were subsequently buried by more overbank deposition. In
turn, the top of Deposit 1 was eroded—how much was lost, we cannot
say—which was then followed by the accumulation of Deposit 2 sediments.
Deposits 1 and 2 were then both eroded and subsequently buried by
Deposit 3. If stone artifacts were found on the uppermost surface of
Deposit 1, it could mean they were contained in sediments originally
part of Deposit 1, which had since eroded; or that they were deposited
after erosion cut into Deposit 1 but before Deposit 2 was laid down; or
if they were found where Deposit 3 sits atop Deposit 1, they could have
been in or atop Deposit 1, or in or atop Deposit 2, or were dropped
there just before Deposit 3 began to accumulate. Given what is known of
the radiocarbon ages from this site (which range from 7800 to 2200 BP),
incorrectly reading the stratigraphy could mean “misplacing” the
artifacts in time by as much as 5,000 years. And that assumes the
artifacts were dropped at this spot, but because this is a river valley,
they could have been washed in from some distance away, and were older
(or younger) than their position at this spot would indicate.
(Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

Back in the pre-Folsom days, Holmes and Hrdlicka guarded against the
possibility of stratigraphic mixing by automatically assuming that any
artifact or human skeleton found in Pleistocene-aged deposits had
arrived there at a later time. A site was strati-graphically guilty
until proven innocent. Theirs was an extreme position, but in the
sometimes complex stratigraphy of ancient valleys, terraces, and
especially caves (recall the worries over Brixham Cave), where claims of
great antiquity hang in the balance, stratigraphic caution is
appropriate.

A YOUNG CHILD ON OLDMAN RIVER

In the early 1960s, in a modern gully draining into the Oldman River of
southwestern Alberta (near Taber), Archie Stalker of Canada's Geological
Survey came across the fragmentary skeleton of an infant. Little could
be told of the child's heartrending story, but perhaps the tiny presence
was a story in itself. The remains were in a block of calcium
carbonate-cemented sands, apparently broken away from a layer of ancient
stream alluvium exposed on the gully floor.¹¹

The alluvium layer was deep below the surface, itself no great sign of
age. More significant, it was sandwiched above one glacial till and
beneath another. By Steno's law, the child predated the Late Wisconsin
till; given how far beneath the till the skeleton was found, Stalker
thought it might reach into the Middle Wisconsin.

A geologist by training, Stalker was well aware of the necessity of
guarding against possible stratigraphic mixing and intrusion, but he was
certain that had not happened at Taber. There was no evidence for
erosion older than the modern gully but younger than the alluvium, which
might have carried the infant remains down from the surface. The bones
were in place, he insisted, their age bracketed by the ages of the
enclosing alluvium that had been radiocarbon dated at nearby sites. In
round numbers, the remains were likely more than 18,000 years old, and
perhaps as much as 60,000 years old. Unfortunately, there was not enough
bone to be directly dated using radiocarbon techniques then available,
and despite Stalker's almost annual visits to the site, no more bone was
found.

Stalker's confidence notwithstanding, few were completely satisfied with
the antiquity of the Taber child. In the late 1970s, Michael Wilson and
others returned to the site (Figure 21) to look for more remains and
clarify its stratigraphic sequence. They had no better luck than Stalker
finding skeletal remains, but did spot patches of bone-bearing,
redeposited Holocene sands on the nearby slopes.

[images]

FIGURE 21.
Excavations at the Taber Child site, Alberta. The folding and dipping of
the deposits (which complicated the stratigraphic interpretation) show
up nicely in the pit floor. (Photograph courtesy of Michael Wilson.)

Those recent sands possessed many features thought to be unique to the
Middle Wisconsin alluvium, but careful inspection revealed the two sands
were quite different in texture, color, and chemistry. Fortunately, the
sand adhering to the remains of the Taber child had been saved, and when
it was analyzed, it proved to be like the Holocene sands, and not Middle
Wisconsin sands. At some time in the recent past, the unfortunate
child's bones had been redeposited alongside, but not in, a layer of
genuine antiquity.

In the 1980s, after AMS radiocarbon dating was developed, a tiny piece
of the Taber skeleton was submitted: it dated to 3,550 ± 500 BP. Stalker
rejected that result because of possible contamination of the bone.
Perhaps. But if the date is off, the revised stratigraphy shows it is
not off by much.

THE DATING GAME

Stratigraphy is a relative dating technique: the age of a layer (or
items in it) is only known to be older or younger than some other layer.
Knowing the actual age of an artifact or event requires using an
absolute dating technique that yields ages in years (usually measured
“before present”). There are many such techniques available nowadays,
some of which can be used for specimens less than a thousand years old,
others on materials more than a million years old.

Many use the clock nature provides in the radioactive decay of elemental
isotopes, such as radiocarbon (¹⁴C), Argon/Argon (⁴°Ar/³⁹Ar), and
uranium series dating (²³°Th/²³⁴U). Others rely on incremental time
markers such as dendrochronology (which uses the annual growth rings in
trees), and luminescence dating (which measures the accumulation of
electrons in crystal lattices within quartz grains). Still others rely
on changes in the position of the earth's magnetic pole
(archaeomagnetism and paleomagnetism). In order for a dating technique
to be useful, certain conditions must obtain; among them are these:
there must be a time-dependent signal (a natural clock) that is
relatively constant over time; a means of calibrating the signal in
years; a rate of chemical or physical change that matches the time span
of interest (some short-lived isotopes disappear in a matter of
minutes—those are not useful for dating events thousands of years old);
and a means of linking the sample being dated, be it charcoal, quartz
grains, or magnetized clay, with the event of interest—say, the
occupation of an archaeological site.¹²

Over the decades since its development by Willard Libby, radiocarbon
dating has been the preferred method for dating the sites of the
earliest Americans: its range reaches back to around 50,000 BP (Chapter
1), which nicely covers the time period of interest. Its reliability is
well attested, since we now know that the amount of radiocarbon in the
atmosphere has changed over time but can account for the confounding
effects of that through calibration (though as noted, the calibration of
ages from the Younger Dryas period is still challenging). And, finally,
the technique can be applied to any material that incorporates
radiocarbon, such as charcoal and wood from plants, bone, teeth, ivory,
keratin, hooves, horns, shell from animals, and even soils, by virtue of
the organic acids that seep into them.

Yet, not all these materials, including charcoal and bone from which
radiocarbon ages are most often obtained, give results that are equally
reliable (if we run the sample multiple times will we get the same
result?) or valid (is the result correct?). Case in point: prior to our
reopening excavations at the original Folsom site in the 1990s (Chapter
9), the bison kill was thought to have dated to 10,890 ± 50 BP, based on
radiocarbon ages of charcoal found with the bison bones. Yet, our
subsequent radiocarbon dating of the bison bones themselves yielded an
average age 400 years younger: 10,490 ± 20 BP. Why the discrepancy?

Charcoal has the virtue of being relatively impervious to contamination
and thus normally yields a reliable age. But the age may not be valid
since the charcoal may not be the same age as the bison kill. If the
charcoal came from, say, a lightning-strike forest fire, it will have no
bearing on the age of the kill. Even if the charcoal was from wood that
stoked the fires over which bison meat was cooked, it could still
overestimate the age of the kill if the wood came from a long-lived
tree, the inner rings of which could be decades or even centuries older
than its outer rings. This is why, as we'll see, there is often a call
in contentious cases for the radiocarbon dating of shortlived seeds.

Conversely, radiocarbon dating of animal bones can more precisely pin
down the age of a site, since animals live shorter lives than trees, but
only if those bones occurred there as a result of human activity (which
is certainly the case of the Folsom bison). But dating bone itself can
be challenging, since it is made of multiple constituents, some of which
are highly susceptible to contamination. The inorganic (apatite)
portion, for example, readily absorbs ancient carbon via groundwater or
other contaminants. Before that was realized, multiple radiocarbon ages
on the same skeleton often gave wildly divergent results—in one case,
for example, the oldest and youngest radiocarbon ages on the same
mammoth were nearly 3,000 years apart. It was only in the 1980s, after
laboratory advances enabled the extraction of protein and even
individual amino acids from organic bone collagen, substances less
susceptible to contamination, that it became possible to derive ages
from bone that were more reliable. Hence, our conclusion the bone amino
acid we obtained dates from Folsom better estimated when that kill
occurred.

But the handicap of radiocarbon dating, which will be felt if the first
Americans prove to be far older than supposed, is that it does not
provide reliable ages for any samples that might prove to be
significantly more than 50,000 years old. For that, waiting in the wings
are a number of dating methods that can go beyond radiocarbon's limits
(or can be used where we lack material suitable for radiocarbon dating).
Among those tried on pre-Clovis sites are amino acid racemization,
cation-ratio dating, fission-track dating, electron spin resonance
(ESR), uranium-series dating, and thermoluminescence (TL) and optically
stimulated luminescence (OSL) dating (the difference between the TL and
OSL techniques is in how the accumulated electrons in the lattice traps
are released and measured). Sometimes the results of these applications
have been good, sometimes not, and sometimes one can't tell, which is
worse than getting bad results or no results at all. Thus far, no dating
method has proven to be as tried and true as radiocarbon dating.

FOOTPRINTS IN THE ASHES OF TIME

Every year London's Royal Society puts on a summer exhibition to
showcase some of the UK's latest scientific research. One of the
exhibits in 2005 was an archaeological show-stopper: a report of more
than 150 apparently human footprints in a volcanic ash (the Xalnene ash)
at the Toluquilla site in central Mexico, which were possibly more than
40,000 years old. Finding human footprints is unusual, though not
unprecedented: 3.6-million-year-old tracks of early hominids were found
at the site of Laetoli in northern Tanzania. But the Toluquilla site was
rare enough and old enough by New World standards to be noticed,
especially for the faint bell it rang in archaeological memory.

Toluquilla, it turned out, was on the edges of the Valsequillo
reservoir, which was constructed in the 1940s in the basin of a one-time
Pleistocene lake. A 30-meter-thick gravel formation outcropping along
the edges of the reservoir had yielded a zoo of Pleistocene fossils, and
a slew of archaeological sites including a very controversial one:
Hueyatlaco, the lower layer of which had flake tools and possible
projectile points associated with the remains of a mastodon. Geologists
had dated that lower layer at 250,000-600,000 years old, based on the
then-experimental techniques of uranium-series, fission-track, and
tephrahydration dating. However, the archaeologist excavating the site
put that layer at just 9,000-22,000 years old, based on results from
radiocarbon dating of mollusk shells contained within it.¹³

Unfortunately, it proved impossible to close the huge gap separating the
two sets of age estimates, and from the 1960s through the 1980s,
Hueyatlaco was a poster child for problems that occur when different
dating techniques, especially still-unproven ones, cannot be reconciled.
Further efforts in the 1990s using the ages of the vertebrate fauna and
of the diatoms from Hueyatlaco were equally at odds: the vertebrates
pointed to an age less than 30,000 years ago, while diatoms in the
deposits appeared to be more than 80,000 years old. “Conflicting and
confusing” was the verdict handed down on the site's age.¹⁴

Worse, many of the original Hueyatlaco artifacts, including mammoth bone
ostensibly engraved with serpents and saber-toothed cats, had
disappeared under puzzling circumstances. Ugly accusations surfaced that
the artifacts at Hueyatlaco had been planted by unscrupulous laborers.
The allegations were false. But the odor permeating the site's integrity
and age was enough to knock it from the list of pre-Clovis contenders,
though its claim to great antiquity lived on in the archaeology
conspiracy literature (yes, there is one¹⁵) as one more site
professional archaeologists suppressed ostensibly because it threatened
our authority to dictate archaeological knowledge. Alas, the truth is
far less sinister: we just didn't know what to make of this site.

In the summer of 2003, a team led by archaeologist Sylvia Gonzalez
returned to the Valsequillo region and spotted the footprints. They
undertook an ambitious campaign to date the Xalnene ash in which the
tracks were imprinted. OSL dating yielded an age of about 40,000 BP,
older (as it should be) than radiocarbon and ESR ages from overlying
deposits. Better still, since that ash occurs throughout the
Valesequillo area, and at Hueyatlaco 2 kilometers away it lies beneath
the gravels in which the site is situated, that meant (here's Steno
again) the 250,000 years and older ages from this controversial locality
must be wrong. After forty years, the age of Hueyatlaco was finally
known to be younger than 40,000 years old. At least now we had a
ballpark age.¹⁶ Or so it seemed.

Within months of the Royal Society's summer exhibition, geochronologist
Paul Renne and colleagues announced that ⁴°Ar/³⁹Ar and paleomagnetic
dating of the Xalnene ash—for those keeping count, we're up to ten
separate dating methods brought to bear on this chronologically stubborn
region—had yielded startlingly different results: the ash was laid down
1.3 million years ago. If those were indeed footprints, they must have
been made by an ancestral hominid that was no Homo sapiens. Hardly
plausible, they argued: more likely, those weren't human footprints at
all, or if they were, they were not made when the ash was fresh. An
expert on OSL chimed in as well: the Xalnene ash contained negligible
amounts of quartz, making it “far from ideal” for luminescence dating,
especially since over half the quartz grains analyzed had their electron
traps completely emptied, others partially so, making age estimates
unreliable. He would not be convinced that ash was 40,000 years old
until additional OSL dates replicated the result.

Gonzalez's group had already tried ⁴⁰Ar/³⁹Ar dating, but had no success
because they spotted in the ash older mineral fragments that could skew
age estimates, so they, in turn, were suspicious of the ages from
Renne's group. Besides, if it were 1.3 million years old, why was there
no stratigraphic hint of the vast time separating it from the late
Pleistocene deposits directly atop it? Clearly, replication of the
dating of the ash was in order, not just of the OSL results but of the
⁴⁰Ar/³⁹Ar and paleomagnetic ages as well. Turnabout: it's fair play in
science.¹⁷

So the long-running debate over the age of the Valsequillo gravels is
not over. Gonzalez's group has embarked on additional efforts to date
the ash, and are optimistic they will eventually be able to nail down
its age, and with it the age of the apparent footprints (their human
origin is in question), and of the Valsequillo gravels that bury
Hueyatlaco. They're optimistic, too, their results will make the
Valsequillo Basin one of the oldest and most important regions for the
study of the first Americans. On that, they may be correct. And they
suggest that even if the Xalnene ash is 1.3 million years old, those
could still be human footprints. But that's not a rabbit hole most
archaeologists will be willing to follow them down, though conspiracy
buffs might.

SO MANY SITES, SO MANY PROBLEMS

Ambiguous artifacts, scrambled stratigraphy, dubious dates. The problems
at Calico, Taber, and Valsequillo are matched in a roll call of sites
from Old Crow in Canada's Yukon Territory, to Lewisville in Texas, to
Pikimachay in Peru. Could the search for pre-Clovis be doomed to failure
simply because there is no pre-Clovis? Some skeptics suspect as much and
point to Australia, where American archaeologists have long looked with
interest and more than a touch of envy. We are interested because of
similarities in the prehistory of the two continents. Both were
colonized about the same time from Asia by highly mobile people
possessing Stone Age technology, who found a new landscape teeming with
a naive native fauna, and who—it seems—spread quickly through each
continent.

And we covet our neighbor's archaeological record because of our
apparently very different archaeological histories. The search for the
earliest sites in America has been suffused with ambiguity and
controversy. But look at Australia, many a pre-Clovis critic has said:
once serious archaeological work began there in the 1960s, its deep
antiquity was “established quickly, definitively, and largely without
rancor,” despite that continent having far fewer archaeologists.
Perhaps, Paul Martin suggested, we just need to hire some “Aussies [who]
seem to be capable of finding and agreeing on the existence of [ancient]
sites…unclouded by controversy.” Were that only true.¹⁸

As archaeologists James O'Connell and Jim Allen have recently recounted,
in the early 1960s Australian prehistory was thought to extend back a
mere 10,000 years. But within two decades, widespread excavations and
radiocarbon dating had pushed the arrival of the earliest Australians to
just over 40,000 years ago. That antiquity held for a brief time, but
then a series of TL and OSL ages suddenly plunged its prehistory back to
65,000 years ago, and then, astoundingly, to almost 176,000 years ago
(at the site of Jinmium). That sparked a lively—and to American ears
familiar—debate over the antiquity of the first Australians. Is the
controversy over Down Under? Hardly. O'Connell and Allen make a
compelling case for an antiquity no greater than 45,000 years old, but
there are those who continue to push Australia's antiquity earlier
still.¹⁹

Pre-Clovis critics also point to the impoverishment of early American
archaeological records compared to those of Europe, Africa, and Asia.
Look around before 11,000 BP, Martin suggests, and everywhere but in
America artifact quantities are “awesome.” If America were occupied at
the same time, “why didn't they leave us some similar trophies?”²⁰ The
answer, quite simply, is antiquity and demographics. The Old World was
occupied much earlier than the New, no matter how old the New, and by
late Pleistocene times, it had relatively large and archaeologically
visible populations. Of course there are many more Old World
Pleistocene-age sites.

In contrast, as Fekri Hassan and others have shown, a small number of
hunter-gatherers could have entered the New World 25,000-20,000 years
ago, yet hovered below archaeological radar for a long time
thereafter.²¹ We'll probe this matter further; for now, bear in mind
that the search for pre-Clovis in the Americas may be a search for a
very elusive quarry indeed.

That being the case, should the criteria be relaxed? Is it true, as
pre-Clovis proponents insist, that by the criteria, Clovis would not
pass muster? Hardly. Clovis long ago met these criteria, and the process
need not be repeated with each discovery of a new Clovis site, since a
site's recognition—assuming it has diagnostic Clovis points—is
straightforward (however, what is appropriate to ask are whether claims
about, say, Clovis adaptations, can be supported by evidence from those
sites, and such questions are being asked—as we'll see). That same
privilege cannot be granted pre-Clovis until after a site is found that
meets these criteria, and when we have learned how to recognize sites
and distinctive artifacts of that age.

That the criteria worked at Folsom, at a time when archaeological
methods were less refined than they are today, is also testimony that
the criteria are not too rigid. The fact so many pre-Clovis sites since
have not measured up speaks more of problems with the sites than with
the criteria.

Those problems notwithstanding, there have been payoffs along the way.
In the course of evaluating new kinds of evidence, applying new methods
and techniques, or trying on new ideas, the field as a whole advances. A
prime example: archaeologists working in the Old Crow Basin of the Yukon
Territory found mammoth bones that appeared to have been flaked,
fractured, and polished in ways that seemed “unnatural.” Could they be
artifacts? The specimens were sent off for radiocarbon dating, and the
results were surprising: some dated to 60,000 years ago. A paralithic
industry, William Irving called these ostensible artifacts, and he and
others showed experimentally they could have been made by humans. Fair
enough. But then Irving threw down the gauntlet, insisting only humans
could make those fractures. It was “difficult to imagine,” he said,
nature breaking bones the same way.²² Upping the ante, he announced some
of those broken bones were in 350,000 year old deposits, thereby
plunging North American prehistory deeper into the Pleistocene, and even
before the appearance of anatomically modern humans.

That did it. The gauntlet was picked up by a gaggle of researchers who
soon proved nature could fracture bone in ways identical to the Old Crow
specimens with embarrassing ease, whether by carnivores gnawing, large
animals trampling, rivers freezing and thawing, or even volcanoes
exploding.²³ In the end, it raised the red flag of equifinality: if
humans and nature can break bones the same way, then one must find
independent evidence to prove the bones were artifacts (say, finding
them in an undeniable archaeological site context). That hasn't
happened. Instead, the paralithic specimens have come from stream
deposits that are chock full of naturally broken bones (a sort of “bony”
Calico).

Nowadays few believe the Old Crow mammoth bones were humanly modified or
attest to an ancient human presence. But credit Old Crow with igniting
an explosion of studies that have helped us understand how geological
processes, animals, and humans may have altered the bones that we find
in archaeological sites. Because of it, we know a great deal more about
the mechanics of bone breakage, and along the way, we forever lost our
innocent notion that just because something could have been broken by
people is somehow proof it was. Like other knowledge forged in this
dispute, lessons learned here have rippled outward to benefit the
archaeology of other places and times.

In the end, it comes down to this: no matter how vigorously claims for a
pre-Clovis site are promoted, they will never prove compelling unless
the site's artifacts, stratigraphy, and ages are unimpeachable. And
preaching to the choir will not do: they are already believers. Instead,
the site has to convince the skeptics. And it has to be utterly
unimpeachable in all respects: one that can withstand withering
criticism and meet the criteria with room to spare. Call it the Jackie
Robinson Rule, after the first African American to break the color
barrier in major league baseball (in 1949 with the then Brooklyn
Dodgers), who not only had to be a superb ballplayer, which he was, but
also an exemplary human being (he was that, too) who could rise above
the inevitable attacks he would bear for the color of his skin. In the
last decade or so, archaeology has had a few sites come close, and one
that made it over the bar.

STORMY SHELTER

Meadowcroft Rockshelter is 50 kilometers west of Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, on a steep slope 15 meters above Cross Creek, a tributary
of the Ohio River. James Adovasio and an interdisciplinary team of
geologists, paleontologists, palynologists, and others began work in
this large (15 m wide, 6 m deep, and 13 m high), sandstone overhang in
1973. Intensive excavations continued at Meadowcroft for the next five
years, and by all accounts—including those of the site's harshest
critics—the work was superb. Adovasio has a well-earned reputation for
employing cutting-edge field techniques, and for being a meticulous,
demanding, highly skilled excavator, even in the stratigraphically
challenging setting of a rockshelter.²⁴

As a result, the excavations—sometimes done by razor blade to follow the
thinnest deposits—went slowly, but ultimately the team dug through 4.6
meters of sediment, divisible into eleven natural strata (Figure 22), in
which were artifacts, charcoal, and various features of human
occupation, mostly from later (Woodland) occupations (marked by pottery
sherds and early cultivated plants such as squash and corn). In the
deeper levels of Stratum II was a rich record of Archaic
hunter-gatherers, and beneath that, remains from Paleoindian times. The
stratigraphic sequence was anchored by fifty-two radiocarbon dates,
analyzed by several different laboratories, which ranged in age from
31,400 BP to the Historic period; the Declaration of Independence was
signed on the opposite side of Pennsylvania about the time the last
hearth at Meadowcroft was snuffed out. All but four dates are in proper
stratigraphic order, and the ones out of order are minor flip-flops in
upper, Holocene-age levels. Steno would have been proud.

[images]

FIGURE 22.
Excavations and soil sampling in the deep pit at the Meadowcroft
Rockshelter, Pennsylvania, ca. 1976. The white tags on the wall mark
individual stratigraphic layers. (Photograph courtesy of James
Adovasio.)

The pre-Clovis action is down in middle Stratum IIa, bracketed between
11,300 and 12,800 BP and which has produced an unfluted lanceolate
projectile point, and lower Stratum IIa, which has six radiocarbon dates
from 12,800 to 16,175 BP, along with associated artifacts (Figure 23).
These are genuine artifacts, too (about 700 altogether), and include a
broken bone punch, flake debris from stone tool making, small blades
(long and narrow pieces of stone), unifacial (flaked on one side only)
and bifacial knives, and gravers (pointed tools possibly used for bone
or wood working). The stone for these artifacts came from distant (or
exotic) sources in New York, Ohio, West Virginia, and Pennsylvania.

The average of the lower Stratum IIa dates associated with these
artifacts indicates a human presence at Meadowcroft around 14,250 years
BP. This is Adovasio's “conservative interpretation.” It may, of course,
be earlier still. But, skeptics say, consider the implications: 14,250
years ago the Laurentide ice sheet was within 150 kilometers of
Meadowcroft. At that close range, they say, Meadowcroft ought to have
experienced near-glacial climatic and ecological conditions: permafrost
and tundra, perhaps, or shy of that, a boreal setting with cold-loving
flora and fauna. Yet, there is no evidence for either. Present instead
in the Pleistocene levels at Meadowcroft are bits of wood and charcoal
from deciduous trees (oak, hickory, and walnut), along with the bones of
white-tailed deer, southern flying squirrel, and passenger pigeon. These
speak of a temperate environment, seemingly anomalous for this time and
place. Where are the bones of extinct Pleistocene fauna like mastodon or
sloth, or the remains of displaced arctic or boreal plant and animal
taxa?

[images]

FIGURE 23.
Miller lanceolate projectile point in situ in Stratum IIa at Meadowcroft
Rockshelter, Pennsylvania (Photograph courtesy of James Adovasio)

Certainly not in the lowest levels at Meadowcroft, but then hardly any
organic remains come from there. Nearly 1 million animal bones were
recovered from the entire shelter excavations, but only 278 bones came
from the lower reaches of Stratum IIa, and of those, just 11 could be
identified. Same story with the plants: roughly 1.4 million fragments of
wood, charcoal, seeds, and fruits were recovered. The grand total from
the glacial-age levels was a pitiful 11.9 grams.

That's a hopelessly inadequate basis to judge whether the anomaly is
real, or a freak of sampling that netted only deciduous elements from
local, complex boreal-deciduous forests (Chapter 2). Adovasio's team
sees no anomaly, attributing the absence of boreal species to
Meadowcroft's low-lying (260 m above sea level) and south-facing aspect.
Still, without an adequate sample the Meadowcroft paleoenvironmental
record cannot well support any interpretation.

Or perhaps, critics add, the radiocarbon dates are simply wrong, and
Stratum IIa is actually post-glacial in age? Meadowcroft is, after all,
in western Pennsylvania coal country, and skeptics—Vance Haynes foremost
among them—wondered whether ancient coal infiltrating the deposits as
dust or via groundwater contaminated the Meadowcroft radiocarbon samples
and inflated their actual ages.

Adovasio and colleagues counter that the closest coal to the rockshelter
is 800 meters away, and neither coal particles nor coal-associated
spores were found in microscope scans of the radiocarbon samples.
Besides, if there had been contamination, it surely would have been
noticed by one of the several radiocarbon laboratories that analyzed the
Meadowcroft samples—unless, Adovasio snarled sarcastically, one assumes
“a witless incompetence of astronomical…dimensions” on their part, which
he does not.²⁵ Moreover, if the samples were contaminated, the fifty-two
dates would not have been in near-perfect stratigraphic order.

Maybe, Haynes responded, only the charcoal from lower Stratum IIa sat in
contaminated groundwater and got proportionately older as a result.
Adovasio calls such a scenario “contorted, even fanciful,” since the
geologists on his team showed that groundwater never got closer than 10
meters below the deepest occupation surface at Meadowcroft. More
important, geoarchaeologist Paul Goldberg conducted an independent
microscopic inspection of Stratum IIa sediments searching for traces of
groundwater saturation or coal particles, but found no evidence of
either.

Haynes, dismissing the Goldberg study (though without explaining why),
said the chronological dispute could neatly be resolved if only some
short-lived seeds or nuts from lower Stratum IIa were dated, believing
they would be less susceptible to contamination. Only, he complains, his
“repeated pleas for radiocarbon dating of nuts and seeds…have gone
unheeded.”²⁶

Not exactly unheeded, more like emphatically rejected: “I knew,”
Adovasio writes, “that by Haynes's tortured reasoning, if I took a seed
from Stratum IIa at Meadowcroft and the date came back just as old as
the 16,000-year-old date from charcoal from a hearth, Haynes would say
it had to have been tainted by some soluble contaminant—yet to be
identified, of course. And if it came out younger than my older [16,000
BP] dates, Haynes would deem [those older] dates discredited, although
it is well known that seeds can migrate between horizons quite
easily.”²⁷ Adovasio figures he cannot win for losing. He might be right.

Round and round it goes. So far, Meadowcroft has cheated pre-Clovis
actuarial tables, with more written about it than any other potential
early site, save Trenton itself, an analogy Adovasio himself has drawn.
They are both, arguably, the most controversial sites of their times.
And like Abbott, Adovasio has aggressively carried the flag for
Meadowcroft, branding his critics “gnats,”²⁸ and producing to date more
than 100 published articles and papers pushing the pre-Clovis antiquity
of the site.

But there's one thing Adovasio hasn't done: issue a comprehensive, final
report on Meadowcroft. One is needed, as even he admits, in order to lay
out all the data in one place, including detailed descriptions of
individual artifacts, precise information on their position relative to
radiocarbon samples, and the context of those samples relative to the
stratigraphy. Then the archaeological community will have the chance to
evaluate it in detail. Until that moment, Meadowcroft may remain in
archaeological limbo, the exception that proves the rule that if a site
is not convincingly older than 11,500 BP before a pre-Clovis presence is
generally accepted, then it will not be any more convincing afterward.

EARLY AMERICAN ART?

The prehistoric rock art of the remote, arid caatinga (“thorn forest”)
of northeastern Brazil is rich, colorful, expressive, and in spots,
downright racy (some Brazilian customs, it appears, have prehistoric
precursors). It was rock art that drew Niede Guidon to Toca do Boqueirao
da Pedra Furada (“hole in the wall,” after an erosional cavity in a
nearby cliff), a rockshelter that covers a roughly semicircular area 70
meters wide and nearly 18 meters deep. Seeking to determine the age of
the art, Guidon began excavations in 1978 that continued until bedrock
was reached in the late 1980s. Her team dug through nearly 5 meters—and
as many strata—of sediment filling the shelter, now dated by more than
fifty radiocarbon ages, the earliest of which is greater than 50,000
years old. Two periods of prehistoric occupation were recognized: the
Pedra Furada phase, all materials predating 14,300 BP, and the younger
Serra Talhada phase, which began around 10,400 BP and lasted through
much of the Holocene.

The Serra Talhada phase is marked by distinctive, well-made bifacial and
unifacial stone tools fashioned, in many cases, of exotic chert. It has
extensive and complicated rock art, abundant ocher (a natural paint),
well-defined hearths, and easily detected living surfaces that preserved
animal bones and plant remains. Serra Talhada is unequivocally
archaeological.

[images]

FIGURE 24.
A quartzite cobble “chopper” from one of the deepest levels at the Pedra
Furada site, Brazil. (Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

Less so the older Pedra Furada phase, which lacks bone, wood, or other
organic remains, save for charcoal. Nor does it have the rock art,
unmistakable hearths, or the obvious living floors of the younger phase.
Instead, proof of its human presence rests largely on about 600 crudely
fashioned quartz and quartzite cobble choppers (Figure 24), scrapers,
and flake cutting tools, along with clusters of rock identified as
hearths.

Such wholesale differences between the two phases naturally make
skeptics wonder whether the older material is truly archaeological, and
not just rocks flaked and arranged by nature. Guidon dismissed such
carping, however, and for seemingly good reason: a 1993 doctoral thesis
by Fabio Parenti showed that the Pleistocene-age specimens possessed
flaking patterns diagnostic of human manufacture (these included the
removal of more than three flakes, edge angles less than 90°, and a
“logic” to the flake removal pattern). No small triumph that, and even
Nature, a journal that rarely notices doctoral theses, noticed this one.

Of course, we know the pre-Clovis dispute is littered with sites that
testify to nature's uncanny ability to mimic primitive human artifacts,
and trap even the expert (think Louis Leakey). Pedra Furada might be
such a setting. It is nestled beneath a sandstone cliff more than 100
meters high (see Plate 5). Atop the cliff is a 20-meter-thick rock layer
of densely packed quartz and quartzite pebbles and cobbles: a
high-energy gravel bar, frozen in time. At both the east and west ends
of the shelter are water-stained chutes down which rocks, dislodged from
the cobble layer by weathering and erosion, plummeted to the shelter
floor, occasionally swept along by “violent torrents of water” (Guidon's
words²⁹). At the base of the eastern chute there is a large debris cone
of shattered quartz and quartzite pieces, flaked by the impact of their
100-meter free-fall; beneath the western chute are potholes scoured from
the bedrock, one upwards of 3 meters in diameter, testimony to the
erosive pounding of cascading water and debris. Filling the shelter are
coarse sediments, pebbles, and hand-to head-sized cobbles, coming from
directly overhead. Not surprisingly, the pebbles and cobbles are flaked
to varying degrees. Clearly, nature's been dropping rocks into Pedra
Furada over tens of thousands of years. But were people?

As Nature said of Pedra Furada, seeing may be believing. And believing
“meetings of specialists on site, and formal debates, should take place
regularly if we are to establish an agreed basis for evaluating
evidence,”³⁰ Guidon generously extended invitations to proponents and
critics to visit Pedra Furada in December 1993. We accepted. The meeting
was held in Sao Raimundo Nonato, a dot on the map in the northeastern
Brazilian state of Piaui and the gateway to a beautiful ecological and
archaeological preserve, of which Pedra Furada is the centerpiece. It
was a landmark meeting: stimulating, intense, enlightening, and
sometimes downright uncomfortable, simultaneously and in several
languages.

James Adovasio, Tom Dillehay, and I were among the conferees (Figure
25), and we raised questions (later published), about the site
stratigraphy, its supposed hearths, and the 600 Pedra Furada-phase
artifacts.³¹ We were especially concerned about the artifacts. They had
been identified as such during excavations, presumably because they
looked the part, and then afterward were sent to Parenti for analysis to
see if they could be artifacts. Yet, these were specimens already
suspected to be of human manufacture. What was not at all apparent was
how much these specimens, plucked from a dense deposit of naturally
broken rocks, differed from those left behind.

No matter. The supposed artifacts certainly looked the part, though were
decidedly retro: more akin to stone tools hundreds of thousands of years
old than to what was being used around the globe 50,000 years ago. Looks
aren't everything, of course, and their crudeness might easily be
explained by the indifference of those who did the flaking, or the mean
quality of the raw material. Some of prehistory's most spectacularly
ugly stone work was executed in quartz and quartzite.

[images]

FIGURE 25.
James Adovasio (left) and Tom Dillehay (to Adovasio's right) examining
the witness block left unexcavated at the Pedra Furada site, Brazil,
during the international site visit in December 1993. Naturally broken
cobbles are visible throughout the witness block. (Photograph by David
J. Meltzer.)

Even so, many bore a worrisome resemblance to the naturally flaked
cobbles that today litter the surface beneath the chutes at the site.
Just how guilty nature might be comes clear on a visit to Pedra Furada,
as you crane the neck upward to catch a glimpse of the conglomerate
layer high overhead. How long would it take for a dislodged cobble to
make the Pedra Furada plunge, and how fast would it be traveling when it
smashed onto the rock-strewn surface below? The questions aren't
entirely academic: one instinctively steps back from the impact zone
while calculating the physics of free-falling rocks. From that height,
it would take a cobble just 4.51 seconds to hit bottom, impacting at a
velocity of roughly 160 kilometers per hour (100 miles per hour). Give
that rock a mass of 1-2 kilograms, and there's considerable force
involved, far more than a person fashioning a stone tool normally
musters. Cobbles would be flaked when they first hit, when they bounced
into other rocks after impact, and again when they were struck by
later-falling stones. Could such natural impacts produce the patterns
seen on the Pedra Furada specimens?

The conference hall in Sao Raimundo Nonato grew warm on this issue, even
before an electrical failure knocked out the ceiling fans. A deep
division emerged on the question of a Pleistocene human presence at
Pedra Furada. The divide was partly, though not entirely, along national
lines, but for reasons that have little to do with politics, and much to
do with paradigms: the question of antiquity looks very different
depending on the intellectual tradition from which one emerges. North
Americans tend to be more skeptical than most, but then we brought
Calico into the debate and have much for which to atone.

For us, it's the usual rub: it is not enough to show a specimen could be
cultural, one must also demonstrate it could not be natural. The Pedra
Furada team was ready for that. Parenti had gathered 2,000 cobbles from
the modern debris cones. All were obviously flaked by nature, fell in
the last couple of decades, and were well above the archaeological
levels at the site. He was pleased to report none exhibited the flake
scars or patterns observed in the 600 specimens from the Pleistocene
levels. Case closed?

Not yet. The issue is one of probability. As stone tool expert Jacques
Pelegrin admitted, nature can flake stones in ways that mimic the Pedra
Furada specimens, though he thought the odds slim, less than 1 in 100,
he supposed. For the sake of discussion, make them even more remote: 1
in 1,000, or 1 in 10,000. Yet, no matter how rare the chances, given
sufficient time and raw material (Pedra Furada had plenty of both),
nature can magnify even the slimmest odds to the point where such
geofacts occur in detectable frequencies. The shelter first opened more
than 50,000 years ago, and has been bombarded by cobbles ever since: by
conservative estimate, upwards of 10 million cobbles have taken the
100-meter plunge. That's a potential yield, even with odds as slim as 1
in 10,000, of roughly 1,000 geofacts. Nature, it appears, had ample
opportunity to produce the 600 “artifacts” that occurred at the site—far
better odds, in fact, than waiting for a monkey to type Shakespeare (the
analogy Pedra Furada's defenders invoke).

Guidon fired back, fiercely so, denouncing our assessment as
“worthless,” pointing out several errors of fact in our statements about
the site and their excavation methods (errors for which we were guilty),
but otherwise largely ignoring the critical question of whether those
were truly artifacts, except to say that “only one lithic flaked by man
is enough to demonstrate his presence.”³² Alas, were it only so easy in
a geological context such as this.

Work has continued intermittently at Pedra Furada, and recently included
one analytical surprise: thermoluminescence was used to date forty
burned quartz pebbles thought to come from Pleistocene hearths. These
results failed to confirm that the burning resulted from human activity.
Moreover, the TL ages ranged so widely (to nearly 162,000 years ago)
they raised the possibility the deposits had been disturbed and that the
stratigraphy was “much more complex than suspected.”³³ One can only
admire Guidon and colleagues’ candor. Clearly, more needs to be known of
Pedra Furada, its artifacts/geofacts, features, and stratigraphy. On
these, its pre-Clovis status will ultimately stand or fall.

BANKING ON CHINCHIHUAPI CREEK

Monte Verde is on the banks of Chinchihuapi Creek in southern Chile, 50
kilometers up the Rio Maullin from the Pacific Ocean. It was found when
local woodsmen, cutting back the creek bank to widen an oxcart trail,
dislodged some buried wood, mastodon bone, and a stone artifact, all of
which found their way to American archaeologist Tom Dillehay, then
teaching at the Universidad Austral de Chile (Valdivia). From 1977 to
1985, Dillehay and an international, interdisciplinary team of nearly
eighty collaborators excavated and analyzed the material from the site.

Monte Verde first leapt into archaeological consciousness one afternoon
in the spring of 1989 when a couple hundred archaeologists assembled at
the University of Maine for several days of wrangling over the origin
and antiquity of the first Americans. It was a tough crowd. The evening
before, it had sat quietly and largely unimpressed by a presentation on
Pedra Furada. But ten minutes into Dillehay's talk on Monte Verde, the
fellow sitting next to me (then, a hard-nosed skeptic—now, ironically,
the purveyor of his own pre-Clovis site) whistled softly in astonishment
and then said, to no one in particular, “What planet is this stuff
from?” I was wondering that myself.

The images Dillehay was showing of the well-preserved remains at Monte
Verde—wooden artifacts and house planks, fruits, berries, seeds, leaves,
and stems, as well as marine algae, crayfish, chunks of animal hide, and
what appeared to be several human coprolites found in three small
pits—were unlike anything most of us, who long ago had learned to be
used to stone tools and grateful for occasional bits of bone, had ever
seen. The site's unusual preservation resulted from a geological fluke.
Very soon after the people who camped on the sandy banks of Chinchihuapi
Creek departed, the creek was dammed, water backed up over the site, and
a water-saturated, culturally sterile, grass-matted peat deposit formed
atop the 600 m² area they once occupied—what Dillehay calls the MVII
surface (there's a much older MVI surface, but let's put that aside for
now). In that oxygen-starved setting, the normal decay processes
stalled, preserving that astonishing array of organic materials.

Excavating such remains is extremely challenging. They are saturated
with water, extremely soft, and easily harmed; worse, once exposed to
the air they rapidly dry, crack, and crumble to dust. In order to
minimize the damage—especially of fragile wood and animal
hide—Dillehay's team had to excavate slowly and without the usual metal
tools of the trade, using instead fine-haired brushes, small air pumps,
even their fingers. They had to minimize the exposure of these remains,
then move quickly to keep them saturated for safe transport to the
laboratory where, after 6-8 months in carefully controlled water and
chemical baths, the items could be permanently stabilized.

Those painstaking efforts were well worth it, for they revealed a site
rich in plant remains: parts of some seventy-five species littered the
MVII surface, many more than occur in a comparably sized natural
deposit, which Dillehay knew because he had dug where the site was, and
where it wasn't: he ventured 2 kilometers up and down Chinchihuapi Creek
to examine naturally deposited, non-artifact bearing sediments. That
preemptive shoveling helped muffle criticism that the site had formed
naturally by highlighting differences between natural deposits and the
archaeological ones.³⁴

About a third of the plants at Monte Verde were charred from cooking; a
quarter were exotic, imported to the site from the Pacific coast some 30
kilometers distant (including seaweed, the residue of which adhered to
many tools), from high Andean settings, or from arid grasslands up to
600 kilometers away. Coincidence or not, more than half the plants are
still used by the native Mapuche as food, drink, medicine, or
construction materials. The archaeological list includes charred and
uncharred skins of wild potato, along with burned and unburned juncus
and scirpus seeds that were found mashed into the cracks of wooden
basins. Among the most unusual of the MVII plant remains were a
half-dozen plugs of chewed boldo leaves mixed with seaweed, forming a
medicinal tea still used by the Mapuche to relieve stomach ills, colds,
and congestion.

Prehistoric chaw, we'd call that, and the plugs were found lying just
outside a wishbone-shaped foundation (roughly 3.9 m by 3 m) of sand and
gravel that appeared to be glued together by animal fat, and lined with
vertical wood stubs and scraps of animal skin, the remnants of a
hide-draped frame hut that once stood there. Inside the structure were
three small hearths containing a variety of exotic plants and stone
artifacts including quartz crystals. Fronting the structure were
hearths; a small cache of salt brought from the coast; a litter of
leaves and seeds; scraps of mastodon meat and bones; artifacts of stone,
wood, and ivory; and a large (30 x 40 cm) cut and scraped block of red
ocher. Monte Verdeans worked, ate, and took cures here.

They lived about 35 meters away in a cluster of roughly rectangular
huts, the wooden foundation timbers of which survived (Figure 26). The
structure was about 20 meters long, arranged like a row house, and
framed by log planks anchored by wooden stakes, which supported walls of
wooden poles that had bits of animal skin still clinging to them,
possibly the remains of mastodon or paleo-llama hide that once draped
the structure. String fashioned of juncus reed was knotted around many
of the wooden stakes, likely tent pegs for securing the hide cover.

The hut floors were high in nitrogen and phosphate, a sure chemical sign
of human waste, and littered with ash, grit, and flecks of animal skin.
The huts surrounded two large communal hearths, and two dozen smaller
ones, which were clay lined, contained ash and charcoal, and often had
been heavily scorched. In the muddy sand and clay floor alongside one of
the hearths was a child's footprint (one of three found) (Figure 27). In
this area, too, were traces of meals: more plant parts, as well as the
bones, tusks, teeth, and fractured ribs of mastodon; paleo-llama bones;
and the remains of fish, shellfish, birds, and even seaweed, coastal
algae, and egg shells.

Most of the MVII artifacts are wooden (digging sticks, mortars, lances),
while others are bone and ivory, and still others stone (some 715
specimens), including bola stones, cores, a polished basalt perforator,
grinding slabs, knives, unifacial scrapers, and spear points (Figure
28). Not all the stone pieces, even the majority, are indisputably
artifacts. Many are unmodified stones from the stream bed or distant
coastal beaches. But because they were found amid sandy sediments (this
was no Pedra Furada) and showed, as Michael Collins demonstrated, an
unnatural sphericity, they are accorded human authorship. Most of the
stone for the artifacts was locally derived, but over forty were made of
material from distant sources. And from the coast came bitumen, a
natural tar used to bind several of the stone tools to wooden and bone
handles.

[images]

FIGURE 26.
Timbers that served as the base of the hut remains in Area D of the
Monte Verde site, Chile. (Photograph courtesy of Tom D. Dillehay.)

[images]

FIGURE 27.
One of the three human footprints left in the muddy sand and clay in
Area D of the Monte Verde site. By its size (13 cm long), the print was
apparently left by a young person. (Photograph courtesy of Tom D.
Dillehay.)

[images]

FIGURE 28.
Two of the Monte Verde lanceolate projectile points. (Photograph by
David J. Meltzer.)

The assemblage from Monte Verde is extraordinary, all the more so
because of its age. The preservation of organic material made it
possible to obtain radiocarbon dates on wood, charcoal, tusk, and bone.
The radiocarbon analyses were conducted by several different
laboratories, a handy cross-check of the reliability of the results, and
produced ages on the MVII surface and its artifacts that ranged from
11,790 ± 200 to 13,565 ± 250 BP. The average was put at 12,500 BP.

That's certainly old enough to establish Monte Verde's pre-Clovis
credentials, but making matters more intriguing, Dillehay's excavations
in a different area of the site encountered a couple dozen more stone
specimens, along with three small, shallow, circular hearth-like basins,
each containing charcoal specks that dated to more than 33,000 BP. These
MVI deposits lack the spectacular organic preservation typical of the
MVII occupation, and though some of the MVI artifacts are unequivocal,
no one, least of all Dillehay, was quite sure what to make of this much
older occupation, since it has not been fully excavated. Understandably,
he concentrated his efforts and attention on MVII—as I shall here.

FROM RESISTANCE TO RESOLUTION

Monte Verde, like all pre-Clovis contenders, got no free ride: early on,
it even failed to make Morlan's 1988 list of the five “best pre-Clovis
sites,” wary as he was that the wooden timbers were naturally fallen
trees and the stakes merely branches. It took Dillehay more than a
decade of postexcavation analysis to fully compile the evidence, during
which time he published a series of papers and—in 1989—the first of two
books on the site. The volume presented the results of the
paleoenvironmental and geological studies, and descriptions of the
plant, animal, and other organic remains. Yet, it said very little about
the site's artifacts and architecture. This was deliberate. Dillehay
wanted to prove Monte Verde was an archaeological site by showing nature
could not have deposited plant and animal remains in that variety and
amount. It was a novel gambit, and one Dillehay admitted imposed “a
burden on the reader to understand and accept results not yet
presented.”³⁵ He was right, though the effort almost paid off. Almost.

But the burden of proof, as always, had to wait on the archaeological
testimony. Skeptics were willing to grant Monte Verde's
non-archaeological remains were unusual, but was their “pervasive
strangeness” (as skeptic Dena Dincauze put it) necessarily
archaeological?³⁶ That was something only the artifacts—slated for
description in the second volume—could resolve. Some were unwilling to
wait. Thomas Lynch, who for many years had carefully patrolled the
pre-Clovis border in South America, was not giving Monte Verde a pass
based on its plant and animal remains, or its promise of artifacts.
Indeed, what little he had seen of MVII's artifacts and features failed
to convince him that MVII was an archaeological surface. The few
artifacts that he deemed genuine might, he suspected, come from later
(Archaic) occupations in the area, and even the biface associated with
mastodon bones still dated to “essentially Clovis time.” Lynch dismissed
the older MVI evidence outright: he doubted its specimens were
artifacts, and thought it highly unlikely humans would camp twice in
this “wet and boggy” creek bottom 20,000 years apart (in point of fact,
MVI sits on the high terrace over a lagoon, not on the floor of the
creek).³⁷

Dillehay and Collins were quick to defend the site: Lynch was biased,
ignorant of the Monte Verde artifacts, and misunderstood the site's
geological and archaeological context. This was, they argued, an ideal
place to camp, and the closest Archaic site was at least half a
kilometer away, precluding any mixing of younger artifacts. Lynch didn't
back down. The accusation of bias was “baseless,” and more to the point,
he dismissed their rebuttal as disingenuous. After all, how could he
(Lynch) be accused of ignorance or misunderstanding if the evidence
itself remained “unpublished or inadequately illustrated”? (To which
Dillehay asks, that being so, how could Lynch be so stringent in his
judgment?³⁸). And to Dillehay's lament that only two archaeologists had
responded to his invitation to visit Monte Verde during the excavations
and see for themselves, Lynch growled: “If so many of us stayed away, it
was in good part because we did not feel free to go and make our own
observations.”³⁹

Clearly, much was riding on the publication of the second Monte Verde
volume, and what it would say of the site's artifacts, archaeological
features, and architecture. When it finally appeared in early 1997,
written by Dillehay and a team of thirty-two co-authors and weighing in
at a whopping 1,000 pages, reviewers were awestruck. Nature hailed it as
“one of the most persuasive and impressive interdisciplinary volumes of
any kind of archaeology for a generation.”⁴⁰ That wasn't hyperbole: the
volume bristled with meticulous details on everything from mastodon
bones and wooden lances to eggshell fragments and finely made strings;
it examined and analyzed evidence that could be seen with the naked eye,
and that which could not, such as the sediment chemistry; residues
adhering to stone, bone, and wooden artifacts; and the microscopic bits
of animal tissue. The effort was analytical overkill. Yet, overkill was
necessary, given the great skepticism facing this (or any) potentially
early site and the doubts expressed about Monte Verde's antiquity by
Lynch and others since the site's discovery. Jackie Robinson could not
be baseball player of merely average skill.

But would the second volume be enough to bring about consensus and—if
judged positively—establish a pre-Clovis presence in the Americas? A few
years before, following the appearance of the first Monte Verde volume,
I had put that question to Vance Haynes, the dean of the skeptics: “No,”
he said.

“But why not?”

“Have you ever visited a site,” he replied, “that looked just the way
you thought it would, based on what you'd read of it beforehand?”

I had to admit I hadn't. But was a site visit really necessary? Much has
changed since the 1920s visit to Folsom. Nowadays, professional
competence can usually be assumed, and archaeological fieldwork follows
well-defined protocols. More significant, much of the crucial evidence
emerges only in postexcavation laboratory analyses of radiocarbon
samples, sediment chemistry, artifacts, the isotopic composition of
organic remains, and the detailed spatial analyses of the artifact
distribution maps. Fortunately, those results can be evaluated without
having to look over the shoulders of those doing the analyses, and thank
goodness for that: who has time for a six-month watch in a radiocarbon
laboratory to insure dating samples are properly analyzed? A site visit
might lead one to reject a claim of great antiquity, but cannot
demonstrate one. Folsom was the first, and almost assuredly the last
site in which a visit fully and without ambiguity resolved a claim of
great antiquity. In the 1990s, a site visit could reasonably be viewed
as an anachronism, even irrelevant.

So why bother? One good reason: as Haynes said, what one reads of a site
and what one sees are often very different. Unlike researchers in the
experimental sciences, archaeologists cannot replicate a critical study
in our own labs, nor fully recreate in words and pictures a site's
setting and surroundings, the complexity of the sediments and
stratigraphy, the artifacts in the ground (if you arrive in time), a
measure of how difficult the sediment was to excavate, how easy it might
have been to miss potentially mixed deposits, or what the back dirt
piles look like (one sometimes learns an embarrassing amount about an
excavation by looking through the backdirt at what was missed).

“The next book's important,” Haynes said, “but one day on the site of
Monte Verde would be worth all the words they could write.”
Overstatement, perhaps, but no matter.

Dillehay's response? “Fine. Let's go look at it.”

And so Dillehay, Haynes, and I began organizing a visit to Monte Verde,
which took place in January 1997. A group of pre-Clovis proponents and
skeptics—including Dincauze and Haynes—armed with the proof pages to the
forthcoming second Monte Verde volume, traveled to the site via the
University of Kentucky (where Dillehay was then teaching) and the
Universidad Austral de Chile (Valdivia), both of which housed the
artifact collections from Monte Verde. Over a week-long, nearly
continuous conversation and debate reaching from North to far South
America, the Monte Verde evidence—detailed in the pages of Dillehay's
book; visible in the specimens laid out on tables in Lexington and
Valdivia; and seen in the geology, setting, and stratigraphy of the site
itself—was thoroughly vetted.⁴¹

The trip to Monte Verde was extremely interesting, educational, and
mostly enjoyable, though it also had its share of tense and downright
unpleasant moments. No one ever promised breaking the Clovis barrier was
going to be easy. Awkward as it occasionally was, that was a sure sign
the visit was doing what it was supposed to do: allow a careful
inspection of the evidence and a frank exchange of views. The one thing
the Monte Verde trip was not was a counterpart to the 1927 Folsom site
visit, but then it wasn't intended to be. The excavations were
long-since completed, and much of the site was gone. There were no
artifacts to be witnessed in place.

On the final evening of the trip at a quiet bar in the seaside town of
Puerto Montt, Chile, we had a long and sometimes rancorous discussion
that finally culminated in a consensus: all agreed Monte Verde was
archaeological and 12,500 years old (Figure 29). Everyone around the
table knew exactly what that meant.

[images]

FIGURE 29.
The calm before the storm: at Monte Verde late in the afternoon, January
1997, as the site visit was wrapping up (the author is on the far left).
(Photograph courtesy of Alex Barker.)

A couple months after our return, and after we'd had a chance to mull
what had been seen and said, Donald Grayson and I drafted a summary
report of our visit and assessment that was circulated for comment and
signature by the participants—if they accepted its conclusions. Everyone
had a chance to examine and reassess the Monte Verde case in the cold
light of day and well after any bruised egos or perceived twisted arms
had fully healed. To be sure, some of us had lingering questions about
the character of the Monte Verde artifact assemblages and their
interpretation (for example, does the MVII occupation represent, as
Dillehay suspects, a nearly year-round encampment?), but that did not
change our central conclusion about the site's age and archaeological
status. Everyone signed.⁴⁷

The statement was published in American Antiquity, the premier
professional journal of American archaeology.⁴⁸ In it, we urged others
to judge Monte Verde for themselves based on their own evaluation of the
evidence in Dillehay's two volumes on the site. Many did just that, and
the fact that a few (but only a few) reached different conclusions than
we did is testimony our say-so did not carry the weight that Lyell's or
Kidder's had 140 and 70 years earlier.

So, too, is the fact that Haynes has since had second thoughts, claiming
the site has only six unequivocal artifacts; those six, naturally, are
the ones that most resemble the North American Paleoindian projectile
points with which he (and I, for that matter) is most familiar.⁴⁹
Frankly, I think that's a red herring, ignoring as it does the wooden
artifacts, modified bones, ivory pieces, chunks of mastodon meat, the
strings tied in overhand knots around the wooden stakes, the exotic
plant remains, and so on. We can agree to disagree about those other
remains, but it doesn't matter: even with just six artifacts, we are
still left with an archaeological site that is 12,500 years old.
Haynes's second thoughts have not reversed the archaeological tide of
opinion on Monte Verde.

A VISIT TO MONTE VERDE

We came, we saw, we were convinced. And a few weeks after our return
from Monte Verde in January 1997, the Dallas Museum of Natural History
and the National Geographic Society (which co-sponsored our trip)
organized a press conference to announce our conclusion that Tom
Dillehay's work at Monte Verde had finally broken the Clovis barrier. It
was a moment the New York Times ranked with “aviation's breaking of the
sound barrier.”⁴² Heady stuff this—but The Right Stuff? I wasn't
convinced. We'd long been open to the possibility of pre-Clovis; most
thought the sound barrier unbreakable. However, part of the comparison
rang true: as Chuck Yeager had discovered fifty years before, when
approaching the sound barrier, a plane is badly buffeted. Now that I'd
experienced.

The visit to Monte Verde began in calm skies, when from across the
United States and distant points in South America participants assembled
at the University of Kentucky. That first evening Dillehay briefed us on
South America late Pleistocene archaeology. To those of us who work in
North America, it was an eye-opener: an archaeology with a scant
bifacial technology, few formal tools, little in the way of “big-game”
kills, and yet a gaggle of sites as old as Clovis—and a few possibly
even older.

The next morning we assembled in Dillehay's lab where many of Monte
Verde's stone, bone, ivory, wood, and soft tissue specimens were neatly
laid out. Dillehay and his colleagues explained their analyses and
results, but the talks were no match for seeing Pleistocene string tied
in overhand knots, a wooden lance with mastodon flesh adhering to it, or
a log mortar with wild potato skins pounded into it (dinner was meat and
potatoes?). There was give and take: in a room full of pros, there was
no avoiding it—or so I thought. Deep into what I judged a riveting,
statistics-studded debate over whether some rounded stones were
artifacts, I glanced over at the National Geographic writer traveling
with us. He was dozing. Maybe it wasn't so riveting.

After several long plane rides, we repeated the process in Valdivia,
Chile, with the Monte Verde collections housed there: more stunning
specimens, more exchanges. Finally, to the site itself. It was a
spectacular austral summer day. We examined the stratigraphy in the
walls of Chinchihuapi Creek, studied the different MVII occupation
areas, and visited off-site spots where Dillehay had tested the natural
deposits. We peered into a trench in the MVI area, and wondered if
people had also been on this spot 33,000 years ago. But no one wanted to
go there just yet: we stayed focused on MVII. Vance Haynes, as is his
custom, collected charcoal samples; Jim Adovasio, as is his custom, wove
string from juncus reed.

Since it was the last day of the trip and participants would scatter the
next morning, we headed back to Puerto Montt looking for a restaurant
where we could chew over dinner and all we'd seen. None were open that
early, so we headed instead for a local bar: La Caverna. I had a sinking
feeling. There'd been tense moments already. Dillehay was dealing as
best he could with a nonstop barrage of questions from a dozen of his
peers about a project to which he'd devoted twenty years of his
professional life. None of us had ever experienced that kind of intense
grilling. I thought it best if everyone was feeling satisfied from a
meal before turning to what I suspected would be a hard conversation. It
wasn't to be. Drinks were ordered, and the talk began.

And it was tough talk, lasting over two hours. We probed Monte Verde for
flaws, and hashed and rehashed alternative explanations. Maybe the dates
were contaminated by local volcanic eruptions,⁴³ perhaps those wooden
“lances” were natural, where exactly were the artifacts relative to the
dated remains, were the deposits at all mixed, and on, and on. Dillehay,
who'd spent years thinking about such matters and was unquestionably
more familiar with the evidence than we ever could be, grew increasingly
short-tempered, even insulting (which is not his personality). Tempers
flared, and at a moment when the words grew especially heated, Alex
Barker, the Dallas Museum's representative on the trip, gave an
ear-piercing whistle. Stunned silence. The museum, he announced, had
sponsored the trip with the proviso we'd seek some degree of closure
over Monte Verde. He didn't want to have to report that we only learned
“archaeologists don't play well together.” The tension broke, the
discussion continued. Finally, Barker called for a vote on whether we
believed Monte Verde was a pre-Clovis site. It was a theatrical ploy,
but I was not entirely surprised by how it turned out—though I was
intensely curious. Nor was I the only one. As I was furtively looking
around the table to see whose hands were up, so was everyone else. But
all hands were raised: everyone agreed MVII was archaeological and
12,500 years old.

Barker called for a toast, and then a dreadful slip of the tongue:
Dennis Stanford, perhaps looking at Jim Adovasio sitting across the
table, raised his glass and inadvertently toasted Meadowcroft, not Monte
Verde (I knew we should have had food first). Stanford recovered as best
as he could, saying we should all do this next year at Meadowcroft. Too
late. Haynes innocently chimed in, suggesting that if Adovasio would
date just one more seed from the deepest levels at Meadowcroft, he might
believe in the antiquity of the site.

By his own admission, Adovasio lost it: “I burst out in derisive
laughter,” and he then spat that “never would I accede to any request
[Haynes] made for further testing of the Meadowcroft site because if I
did he would simply ask for something else in a never-ending spiral of
problems…. Meadowcroft's antiquity was settled as far as most other
professionals and I were concerned, and that if any remaining skeptics
did not believe it, I could not care less. I then stormed out of the
bar.”⁴⁴

It was painful. Haynes looked like he'd been slapped. A pall settled
over the room. We'd been so close to getting through without an
explosion. The National Geographic writer sat intently witnessing it
all. I wondered if he was trying to memorize everyone's lines. I headed
for the restroom to wash my hands (it seemed the right thing to do). The
restaurant was now open, so we drifted out of La Caverna, much more
subdued than we'd been just five minutes earlier. The moment of triumph
had passed.

Ironically, Adovasio and Haynes were sharing a hotel room, and I hoped
they would have the chance to smooth over matters (I can't help it: both
are good friends of mine). But Adovasio got in late that night, and
Haynes left early the next morning. He was not flying back to the States
with us, but was headed to a conference in Cairo. He was gone before any
of us saw him.

In the weeks after we returned, Donald Grayson and I circulated to our
colleagues drafts of the statement for American Antiquity; a press
conference was held; we began to ponder the full implications of Monte
Verde. There was much to ponder, but the one thing I thought was beyond
pondering was the site's antiquity and archaeological status. I was
wrong.

After our American Antiquity statement appeared, archaeologist Stuart
Fiedel took our advice and examined Dillehay's Monte Verde volume. He
found errors, which mostly boiled down to discrepancies in artifact
location, numbers, and mapping. I was not surprised: errors are
inevitable in complex, multiyear, multidisciplinary research programs
and the massive books they yield. All of us who do such projects live
with that unfortunate reality, however much we attempt to prevent errors
from happening. But were the errors in the Monte Verde volume trivial or
profound? It was hard to say, and Fiedel's critique hard to swallow
since he gave all his criticisms equal weight, and blanketed them in a
patina of conspiratorial mistrust and accusations, layered with snide
remarks. He did his critique no favors.

Worse, instead of sending it to Dillehay prior to publication—it's
professional courtesy, and would allow Dillehay to correct errors of
fact—then submitting the piece to a rigorously peer-reviewed academic
journal (the usual procedure), Fiedel instead sent it to Discovering
Archaeology, a “popular” archaeology magazine (but not too popular: it's
now defunct). Dillehay learned ofFiedel's attack only after returning
from a long season of fieldwork. Discovering Archaeology's editor told
him Fiedel's piece would be published, and if Dillehay wanted to
respond, he had two weeks: the magazine was being hurried for
distribution at the Clovis and Beyond conference that fall of 1999. As
David Hurst Thomas observes, it looked like an ambush.⁴⁵ To those of us
also asked to comment under this looming deadline, it certainly felt
like an ambush. Fiedel claims this was not his doing: the editor assured
him the piece would not be published if Dillehay chose not to respond.
Right. The editor—knowing full well controversy sells magazines—failed
to mention that option to Dillehay, who responded as best he could in
the time allowed, then later produced a much lengthier reply for posting
on the Web.⁴⁶

So was this much ado about nothing? Fiedel's critique focused on the
“unambiguous” artifacts (projectile points, mostly): Where were they
found? How were they associated with dated samples? Why were there no
photographs of them in place, as at Folsom? Dillehay and colleagues
clarified their provenience and provided photographs. I could only shake
my head. Could a picture of a point in place make that much difference?
Adovasio had published pictures of a projectile point in pre-Clovis age
levels at Meadowcroft (see Figure 23 in this book), but where was the
groundswell of support for that site's claims to great antiquity?

The Clovis and Beyond conference buzzed with talk of the Monte Verde
critique, but it was clear what the 1,200 people in the hall listening
to Dillehay's response to Fiedel thought of the whole matter: when he
finished speaking, Dillehay was given a long, standing ovation. I was in
the back of the hall with one of the conference organizers when he was
approached by a furious Fiedel asking for “ten minutes on stage to
respond to this crap.” “No, Stuart,” came the reply, “you can write a
letter to the editor of Discovering Archaeology.”

And, indeed, the tide keeps rolling in for this site: in early 2008
Dillehay and colleagues reported further analysis of hearth sediment
from Monte Verde yielded half a dozen previously unrecorded species of
algae and seaweed (the latter still adhering to a stone tool), and
radiocarbon dates neatly affirming the site's great age. These new
results, as long-time skeptic Daniel Sandweiss graciously admitted,
“remove any lingering doubts about the antiquity of human presence at
that site.”⁵⁰ And as Dillehay observed, here was further testimony to
the importance of coastal resources in the diet and health of early
Americans.

Although Monte Verde is just a thousand years older than Clovis, what a
difference a millennium makes: to have reached southern South America by
12,500 years ago, the first Americans must have left northeast Asia and
crossed Beringia—16,000 kilometers distant—much earlier. But when, from
where, and how? And why is the oldest acceptable site in the Americas
about as far from Beringia as one can reach, with no sites in North
America demonstrably as old or older? Monte Verde has forced a sea
change in our thinking of the possible entry route(s) into the Americas,
the timing and mode of that entry, how and where we look for ancient
archaeological sites, and just who the first Americans were and from
whence they came.

COASTING TO AMERICA

Current geological evidence has the Laurentide and Cordilleran
obstructing the interior route into North America from before about
28,000 until sometime after 12,000 years ago (Chapter 2). That being the
case, no matter how fast one supposes the first Americans traveled south
from Alaska, they could not have gone fast enough to arrive at Monte
Verde 500 years before the ice-free corridor opened. This leaves a
couple of interesting possibilities: either they departed Alaska before
the interior corridor opened—that is, in pre-LGM times—or they traveled
south ice via a coastal route.

So far, no pre-Clovis sites have been found in the interior corridor
region. A very few are Clovis age, but most are younger than 10,500 BP.
And no sites here or, arguably, anywhere else in the New World, precede
the LGM. That would seem to preclude entry through an interior route—for
the moment (we have learned the hard way to be circumspect about such
pronouncements, since new discoveries often surprise and contradict our
received wisdom).

In the meantime, and in the wake of Monte Verde, archaeological
attention has turned to the Pacific Northwest coast to explore the
timing and viability of a coastal entry route. Opinion is divided over
whether in-migrating groups coming down the coast would have traveled on
foot or by boat. Since we've not found any late Pleistocene watercraft,
much of this debate rests on speculation and circumstantial
evidence—both for and against the possibility.

Pleistocene Australia, for example, even though joined during times of
lowest sea level to New Guinea and Tasmania in a land mass known as
Sahul, was throughout the Pleistocene separated from mainland Southeast
Asia by at least 90 kilometers of open ocean. That the first Australians
crossed open water over 40,000 years ago is taken as indirect testimony
that the first Americans could also have paddled the coastal waters of
Beringia and northwest North America. But the North and South Pacific
are very different oceans, especially during glacial episodes. No early
Australian on a raft had to contend with a northern ocean's dark skies
and frozen seas of winter, the treacherous ice floes and squalls of
summer, and year-round frigid water, where death by hypothermia would
come quickly when capsizing or falling into those inhospitable waters
(in any case, regular, planned, and repeated voyaging around the South
Pacific began only 3,500 years ago).

The first evidence watercraft were used in the North Pacific—the
occupation of islands off the Pacific Northwest coast and the hunting of
marine mammals—mostly postdates 10,000 BP, too late for initial
colonizers skirting south around the ice sheets (Chapter 6). Early
Americans made it onto a couple of California's Channel Islands, at the
Arlington Springs site on Santa Rosa Island and Daisy Cave on San Miguel
Island, as early as 10,960 BP.⁵¹ Even at the LGM, these islands were
separated from the mainland by at least 10 kilometers and had to be
reached by watercraft (see Plate 6). That said, they are too far south
to be relevant to the question of whether the first Americans got from
Alaska to unglaciated North America by boat.⁵² Nonetheless, based on
such evidence, scenarios are conjured of early American seafarers who
hunted and fished saltwater, and gathered shellfish and other intertidal
resources, and thus could have made it down the coast in short order.
That they may have, but whether they had boats to travel in remains
unresolved.

Walking (rather than rafting) down the Pleistocene coast became a viable
option once the outer coast was free of glacial ice (Chapter 2).
Although the terrain of the present-day Pacific coast is highly
dissected and inhibits movement, the now-drowned Pleistocene coastline
would not have presented such a challenge. For the moment, Occam's razor
points to groups walking down the coast—if they came via that route.

Forestalling the resolution of the by-foot vs. by-boat debate, and
indeed the larger question of whether colonization proceeded via the
coast, is the fact that much of that route is presently under water,
drowned by rising post-glacial seas. Yet, as noted in Chapter 2, not all
the Pleistocene coast was drowned: rapid isostatic rebound and tectonic
activity has uplifted segments of the Pleistocene coastline in Alaska
and British Columbia. Unfortunately for archaeology, dense temperate
rainforest hinders surface visibility along much of that stretch. These
challenges notwithstanding, in the last decade, Daryl Fedje and
colleagues (among others) have sought early coastal sites on land and
under sea, an effort enhanced by sophisticated geological and
bathymetric mapping and seafloor coring, along with efforts to predict
the most likely places to locate sites.⁵³ To date, none older than
10,300 BP have been found, but it's still early in the search.

IT'S ABOUT TIME

Monte Verde implies an arrival in the New World much earlier than 12,500
years ago, given how long it must have taken to travel from Beringia to
southern Chile. The initial round of speculation, and it was little more
than that, put the arrival at perhaps 20,000 years ago. It could have
been later, of course, or even far earlier, if one had to reach Monte
Verde in time to make the MVI occupation. But estimates of the timing
depend on how long it would take for colonizers to traverse the
continent. Chapter 7 looks into what we know or might infer about how
fast the first Americans dispersed, in light of obstacles or challenges
they may have met along the way, how readily they adapted to the diverse
and increasingly exotic New World in which they found themselves, how
easily they may have coped with novel pathogens and diseases, and how
they might have maintained their population size and reproductive
viability while living in relatively small numbers spread thinly over a
vast and otherwise unpopulated continent.

For now, consider this: hunter-gatherers can travel quickly within
familiar environments (especially ones that are relatively homogenous)
in which they know the plants that are edible and when they are
available, how animal prey behave, where rock outcrops to replenish
their stone supplies are located, where (or how) to find water, and so
on. Such knowledge is usually hard won over lifetimes and generations.
Yet, to the first Americans, this was a new, exotic, and utterly unknown
landscape, which became ever more alien to their Beringian experience as
they entered different habitats on their journey south. With every
ecological boundary and geographic barrier they crossed, and there were
many across late Pleistocene North and South America, the process of
finding water, food, and critical materials began anew. This was not the
Oklahoma Land Rush, with a known destination, wagons bulging with
homesteading provisions, and a strict timetable to meet. The process
took time: just how much, we don't know (more on this in Chapter 7).

SEARCHING FOR THE VERY FIRST AMERICANS

What we do know is that if people were in southern South America 12,500
years ago, sites of equal or greater age should be found between there
and the Beringian gateway. Some argue they already have been. In
Venezuela, projectile points similar to those at Monte Verde were found
with the skeleton of a young mastodon. Skeptics suspect the points sank
through overlying wet sediment, and came to rest next to the bones. If
so, nature is wonderfully perverse: one of the points rests snugly in
the cavity of the mastodon's right innominate (pelvic) bone. The
radiocarbon ages on the bone do not much help the case, ranging as they
do from 12,980 to 14,200 BP, with some suggestion the site may be much
younger. Taima-Taima's antiquity and association must stand on its own
merit, but having artifacts similar to those from Monte Verde raises the
possibility it is an expression of the same early archaeological
presence. However, until the age of Taima-Taima is pinned down, it will
remain in archaeological limbo.⁵⁴

As for pre-Clovis age sites in North America, there's Meadowcroft, of
course, though we still await its final report. In the wake of Monte
Verde, a flurry of additional pre-Clovis contenders have appeared—almost
twenty, by Adovasio's count—including the sites of Big Eddy (Missouri),
Cactus Hill and Saltville (both in Virginia), the localities of the
Chesrow complex (Wisconsin), Paisley Cave (Oregon), Pendejo Cave (New
Mexico), and Topper (South Carolina). Most of these have only recently
been discovered and/or reported, some are still undergoing excavation
and analysis, but a few—like Paisley Cave, which has yielded ancient DNA
from human coprolites that date to more than 12,000 BP—are nonetheless
extremely promising: the ages of the coprolites were determined by two
different radiocarbon laboratories, the DNA analysis was likewise
cross-checked by independent laboratories, the investigators carefully
guarded against the possibility of contamination (in the field and the
laboratory), and the mitochondrial DNA haplogroups matched those seen in
American Indians.⁵⁵

So far, however, none of these sites has been fully accepted by the
archaeological community in North America that, I think rightly, still
maintains a healthy skepticism toward pre-Clovis claims. It is a point
worth emphasizing: seventy years earlier when Folsom broke the
Holmes-Hrdlickian log jam, Abbott's paleoliths got no older as a result.
Merely because a barrier is breached does not mean it should be removed.
Put another way, reason to expect a pre-Clovis site should never be
mistaken for evidence a site is pre-Clovis. Each must stand on its own
merits.

All of which begs a question: do we need to find more than one site to
prove a pre-Clovis presence? A few critics insist on it. But that
insistence logically confounds the process of establishing
antiquity—finding a site that meets the necessary criteria—with the
process of discerning the broader cultural patterns of that period
(which does require multiple sites). The initial establishment of a
Pleistocene human presence in America required only one site (Folsom),
and there is no reason why that should be any different today. Indeed,
in 2004 V. V. Pitulko and colleagues announced the discovery of the Yana
RHS site in northeastern Siberia, which at 71°N and dated to 27,000 BP
was nearly twice as old as any previously recorded far northern site,
and had artifacts startlingly like those found in Clovis assemblages
(Chapter 6).⁵⁶ No one batted an eye, or insisted that Yana would be
unacceptable until replicated.

So why hasn't a pre-Clovis presence been better established in the
decade since Monte Verde? Within a decade of the discoveries at Brixham
Cave and Folsom, dozens of Paleolithic and Paleoindian sites
(respectively) were found. But the circumstances then and now are very
different. Both Brixham Cave and Folsom lent themselves to ready
generalizations about how or where more sites like them would be found
(Chapter 3). Equally important, the occupation at Brixham Cave was
preceded by many hundreds of thousands of years of Paleolithic
prehistory. Folsom, at the very least, came on the heels of a millennium
or more of a well-established human presence in the Americas. Neither
Brixham nor Folsom were the very oldest sites ever found in England or
America, and that's no surprise: the very oldest archaeological sites
are extraordinarily hard to find, and almost never the first ones
discovered.

Here's why: the number of sites produced in a given period or region is
the sum of many things, not least the size of the contemporary
population. Lots of people produce lots of debris and ample evidence of
their presence; if there are fewer people on the landscape, and they are
highly mobile and widely scattered, their traces are much rarer. And
certainly in the earliest centuries and millennia of colonization, large
areas of the American continent were thinly occupied, or simply
unoccupied. This is why we know so much less about the first peoples of
a continent than about a continent's first farmers: the latter were
numerous, more firmly rooted in place, and produced heavier artifact
“rains.”

We do not know how large the first group(s) of colonizers in the
Americas was, but it was almost certainly not large. We assume, in the
absence of any evidence but in keeping with studies of modern
hunter-gatherers, that minimally viable numbers for an initial
population might have ranged between several score and several hundred.
So one part of the answer to the question of why there were so few early
sites is that there were few early people.

The other part of the answer is that the odds of site preservation and
discovery can be slim. The number of sites recovered archaeologically
from a given period is determined by, among other factors, erosional and
depositional processes that help erase or bury ancient sites and make
them less visible; the antiquity of the period, older sites being rarer
because time has had longer to erase them; the search techniques used to
find sites, because if sites are deeply buried or, say, underwater on
the now-drowned continental shelf, they will be more difficult to locate
(of which, more below); and, finally, the number of sites relative to
the size of the area being searched by archaeologists.

The last point perhaps requires a bit of explanation, easily done by
comparing the colonization of North America with the colonization of,
say, any one of the scores of islands that dot the Pacific Ocean and
were settled in just the last few thousand years. In those instances,
the number of colonizers might well have been no larger than the group
that came to the Americas. Yet, when these seafaring peoples arrived on
an island, they had an immediate and devastating ecological impact: the
native, flightless birds were driven to extinction, trees were felled
for fuel and construction materials, and exotic plants and animals (such
as yams and stowaway rats) were introduced. Ecosystems changed radically
on the heels of human arrival, and given the small size of these
islands, those changes were sweeping and are usually highly visible
archaeologically (sediment cores, for example, show a sharp drop in the
pollen of native trees and a sudden rise in the amount of charcoal,
while the fossil record is marked by a precipitous decline and
disappearance in the number of bird species). Moreover, the size of the
area to be searched on islands is smaller than a continent by many
orders of magnitude, and thus the likelihood of finding the
archaeological “footprints” of the first colonists correspondingly
greater.

Not so in the Americas, where the area to be searched is a haystack of
many millions of square kilometers, and the needle a tiny number of
sites, left by people that could not have had a visible impact on the
hemisphere's ecosystems (though as we'll see in Chapter 8, some have
claimed as much⁵⁷).

Archaeological geologist Karl Butzer has observed, further, that because
of the converging circumstances of low population and destructive
geological processes, “recoverable” sites dating to, say, 30,000 years
ago, will be about ten to fifteen times less common than those dating to
11,000 years ago.⁵⁸ All of which implies that

 

•  people were likely present in the Americas long before their traces
appear on our archaeological radar screen;

•  the oldest archaeological site in the Americas that we currently know
of—Monte Verde—represents an early presence in the New World, but
assuredly not the earliest; and

•  earlier or the earliest sites of the first peoples will be rare, hard
to find, and may never be found.

 

If Monte Verde is pushing the limits of antiquity in this hemisphere,
then the likelihood of finding dozens or scores more as old or older
diminishes.

For that matter, and again unlike the circumstances of Brixham Cave and
Folsom, the unusual geology and archaeology of Monte Verde do not
readily lend themselves to easy generalizations about how or where more
sites like it will be found. The absence of confirmed North American
pre-Clovis sites raises the possibility that archaeologists haven't
looked in the right places or in the right way for sites of this age
(Albert Goodyear even admits he never used to excavate below the Clovis
layer; once he started doing that, he discovered the Topper site). It
is, for example, a curious but well-known fact of the archaeology of
North America that Paleoindian traces are rarely found in rockshelters
or caves, Meadowcroft being (once again) the obvious exception. Yet
around the world, from Arago (France) to Zhuoukoudian (China), caves
were used throughout prehistory.

Various scenarios are conjured to explain why Paleoindians failed to
inhabit North American caves, notably that they were moving through the
Americas at such a fast clip they hadn't had time to find them (though,
as we'll see later, they managed to find small and isolated stone
sources). Archaeologist Michael Collins has another idea: North American
archaeologists only excavate the younger (generally Holocene) deposits
in caves, and routinely fail to peer beneath massive roof spalls—as
Adovasio did at Meadowcroft—to see what traces may be found in older,
Pleistocene sediments (more on this in Chapter 9).

Indeed, there are many regions and settings yet to be searched
systematically for evidence of the first Americans: deeply buried late
Pleistocene surfaces, especially at the intersection of major rivers
(which were likely corridors of travel); bogs and wetlands; now-drowned
or uplifted coastlines; resource-rich forests; and especially the
60-kilometer-wide Panama bottleneck connecting North and South America,
through which the earliest South Americans must have passed. Searching
those settings will require more than the usual archaeological field
techniques: geological and geophysical remote sensing techniques will
become increasingly in demand.⁵⁹

WHO WERE THE FIRST AMERICANS?

Whatever may ultimately prove to be the antiquity of the first
Americans, Monte Verde has renewed discussion of who they were, and
where they originated. The archaeological “footprints” of those who
occupied Monte Verde cannot be followed back to North America, let alone
across Beringia or into northeast Asia (Chapter 6). The absence of an
obvious Siberian precursor has prompted some breathtaking speculations,
among them that the first Americans came across the Pleistocene Atlantic
from Europe, or sailed across the Pacific, possibly first setting foot
in South America. Those scenarios are highly doubtful (of which, more
later).

Monte Verde's decidedly non-Clovis look raises further questions of the
historical relationship between the people who occupied this site and
later (and northern) Clovis groups. Were they related, and if so, how?
Do they represent the same or different colonizing pulses? More broadly,
how many early migrations were there to the Americas; was it a single
event from which all subsequent groups were descended, or (as Hrdlicka
supposed) did it involve a series of separate migratory pulses? And what
might we say from this of the population history of contemporary Native
American populations: are they descendants of the first Americans?

These are not strictly archaeological questions, but ones to which
geneticists, linguists, and physical anthropologists have offered
answers. Indeed, few archaeological questions lend themselves more
readily to an interdisciplinary solution than that of the peopling of
the Americas.

5

NON-ARCHAEOLOGICAL
ANSWERS TO
ARCHAEOLOGICAL
QUESTIONS

“The hour has at last arrived,” Pliny Earle Goddard crowed the spring of
1927, “for an extensive reorganization of our conception of the peopling
of America.” About time, too. Goddard, a linguist, had just read Harold
Cook's proclamation that the Lone Wolf Creek site (Chapter 3), with its
artifacts and extinct bison, proved beyond “reasonable doubt” humans
were here in the Pleistocene. Goddard had long suspected as much and was
delighted by the news, for it meant Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka, whom he
despised (the feeling was mutual), were finally proven wrong on their
terms. Goddard scolded them for refusing to admit a deep human antiquity
on this continent. People inclined to be critical and conservative, he
sneered, should doubt that humans were recent, not the other way around.
How else could one account for the time required for New World peoples
to domesticate maize, develop the “higher civilizations of Peru, Mexico,
and our own Southwest,” and allow for the divergence of some “fifty
languages [families] so distinct from one another in their vocabularies,
that no relationship can be traced”?¹

Assuming the first Americans came as a single group, they must have
spoken one language “as pure biology would require,” and had to have
arrived “many millenniums”² ago in order for that single language to
evolve into the hundreds now spoken. Goddard guessed 100,000 years or
more was needed. Not a bad number, Cook supposed. He thought Lone Wolf
Creek might be even three times older.

Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka weren't buying: not Cook's Lone Wolf Creek
claims (Chapter 3), nor the idea that the diversity of American Indians,
whether cultural, linguistic, or physical, implied a lengthy period of
divergence from a common ancestor. Not only were Native Americans not as
diverse as they appeared—Hrdli[images]ka had long argued American
Indians and Asians were so similar physically they could not be long
separated—but such diversity as existed could be readily explained by
processes other than divergence over time from a single ancestor. The
many Native American languages, for example, could reflect successive
migrations from Asia of different groups speaking “radically different
tongues.”³

It was a reasonable counterargument, so far as it went: cultural,
linguistic, or physical diversity could result from either cause, so by
itself was no measure of antiquity. That required independent evidence,
such as a well-dated archaeological site. But the archaeological
evidence in those days was equally unsettled. Even when Folsom came
along a few months later, its antiquity was far from what Goddard deemed
necessary. He wasn't alone. The giants of his day—like linguist Edward
Sapir, who thought it “intrinsically highly probable” there had been
multiple migrations, and even anthropologist Franz Boas who did
not—nonetheless supposed that 10,000 years was “a hopelessly inadequate
span of time” to account for American Indian language diversity.⁴

Archaeologists, physical anthropologists, and linguists haven't stopped
bickering over the origin, antiquity, and number of migrations of the
first Americans. Yet, for a brief period in the 1980s, interdisciplinary
peace threatened to break out. It began with a visit by Stanford
University linguist Joseph Greenberg to the University of Arizona, where
he presented his idea that American Indian languages could be grouped
into three families, each a descendant of three independent groups that
had separately migrated to America. In the audience was geneticist
Stephen Zegura, and he was astonished. He'd heard that punch line
before, only not from Greenberg but also from physical anthropologist
Christy Turner, who studies teeth. Zegura wondered if the pattern
evident in languages and teeth was also true of American Indian genes.
He took a look: with a bit of prodding, the genetics might also support
a model of three migrations to America.⁵

In December 1986, Greenberg, Turner, and Zegura jointly announced the
sweeping conclusion that independent linguistic, dental, and genetic
evidence was converging on a single story of the identity, number,
relative order, and antiquity of migrations to the Americas. Yet, with a
speed and ferocity unusual even for the long history of controversy over
the peopling of the Americas, their coalition was attacked. And unlike
in years gone by, where disputes mostly raged between disciplines,
strong opposition also came from behind their own disciplinary lines.
The convergence was short-lived.

So we're back to bickering. Although this debate has an almost
NASCAR-like appeal (watching for the crashes), much is being learned
from the non-archaeological evidence being brought to bear on these
archaeological questions. This chapter explores what language, skeletal
biology, and genetics can say and have said about the origin and
antiquity of the first Americans. We'll postpone for Chapter 6 the more
challenging question of how (or whether) these various lines—along with
archaeology—converge on answers to the central questions of the peopling
of the Americas.

SPEAKING OF THE FIRST AMERICANS

When Europeans arrived, American Indians spoke a bewildering number of
languages. Just how many, no one knows. Linguists recognize over 1,000
languages (out of about 6,000 spoken worldwide), but only about 600
survived as of 1950 (see Table 3). The loss of approximately 40% of
America's native languages resulted from several factors, the most
important being the arrival of infectious epidemic diseases on the heels
of European contact, which wiped out many groups of speakers, or forced
survivors to amalgamate and adopt a common tongue. That cause, coupled
with centuries of acculturation and the steady decline of native
speakers (which has been precipitous since the 1950s—only about
forty-five of North America's languages are still spoken), has meant
that many languages are poorly known, some by no more than a single
phrase or word. South America has suffered the greatest losses, where
only 15% of surviving languages have been adequately documented.⁶ The
losses, linguist Ives Goddard (no relation to Pliny Earle) grimly
observes, are “a cultural tragedy of almost unimaginable dimensions.”⁷

Given the loss of so many American Indian languages, what might we say
about the historical relationships among them? The answer lies in
classifying languages, though the aim is not just to bring order to
Babel. Languages evolve. That process, as Charles Darwin long ago
observed, parallels biological evolution: over time, languages change
and diversify into new forms (try tackling Shakespeare as it was
originally written just 400 years ago). There are, of course, language
rules, but those are not strictly enforced by the community of speakers,
though they might have been by your grade-school English teacher, nor
are they even enforceable. As new words or pronunciations are invented
by an individual (or individuals), new variants of semantics, syntax,
and sound spread through the community. Most members adopt the new
forms: speaking the same as your peers is a way of being part of a
group.⁸

TABLE 3 Counts of languages and language families in the Americas

[images]

NOTE: Data from Goddard 1996, Golla 2000, Greenberg 1987, and Kaufman
and Golla 2000; given language losses, other estimates of American
languages and language families naturally vary, but are within the same
ballpark.

But then, some of the speakers moved away—to America, say. Months pass,
then years since these individuals (or their ancestors) were part of
that original community. They may have maintained sporadic contact over
that time, rendezvousing at intervals to exchange information,
resources, or mates. But because contacts are limited, the inevitable
changes taking place within each group's speech have led to the
emergence of different dialects, or regional varieties of a language.
Although no longer identical, the dialects are to a degree mutually
intelligible. Were the splinter group to return to the ancestral
homeland or meet their now-distant cousins, they would be able to make
themselves understood.

However, if the descendants are separated long enough so as to lose all
contact, their speech will become mutually unintelligible, and their
dialects different languages. At that point, you can't go home again—or
more properly, make yourself understood if you do, for whether you
remember the old language or not, the speech of those who stayed behind
would have since changed as well.

The time it takes for a new language to develop is not known precisely,
largely because rates of language change vary owing to the size of the
group, the degree of geographic and social isolation or contact, and as
Daniel Nettle adds, circumstances such as speakers dispersing across a
new and empty landscape (obviously relevant in this instance), which
often leads to a proliferation of new languages.⁹ But as a very rough
estimate, linguists suggest a new language can emerge after 600-1,000
years.

Repeat this process over time, such that many groups splinter off and
move to distant regions, or otherwise become linguistically isolated,
and a Babel of different tongues emerges. The descendant languages are
considered part ofthe same language family, such as the Romance
languages of Europe (including French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, and
Rumanian, descended from Latin). In turn, the Romance and Germanic
families, along with ancient Greek, Sanskrit, and dozens of others, are
more distantly evolved from Indo-European, a mother tongue spoken
sometime after about 9,000 years ago (since words for wheeled transport
and domesticated animals are common) but before about 6,000 years ago
(since words for metallurgy are not).

Some languages, however, are not easily linked to any family. Euskara,
spoken by the Basque inhabitants of the Pyrenees region between France
and Spain, is an isolate, completely unrelated to its neighbor
languages. Isolates in North America include Tonkawa, Tunica, Zuni, and
(possibly) Haida. Assuming their uniqueness is not a function of
inadequate documentation, any linguistic ancestors these share with
other American languages may be very deep in time.

In principle, then, separate languages sharing an ancestor retain
vestiges of their common inheritance in words (meaning and form), syntax
(grammatical structure), and sound (pronunciation). But how distant are
the ancestral echoes we can hear? Can languages descended from a common
form spoken in, say, Pleistocene times, retain traces of their shared
ancestry? There are two camps on the issue. One argues the rate of
language change is so rapid that within 8,000-10,000 years, all vestiges
of once-common elements will be erased. The other believes they can
detect in the world's languages subtle reverberations of words that were
once spoken by the first modern humans 40,000-60,000 or more years ago.
A few among them think they hear faint sounds of the first words spoken
100,000 years ago (apparently one of those was tik [finger], according
to Merritt Ruhlen).¹⁰ Not surprisingly, the two camps take very
different routes in arriving at such divergent estimates (of which more
below), but in both cases, finding like languages is the vital first
step in recognizing their shared ancestry.

The process of classifying American languages began in earnest in the
late nineteenth century, when the BAE's John Wesley Powell—examining
similarities across word lists—grouped North America's languages into
fifty-eight broad families. Although he believed that these families
could “not have sprung from a common source,” he supposed “future and
more critical study will result in the fusion of some of these
families.”¹¹ He was right. Linguists progressively lumped languages
together until, by the 1920s, Sapir—who considered Powell's idea of
nearly sixty genetically independent families “tantamount to a
historical absurdity”—had whittled that number down to just 6 families,
each presumably sharing elements and a common ancestor.¹² Powell was
long dead by then, but Sapir still faced formidable opposition: his
mentor, Franz Boas, who chided Sapir for assuming like languages had to
be related. After all, Boas reminded him, languages (like other elements
of culture) can be similar for other reasons, borrowing and chance,
chief among them.

Sapir understood that, but he possessed remarkable linguistic intuition
and the cool nerve of a gambler. He was playing a hunch with his
6-family scheme, sensing the similarities among these many languages
meant they were related. As even his critics granted, Sapir's hunches
were often better than most others’ evidence. Still, Sapir expected
amendments to his scheme, friendly or otherwise, and he got them. One
camp, the great majority, splintered his 6 families into 150, believing
no fewer could be justified. The other camp, led by Joseph Greenberg,
out-Sapired Sapir himself, grouping all American languages into just 3
families. It was, Greenberg acknowledged, “a very bold thesis indeed.”¹³
Could it also be right? It depends on the method one uses.

THE TRADITIONAL METHOD

Traditional historical linguists—and Greenberg is not one—identify
language families from the bottom up, comparing two languages side by
side, starting with a search for cognates (words alike in form and
meaning). They recognize that shared words themselves may not indicate
common ancestry. When speakers of different languages come into contact,
words often jump from one language to another: the Norman Conquest in
1066, for example, injected a heavy dose of Norman French (a Romance
language)into Old English (a Germanic language), resulting in Middle
English, which combined elements of both.¹⁴ Likewise, some words are
similar across languages because of deep-rooted patterns in the
evolution of human speech (the reason why certain consonant-vowel
combinations such as “mama” recur), and some are similar just by chance.
How then, to sort the historically meaningful cognates from ones that
are merely accidental?

A key answer for historical linguists lies in finding sound
correspondences. As languages evolve, the words change, but so, too, do
the sounds. And they do so, as Donald Ringe puts it, with “statistically
overwhelming regularity.”¹⁵ Thus, Latin words with the consonant pairing
ct (for example, octo and noctem) consistently shifted in Spanish to a
ch sound pairing (as in ocho and noche), and so on (see Table 4). The
phonetic expression of the sound change, Ringe explains, is irrelevant:
what matters is the regularity of the pattern and the number of those
changes. Where a sound change is broadly consistent, it provides strong
and, importantly, statistically reliable proof the cognates result from
common descent; borrowing, because it is more haphazard, will not be
accompanied by regular, widespread sound correspondences.

Traditional historical linguists take the analysis a step farther. If a
number of different languages are part of the same family, they should
be able to reconstruct the proto-language by identifying the core
elements shared by the related languages, including words and
grammatical forms. The hypothesized proto-language can then be put to
the test, and this was done dramatically in the case of Indo-European,
when archaeologists in the 1920s excavated a stone tablet in Turkey on
which was carved the predicted consonant sets of the now-extinct
Indo-European language of Anatolian.

It took more than a century to work out the details of Indo-European,
despite the fact that the number of languages under study was relatively
few and well attested: approximately 100 Indo-European languages are
still spoken by half the world's population. Understanding the history
of American Indian languages is far more challenging, given the severity
of language loss and the attendant difficulty of fully identifying
cognates, sound correspondences, and the like. Nonetheless, based on the
data at hand, traditional historical linguists sort North American
languages (Figure 30) into about 33 separate families, and about as many
isolates (for a hemisphere-wide total of approximately 170 families and
isolates).

TABLE 4 Cognates and sound correspondences among Romance languages

[images]

NOTE:. Data from Ringe 2000:144.

[images]

FIGURE 30.
Map of Native North American language families and languages, based on
traditional historical linguistics. The northern portions of the
Eskimo-Aleut and Na-Dene regions are not shown (see Figure 31). Areas in
gray are regions where data are inadequate or languages are
unclassified.

The 33 North American language families (keyed to map numbers): (1)
Algic, (2) Alsean, (3) Atakapan, (4) Caddoan, (5) Chimakuan, (6)
Chinookan, (7) Chumashan, (8) Cochimi-Yuman, (9) Comecrudan, (10)
Coosan, (11) Eskimo-Aleut, (12) Iroquoian, (13) Keresan, (14)
Kiowa-Tanoan, (15) Maiduan, (16) Muskogean, (17) Na-Dene, (18)
Palaihnihan, (19) Salishan, (20) Salinan, (21) Pomoan, (22)
Plateau-Penutian, (23) Shastan, (24) Siouan-Catawba, (25) Takelman, (26)
Timucuan, (27) Tsimshianic, (28) Utian, (29) Uto-Aztecan, (30) Wakashan,
(31) Wintuan, (32) Yokutsan, and (33) Yukian.

There are as well some individual languages and language isolates
identified, as follows: (34) Aranama, (35) Beothuk, (36) Calusa, (37)
Coahuilteco, (38) Haida, (39) Karankawa, (40) Kootenai, (41) Natchez,
(42) Seri, (43) Solano, (44) Tonkawa, (45) Tunica, (46) Washoe, (47)
Yuchi, and (48) Zuni. (Adapted from Goddard 1996.)

We are a long way from ascertaining precise historical relationships
among them. Consider the Algic language family. It includes a couple
dozen languages scattered from California (e.g., Yurok and Wiyot) to the
Plains (Arapaho, Cheyenne), around the Great Lakes (Fox, Menominee), and
along the eastern seaboard (Delaware, Micmac).¹⁶ Though demonstrably
related, there are considerable differences among these languages,
bespeaking a common ancestor deep in the distant past. How deep is a
matter of speculation. So too, Lyle Campbell adds, is the question of
where the ancestral language was first spoken, and how or why the
languages became so geographically far-flung.

It is assumed, and reasonably so, that additional and still deeper
historical relationships exist between Algic and other American Indian
languages and families. As Jane Hill says, “We can never prove that two
languages are not related to each other.”¹⁷ However, the approximately
thirty-three families currently identified are as far as traditional
historical linguists care to go with the available data, which in many
cases is the most data we'll ever have, given the continued, relentless
loss of American languages.

Traditional historical linguistics yields robust groupings. Yet, robust
as the method might be, obtaining those groupings is also
extraordinarily labor-intensive and, worse, “discouragingly slow.”¹⁸
Others searched for an easier way.

SEEKING A SHORTCUT

Sapir, the godfather of the radical historical linguists, certainly
thought there was; Joseph Greenberg is convinced he found it. Greenberg
rejects the traditionalists’ approach and results, and thinks North
American language families are not nearly so difficult to group as
traditionalists portray them. He uses a technique he dubs multilateral
or mass comparison, which works not from the bottom up but from the top
down, by simultaneously comparing a relatively few words across as many
different languages as possible.

Doing so sacrifices linguistic details, but Greenberg thinks the cost is
worth it. With so many American languages to examine, comparing only two
or three at a time would make the process impossibly long. Besides, he
argues, two distantly related languages may actually look different when
compared only with each other, but their similarities would emerge when
compared against many others simultaneously. As Greenberg explains,
English and German, though related, have only vaguely similar words for
tooth (zahn in German). Yet, alongside Dutch (also a Germanic language)
the connections become more apparent (tand), as do their
farther-reaching similarities to Italian (dente), Greek (dhondi), and
the even more linguistically distant Lithuanian (dant-is) and Hindi
(da:t).¹⁹ Hindi and English share an Indo-European ancestor, but perch
on distant branches of the tree of its descendants.

Of course, just because many languages have a similar word for tooth
does not a shared ancestor make. Any single match can easily result from
borrowing, onomatopoeia, or chance. To show common origin, Greenberg
argues, play the odds: Compare a list of words. The more that are
shared, the more likely they result from common ancestry and the closer
their historical relationship. Family trees, even linguistic ones, are
like that.

[images]

FIGURE 31.
Map of Joseph Greenberg's three New World language families, based on
his method of mass comparison. The Eskimo-Aleut and Na-Dene families are
relatively uncontroversial; Amerind is not. (Adapted from Greenberg
1987.)

In applying his method of mass comparison to American languages,
Greenberg checked all the languages against a word list of about 300
personal pronouns, body parts, and common natural objects (e.g., I, you,
mouth, tooth, leg, foot, hand, dead, blood, water). He selected these
because they ought to be enduring, non-culture-specific words. From that
investigation, he concluded, as presented in his 1987 book, Language in
the Americas, that all American languages fell into just three families:
Eskimo-Aleut, Na-Dene, and one vast family called Amerind (Figure 31).

Eskimo-Aleut comprises ten languages, including Aleut, spoken on the
Aleutian Islands; Yupik or western Eskimo, spoken on the Siberian and
Alaskan coasts; and eastern Eskimo, Inuit-Inupiaq, spoken in the
northern Arctic from Alaska to Greenland. These languages are striking
in their homogeneity, Inuit-Inupiaq especially so: early European
travelers learning a dialect at one end of the range were able, albeit
with increasing difficulty, to converse with other Inuit-Inupiaq
speakers as they made their way across their territory. The lack of more
pronounced differences suggest all spoke a common language in the
not-too-distant past, and dispersed across the far north from an Alaskan
homeland relatively rapidly. The Eskimo-Aleut languages, Greenberg
believes, show close affinities to Asian Pacific Rim languages such as
Ainu and Chukchi-Kamchatkan.

The thirty-eight Na-Dene or Athabascan languages are today spoken by
three widely separated peoples: the majority, Northern Athabascans
(including Koyukon, Dogrib, Chipewyan, Sarcee) inhabit a large area of
interior subarctic Alaska and Canada; Pacific Coast Athabascans live in
the large river valleys of Oregon and northern California; and Apachean,
including the Navajo and Apache, inhabit the southwestern United States
(the Apachean apparently separated from Northern Athabascan in just the
last millennium). According to Greenberg, Na-Dene languages have distant
links with a few Old World language families, notably Sino-Tibetan and
Yeniseian.²⁰

Greenberg's Amerind family embraces the remaining approximately 900
indigenous languages of the New World, strikingly different tongues
spoken across a vast region from Hudson's Bay to Tierra del Fuego by
peoples surely separated by thousands of years of prehistory. Yet, by
Greenberg's accounting, all share some words and a distinctive first
person/second person pronoun pairing of n/m (in many Indo-European
languages, the pattern is m/t as in me/thee, moi/tu, etc.). He believes
the n/m pronoun pattern is so pervasive it should lead any “historically
minded” linguist to conclude it marks a common ancestry.²¹

Profound differences between Eskimo-Aleut, Na-Dene, and Amerind
convinced Greenberg these were distinct families in Asia before they
migrated to America, each at different times. But in what order? The
greater the differentiation within a language family, and the greater
its geographic extent, Sapir argued, the older the family (the
underlying assumption being that over time, language families become
more heterogeneous). And the older the family, Greenberg added, the
fewer the links to Old World languages and the farther south its
location: they left Siberia earliest, and traveled the farthest.

By this reasoning, Amerind, the most heterogeneous and widespread, which
lacks all but the slightest affinities with Old World languages, is the
oldest. That Amerinds inhabit nearly the entire hemisphere and are far
from Beringia suggests to Greenberg their ancestors arrived when no
other humans were here to impede their travel. They were the first
Americans.

That was apparently not the case with the Na-Dene or Eskimo-Aleut, who
today occupy lands north of Amerind speakers, and whose southward
progress was presumably blocked by them. Ancestral Na-Dene speakers,
whose language family is less internally differentiated (relative to
Amerind), and still has attenuated ties to a few Old World languages,
must have followed the ancestral Amerinds. The ancestral Eskimo-Aleuts
must have come last, since their languages are the least differentiated
and have the most conspicuous links to Siberian and Asian languages.

Languages cannot be directly dated. But Greenberg hazarded a guess based
on presumed rates of language change: the Eskimo-Aleut family was about
4,000 years old, Na-Dene about 9,000 years old, and Amerind greater than
11,000 years old. About as old as, say, Clovis.

HARSH WORDS

In the later decades of the twentieth century, Sapir-inspired lumping
fell from grace in American linguistics, and hard-nosed, traditional
historical linguists busily dismantled language families they believed
had been sloppily pasted together. Languages in the Americas was bucking
that trend, and Greenberg knew it, predicting 80%-90% of American
linguists would receive his ideas with “something akin to outrage.”²² He
was right. His claim that the vast majority of all New World languages
were historically related within Amerind met with scorching criticism.
The attack began even before Languages in the Americas appeared, when
Lyle Campbell, one of the most outraged—and who was aware of Greenberg's
forthcoming work—proclaimed it “should be shouted down.”²³

Campbell and other critics did not dispute Greenberg's goals: they, too,
sought historical relationships among languages. They also believed many
of the current American language families and isolates might be
historically related. And they accepted the Eskimo-Aleut family (but
then this grouping had long been uncontroversial). Beyond that, common
ground vanished. Greenberg's critics absolutely rejected the Amerind
grouping, and were at best lukewarm about Na-Dene. They accused
Greenberg of going too far, too fast, using bad evidence and a method
that Ringe denounced as “antiscientific” and “crap.” Most critics
privately shared this opinion; few were quite so publicly blunt about
it.²⁴

Cynics might dismiss the dispute as no more than an academic border war:
Greenberg had made his reputation studying African languages, and only
later came to work on American ones. Naturally, those who worked in the
Americas would resent his presence. Maybe. But Greenberg's
critics—experts in American languages—had legitimate complaints. They
readily showed he had badly mishandled the American word lists, failing
to recognize borrowed words (including Spanish ones), attributing words
to one language (e.g., Quapaw) that actually came from another unrelated
one (Biloxi), and including so many spurious words that one reviewer
declared Greenberg's word matches were wrong more often than they were
right. Nor were these harmless mistakes, since his criteria for spotting
similarities between languages (never consistent, the critics snarled)
sometimes involved a single consonant, making it all too easy for chance
resemblances “masquerading as historical evidence” to occur.²⁵

In tackling all the languages of America, Greenberg admitted there would
be mistakes: “It would be miraculous,” he said, if there weren't.²⁶ But
he also insisted errors were inconsequential. Comparing a few words
broadly across hundreds of languages, he argued, reduced the statistical
likelihood of having a match by chance alone. Yet, as Ringe and others
quickly countered, the situation is just the opposite: Greenberg's
method compounds the problem by multiplying opportunities for chance
resemblances (since there are a limited number of consonant
possibilities appearing in a vast number of languages).

Errors in the word lists were a serious problem, given how little
attention Greenberg paid to other aspects of language such as grammar,
sound, and meaning. Greenberg insisted he was not neglecting those
elements, pointing to the key role the “enormously widespread” n/m
pattern played in grouping Amerind. That defense gained no traction
either: the frequency of n/m in America, critics groused, was “grossly
overstated” (oddly, neither side actually tallied n/m frequencies, nor
could agree on whether counts at the level of languages or language
families mattered more). More telling, critics argued this supposedly
unique American form occurs elsewhere, while the ostensibly non-American
pronoun pattern (m/t) occurs here.²⁷

The indifference Greenberg showed to testing his language families by
establishing sound correspondences, at times belittling their importance
(even Sapir never did that), made his critics all the more dismissive of
his results and, indeed, of mass comparison itself. In reply, Greenberg
and his supporters played the Africa card: mass comparison worked
there—despite, they added, initial hostility—without sound
correspondences, etymologies, and reconstructions of proto-languages.
Why shouldn't it ultimately triumph in America as well? The “African
Fallacy,” Campbell shot back: not only were Greenberg's African language
families still in dispute, but “posturing for the American Indian
classification on the basis of an African classification is
irrelevant.”²⁸

Greenberg wanted Languages in the Americas judged as a whole. His
critics did, and rejected it wholeheartedly. Realizing he would never
convince his fellow linguists, Greenberg branded them timid souls
unwilling to seek bold, broad patterns, prejudiced against his efforts
to do so, and in the unkindest cut, not even well acquainted with their
own data.

“Megalocomparison,” James Matisoff dubbed Greenberg's method,
contrasting it with the more traditional microcomparison of languages.
Those who practiced micro-comparison Matisoff called “micromaniacs.” He
didn't need to fill in the blank about who he thought practiced
megalocomparison. He was right. Greenberg had no need of linguists’
approval. Not when he saw vindication in an “almost exact match” of his
language families with independently grouped teeth and genes, which he
proclaimed “virtually confirms the validity of the Amerind family” and
his three-migration model.²⁹

TALES FROM TEETH

In the 1920s, just as Sapir was reducing all American languages to six
families, Hrdlicka was identifying physical traits common to all
American Indians. One of the most significant was a distinctive “shovel
shape” to the upper incisor (where extra ridges on the tongue side give
the crown a shovel look). This inherited trait satisfied Hrdlicka that
all Native Americans shared a common ancestor. That was important to him
because their physical unity meant they hadn't been here long enough for
evolutionary divergence to occur, proof that his staunch opposition to
their Pleistocene arrival was correct. Several decades later, Christy
Turner's extensive analysis of teeth both fortified and falsified that
conclusion.

Why study teeth? They are hard, dense parts of the skeleton, more
resistant to weathering, and not an especially attractive target for
carnivores or scavengers, or easily broken down by insects, fungi, or
other agents. As a result, they invariably outlast the body's soft parts
and often bones as well. Although all humans share the same general
dentition (thirty-two adult teeth: incisors, canines, premolars,
molars), we differ in secondary dental traits, such as tooth shape and
size, the number of roots, crown geometry, and the like. Importantly,
Turner notes, tooth anatomy is inherited and little modified by
environment, use, health, or diet. If two groups have the same dental
traits, he argues, they are almost certainly related to one another.
Even better, because tooth structure changes slowly, it is possible to
trace a dental lineage across space and through time. And teeth can be
directly radiocarbon dated. We may never know what language prehistoric
Americans spoke, but we can examine their teeth and group them by their
similarities. Ethnic odontology Turner calls it.

Turner examined over 200,000 teeth from more than 9,000 individuals in
sites throughout the New World, and for comparison across many areas of
the Old World, especially China, Siberia, and other regions of eastern
Asia. He tallied the occurrence of twenty-eight crown and root traits,
such as the occurrence of shoveling or winging of the upper incisors,
the presence of Caribelli's trait or hypocone on the upper molars,
groove and cusp patterns on lower molars, and the number of roots
(either two or three) on some premolars and molars (some examples are
shown in Table 5).

These are traits that generally occur in all peoples, though in varying
frequency in different populations. Incisor shoveling, as Hrdlicka first
realized, is common among American Indians but rare elsewhere. On the
other hand, a Y groove on the lower first molar occurs in nearly the
same percentage (about i0%-20%) in populations around the globe. Hence,
doing ethnic odontology is a statistical exercise in ascertaining how
one sample of teeth differs from another based on a constellation of
traits.

Using such analyses, Turner distinguished Asian teeth from those of
Africa and Europe, then broadly divided the Asian sample into two
groups: Sundadonts and Sinodonts. He separates the two based on the
higher incidence of shoveling and three-rooted molars in Sinodonts, but
the division is not altogether a clean one, since on certain traits
(such as winging on the upper incisors), Sinodonts and Sundadonts are
indistinguishable. One can be hard-pressed to assign jaw fragments or
individual teeth to the correct group if all that remain are teeth with
traits common to many.

Turner suggests the Sundadont pattern, widespread in Southeast Asia, is
the older of the two and the root from which Sinodonty, characteristic
of northern Asian and all American populations, evolved. Sundadonts, he
believes, “had nothing to do with the peopling of the Americas.”³⁰

TABLE 5 Dental morphology of Native Americans and other groups

[images]

NOTE: From Turner 1985: Table 1 and Turner 1986: Table 1. Values are
expressed as percentage within the sample; sample sizes vary.

Turner puts the earliest Asian appearance of Sinodonty in the jaws of
early modern humans from the Upper Cave site at Zhoukoudian, China,
although the ages of these specimens are uncertain (the dates on them
range from 10,000 to 29,000 BP³¹). In America, the Sinodont pattern
appears in teeth from the Cerro Sota and Palli Aike caves of
southernmost Chile, dated to 9000-10,000 BP. As might be expected given
the time elapsed since Northeast Asian and American Sinodonts diverged,
Turner sees dental differences between the two. American Sinodonts have,
for example, greater frequencies of Carabelli's trait, shoveling and
double shoveling, and lower frequencies of three-rooted lower first
molars and Y-groove patterns than their Northeast Asian counterparts
(let's ignore for the moment that many of the trait frequencies for the
populations in Table 5 are at odds with these general statements).

Nor are all American Sinodonts alike. Turner subdivided them into three
groups: Eskimo-Aleut, Greater Northwest Coast (which includes southwest
Athabascan speakers), and all other American Indians. Eskimo-Aleut and
American Indians are least like each other, the first having a lower
incidence of shoveling and Carabelli's trait, but a higher frequency of
three-rooted molars. Between these extremes the Greater Northwest Coast
cluster perches, its dental traits betwixt the other two, yet showing
less internal differentiation than either. Turner interprets that as
evidence the ancestors of this group were present in Siberia, and were
not more recently hybridized between Eskimo-Aleuts and American Indians.

Like Greenberg, Turner explained his three groups as the result of three
separate migrations from the Old World (he even uses Greenberg's group
labels). All three are traceable back to the same northern Chinese late
Pleistocene Sinodonts, but none have distributions that correspond to
“natural areas” of the Americas, and so Turner believed each must have
formed separately in China or Siberia sometime after the first
appearance of Sinodonty, and then gone their separate ways, arriving in
the New World at different times via different routes. He supposes
ancestral Amerinds drifted initially to the west then north, through the
Lena River basin and then along the Arctic shelf across northern
Beringia. The Eskimo-Aleuts went east and north, down the Amur River to
its mouth, then sidled over to Hokkaido, up the Sea of Okhotsk, and then
skipped across the Aleutian Islands. The first Na-Dene traveled the gap
between the two. However, no teeth have been found along these routes.

Turner believes the Amerind dental group was the first to reach the New
World (manifest archaeologically as Clovis). By his dental reckoning,
Eskimo-Aleuts came second, and the Na-Dene were a distant third. That
relative order differs, of course, from the one Greenberg arrived at
based on languages, as they candidly admitted in their 1986 announcement
of the convergence of their views.

Their estimates of an absolute chronology for the migrations naturally
differed as well. For want of sufficient radiocarbon dated teeth, Turner
invented a quasi-absolute dating technique he called dentochronology
(not to be confused with dendrochronology, or tree-ring dating). On the
assumption teeth change at a constant rate, dental differences between
groups—quantified using the mean measure of divergence (MMD)
statistic—become a measure of the time elapsed since the groups split
from one another (see Table 6).

TABLE 6 Mean Measure of Divergence (MMD) between sample groups

[images]

NOTE: Data from Turner 1986: Table 2. Significance values not provided
in original, but assume differences are significant if MMD > -.040.
Smaller values indicate more similar groups.

To calibrate the rate of change, Turner calculated the MMD between
groups whose divergence times were independently dated, then divided the
MMD by the total elapsed time, to derive and average global dental
evolution rate of 0.01003 ± .004 MMD per 1,000 years.³² Multiplying that
rate by the MMD between various Amerind and Northeast Asian populations
suggested to Turner they split about 14,000 years ago, a time he thought
nicely corresponded to when Clovis ancestors may have first emerged in
Siberia.³³ Calculations for Eskimo-Aleut and Northeast Asian populations
yielded an age at divergence of approximately 11,000 years ago. The
numbers for Na-Dene were more elusive, but nearly all postdated the
Eskimo divergence. Altogether, not too bad a fit with the archaeological
evidence, Turner supposed. Given the vagaries of estimating antiquity
from language, Greenberg deemed it not a bad fit with the linguistic
evidence either.

CAVITIES

Indeed, much was made of the “independent” confirmation the teeth
provided of Greenberg's language groups. It was “strong presumption,”
Merritt Ruhlen argued, that Greenberg's groupings and the
three-migration model were correct.³⁴ But as Greenberg, Turner, and
Zegura candidly admitted, when an investigator in one field is aware of
the conclusions proposed in another, “he or she may be influenced by
this knowledge in developing a theory.” Thus, the “ultimate test”—as
they saw it—was whether the data from the field itself could justify the
conclusions drawn.³⁵ Did it in this case? And just how separate were the
two lines of evidence?

Ideally, analysis of the teeth ought to proceed independently of any
preconceptions about the language group to which they might belong.
Turner's analysis certainly began there, but soon thereafter, he spoke
with Greenberg about his linguistic groupings. After that, Turner
explicitly linked his dental clusters with Greenberg's language
families, and the change was in more than name only: for analytical
purposes, he pooled his tooth samples into “regional sets” by dental
similarity and by their “known or presumed linguistic affiliation.”³⁶

Now, teeth may chatter, but they don't talk. Not by themselves, anyway.
How, then, can dental groups be assigned to “common culture and closely
related languages”?³⁷ Turner did so by where the teeth were found: a
sample of teeth from sites in regions now occupied by Eskimos or Aleuts
are assigned to the Eskimo or Aleut group. It can be as simple as that,
and can cause trouble just as easily. For doing so requires seeing what
Goldilocks saw: that each group, like the Three Bears, has its own—and
only its own—language, which co-occurs over time with a particular set
of genes, artifacts, and teeth in a territory that does not change hands
(or teeth).

That might be true at certain times and places. Teeth and artifacts from
a 900-year-old site on the northwestern shore of Hudson Bay, for
example, are likely those of ancestral Eskimo speakers: there is good
archaeological reason to think no one else was there in later
prehistoric times. But 500 years earlier in the same place, the
archaeological record looks very different. Whose teeth are those? What
language did they help voice? The Goldilocks Standard, if it might be
called that, is harder to achieve as one goes deeper into the past, and
also in places that have long trafficked in human beings—like Alaska,
the corridor for all American migrations (however many there were). What
language was associated with 5,000-year-old teeth found there? Can one
presume a linguistic affiliation of undated teeth? Not surprisingly,
teeth from Alaska and the far north often stubbornly resist falling
neatly into corresponding language groups.

The dilemma is obvious: places and times where we might hope to come
onto the dental trail of the first peoples are the very times and places
where we have the least chance of figuring out who those people were or
what language they spoke. Of course, if Turner found three dental groups
in Alaska, one dated to 12,000 years ago, the other never occurring
before 10,000 years ago, and the third always postdating 4,500 years
ago, it would be powerful evidence of three migrations.

But that's not happened. Nearly all the teeth in Turner's sample are
less than a couple thousand years old, and their young age, tied to the
undemonstrated (if not false) hope that inhabitants haven't changed over
that time, makes it hard to do just that. To be sure, Turner's sample
includes all known Paleoindian and Early Archaic specimens, but that
amounts to teeth from no more than twenty sites, few of which are
actually dated to the Pleistocene.

The consequences of this complication are plain enough to see in MMD
values: teeth that ought to cluster together are dissimilar, and those
from unrelated groups overlap. For example, Aleut teeth, which ought to
be most similar to Eskimo teeth by their linguistic affiliation, are
statistically more like the Na-Dene teeth. For that matter, some Amerind
groups are dentally closer to Na-Dene than to other Amerinds. These
complications spill over into the dentochronological estimates, which
have Eskimo-Aleuts departing Northeast Asia 8,000 years ago and Na-Dene
groups 4,000 years ago, and yet by Turner's reckoning, the Na-Dene
arrival is marked by the Paleoarctic archaeological tradition, which is
radiocarbon dated to 10,000 BP (thus predating both the dental
divergence age and the earliest Eskimo-Aleut sites) (see Table 7).

Likewise, the time separating Sinodonts from Sundadonts (a
dentochronological date of about 13,460 years ago) ought to be much
greater than that separating Asian from American Sinodonts (which by
dentochronology occurred about 20,400 years ago, making it curious, too,
that Turner insists there is nothing in the dental evidence to suggest
“entry much before Clovis”). Coincidentally, a recent study of eastern
Asian teeth failed to support the validity of the Sinodont and Sundadont
groups.³⁸

In light of the messy overlap of the dental groups, physical
anthropologist and geneticist Emoke Szathmary wondered whether Turner
was forcing his results and interpretation to fit Greenberg's language
families and three-migration model. A harsh accusation, but one easily
put to the test by seeing how the teeth cluster when examined strictly
by their dental attributes, without presuming what language they once
voiced. Unfortunately, Turner has never done such a test nor published
his raw data, making it impossible for others to do so.

TABLE 7 Elapsed Time from Divergence with Northeast Asian Sinodonts

[images]

NOTE: Based on Mean Measure of Divergence values (from Table 6) and the
global dentochronological rate (.01003 ± 004).

How, then does the genetic evidence fit?

A COMPLEX INHERITANCE

When Zegura joined forces with Greenberg and Turner, he knew the genetic
evidence was not as well developed. The basics were certainly known:
packaged within the nucleus of cells are chromosomes, of which there are
twenty-three pairs per cell. Within each pair are long strands of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) made of a sugar molecule (deoxyribose or D)
attached to one of four chemical bases: guanine (G), cytosine (C),
adenine (A), and thymine (T). These, in turn, are linked to phosphoric
acid (P), the combination forming a nucleotide. A DNA molecule is a very
long sequence of paired nucleotides joining A to T, and C to G in a
double-stranded helical structure. There are approximately 100 million
nucleotide pairs (or base pairs) per chromosome, and some 3 billion base
pairs in the human genome. Segments along either DNA strand with
specific functions (not all have them) are genes, and together these are
responsible for the biology of an individual.

The nucleus at fertilization joins twenty-three chromosomes from the
mother and father: twenty-two of these chromosome pairs make up the
autosomes, and the twenty-third pair are the sex chromosomes (either XX
[female] or XY [male]). The vast majority of the DNA in the genome is
inherited from both parents, joined in a process much like the shuffling
of cards, making the offspring about a 50/50 mix of parental DNA. Since
auto somes undergo recombination each generation, autosomal DNA is a
highly complex skein derived from a geometrically expanding pool of
ancestors (two parents, four grandparents, eight great-grandparents, and
so on). Go back more than a few generations, and it becomes impossible
to tell which specific ancestor contributed a particular piece of DNA to
an individual, at least not without comparing the DNA of all.³⁹

However, one can spot genetic differences between groups by measuring
the frequency with which certain genes and mutations occur in
populations that have been isolated for periods of time. The study of
genetic distance between human populations began with serological
markers—blood group antigens (A, B, and Rh blood groups), serum
proteins, immunoglobulin (antibody molecules), and various enzymes.
These were the classical genetic markers.

Not all New World populations are genetically alike, but at the time
Zegura was working with Greenberg and Turner, he faced a challenge in
showing genetic differences among New World peoples. The classical
markers then available were known to vary on the scale of continents:
useful for separating, say, African, American, Asian, and Europeans.⁴⁰
They were stubbornly irresolute, however, on whether there were
identifiable genetic groups within Native Americans, let alone which
matched Greenberg's Amerind, Na-Dene, and Eskimo-Aleut. The closest
Zegura came were patterns in immunoglobulin Gm allotypes, but only
because their distribution was “analyzed with respect to the
three-migration hypothesis.”⁴¹ Had he not been looking for those three
groups, he might not have seen them.

The genetic evidence simply didn't match up with the languages and
teeth, as Zegura admitted. Mostly, it produced a picture of “discordant
variation,” the result of thousands of years of gene exchange,
recombination, random flutters in gene frequencies, and mutation, all
conspiring with natural selection to obscure what once may have been
discernable genetic genealogies. Unraveling millennia of history from
classical genetic markers was going to be a “challenging and highly
speculative enterprise”—or so it appeared in 1986 (it is still mostly
that way, though recently inroads have been made using genome-wide
autosomal markers to detect signals of the peopling process⁴²). And so
Greenberg, Turner, and Zegura relegated the genetic evidence to
secondary status, unable to confirm their tripartite migration model.

Ironically, within a decade, rapid advances in genetics in two separate
corners of the human genome made it possible to reject that model and
replace it with a very different picture of the peopling of the
Americas. When that happened, Zegura “fully opted out” of the tripartite
model, much to the dismay of his co-authors.⁴³

ANCESTRAL GENES

Those advances occurred when geneticists shifted their attention away
from classical markers and began looking at DNA in mitochondria, the
thousands of small, bean-shaped organelles in the cell responsible for
the cell's energy metabolism (think of them as cell batteries).
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and nuclear DNA fundamentally differ: both
occur in males and females, but through a strange quirk of nature, the
mtDNA from the sperm is discarded when an egg is fertilized, and hence
mtDNA is inherited strictly from mother to child (male or female). The
bane of human genetics—the recombination of genes in mating—does not
occur in the passage of mtDNA down the maternal line. Conveniently
enough, geneticists peering into another corner of the genome soon
realized that uni-parental inheritance also took place down the paternal
line, via the non-recombining portion of the Y chromosome (or NRY),
which is inherited directly from father to son to son (Figure 32).⁴⁴

With mtDNA and NRY, it is possible to identify the female and male
descendants (respectively) of a particular lineage, for they will
directly inherit the markers possessed by their common ancestor. But
what makes these two inheritance pathways even more valuable for tracing
ancestry is the fact that the DNA undergoes mutations, or changes over
time.

At reproduction the nucleotides in DNA are copied almost—but not
entirely—without error, which is quite astonishing, given that about 3
billion must be copied and in the same order in which they are found on
the original chromosomes. Although this takes place with amazing
accuracy each cell generation, mistakes or mutations occasionally
occur.⁴⁵ These might include the replacement of one nucleotide by
another (C→T, called a single nucleotide polymorphism, or SNP), or
perhaps involve the insertion or deletion of a base pair(s) at a
particular site. These become variants (alleles) of those 0 nucleotides.
0

Although we tend to think of mutations as trouble, particularly the ones
that directly impact the function of a particular gene, many are trivial
and indeed neutral with respect to our genes or our phenotype (outward
appearance) and are not subject to the forces of natural selection.
These neutral traits are sometimes uncharitably referred to as “junk
DNA” because they do not encode proteins or regulatory information. Each
of us carries about 100 new neutral mutations our parents did not have.

These mutations in our junk DNA can be remarkably useful for tracing
population history, since similarities among them can help trace common
ancestry. Put simply, individuals or groups that share mtDNA and NRY
markers are related; the more they share, the closer they are related,
and the closer in time their common ancestor. Consider a very simplified
example (Figure 33): the mtDNA molecule has 16,569 nucleotide base
pairs. Let's say a SNP occurs in one of the women of a population at
nucleotide pair (np) 16327 in the control region of the mtDNA molecule.
Her several daughters inherit that marker. In one of them, another SNP
occurs at np 16325. This woman and all her daughters (but neither her
sisters nor their children) now have the same markers at np 16327 and
16325. In a subsequent generation, another mutation occurs, this time in
the coding region at np 493, so all members of this lineage now have
identical markers at np 16327 and 16325 and 493. Through the
generations, the SNP list will grow, including all the mutations that
occurred previously—unless a new one happens to occur at the same site
as a previous one, erasing an ancestral marker. Meanwhile, in the other
branch of the family, the marker at np 16327 is also being passed down,
but in those other lines of descent, mutations are also taking place,
say at np 16356. All branches carry the original mutation at np 16327,
but each will have added its own shared by daughters down those
lineages, but not in other more distantly related lines.⁴⁶

[images]

FIGURE 32.
Schematic illustration of the inheritance of mitochondrial, Y
chromosome, and autosomal DNA through four generations of males (M) and
females (F). The DNA on the twenty-two pairs of autosomes, represented
by the two tall bars, combines each generation, and by the fourth
generation, the son's autosomes are a complex mix of maternal and
paternal DNA from all eight great grandparents (as illustrated by the
different patterns). The Y chromosome (the short bar) and the mtDNA (the
circle) are inherited uni-parentally, so each son carries the Y
chromosome of his father, and each child the mtDNA of his or her
mother—but only the daughter passes along mtDNA to the next generation.
Hence, the son in the fourth generation traces his Y chromosome solely
to his paternal great grandfather, and his mtDNA solely to his maternal
great grandmother. (Adapted from Hammer and Zegura 1996.)

[images]

FIGURE 33.
Schematic (and highly simplified) illustration of the descent with
mutation of mtDNA in two maternal lineages. The mutations are not as
rapid as depicted here, but the schematic is intended merely to convey
the larger point that over time, mutations occur in the separate lines
of maternal descendants, such that subsequent generations along those
separate lines grow increasingly different from one another in their
mtDNA. If both lines are descendants of a common founding lineage, they
will share a set of markers in their mtDNA (unless later mutations have
changed those as well). The analogous process also takes place down the
paternal line.

A brief vocabulary time out: all individuals who share an ancestral
nucleotide signature (np 16327 in the example) are part of the same
haplogroup, or genetic lineage, while the more specific markers within
the branches of the haplogroup (np 16325 and np 16356) are known as
haplotypes. Though one doesn't want to put too fine a point on the
analogy, think of haplogroups as language families and haplotypes as
specific languages.⁴⁷ A haplogroup is considered a founding lineage if
it occurs in both Asian and Siberian populations, but is also widespread
in America and one from which New World-specific haplotypes have
diverged.⁴⁸

As one might surmise, mtDNA and NRY founding lineages may not trace back
to the same actual population, since male and female movements can
differ significantly. In some cultures, males travel long distances to
find geographically far-flung mates; in others, it is females who leave
behind the group into which they were born.⁴⁹ By all indications, the
first Americans were highly mobile, but it remains uncertain whether,
once their descendants began to settle down, differences in male and
female migration patterns emerged. Given the adaptive challenges of
being in a vast new landscape, there's reason to think differences might
emerge (Chapter 7). But whether these, or other gender-specific trends
(higher male mortality, or more widespread polygyny) have confused the
resulting picture of mtDNA and NRY diversity, is yet unknown.

CLOCKING THE FIRST AMERICANS

Changes in mtDNA and NRY accumulate rapidly (though not quite as rapidly
as in the example above); by one estimate, mtDNA mutation rates are 6-17
times faster than those in nuclear DNA. Thus, even after the roughly 400
generations people have been in the Americas, we can expect significant
differences to have accumulated between American Indians and their
Northeast Asian relatives, as well as between American Indian lineages
that went their separate ways once here.

In principle, mutations in mtDNA and the NRY can serve as a molecular
clock timing the splitting of genetic lineages. This is so because
mutations also occur at a relatively steady rate: about 2.81-6.62
mutations per 10,000 years on the mtDNA side (depending on where in the
mtDNA molecule those changes are taking place), and over on the NRY, a
slower 1.45 changes or so per 10,000 years (that's the SNP mutation
rate; other mutations on the NRY, as noted below, are faster). By
measuring the sequence diversity of mtDNA (or NRY) in a population, and
knowing the mutation rate at whithose changes accumulated, we can in
principle convert genetic distance into the time necessary to have
generated that level of diversity (that's one method; another estimates
time in a different manner).⁵⁰

But molecular clocks must be used with caution, for they can run fast or
slow owing to variation in mutation rates (which differ by mutation type
and region in the mtDNA and NRY molecules), depending on whether
mutations occur uniformly over time (for clock purposes, it is assumed
they do), whether the mutations get “fixed” with the population or
disappear (what geneticists refer to as the difference between mutation
and substitution rates), how reliably the mutation rate has been
calibrated,⁵¹ and whether the number of founding haplotypes within a
haplogroup is known. A bit of elaboration on this last point: if all the
diversity within a haplogroup accumulated in a single haplotype, then
mutations must have occurred in a more or less serial fashion one after
another, and that will yield an older age for the haplogroup. But if the
diversity within a haplogroup is the result of mutations within multiple
haplotypes, those could have arisen concurrently, and the molecular age
for the haplogroup will be correspondingly younger. Without knowing the
number of haplotypes in a founding haplogroup, one cannot know whether
the molecular clock is telling the right time. Geneticists are aware of
these problems and are rightly wary of ages based solely on molecular
clocks.⁵² We should be, too.

Those matters aside, what time is told by the ticking of the molecular
clock? Unfortunately, it is not necessarily the moment when a group
split from their Northeast Asian relatives and headed for America—though
it could be. Rather, the clocks measure the time elapsed since two or
more molecular lineages began to diverge. Molecular divergence can occur
(and often does occur) in a population long before a part of them goes
off to discover a new homeland, in which case the molecular age says
nothing about when that divergence occurred. But if those genetic
lineage and population splits coincide, genes become a handy clock
indeed.

MITOCHONDRIAL MEMENTOS

All the nucleotide positions on the mtDNA molecule have been mapped, and
it is known where SNPs are likely to occur. Accordingly, geneticists
seeking clues to mtDNA history pay particular attention to the coding
region, which directs the biochemical processes of the mtDNA (and which
comprises approximately 94% of the mtDNA and contains thirty-seven
genes), and especially to the smaller control region (CR), where mtDNA
is initiated and regulated, and where changes occur at a faster rate
(though mutations here also have the unfortunate tendency to be
recurrent, and thus can partially obscure earlier, founding markers).⁵³

In the mid-1980s, Douglas Wallace began looking at mtDNA in Arizona's
Pima peoples. Their genes bespoke an ancestry of only a few mtDNA
lineages. Later, casting the sampling net wider on the chance that the
small number of haplogroups he identified were Pima specific, Wallace
and his team examined mtDNA from the Yucatan Maya and South American
Ticuna. To his surprise, these geographically separate groups showed
high frequencies, but not the same high frequencies, of the same marker
(which became haplogroup C), again bespeaking common ancestry. That all
three were in Greenberg's Amerind group seemed no coincidence. And
something else: this marker occurred among Native Americans in
frequencies twenty times higher than in Asians. Here was the first
indication that the ancestral population of these widely separate groups
had been very small, likely having passed through a population
bottleneck, as geneticists call it, and left Asia with only a tiny
fraction of the genetic markers present in the parent population (this
is the geneticists’ founder effect, which recognizes that a new
population founded by a small number of individuals necessarily
represents only a fraction of the diversity of the source population).⁵⁴
Once here, those markers naturally came to dominate in the descendant
populations.

Within a few years of Wallace's study, three more haplogroups were
identified among American Indians (haplogroups A, B, and D). Together,
these were found in 98% of all Native Americans.⁵⁵ That's a large
percentage, but the absolute number of individuals who have participated
in such studies was small, and small samples (statistically speaking)
are more likely to encounter the most common haplogroups first, and only
later detect the rarer ones (a complicating factor to which we shall
return).

These four haplogroups vary in their frequency, and coincidentally do so
in alphabetical order: haplogroups A, B, C, and D are present in
(respectively) 40%, 32%, 17%, and 7% of American Indians.⁵⁶ Because they
all occur widely (if unevenly) among Native Americans, they are thought
to be founding lineages. Originally, geneticists sorted their results by
Greenberg's language families (geneticist Antonio Torroni admits it was
hard to avoid using that scheme⁵⁷), and doing so revealed certain
patterns. All four haplogroups occurred in peoples identified by
Greenberg as Amerind. Yet, Na-Dene speakers generally harbored only
haplogroup A; it appeared they shared a deep Siberian ancestor with
Amerinds, but because haplogroup A showed less internal variation in the
Na-Dene, it seemed they split off from their common Siberian ancestor
sometime after the Amerind split. Haplogroup B was virtually absent from
both Na-Dene and Eskimo-Aleuts, and was not as old as haplogroups A, C,
and D, suggesting it, too, was derived from a separate migration, but
one sandwiched between an early (haplogroups A [in Amerinds], C, and D)
and a later migration (dominated by haplogroup A [in Na-Dene]). For a
time, it seemed the three-migration model might just be saved from
scientific purgatory and Greenberg's language families vindicated.⁵⁸

The moment didn't last. Once additional mtDNA samples were analyzed,
Na-Dene and Eskimo-Aleuts proved to have all four haplogroups. Andrew
Merriwether and others then began lobbying for a simpler scenario: a
single migration to the Americas. The rationale was straightforward:
given there were only four founding haplogroups found in all Native
Americans, their ancestors must have arrived as part of the same
migration.It seemed unlikely that different groups of people leaving
Asia at different times from different places would all be members of
the same genetic club.⁵⁹

Most geneticists accepted the idea of a single migration, even after
they realized there weren't just four mtDNA haplogroups. In the late
1990s, a fifth, more-minor haplogroup (X) was spotted in very low
frequencies (about 3%) among Native populations in the northeastern
United States. Because X was known to occur in Europeans, its appearance
among American Indians was initially written off as a case of post-1492
admixture. But then a closer look revealed X was scattered across the
Americas (even in pre-European contact burials from North and perhaps
South America), never appeared alongside other European markers, and was
sufficiently distinct from European X their shared ancestor must be deep
in time. Clearly, X was a founding lineage that came to America. But
from where?⁶⁰

Haplogroup X was rare in Siberia and eastern Asia, and its presence in
western Asia and Europe prompted a team of geneticists to make the
breathtaking speculation that Pleistocene Europeans had crossed the
Atlantic to colonize the Americas. But almost immediately the
geneticists recanted, after X also turned up among the Siberian Altai
and proved to be an extremely old, possibly central Asian lineage on a
different branch of the haplogroup X tree, whose descendants went both
west (to Europe) and east (to America). It was too late: by then several
archaeologists and skeletal biologists had jumped on the bandwagon and
were trumpeting the idea Europeans colonized the Americas (more on that
below, and Chapter 6).⁶¹

Five founding lineages,⁶² all from a single migration. Curiously,
despite denying the three-migration model, geneticists continued to use
Greenberg's three language families to classify their samples—testimony
to the time it takes for knowledge from one discipline to fully
penetrate another. And even though it was noticed by the late 1990s by
Tatiana Karafet and colleagues that the linguistic-genetic fit was
problematic,⁶³ it was not until 2004 that robust statistical tests were
conducted to assess whether genetic haplogroups actually coincided with
Amerind, Na-Dene, and Eskimo-Aleut.⁶⁴ They didn't. In fact, they missed
badly, not just among groups assigned to Amerind, but even with
Eskimo-Aleut, the one language family on which Greenberg and his
linguist critics actually agreed. Aleuts did not cluster genetically
with Eskimos, but instead were closer to several of Greenberg's Amerind
tribes, as well as to the Navajo, a Na-Dene group.

The mismatch between languages and genes testified there had been, as
geneticists Keith Hunley and Jeffrey Long put it, a long “history of
pervasive genetic exchange across linguistic boundaries.”⁶⁵ Or perhaps
language sharing across genetic boundaries. Either way, the last hope
for independent support of Greenberg's language families vanished. Lyle
Campbell and Ives Goddard, Greenberg's longtime adversaries, took a
victory lap: joining a pair of geneticists, they pronounced Amerind,
abandoned in linguistics, could no longer be used in genetic analysis
either.⁶⁶

Although the distribution of the major mtDNA haplogroups did not neatly
align with languages, they were not randomly scattered among tribes
across the hemisphere either (see Table 8)—and that is a good thing, for
it indicates the subsequent millennia of gene flow and genetic drift
have not obscured the molecular signal. Haplogroup A is especially
frequent in Arctic populations, common among Pacific Coast groups but
otherwise rare in western North America, present in eastern North
America and Central America, and infrequent throughout much of South
America (and there are hints the northern groups possess a different,
possibly later haplotype of A). Haplogroup B, on the other hand, is
virtually absent in the far north (Siberia, too), though it, too,
increases in abundance in more southern regions, especially in the
American Southwest and Central America, only to diminish altogether in
far South America. Haplogroup C is particularly abundant in South
American populations, less so in Central and North American groups. The
distribution of haplogroup D is a mix: common in far northern
populations (especially among the Aleut), present but rare in North
American populations, and quite frequent among South American groups
(like C). Finally, haplogroup X is widely scattered but in very low
frequencies across North America.⁶⁷

What might these broad patterns reveal? One possibility: the original
colonizers carried the full complement of founding lineages, but as they
dispersed found themselves isolated for long periods of time. Strongly
affected by genetic drift—random changes in gene frequency, which are
often pronounced in small populations—certain markers diminished in
frequency or were lost altogether. Alternatively, there was more than
one migratory pulse, and groups with especially distinctive haplogroup
and haplotype profiles (like many Eskimo-Aleuts, for example), represent
separate migrations.⁶⁸

Molecular ages may shed light on the matter (if one haplogroup, say, was
much younger than the others). Early molecular ages ranged from 20,000
to 41,000 years for haplogroups A, C, D, and X, and from 6,000 to 12,000
years for haplogroup B.⁶⁹ These provided the first molecular indication
ancestral American Indians left Siberia far earlier than the generally
accepted Paleoindian ages, and hinted that haplogroup B might represent
a later migration.

In subsequent years, the molecular clock seemed to spin wildly around
the dial, with estimated ages growing younger in some haplogroups, older
in others, and in some in both directions simultaneously. The spinning
has since slowed, and in general the molecular ages are younger, but
there is still considerable scatter in them (and in the accompanying
error estimates), the result, Jason Eshelman and colleagues explained,
of varying haplotypes used to estimate diversity, and the methods
employed to calculate molecular divergence.

Change may be on the horizon, however: recent work by Erika Tamm and
colleagues examining whole mtDNA sequences for haplotypes within
haplogroups A through D put their ages generally younger than 20,000 BP,
with haplogroup B now aligning in age with the others (indeed, it's now
estimated to be slighter older).⁷⁰ This makes good sense, since
haplogroup B is present in coprolite samples from Paisley Cave alongside
haplogroup A (Chapter 4). Still, it remains uncertain just when the
mtDNA clock started ticking relative to the population dispersal of the
first Americans, and (naturally) whether that occurred at the same time
for all haplogroups.⁷¹

As to where they originated, haplogroups A, C, and D—or at least
haplotypes within them—are present among eastern Siberians, though
haplogroups B and X are virtually absent. Yet, all five markers occur
elsewhere in Asian populations, from as far west as the Altai Mountains
of Siberia, to as far east as Japan and Korea. If we simply use
present-day occurrence to map Pleistocene distributions, then the
potential home range was extensive.

One region all haplogroups occur is Mongolia, which consequently has
been identified as the source of ancestral American Indians.⁷² Of
course, this claim is based on little more than the observation that
haplogroups present in Native Americas are also present among Native
Mongolians. Yet, people living in Mongolia today may not have been
living there more than 20,000 years ago. They could have arrived there
in recent times, just as their modern Native American counterparts
arrived at their residences relatively recently. The most we can
reliably say is that Native Mongolians and American Indians are
descended from the same population; Mongolia cannot be confirmed as a
molecular homeland until we find Pleistocene-age DNA in Mongolian
skeletal remains that matches those founding lineages.⁷³

TABLE 8 Founding mtDNA lineages in the Americas

[images]

NOTE: 2007 and Smith et al. 2006. Haplotype markers are ones widespread
in the Americas but generally absent in Asia, suggesting a post-arrival
appearance. Molecular ages, as noted in the text, vary widely depending
on method and region; only two sets of estimates are provided here.
Ancient DNA haplogroup assignments are unconfirmed: not all defining
markers for all haplogroups were sequenced.

^(a) Data from Schurr 2004a, ^(b) Data from Tamm et al. 2007, ^(c) Data
from Malhi et al.

AMERICAN ADAM (S)

The Y is one of the smallest of the chromosomes, comprising
approximately 51 mega-bases of DNA (a megabase is 1 million base
pairs).⁷⁴ Although relatively small, most of it is non-recombining,
making it the largest such block of the human genome. NRY mutations can
occur in one of several forms, which include SNPs, insertions/deletions,
and Short Tandem Repeats (STRs). STRs differ from the other mutations in
that instead of being binary (e.g., a C→T change), they are
characterized by multiple repeat states (e.g., CG→CGCGCG change), and
their mutation rate is higher, making them more variable in human
populations and more useful than SNPs for tracking more recent events in
human history. In the NRY, haplogroups and founding lineages are
generally defined by SNPs (the broader groups), and the haplotypes by
STRs.

Investigations of the NRY began in the mid-1990s, and owing to the small
number of samples examined and the large regions to be mapped, there are
fewer studies than of mtDNA. Complicating matters, different
laboratories were not looking at the same segments of the NRY initially,
and when they did, they were not using the same labels. Fortunately,
such confusion has been straightened out, and there is a now
standardized nomenclature for the eighteen NRY worldwide haplogroups
(labeled A through R).⁷⁵

Zegura and others have detected three major NRY lineages in America: C,
Q, R (see Table 9). Together, these comprise over 95% of the Native
American NRYs examined thus far. The remaining 5% are haplogroups E
through G, and I through J, all of which are European markers and are
attributed to recent genetic admixture.⁷⁶ Haplogroup R might also have
arrived on these shores after 1492. Most American Indians who are
members of haplogroup R are in lineage R-P25, one widely shared by
Europeans and Native Americans, but not Asians. Either Europeans and
American Indians have a common ancestor deep in time that left no
descendants in Asia (akin to the situation with mtDNA haplogroup X),
or—more likely given the strong similarity in the STRs between Europeans
and American Indians—that shared ancestor is relatively recent (post
1492).

TABLE 9 NRY lineages in the Americans

[images]

NOTE: Data from Zegura et al. 2004.

We are left then with NRY haplogroups C and Q, both of which appear to
be founding lineages. Haplogroup Q occurs in 65%-75% of all individuals
and in all American Indian tribes. Haplogroup C is less abundant and
patchier in its distribution, being present primarily in Na-Dene groups,
and sporadically in Eskimo and ostensibly Amerind groups. Both of these
haplogroups thus crosscut Greenberg's three linguistic families
(Eskimo-Aleut, Na-Dene, and Amerind), indicating those language families
are once again “a poor predictor of paternal genetic affinities among
Native American populations.”⁷⁷

As was the case with mtDNA, Native American Y chromosome diversity is
much lower than in Asia, showing that here, too, the ancestors left Asia
with only a fraction of the genetic variability of the parent
population. But did they come as one migration or two? Back to the
molecular clock. The age of Q-P36, the marker defining the Q lineage, is
estimated at 17,200-14,300 years ago but with a large margin of error.
The estimated age for the C lineage is 13,900 years ago (± 4,000 years).
These generally put the molecular split between 18,000 and 14,000 years
ago; population expansion must have come later. It hasn't escaped notice
these ages are generally younger than those based on mtDNA.⁷⁸

Given that the molecular ages for haplogroups C and Q broadly overlap,
they could be part of the same, single migration to the Americas. If so,
they ought to have come from the same place and show similarities to the
same Asian populations. Both, in fact, are present in relatively high
frequencies in the Kets and Selkups of western Siberia, though this is
where populations with those particular markers happen to live now. It
is supposed by some historians that the “ancient homeland” of the Kets
and Selkups was farther south in the Altai region (where haplogroups are
also found in modern populations), though it is not clear on what actual
evidence that is based.

As it happens, mtDNA haplogroups A-D and X are also found among some
Altai populations, but not the same populations that yielded the NRY
haplogroups C and Q. Of course, that difference might mean little: mtDNA
and NRY haplogroups could have been present in a single population
living here in late Pleistocene times, and the fact they are scattered
today only means their ancestors dispersed over time. We know that
happens: after all, at least some of them went off to colonize the New
World. Nor will we know, without ancient DNA from Pleistocene skeletal
remains from this area, whether their ancestors lived in the Altai
region at the time of migration to the Americas. It is reasonable to
suppose present-day Altaians are descended from the same population as
Native Americans, and that's why they have complementary mtDNA and NRY.
Assuming, that is, a single population harbored all those haplogroups.

DOES 5 + 2 = 1?

Certainly, that's been the view for much of the last decade: one
relatively small, presumably closely related founding population
harbored five mtDNA and two NRY founding haplogroups. How small? Jody
Hey has shown DNA diversity in the Americas could result from an initial
effective population of around 70 individuals (the effective population
is the number of individuals likely to contribute genes to the next
generation; the actual on-the-ground size of the population is routinely
about three to five times larger). Andrew Kitchen and colleagues have
more recently pegged the initial effective population at about
1,000-5,400 individuals (-5,000-27,500 people altogether). Hey's
estimate seems an especially small number with which to found a New
World (-200-350 individuals), but there's no anthropological or genetic
reason to preclude the possibility. There are signs in all genetic
systems (mtDNA, NRY, autosomal) of a population bottleneck, so whatever
the absolute number, those who made it to the New World were some
fraction of the Pleistocene population of East Asia and Siberia.⁷⁹

But was it a single migration? Much of the support for that idea is the
difficulty of imagining, as Merriwether and colleagues put it, that
“these [founding] lineages were drawn from separate populations…or from
the same population thousands of years apart.”⁸⁰ In part, our inability
to conjure that image is rooted in the idea there are just a handful of
founding lineages in the Americas, and all of them have been accounted
for in studies of American Indian mtDNA and NRY. That may be the case.

Yet, many New World groups have not participated in mtDNA or NRY
studies, and among groups that have, the number of participants is often
relatively small, on average fewer than thirty individuals. Small
samples are the bane of scientific conclusions since (as noted) they
typically detect only the most common haplogroups and haplotypes in a
population. Recall that it took more than a decade before geneticists
came across haplogroup X, which occurs in only about 3% of Native
Americans. Such gaps in sampling, Ripan Malhi and colleagues argue,
“make it likely that significant undocumented genetic structure still
exists in the Americas.”⁸¹

The National Geographic Society and IBM's five-year Genographic Project
aims to rectify that situation by assembling the world's largest
collection of mtDNA and NRY, with the lofty goal of mapping human
genetic diversity and history.⁸² Shifting analytical attention from the
mtDNA control region to the whole mtDNA molecule will help.

So, too, will greater attention to genome-wide autosomal patterns. After
all, mtDNA and NRY markers represent uni-parental descent in small
corners of the human genome. Yet, each of us has two parents, four
grandparents, eight great-grandparents, and so on; go back just twenty
generations, for example, and each of us has more than 1 million
ancestors. All of them were potential contributors of some piece,
however tiny, of our autosomal DNA.⁸³ Thanks to ongoing advances in
genetics and the statistical analysis of the genome, the “discordant
variation” that stymied Zegura in the mid-1980s is being parsed, and as
computational biologist Nick Patterson reports, the study of auto-somal
(nuclear) DNA is likely to lead soon to a much richer genetic
understanding.

All of these efforts will show whether our current picture of Native
American genetic diversity and the conclusions drawn from it about the
number of founding lineages and the timing of their divergence are
correct (I'll return to these issues but from another angle in the next
chapter).

But it still might not be enough. The genetic studies to date are
primarily based on modern populations, which represent only the most
recent time slice of the more than 12,500 years (and about 400
generations) Native Americans have occupied the New World. There's long
been reason to suspect that over that span, there were mtDNA and NRY
lineages that once existed but have since vanished, and thus would never
be detected in modern populations, even if those populations were
adequately sampled. Recently, that suspicion was heightened.

In January 2007, Malhi and colleagues announced that mtDNA haplogroup M,
known from contemporary populations on other continents but heretofore
unreported in the Americas, had been found in ancient DNA recovered from
two skeletons (possibly brothers) from the China Lake site in British
Columbia dating to about 5000 BP.Coincidentally, that same month saw the
announcement by Brian Kemp and others that a bone sample from On Your
Knees Cave, Alaska, dated to 10,300 BP had yielded a new founding
haplotype within haplogroup D.⁸⁴

Neither the discovery of a new haplotype, nor even the discovery of a
previously undetected haplogroup, is surprising. But if these
discoveries are any indication—and they need to be fully sequenced and
confirmed⁸⁵—the recovery of ancient DNA (aDNA) has the potential to
revolutionize our understanding of population history, since genetic
data from contemporary populations may not be fully representative of
the genetics of the earliest populations in the New World. It may not
even fully represent pre-1492 populations. This is not to say, however,
that modern groups are not descended from those early populations, only
that certain specific markers in two corners of the vast human genome
may have disappeared along the way (a matter taken up more fully in
Chapter 6).

Studies of aDNA are in their infancy, and present formidable analytical
challenges.⁸⁶ aDNA recovered from teeth or bones routinely occurs in
badly degraded fragments, and when amplified in the laboratory is highly
prone to contamination, even from a researcher's stifled sneeze or lost
split end. Laboratories working with aDNA must be extraordinarily
vigilant, and maintain a file of the DNA of all who come through the
lab, to ensure an unexpected haplogroup does not belong to anyone other
than the ancient individual whose sample is under study.

In the relatively few studies of aDNA (less than 1,000) to date, most on
archaeological specimens fewer than 4,000 years old, traces of the mtDNA
founding lineages seen in modern American Indians are present in varying
frequency. In some cases, aDNA and modern mtDNA from the same region are
alike, but in others not. Present and past mtDNA signatures tend to
match if the aDNA is not very old: aDNA from the high Arctic that's
fewer than 1,000 years old matches that of Eskimo populations, but aDNA
from Windover, Florida (dated to 7400 BP), is mostly haplogroup X, in a
part of the country where X has not been documented among American
Indians. It is too soon to conclude that DNA continuity occurs only
where there is a relatively shallow time depth, and that the further
back in time, the more likely the DNA signal will flicker and then
disappear. But this possibility has far-reaching implications for
scientific and legal efforts to document the modern identity of ancient
skeletal remains (as explored in Chapter 10).⁸⁷

Of more immediate consequence, the newly discovered haplogroups and
haplotypes in aDNA may imply that the diversity of the founding Native
America population was larger than previously proposed (and will lead to
different estimates of the effective population size of the founding
group); that molecular estimates for the timing of the peopling of the
Americas will have to be recalculated to reflect the greater number of
haplotypes; and that we're still open for business on the possibility of
multiple migrations, or at least the possibility of multiple sources
contributing to a single founding population.⁸⁸ In this regard, it's
better to think of Beringia as a funnel that was open to the west, with
many genetic streams flowing in (from Siberia) but just one coming out
(in Alaska), rather than as a pipeline (a single stream from Siberia to
Alaska).

That funnel might have been open for some time, for there are four
haplotypes now known within haplogroup C. Of those, haplotype C1a is
restricted to Asian populations, while haplotypes C1b, C1c, and C1d are
widespread in the Americas—and only the Americas. Those haplotypes must
have originally arisen in Asia, perhaps in the region of Beringia, apart
from other populations harboring haplogroup C, but before heading to the
New World. A Beringian “standstill” Tamm and colleagues call it,⁸⁹ one
that possibly lasted 10,000-20,000 years (the time necessary to give
rise to the separate haplotypes C1b-C1d). It is an intriguing, though as
yet untested, hypothesis, not to mention one that sees little
archaeological support of a long occupancy of Siberia and Beringia
(though admittedly that might be the fault of the archaeological
record).⁹⁰

There's one more thing aDNA can do: help resolve a particularly
contentious subplot over whether ancient and modern skeletal remains are
related.

TALKING HEADS

Skeletal remains and particularly crania have long figured in this
debate, though they carry a seedy legacy since the size and shape of the
head—where, of course, the brain is housed—was typed and often
stereotyped to fit prevailing notions of race, ethnicity, and
intelligence. A soft-core racism persisted in physical anthropology well
into the twentieth century. Harvard University's Earnest Hooton
distinguished among a sample of the nearly 1,800 crania A. V. Kidder had
excavated from Pecos Pueblo (New Mexico) seven distinct craniofacial
types, including “Pseudo-Negroid,” “Pseudo-Australoid,” “Plains Indian,”
and “Long-faced European.” Although Pecos had been occupied in Spanish
colonial times, Hooton insisted all of his cranial types were found in
prehistoric deposits. Like other “heriditarians” (his term), Hooton
believed these affinities to Africans and Europeans were no coincidence,
but rather physical testimony of a prehistoric melting pot, one that
enabled him to shamelessly credit the American Indians’ development of
agriculture and civilization to their partial European heritage. Hooton
believed cranial form was permanent, and had no use for “fanatical
environmentalists” who refused to accept that a skull could “withstand
the moulding [sic] and modifying influence of physical environment
and…endure through generations as a racial earmark.”⁹¹

One of those so-called fanatics was Franz Boas, who (in addition to
having a low opinion of Hooton) steadfastly challenged claims of cranial
immutability, showing that the cephalic index, the ratio of maximum
width to maximum length of the skull that was often used to sort races,
varied widely among adults of a single group and even within the
lifetime of a single individual. He later argued, based on a massive
study he conducted of immigrants who passed through Ellis Island in the
early twentieth century, that American-born children of immigrants had
significantly different cephalic indices than their parents—a result of
the healthier American environment in which they were raised. Partly as
a result of Boas's efforts, and also of the development of intelligence
testing (which moved the discussion of race onto even more slippery
ground, craniometry had lost much its luster by mid-twentieth century.

Now it's back, having been revived in a far more sophisticated form in
the last decades of the twentieth century by practitioners armed with
complex statistics and powerful computers for analyzing cranial
variation. They take multiple measurements of a skull (as many as 60-75
on a complete cranium, far fewer on fragmentary archaeological
specimens), including the width of the skull at its maximum point, its
distance from front to back, and the width and height of the eye
sockets. The data are then analyzed using a variety of statistical
techniques—principal components and discriminant function analysis are
the tools of choice—that attempt to discern combinations of variables
that best describe skull shape and size, and can reliably cluster like
crania. They then compare specimens from other times and places to see
how they resemble or differ from one another, and how much variation
each group displays.⁹²

The approach is advertised as “exciting and dynamic,” but in reality
much of it is just old wine in new skins. Many steadfastly hold to
Hooton's assumption that cranial form faithfully reveals group identity
(some, in fact, still haven't forgiven Boas for claiming otherwise). In
so doing, they hold to a deeper belief as well: that race is a natural
category, and individuals can be assigned to one or another race on the
basis of their skulls.⁹³ We'll come back to this point.

TABLE 10 Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene (-pre-8ooo BP) skeletal
remains from North America

[images]

[images]

NOTE: Data from Chatters 2001, D. Steele 1998, and other sources. These
are primarily specimens for which a significant portion of the skeleton
has been recovered. A comparable number of far more fragmentary human
fossils have been found, but are not included here since the information
that can be derived from them is limited.

They have set their analytical sights on early New World crania, or at
least the few there are. Highly mobile peoples spread thinly on a vast
landscape, as the first Americans were, rarely used cemeteries, and very
few skeletal remains have survived the passage of time. Skulls are
especially thin walled and easily broken (unnervingly so, given what
they protect), and almost inevitably disintegrate over time,
occasionally leaving behind the hard and dense teeth they once packed.
In the whole of the New World, only a few crania predating 10,000 years
ago survive. To bolster that tiny sample, osteologists often include
Early Holocene remains (ones more than 8,000 years old) in their
analyses (see Table 10). Even then, it's a total sample of just a few
dozen.

We will never know how many people were in America from 12,500 to 8,000
years ago, but it was assuredly more than three dozen. That's a
pitifully small number on which to draw sweeping conclusions about what
these people looked like, how cranial size and shape varied, and why.
Were that not enough of a challenge, the remains are rarely complete,
making it difficult to collect the full suite of measurements. That
complicates analyses since, as Gentry Steele and Joseph Powell explain,
the form of a skull and its similarity to others can vary depending on
how and how many measurements are used in the analysis.⁹⁴

So if the remains are few, fragmentary, and unrepresentative, it's fair
to ask, Why bother? One good reason: with these bones we come face to
face—literally—with what early Americans actually looked like. But
beyond being able to look them in the eye (sockets), what else? It gets
complicated. Like teeth, skulls vary over time, but unlike teeth, skulls
change easily and more readily. Cranial plasticity, it's called, and it
happens (1) in response to changing environments, where natural
selection confers an advantage to a particular facial shape or
structure; (2) by virtue of isolation—genetic drift again, this time
expressed phenotypically; (3) as a result of cultural practices, such as
from diet or cooking methods; or (4) as a consequence of growth and
development (including the

effects of disease). Morphological change happens, and can even be more
pronounced within a group than between groups.⁹⁵

There are fierce debates over just how rapidly craniofacial form changes
on an evolutionary time scale. A century ago Ales Hrdlicka, believing
evolutionary change was gradual and unhappily facing the prospect of
having Pleistocene peoples in America, emphasized the morphological
similarity between the ostensibly ancient crania and those of modern
American Indians. His was not a terribly sophisticated view: if a
cranium was truly ancient, it ought to resemble a Neanderthal. If it was
younger, but still thousands of years old, it should look modern. As far
as he was concerned, all of them did. It was a conclusion for which he,
like Boas, has not been forgiven.⁹⁶ Most specimens Hrdlicka deemed
modern were not very old, so it's no surprise he came to the conclusion
he did. Yet, he failed to appreciate that even at 10,000 years remove,
archaeological crania can differ strikingly from modern ones. That has
only become obvious in the last couple of decades as radiocarbon dated
skeletal remains appeared.

But can a 10,000-year-old cranium look different from one just a few
thousand years younger, and yet both be members of the same historically
related population? Physical anthropologists Charles Roseman and Timothy
Weaver certainly think so, especially where population size was small
and the likelihood of genetic drift was increased, or where populations
migrated into regions that posed different environmental challenges than
the one they left, a circumstance faced, for example, by the first
Americans (this is akin to Nettle's argument for early language
proliferation).⁹⁷

Under such circumstances, would differences (or similarities) in skull
form say anything about who's related to whom? Perhaps, but the
challenge lies in determining whether those differences (or
similarities) are historically significant, and can reliably distinguish
members of different populations who do not share a common ancestor, or
who may have come to America in different migrations (or, if similar,
show they are a part of the same lineage); or result from structural
changes wrought by natural selection, genetic drift, and/or genetic
change over time acting on related groups (or whether their similarity
results from adaptive convergence); or are a complex mix of history and
structure.⁹⁸

Here's what's been found. Loring Brace and colleagues see evidence of
two major craniofacial “types.” The first links recent and
archaeological American Indian specimens from across the hemisphere with
ones from as far away as Europe (and Paleolithic Europe, at that), as
well as from Bronze Age Mongolia and the Japanese archipelago (those of
the Ainu and Jomon). The second group includes Eskimo-Aleut and
Athabascan crania, along with those of East and Southeast Asians. The
first group—of “Eurasian” origin—is thought to represent an earlier
Pleistocene migration, and the second a later, Holocene-age expansion.
By this analysis, East Asians, including recent Mongolians, made only
“partial contributions” to the peopling of the Americas.⁹⁹

Walter Neves likewise detects two broad craniofacial groups, which he
attributes to two migrations, only they are not the same two groups
Brace spotted. Instead, Neves sees in Late Pleistocene and Early
Holocene crania in South America what he calls the “Paleoamerican” type,
one strongly similar to present-day Australians, Melanesians, and
sub-Saharan Africans. That type is very distinct, he says, from recent
American Indians, whose crania are more akin to the “typical Mongoloid
morphology” of northern Asians. The only modern Native American group
that fell into Neves's Paleoamerican type was the Pericu, who live at
the southern tip of California's Baja Peninsula. Neves suspects they are
survivors of the ancient Paleoamerican migration, somehow having avoided
mixing with other groups over their entire history in the New World.¹⁰⁰

Like Neves (but unlike Brace), Richard Jantz and Douglas Owsley agree
that early American crania are distinct from those of recent American
Indians, who are said to be more typically “Mongoloid.” Yet, unlike the
South American specimens Neves studied, the Late Pleistocene and Early
Holocene North American crania Jantz and Owsley examined, ostensibly
Paleoamericans as well, show no particular resemblance to southwest
Pacific or African populations. In fact, they appear highly variable,
half falling within the range of recent American Indians, the other half
“reluctant members of any recent group.”¹⁰¹

Finally, Steele and Powell report that the crania of South American
Paleoindians are, as Neves suggested, closer in their size and shape to
those of Australians and Africans than to those of any other group. Yet,
unlike Jantz and Owsley, they find that some North American Paleoindian
crania are also similar to those of Australians, Ainu, and Polynesians,
while others are more like those of Africans and Southeast Asians. In
general, however, Steele and Powell believe all Late Pleistocene and
Early Holocene skeletal remains are highly variable (as Jantz and
Owsley, but not Neves found), and are consistently more like those of
southern Asians and Pacific Rim populations than northern Asians, and
are like skeletons of Archaic age here in the Americas, but otherwise
quite distinguishable from more recent Native American populations (they
do not, however, automatically assume that the Americas were peopled by
Polynesians, say, or the Ainu, only that these are forms with general,
and perhaps historically meaningless, resemblances).¹⁰²

Overall, it's a very confused picture. Depending on which analysis one
accepts, the first American crania are either alike, or they are not.
They either look like recent American Indian crania, or they do not.
They either resemble African, Ainu, Australian, European, Melanesian, or
Polynesian crania, or not. They originated in eastern Asia, or not.
There's even disagreement about individual specimens: Jantz and Owsley
liken the Wizards Beach cranium to those of modern Native Americans;
Steele and Powell think it more similar to Polynesians and
Australians.¹⁰³ All this is to say nothing of the vast gulf between the
cranial results and the groups derived from teeth, language, and genes
(a thorny problem to be confronted in the next chapter).

What's going on here?

COMPLICATING CRANIA

There are several possibilities. For one, this could all be a prank of
sampling error: with so few cranial remains, it may be impossible to
detect any meaningful patterns, however powerful the statistics we
apply. Steele and Powell—and Neves, too—doubt this, since they see
widespread patterning in their analyses. But since their separate
analyses often are looking at the very same specimens yet seeing very
different patterns, their rebuttal loses much of its potency.

Alternatively, put the craniofacial variability to use, as Jantz and
Owsley do, and argue it testifies to separate and multiple migrations.
Replace (or assimilate) more ancient immigrants with more recent ones,
bring some from southern Asia and the Pacific Rim and others from
Northeast Asia, and perhaps this craniofacial cacophony makes sense.
Only, that assumes the specimens are representative of the populations
from which they were derived (doubtful, given the time and space over
which they are scattered), and that craniofacial morphology is slow to
change, especially given the brief time the Americas were occupied, and
thus is a meaningful indicator of historical (and historically
unrelated) groups. If crania look alike, it is because they are related;
if they look different, it is because they are unrelated, Boas be
damned.

AND THEN THERE WAS KENNEWICK

Human skulls are—as no stone tool can be—a tangible connection of a
people to their past, a connection that has powerful resonance. But
which people, and whose past? And who makes the call?

Traditionally, anthropologists in the United States rarely gave those
questions much thought. Now, they can't afford to ignore them. It's the
law: the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act
(NAGPRA), signed into law by President George Bush in 1990, stipulates
that American Indians are entitled to the return, for burying, of the
remains of their ancestors housed in museums and universities. This
well-intentioned legislation was aimed at righting the wrongs of earlier
generations of anthropologists, who too often indiscriminately collected
the bones of American Indians for study and display. It was often little
more than genteel grave robbing. Although it was not only Native
American remains that received such treatment, theirs were gathered in
lopsided numbers. To American Indians and many others, this was one more
instance of mistreatment at the hands of Euroamericans. NAGPRA required
institutions having Native American skeletons to inventory and
repatriate (return) those remains and any associated artifacts at the
request of a known “lineal descendant” or the tribe with the “closest
cultural affiliation.”

In NAGPRA's wake, thousands of skeletons and associated artifacts have
been (or are being) repatriated. Many of those remains were only a few
hundred years old or younger, and there was rarely much debate over who
the lineal descendants or cultural affiliates were.

Then Kennewick came along. Its story began in July 1996, when two
twenty-somethings were trying to sneak into the annual hydroplane races
on the Columbia River near Kennewick, Washington. They skirted the
perimeter fence and were wading along the edge of the Columbia River
when one of them spotted a skull in the shallow water. Thinking it might
be a murder victim, they called the police, who collected the skull and
turned it over to the county coroner. He, in turn, called James
Chatters, a local archaeologist who'd also done forensic work. With a
police escort, the coroner and Chatters returned to the site and
collected what bones they could in the muddy bottom as it grew dark.
Near the bones were some late nineteenth-century artifacts, which were
also gathered.¹⁰⁴

Chatters's initial diagnosis of Kennewick, based on characteristics of
the skull and the associated artifacts, was that he was a middle-aged
European. But then he noticed what appeared to be a projectile point
embedded in the pelvis and was curious about “a white guy with a stone
point in him,”¹⁰⁵ particularly since it was a point thought to have gone
out of style thousands of years ago. Chatters sent a few bone fragments
off for radiocarbon dating. Over the next few weeks, he revisited the
site and collected more fragments; then in late August, he got the
radiocarbon results: 8410 BP.

A news conference was called a few days later, and the date was
announced. Here is where everything started to go very wrong. Chatters
described the skeleton as a “Caucasoid” similar to a “pre-modern
European.”¹⁰⁶ Whether or not he inadvertently used the term “Caucasian”
is disputed, but no matter. That's what some of the reporters heard, and
that's what went out over the wires: 8,400 years ago a white man was
stabbed on the banks of the Columbia River. That racial impression was
certainly fueled by the reconstruction of Kennewick's face which, by
Chatters’ own admission, took shape after watching Star Trek: The Next
Generation one evening, and reckoning Captain Picard (actor Patrick
Stewart) was a dead ringer—or, more properly, a live one—for
Kennewick¹⁰⁷ (ironically, the fictional Picard was said to have had
academic training in archaeology). After that, one didn't even have to
say ‘Caucasian.” It was there for all to see. Naturally, no one read the
fine print that putting flesh back on a skull is more art than science.

The local tribes were enraged. They called the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (the Columbia River and its shoreline are in their
jurisdiction) and insisted on a meeting with Chatters and the Corps. The
meeting by all accounts was extraordinarily tense. Chatters felt
physically threatened: one of the tribal members accused him of calling
Kennewick European just to dodge the law (NAGPRA). The tribes left to
draft a legal document demanding Chatters immediately turn over all
human remains in his possession, while Chatters hustled home to record
as much as he could of the skeleton, fearful that marshals would arrive
at any moment to collect it. He also began rounding up legal,
scientific, and congressional support to gain more time to study the
remains.¹⁰⁸

It didn't work. On orders from Corps attorneys, the sheriff soon came to
collect the bones. In mid-September the Corps gave thirty days’ notice
of its intent to turn the remains over to a coalition of Northwest
tribes for reburial under NAGPRA (five called Kennewick their own: the
Colville, Nez Perce, Umatilla, Wanapum, and Yakima). They later buried
the site beneath 600 tons of rock and sediment and planted trees. They
called it site protection. Most everyone else called it a destructive
and heavy-handed act to prevent further investigation. The Corps works
on hundreds of projects across the country, many on tribal lands, and it
was not unnoticed that it was in their best interest to get along with
the tribes. If that meant fast-tracking the transfer of the Kennewick
bones and shutting down the site, they would.¹⁰⁹ Unless there was a
challenge to the validity of the tribes’ claim.

Chatters intended there would be. He frantically worked the phones and
e-mail, and found a receptive audience: skeletons of this age and
completeness (about 90% of Kennewick's bones survive) are rare, and the
study opportunity would be lost if the Corps followed through on their
plan to repatriate. The Corps was bombarded with messages insisting
Kennewick's very un-American Indian appearance demanded further
investigation to determine who he was, and maintaining it was impossible
for any tribe to assert biological or cultural affiliation with a
skeleton of that antiquity. Soon, members of Washington's congressional
delegation—some with seats on the Appropriations Committee (powerful
adversaries for any federal agency)—weighed in on behalf of a study of
the remains.

Inevitably the media picked up the scent of battle, and the story hit
the airwaves as nothing less than a conflict between science and the
religious beliefs of Native Americans. Newsweek and the New York Times,
among others, questioned the Corps’ intent to repatriate: after all, if
it was a Caucasoid, how could it be American Indian? Kennewick
catapulted from Early Holocene anonymity to high-profile appearances on
60 Minutes and People magazine.

Fearing that the Corps would hunker down, ignore the media firestorm and
congressional probes, and proceed with the repatriation, eight
archaeologists and physical anthropologists filed suit in federal court
to block the transfer.¹¹⁰ They argued the Corps’ decision was arbitrary
and capricious, that NAGPRA may not apply to remains this old, and that
repatriation denied their First Amendment rights of access to knowledge
and freedom from establishment of religion. Their suit lacerated the
anthropological community (there was hardly unanimity behind the
action), badly damaged relations with Native American groups—even ones
who had historically welcomed the work of archaeologists—and triggered a
divisive, long-running, and expensive legal tug-of-war, complete with
carnival sideshow: members of the Asatru Folk Assembly, who worship Odin
the Norse sky god, filed their own suit asking the remains be turned
over to them since, as a white man, Kennewick must be one of their own.
There's sometimes a fine line between tragedy and farce.

The Department of the Interior took over for the Corps and brought in a
team to examine Kennewick. They confirmed its age, and on the basis of
Joseph Powell and Jerome Rose's analysis, deemed Kennewick no Caucasoid.
Nor was he like any modern American Indian, but instead was similar
morphologically to East Asian and Polynesian populations. Powell was
well aware that “such a finding means very little, unless one presumes
that all skeletal features are fixed and immutable over time.” He, for
one, does not, so was hardly surprised Kennewick's cranium looked
different.¹¹¹ In January 2000, the secretary of the interior ruled
Kennewick was indeed Native American under NAGPRA, and in September of
that year, decided to turn over the remains to the five tribes, based on
their oral traditions of ancient times and on the fact that Kennewick
was found on their ancestral land.

The plaintiffs scrambled to have the federal judge (John Jelderks) stay
any transfer; he did just that, and then followed with an Opinion and
Order (in August 2002) that accused the Corps of Engineers of violating
federal law and judged the Department of the Interior in error for
determining Kennewick belonged to the tribes. He granted the plaintiffs
the right to study the remains. Appeals were quickly filed by both the
federal government and the tribes. But two years later, the Ninth
Circuit Court of Appeals upheld Jelderks's ruling and ordered the study
to proceed (more on this in Chapter 10).

It has, yet in the end the affair proves a nonstarter. Kennewick is no
European. Rare, interesting, and important he may be, but like many of
his skeletal brethren, all we can securely say is that he appears
distinctive. However, that may only be because he is so rare and was a
member of a once-larger population poorly represented in the fossil
record. His apparently unusual cranium could be readily explained by
evolutionary processes of isolation and genetic drift, migration,
population splits, and recurrent episodes of gene flow. Such
evolutionary processes, of course, fail to account for why he would bear
an uncanny resemblance to a Starfleet Commander.

The myth of Kennewick as the “Great White Hope” for Caucasians
colonizing America has died, at least in scientific circles, and a
well-deserved death it was, though news of the specimen can still
command the cover of Time magazine (as it did in March 2006). Yet, the
claim the Americas were colonized by Caucasians has not gone away.
Instead, it has seeped into the only place such foolishness passes as
fact: the poisonous corners of the Internet where white supremacists
continue to claim Kennewick as one of their own, to promote the idea
that members of the Aryan race—whatever that is—were the real
discoverers of America.

Another possibility: there was but a single migration (perhaps from a
fairly heterogeneous source), and the morphological differences are a
result of generations of isolation, mutation, and genetic drift, mixed
in with recurring episodes of gene flow. The variation in the early
crania of the Americas is not beyond what one might expect of
evolutionary change over that span. Indeed, change and variation, as
Roseman and Weaver said, would be especially pronounced during the early
period of colonization when human populations were small and spread
thinly across the vast continent. There is a strong likelihood
colonizers dispersed and were geographically isolated from one another
for long periods of time, and only later, as populations increased and
isolation broke down, was gene flow reestablished: hence the differences
between ancient and modern crania.¹¹²

Underpinning Roseman and Weaver's argument is the principle that we must
understand crania not in terms of differences between individual
specimens, but as part of larger populations that extended and varied
over space and time. Physical anthropology's in-house critic, Jonathan
Marks, makes the point more broadly and bluntly: “Today the
anthropological community en masse rejects as pseudoscientific the
notion of race as a natural category, and as equally bogus the
assignment of individuals to such transcendent categories on the basis
of their skulls. What exist are features and populations; sometimes one
can map them onto one another, and sometimes one cannot.”¹¹³

How, then, might we track whether there was a single or multiple
migration, or whether such were drawn from the same or different
anatomical well(s)? Not from crania, or at least not without a much
larger sample of the populations of interest. That's unlikely to happen
(it's never wise to bet against something turning up in the ground, but
your money's probably safe on this one).

Geneticists are only too happy to jump into the fray, confident their
data provide a far more reliable indication of population histories. If
aDNA is obtained from ancient skeletal remains, it might reveal whether
an individual harbored any of the modern hap-logroups among Native
American populations. That would certainly establish continuity within
that single locus marker. Yet, suppose it's not one of the haplogroups
present in modern populations (think haplogroup M here). That may not
say much either, since it need not represent a separate population (or
migration), but instead just an mtDNA or NRY lineage that went extinct,
or one that simply has yet to be detected among more recent American
Indians. And, of course, autosomal DNA could well give a very different
picture.

Even so, osteologists aren't ceding any ground. Jantz and Owsley have,
instead, announced we may be entering a period when cranial morphology
will emerge “as more informative than genetic data in elucidating the
history of our species.”¹¹⁴ Hooton couldn't have said it better himself.

But it's not going to be an easy battle for them to win. Even some of
their fellow travelers, like Gerrit van Vark, a onetime believer in
using craniofacial morphology to determine ancestor-descendant
relationships, are rethinking their views in light of genetic evidence
(in this case, from Europe) that indicates continuity where on
craniofacial grounds none was previously thought to exist.¹¹⁵ And it is
sure to be an intensely personal battle, for if cranial morphology does
not prove to be a useful indicator of population relationships and
history, it would make much of their work questionable and, far worse,
irrelevant.¹¹⁶

6

AMERICAN ORIGINS

The Search for Consensus

In March of 1774, on its second circumnavigation of the globe, Captain
James Cook's Resolution anchored off Easter Island (Rapa Nui), a tiny
island and one of the most isolated on the planet. Some of the islanders
canoed out to greet his ship, and the moment they hove into view, Cook
was astonished by the natives’ tattoos, tapa (bark-based) clothing,
weapons, and especially—when they began speaking—their language.He
instantly recognized unmistakable variants of words he'd heard spoken by
Tahitians and Maoris (of New Zealand), who lived thousands of miles away
across vast stretches of open ocean. That the inhabitants on remote Rapa
Nui shared bits of distant languages was testimony, he realized, the
“same nation” must have spread themselves across the South Pacific.
Their descendants may have adopted different “custom and habits,” but
“the Affinity each has to the other” was still obvious.

Fast forward to the summer of 1778, during Cook's third (and ill-fated)
voyage. The Resolution had sailed north to chart the coast of Alaska,
explore the Bering Strait, and probe the possibility of a sea passage to
the North Atlantic. Optimistic he just might be able to sail across the
top of the world, Cook was packing a History of Greenland: the
descriptions of its Natives’ manners and customs would prove a handy
guide when they met. Alas, Cook found no passage to Greenland. But once
again, he found connections. The dress, tattooing, and fishing and
hunting gear of the “Esquemaux” in Alaska matched what a History of
Greenland described of its Natives. So too, did many of their words.
Even with the limited Greenlander and “Esquemaux” vocabularies he
possessed, it seemed to Cook there was “great reason to believe that all
these nations are of the same extraction.”¹

Could the similarities between the Natives of New Zealand and Rapa Nui,
or between the inhabitants of Alaska and Greenland, be mere
coincidences? Cook didn't think so. He appreciated the possibility
unrelated peoples might “accidentally” produce similar clothes or tools
in similar environments. We call that convergence nowadays, and it would
explain why fishhooks, say, were alike on remote islands of the South
Pacific (or even like those used in coastal Alaska). But could
convergence explain a similarity in words across such vast distances?
Cook doubted it: those languages must have had a common origin, however
much they had changed since. Divergence, we call that. Cook concluded
that the peoples who were scattered across thousands of miles of Pacific
Ocean must be related; likewise, those who inhabited the top of America,
from Alaska to Greenland (he did not think, nor do we, that Pacific and
Arctic peoples were related, though we, of course, recognize they must
share a common ancestor at some point in the distant past).

In the two centuries since Cook connected those distant dots, his
insight has been proven correct. Analyses of their respective genes,
languages, and material cultures have amplified the links among these
peoples, and archaeologists, geneticists, and linguists have come to
broad agreement on the central questions of the origin, antiquity, and
timing of the colonization of the Arctic and the Pacific.

Might the same be said of the peopling of the Americas? At the outset of
Chapter 5, I postponed discussion of how or whether archaeological,
dental, genetic, linguistic, and osteological evidence agreed or
disagreed about who the first Americans were and where they came from,
when, how they got here, and how many migrations there were.It's now
time to pay that note.

FINDING THE HOMELAND

On one point, as few others, there is broad consensus: the first
Americans came from Asia. There is nothing to suggest otherwise in the
artifacts, teeth, languages, or genes (that includes autosomal DNA, as
well as mtDNA and NRY). It's true even in regard to skeletal
remains—Kennewick and other like-headed crania having now been rescued
from their dubious assignment as “Caucasoids” and all that wrongly
implied of their ancestry.² The near-universal consensus that America's
first peoples were bygone Asians occurs no matter the differences of
evidence and opinion regarding exactly where in Asia they originated.

Pinning down a more specific place of origin(s) is no easy task, least
of all for archaeology. Sites in northeast Asia are sparse, and there
are few that can be unequivocally linked to the first Americans. But
then we don't expect too close a correspondence in the Pleistocene
archaeology of Asia and America. The migration from one continent to the
other, adapting and settling along the way, assuredly took centuries,
possibly even millennia. By the time the first Americans arrived in
southern South America, their toolkits had changed in significant and
subtle ways. These were not colonists who clambered aboard a ship in Old
England and disembarked in New England just a few months later with
material culture and ideas intact.

LOOKING FOR CLOVIS IN ALL THE WRONG PLACES

Archaeologist Frank Hibben was charming, gregarious, a gifted lecturer
and writer, and though born to modest means, had married extremely well
(running off with the wife of his patron). With degrees from Princeton
and Harvard, he was destined for the good life, even in Depression-era
America. But he aspired to much more, and got it. As a graduate student,
he excavated in Sandia Cave, New Mexico, where—as Loren Eiseley
described it (straining hard to conceal his envy)—Hibben had the “rare
and longed-for good fortune, to be the discoverer of a new and early
cultural manifestation in the New World.”³

The Sandia culture, Hibben proclaimed in 1941, was North America's
oldest, and more intriguing, its projectile points bore an uncanny
resemblance to Solutrean artifacts of Paleolithic Europe. When
radiocarbon dating was invented, Hibben got into the queue to obtain an
age on a mammoth tusk from Sandia Cave: the result was announced in no
less prominent a place than Time magazine. The Sandia culture was 20,000
years old—the same age as Solutrean. The possibility the Americas had
been peopled directly from Europe, suspected since Charles Abbott's
time, now seemed close to proof.

But the archaeological community had grown suspicious. No matter how
good a story Hibben told, and he told them awfully well, Sandia was
suspect. The fieldwork was scarcely complete when Wesley Bliss, a fellow
graduate student who'd excavated there, reported the cave deposits were
badly mixed, and hence any results utterly unreliable. Worse, he
announced that very publicly in American Antiquity. The chairman of the
Department of Anthropology at the University of New Mexico, who'd just
hired Hibben to his faculty, reacted furiously. Hibben did, too.⁴
Bliss's association with the university was terminated.

That hardly stopped the sniping. Hibben's student who had shipped the
mammoth tusk to the radiocarbon lab noticed it had suddenly and
mysteriously acquired a coating of the yellow ocher typical of Sandia
Cave's deposits. Was this a ham-handed effort to make remains found
elsewhere look as though they'd come from Sandia? He wasn't sure, but he
quietly washed off the ocher before boxing up the piece. Even the
radiocarbon laboratory director was skeptical, taking the unusual step
of publicly questioning whether the 20,000 BP age was actually
associated with the human occupation of the cave.⁵

And what of Sandia points? Archaeologist Bruce Bradley later examined
them and, seeing how much they varied in technology and raw material,
and realizing some had been shaped on a grinding wheel to more closely
approximate European forms, could only conclude Sandia was a hoax. But
why? Bradley supposed the hoaxer “needed an assemblage of artifacts that
looked as Solutrean as you can get, and I think the motivation was to
try to bolster the theory that Clovis originated as Solutrean, and the
thing that's most distinctive about Solutrean is the shouldered point.
If you could prove that Clovis originated in southwestern Europe and
came across the Atlantic—my goodness!”⁶

“My goodness,” indeed. By the 1990s, Sandia had slipped into
archaeological oblivion (though not before Hibben's shenanigans inspired
a murder mystery).⁷ But the effort to link Paleolithic Europe and
Paleoindian America had not, and it was revived once more by none other
than Bruce Bradley, along with archaeologist Dennis Stanford. Their
claim, not surprisingly, emerged in the wake of the apparent discoveries
of “Caucasoids” (Kennewick) and supposed European mtDNA (haplogroup X)
in America, and gained traction in the post-Monte Verde ferment, when it
seemed all bets were off about the peopling of the Americas. Why not
shake up the archaeological establishment with a radical new idea?
(Never mind the idea was hardly new or radical). Kennewick and
haplogroup X have since been declared inadmissible evidence of Europeans
in America.⁸ Bradley and Stanford shrug off the losses: they see plenty
of archaeological proof. They even have a catchy jingle: “Iberia, not
Siberia.”⁹

As they envision it, a band of Solutreans rafted to America in skin
boats across an Eden-like Pleistocene North Atlantic, thereby
successfully completing a several-thousand-mile voyage that routed the
Titanic tens of thousands of years later. Only now, instead of heading
to Sandia, Solutreans became Clovis. To be sure, Clovis and Solutrean
groups were both Ice Age hunters, who occasionally took down big game
with large, bifacial, lanceolate spear points. But if they are related,
we face a significant problem: Solutreans vanished from Europe at least
17,000 years ago, 6,000 radiocarbon years before Clovis ever appeared in
North America (it must have been an awfully long journey).

To the dilemma posed by the great gaps in time and space between
Solutrean and Clovis, Bradley and Stanford offer the half-hearted
assertion that Solutrean and pre-Clovis look alike. Given how little we
know of pre-Clovis, and that what's known looks even less Solutrean-like
than Clovis, the assertion rings hollow. But then, so does the link
between Solutrean and Clovis.

Nowadays, our knowledge of Pleistocene prehistory is far richer than in
Hibben's—or Abbott's. It's no longer enough to daisy-pick superficial
similarities between American and European artifacts to show a
hypothesis could be right (indeed, the usual scientific procedure is to
try to prove a hypothesis wrong). Yet, Bradley and Stanford offer little
more than that. The shared Clovis and Solutrean attributes they identify
are the use of red ocher (an iron-rich mineral paint), the production of
bifacial stone tools, a reliance on exotic stone (sometimes, not
always), and especially the presence of a specific technique of thinning
stone bifaces. Outre passé (overshot) flaking, aficionados call it, and
Bradley and Stanford insist only Clovis and Solutrean knappers did this
“intentionally” and so must be related (others might strike overshot
flakes, but only by accident).

Bradley and Stanford are undisputed experts in stone tool technology and
accomplished flintknappers. If they say outre passé flaking proves
historical divergence, we cannot dismiss the claim lightly. But we need
not take it on their say-so either. The burden of proof is on them to
demonstrate outre passé flaking cannot result from convergence. And they
haven't. As for the other similarities cited, even Captain Cook would
recognize them as a result of convergence: it would only be slightly
exaggerating to say it is difficult to find a people in prehistory that
didn't use red ocher. Its blood-red color has universal (and obvious)
symbolism, starting back in Neanderthal times. It's no coincidence that
ocher's formal name, hematite, derives from the Greek haimatites, or
blood-like.¹⁰

Yet, what ultimately sinks the Paleolithic French connection are not the
few similarities, but the large number of Solutrean items missing from
the Clovis inventory. As Lawrence Straus, Ted Goebel, and I argued in a
published rebuttal (Straus is an expert in Solutrean archaeology, Goebel
in the archaeology of Siberia), consider what we ought to see if a group
of Solutreans somehow had been able to successfully negotiate the cold,
harsh, sea-ice choked Pleistocene North Atlantic and beach in North
America (and just what were non-seafaring Solutreans doing in boats in
the ocean anyway?). Those splashing ashore would have transplanted their
unmistakably Solutrean lifeways and toolmaking practices here, traces of
which would have been visible in the archaeological record for centuries
and, possibly, millennia afterward.

Even so, we have looked in vain in Clovis (or pre-Clovis) assemblages
for typically Solutrean cave or portable art (such as engraved stone,
bone, or ivory figurines); beveled antler points; spearthrowers
(atlatls); bone needles; perforated animal teeth and shells; backed
bladelets and true burins; their many hafting designs (bipointed,
shouldered, tanged, stemmed); and most obviously, the distinctive and
diagnostic Solutrean point (Figure 34). None have ever been found in
America North or South, either in Clovis or pre-Clovis assemblages. If
Solutrean boat people made landfall in America, they must have suffered
instant and almost total cultural amnesia—and, for that matter, genetic,
dental, linguistic, and skeletal amnesia as well. Perhaps it was the
stress of the voyage?

More likely, Solutrean groups never made landfall in America, in which
case the Norse retain their title as the first Europeans to reach
America. And they left behind unequivocal proof of what was a very brief
visit around AD 1000: the settlement of L'Anse aux Meadows,
Newfoundland.¹¹ It's also telling that Viking Erik the Red lost nearly
half his fleet of twenty-five ships just sailing from Iceland to
Greenland. That's a good indication of the dangers involved in crossing
the turbulent and ice-filled North Atlantic, and the Vikings didn't have
to contend with the Pleistocene North Atlantic, when sea ice was more
abundant and treacherous, water temperatures much colder, and
thermohaline circulation had stalled.¹²

[images]

FIGURE 34.
Shouldered Solutrean point from La Reira Cave, Asturias, Spain (left),
and a Solutrean laurel leaf point from the site of Laugerie Haute,
Dordogne region of France (right). (Photograph copyright by and courtesy
of Lawrence G. Straus.)

Problems aplenty. But Bradley and Stanford are sticking to their guns.
Bradley insists, “If the French Solutrean were found in northeastern
Asia, there would be nobody asking…whether Clovis was related.”¹³
Actually, we would be: changing location does not mean abandoning
principle. The same rules and expectations apply, whether land or ocean
intervenes. Want proof? When Maureen King and Sergei Slobodin announced
a fluted biface had been found in Siberia and raised the possibility it
was an Asian precursor to North American fluting,¹⁴ questions were
immediately asked—by them and others—whether its age was secure, whether
it truly was fluted, if this could be ancestral Clovis, and so on.
Ultimately, the piece was not accepted as a precursor, but instead as a
bit of fortuitous flaking that mimicked fluting.

Nowadays, few if any archaeologists—or, for that matter, geneticists,
linguists, or physical anthropologists—take seriously the idea of a
Solutrean colonization of America. However, it has achieved Internet
immortality among believers in the Lost Continent of Atlantis.

Recall from Chapter 1 that Homo sapiens first reached central Siberia
about 35,000 BP, but only after about 27,000 BP, and over the next
15,000 years, expanded north and east. But that expansion stalled, and
possibly went into full retreat during the LGM, as testified by a
scarcity of sites in northeast Asia. Humans may not have arrived in
significant numbers in western Beringia until well past 14,000 BP.

The artifact assemblages in Siberian Upper Paleolithic sites include, as
Ted Goebel shows, the same broad classes of tools and technologies one
sees in early American assemblages, whether Clovis or (granting what
little we know) pre-Clovis. In those Siberian assemblages, one can spot
bifaces and points, blades (cutting tools), end and side scrapers (handy
for hide-preparation work), gravers (tools for incising bone and wood),
a variety of bone and ivory implements, tools made on biface flakes and
blades, and even the occasional outre passé flake. It's not an identical
toolkit by any means, but it shows a degree of similarity we expect
given the time and space separating the last Siberians from the first
Americans.¹⁵

Which is not to say we haven't sought (and still seek) tighter links.
From the moment E. B. Howard found fluted points embedded in mammoth
skeletons at Clovis in the 1930s, archaeologists have been trying to
track this distinctive projectile point form back to Asia. For decades
little was found. Hopes were raised when Maureen King and Sergei
Slobodin spotted a stone biface fluted on one face in a museum drawer of
artifacts from the Uptar site near Magadan, Siberia (Figure 35).¹⁶ But
the Uptar excavations had taken place years earlier, and the potential
significance of the biface had gone unrecognized. Its age and context
could not be pinned down precisely. Was this ancestral Clovis in
Siberia, or a biface accidentally flaked in a way reminiscent of
fluting? In the absence of any other fluted bifaces in Siberia, the
betting money was put on accidental fluting.

And then there is the Yana RHS site, found on an ancient terrace of the
Yana River at 70°N, some 100 kilometers from where it empties into the
Laptev Sea. The site has yielded stone bifaces reminiscent of Clovis, as
well as bone foreshafts made of woolly rhinoceros horn and mammoth ivory
that look startling like specimens found in Clovis assemblages (see
Plate 7).¹⁷ Yet, Yana is 27,000 years old, making it 16,000 years older
and tens of thousands of kilometers from the nearest Clovis site, with a
full-blown episode of Pleistocene glaciation in between. The demands of
a Solutrean-Clovis connection equally apply here: great gaps in time and
space must be filled before solid links can be forged.

[images]

FIGURE 35.
The “fluted” biface from the Uptar site, Siberia. Its flute is more
likely a fortuitous technological coincidence than evidence of ancestral
fluting in Siberia. (Photograph courtesy of Maureen King.)

On the American side of Beringia, a possible Clovis precursor is the
Nenana Complex, found in the Nenana and Tanana river valleys of interior
Alaska. Its artifacts include distinctive Chindadn points (Figure 36),
which are small, straight based, and triangular or tear-dropped in
shape, as well as large bifaces, scrapers, gravers, and large planes—the
latter evidently used for woodworking. The initial radiocarbon ages for
the Nenana sites of Moose Creek and Walker Road clustered around 11,800
BP, putting them in Alaska at the right time to be a Clovis precursor.
On the supposition its toolkit resembled Clovis in types and technology,
it was hypothesized to “represent the same population.”¹⁸

The timing is right, though recent re-dating of several of the Nenana
Complex sites showed them to be 500 years younger than previously
thought, clustering around 11,300 BP. That makes them roughly
contemporaneous with Clovis. Yet, Nenana assemblages lack fluted points.
That absence has been downplayed since the small, non-fluted Chindadn
points are reminiscent of miniature points from Clovis sites. But that
similarity is more apparent than real. Small points only rarely occur in
Clovis assemblages, and they are usually fluted—quite unlike the thin,
fine, marginally retouched Chindadn points. And (as in the Solutrean
case) Nenana sites also contain tool classes not found in Clovis.

[images]

FIGURE 36. Chindadn points from the Walker Road site, Alaska, diagnostic
of the Nenana archaeological complex. (Photograph courtesy of Richard
Reanier.)

But taking a step back from the tool forms, it is apparent that Nenana
and Clovis technologies are broadly similar: both contain elements of
biface and blade technologies, unifacial tools made on biface thinning
flakes, and bone and ivory rods fashioned in a similar manner. Again,
the fit is hardly perfect, but the discrepancies could well reflect
different adaptations or disparities in access to useable stone (which
likely explains the lack of large, elegant bifaces and blade cores in
Nenana sites). In any case, there are more similarities and fewer
differences between Nenana and Clovis than between Clovis and Solutrean.
Best of all, there are no Ice Age oceans to cross or yawning gaps in
time to close.

Archaeological affinities to Beringia and northeast Asia match where
Turner's dental evidence places the ancestral Americans. Recall he
identified them as descendants of Sinodonts, and not the Sundadonts of
Southeast Asia, whom he expressly barred from the New World (Chapter 5).
But recall, too, that some studies of early American craniofacial
patterns point to affinities with populations from Southeast Asia (the
Ainu, Polynesian groups, and others) and western Eurasia. It's dangerous
(and frivolous) to jump to the conclusion the first Americans’ heads
came from one place and their teeth from another, nor do evolutionary
principles allow that leap, especially given the analytical baggage
these studies tote: few, fragmentary, and unrepresentative samples of
crania, and questionable groupings of teeth. When there are
representative samples, and a better understanding of the evolutionary
processes in play among small and widely scattered populations, that
will be the time for jumping to conclusions—if necessary.

The genetic evidence (and that includes autosomal DNA) also points
unerringly to Asia as the homeland for the first Americans. American
Indian mtDNA shows affinities to Asians who occupy a broad swath from
the Altai Mountains to Japan and Korea. Like the situation in the
Americas, haplogroup frequencies there vary by region: almost all
Siberian and East Asian populations, for example, lack haplogroups B and
X. The two major NRY haplogroups have an even wider distribution outside
America, haplogroup Q occurring at varying frequencies throughout the
world. Even so, Zegura and colleagues found haplogroups C and Q
intersecting in the Altai region, where (as noted) there are also
populations harboring various of the mtDNA haplogroups. What's not seen
in the Altai region, however, is a distinctive autosomal marker—D9S1120
in the DNA nomenclature—that occurs throughout the Americas, but only in
a couple of Asian populations (Koryaks and Chukchi), indicating it was
part of the ancestral founding population, but one that is evidently no
longer represented across Asia—if it ever was (its presence there today
might be from a more recent back-movement of people from America to
Asia).¹⁹

Of course, and as earlier emphasized, Asian populations have hardly
stood still since the Pleistocene. The rich diversity of genetic
lineages in the Altai region could result from post-Pleistocene gene
flow of multiple Eurasian populations forming, as Connie Mulligan and
colleagues describe it, “a genetic melting pot [that] could easily
contain all the elements common in Native Americans and falsely give the
impression of being the ancestor.”²⁰ Again, merely because the closest
living mtDNA or NRY relatives of American Indian groups live in those
parts of Asia today does not mean they were living there in Pleistocene
times. We await proof on this point from aDNA.

DEPARTURES AND ARRIVALS

On the matter of timing there is agreement, but again mostly in general
terms: all lines of evidence point to a late Pleistocene departure for
the New World. Turner's dentochronology puts the split between Amerind
and Northeast Asian populations at roughly 14,000 years ago, in time for
a late Pleistocene Clovis arrival. Not a bad number, but dentochronology
gives discrepant results in other cases, and cannot be wholly trusted in
this one.

Greenberg, though well aware of the limits of glottochronology, but with
an abiding faith his language families correlated precisely with
Turner's dental groups, likewise put the arrival of ancestral Amerinds
in Clovis times, though expressed a willingness to extend the date if
needed. Others saw a need. Based on presumed rates of linguistic change
and the diversity of languages, Johanna Nichols argued a Clovis
antiquity was not even in the right ballpark, and instead proposed there
had been a single entry 50,000 years ago, or multiple entries beginning
at least 30,000 years ago. When asked why archeologists hadn't found
such old sites, Nichols replied, “As a linguist, that's not my
problem.”²¹

Estimates based on molecular clocks vary, and in many cases have large
error bars attached to them (recall Tables 8 and 9), depending on which
source is consulted, which method was used, and a variety of other
contingencies. This is especially true of mtDNA; age estimates are
tighter over on the Y chromosome (ranging from 14,000 to 18,000 years),
but it's not irrelevant to add there have been far fewer studies
calculating ages from Y chromosome DNA. In any case, none of these
estimates directly dates the migration, only the emergence of particular
molecular lineages, which may or may not coincide with divergence.

There is abundant evidence of Clovis in North America soon after 11,500
BP. A single site, Monte Verde, gives secure evidence of a still-earlier
human presence. Many more are reportedly earlier, but are on less secure
grounds. Given the location of Monte Verde, and its distance from the
presumed Beringian entryway, we assume people arrived in the New World
much earlier than the 12,500 BP age at MVII implies. How much earlier we
cannot say, although from what we know of the timing of the opening of
the coastal route, it was possibly a couple thousand years earlier. If
they came down an interior route before the ice-free corridor closed,
then it might have been earlier still. Importantly, there's no reason
why both routes could not have been used by early colonizers coming at
different times—if there had been more than one early migratory pulse
(more on that shortly).

PLEISTOCENE PATHWAYS

Ironically, the archaeological record does provide one well-defined,
easily followed trail of a Pleistocene population migrating south from
Alaska. The Paleoarctic Complex is marked by stone microblades (Figure
37): these are 2-3 centimeters long and barely 4-8 millimeters wide;
pressure flaked off small, wedge-shaped microcores; and presumably
slotted into wooden, antler, or bone handles to form composite tools.
Microblade/microcore assemblages arrived in southern Siberia about
22,000 years ago, and from there were carried rapidly north and east.
They were in far northeastern Asia and western Beringia by 10,800 BP,
and within a couple of centuries were being used in interior Alaska and
the western Yukon Territory. From there the trail moves south down the
coast and interior boreal forests. Microblade/microcore assemblages
arrived in Juneau, Alaska, around 10,000 BP, and then at successively
younger sites in central British Columbia (about 9700 BP), Prince of
Wales Island (about 9200 BP), and the Queen Charlotte Islands (about
7000 BP), finally reaching the vicinity of the Strait of Georgia and the
Columbia River in Washington around 5000 BP.²²

This time-transgressive expansion of the Paleoarctic looks exactly like
what an archaeological migration ought to look like. Unfortunately, it's
not the migration we're looking for. The bearers of the
microblade/microcore technology could not have been the first Americans,
for this technology does not occur in either pre-Clovis or Clovis sites,
and arrived in North America too late to have been carried by the first
Americans. Indeed, the southward advance of the bearers of this
technology may have been checked when they reached areas already
occupied.²³

[images]

FIGURE 37.
Microblades from the Panguingue Creek site, Alaska. These would have
been set into bone or antler handles, to be used as composite tools.
(Photograph courtesy of Richard Reanier.)

What of the tracks of the first Americans? Those have yet to be found,
and may never be, given the processes that conspire against us, and the
fact that we seek what may have been a fleeting movement on now-vanished
coastline. For if the first Americans came down the Pacific coast,
hugging the seashore, rising sea levels may have since drowned their
footsteps (or boat landings); even where isostatic rebound and tectonic
activity have uplifted the Pleistocene coastline, dense forest and
underbrush hinder archaeological survey (Chapter 4). Nonetheless, there
is plenty of reason to go look, for it has already been shown that
humans occupied Prince of Wales and the Queen Charlotte islands along
the British Columbia coast as early as 10,300 BP, and more importantly,
it has been shown these places could have been occupied a great deal
earlier.²⁴

If colonists came via an interior route in pre-LGM times, all traces
would have been obscured by later glacial action. Had they moved through
the ice-free corridor soon after it opened, they likely moved quickly:
hunter-gatherers tend not to dawdle in harsh and marginal environments,
as the corridor was in the immediate wake of deglaciation.²⁵ At the
moment, the earliest sites in the corridor region—Charlie Lake Cave in
British Columbia, and the Vermillion Lakes site in Alberta—are dated at
10,500 and 10,800 years old, respectively. Although Charlie Lake Cave
has yielded a broken and beat-up fluted point, it's not quite a Clovis
point.²⁶ In fact, neither site is old enough to mark the southbound
trail of Clovis people, let alone ancestors of Monte Verdeans.

In the absence of actual archaeological evidence of the path of the
first Americans, evidence from languages and genes has been pushed into
the breach. It's not a very satisfactory solution.

The argument from languages, ironically, is made by archaeologists
rather than linguists, and is based on the simple observation there are
more Native American languages along the Northwest and California coasts
than in any other area of North America. That's said to imply a great
time depth for human occupation, and thereby “strongly supports” a
coastal entry.

To be sure, the greatest numbers of languages (nearly 40% of North
America's total) were spoken along the West Coast.²⁷ Yet, as linguists
well appreciate, the abundance and distribution of American languages is
hardly a function of time alone (if at all), and owes more to geography,
climate, population density, economy, and other factors. Thus, areas
rich in resources (coasts, lower-latitude areas) allow large populations
to congregate in small areas, which can produce great language diversity
(the best example: Papua New Guinea harbors 862 languages, fully 13.2%
of the world's total, on just 0.4% of the world's land area). In the
cold and dry North American Arctic, with far fewer people inhabiting
much larger regions, there are fewer languages spoken per unit area.
Likewise, regions overrun by expanding empires have lower linguistic
diversity because empires impose languages—think the Roman Empire and
Latin—thereby reducing the number of indigenous ones.²⁸

Consequently, the modern diversity or distribution of languages may say
little about the prehistory of colonization, since these patterns may
have little to do with when people arrived in a region, or where or how
they moved over time.

And something more: Native Americans were hard hit by infectious
epidemic diseases (smallpox, the most deadly among them) introduced by
Europeans in the decades and centuries after AD 1492. Regions that at
the time of European arrival were home to dense populations, such as the
Mississippi and Missouri river valleys, were especially devastated since
their populations were thick on the ground. The Spaniard Hernando de
Soto wandered through what is now the southeastern United States between
1539 and 1542, and described a region teeming with people. When the
Frenchman Rene-Robert de la Salle returned a century later, he was
astonished to find virtually no one home. The very few languages
recorded in that region serve as a grim illustration of population
devastation. In contrast, a large number of languages are known from the
Pacific Northwest and California because intensive linguistic fieldwork
took place here before diseases took their full measure (particularly
among remote inland groups).

All this makes it doubtful whether the number and distribution of
languages bears any relationship to the length of time a region was
inhabited, let alone to fleeting migration routes, particularly those
taken tens of thousands of years earlier across a radically different,
partly ice-shrouded landscape by people who may have been historically
and linguistically unrelated (save in the most general sense that all
were ultimately Asian in origin). It is probably no more realistic to
infer Pleistocene migration routes to North America by the number and
distribution of modern language groups, than it would be to infer de
Soto's route in the sixteenth century by looking at the number and
distribution of Spanish speakers in the Southeast today. And at least we
know de Soto spoke Spanish.

Be wary, too, of the claim that patterns of mtDNA haplogroups along the
west coast of North America “appear to support the hypothesis of a
population expansion out of Beringia associated with gene flow along the
west coast.”²⁹ We cannot assume that migrating groups, like Hansel and
Gretel, left behind a trail of genetic breadcrumbs—that is, people
permanently settled on the trail of their Pleistocene ancestors. The
presence of a haplogroup in a particular region does not mean its
bearers or their ancestors have always been there, just as its absence
does not mean their ancestors never passed through. Haplogroup B is
proof of that: it is scarce among Bering Strait populations, yet present
across the rest of the Americas. Unless its bearers sailed directly
across the Pacific in Pleistocene times (and that's very doubtful),
individuals possessing haplogroup B must have traversed Beringia without
settling down.

VIRTUAL COLONIZATION

Having failed to catch the first Americans in the act of colonizing,
archaeologists and others have attempted to simulate the process by
which the Americas were colonized, to gain a sense of where and how the
first Americans may have entered the continent and dispersed once here.
It's colonization by computer, and is done by building an equation with
variables such as the number of individuals in the colonizing group,
their rate of population increase, the distances they moved annually,
what triggered the movement (usually, population growth filling up the
home territory), what kinds of foods and other resources were available
in different environments, what might guide movement (a path of least
resistance, major drainages, or even fanning out across the landscape),
how fast colonizers could or would move along different routes, and so
on. Then, with the aid of the computer, one starts the algorithm
iterating: a population arrives at time x, for example, and within y
years has increased to the point of straining the local resources, and
so moves z kilometers in the direction of the closest available
resource-rich territory. That process is then repeated in the virtual
world many times over, and after n years, the descendants of the initial
group have filled the New World. It's not SimCity™ exactly, but close to
it (SimColonization?).

David Anderson and Christopher Gillam simulate the process of expansion
into the New World under the premise that humans, like water, flow
downhill.³⁰ Or, more properly, that people will take the easier rather
than the more strenuous route when moving across a landscape. From the
point of view of colonizers arriving in western Alaska, Anderson and
Gillam ask what would have been the easiest route of entry, bearing in
mind they did not know they were supposed to be headed to Monte Verde,
but were simply moving ever outward along a path of least resistance? To
find the answer, they compiled high-resolution digital elevation maps of
the New World, and analyzed them using Geographic Information Systems,
which enabled them to calculate the relative ease of different routes
through the continent. In doing so, they found that the least-cost
pathway from Alaska to all land south of the ice was via the interior
route—if the colonizers were walking. A coastal entry was never a
least-cost solution, owing to its highly dissected terrain. Of course,
if colonizers had boats, then the coast becomes a viable option (why
walk when you can paddle?).

Todd Surovell likewise concluded a coastal colonization was implausible,
based on a model driven by return rates (how much food can be acquired
from a habitat in a given amount of time?).³¹ Colonizers increase in
number (at the rate of 3% per year, he assumes) and move when the
population reaches the point where return rates diminish, and the group
as a whole would be better off if some moved on to the next available
unoccupied habitat to make their living. By the terms of Surovell's
model, people can move down the coast, but if they did so all the way to
Monte Verde, then they also should have “backfilled” interior North
America with substantial pre-Clovis populations. Since in his view no
such population exists, he reasons they must not have come via the coast
(of course, there's no evidence such a population came via an interior
route either, but leave that aside).

Weighing in on the genetics side, Alan Fix begins with the observation
that mtDNA haplogroups A-D and X are widespread on the North American
continent, but in varying frequencies. He then asks whether a single
migration down the coast could account for that continent-wide
distribution (granting changes in gene frequencies over the millennia
since that pattern was established). By his model, and assuming the
colonizers had boats, the answer is yes. A starting population of 25
females harboring all five mtDNA haplogroups and increasing at 0.7% per
year, moving south each time the number of females reached about 175,
would spread down the coast at the rate of 4 kilometers/year. Within
3,000 years, they could travel from Anchorage to Panama, jump the
isthmus, and then make their way up the Gulf and Atlantic coasts, and
deep into the Mississippi Valley. The end result would be a North
American population with haplogroup frequencies that vary much as they
do at present.³²

All these are elegant models, but do they answer the question of whether
the first Americans came via the coast or not? Not really. The merit of
any simulation rests on whether the model incorporates relevant
variables, and realistic values for those variables. Unfortunately,
there's little hard data for many of the variables—that's why the
process is being simulated—so the models instead assume a value or range
of values to approximate an on-the-ground reality. Surovell pegs
population growth at 3% per year; Fix, a population geneticist,
dismisses that as too high and uses 0.7%. Both their results would
change significantly were they to trade numbers. But then others have
argued colonization was not driven by population growth at all. For that
matter, because of computational complications, there are limits to how
many variables can be incorporated in a model, and it would be conceit
on our part to believe we have included (or even understood) all the
variables relevant to the colonization process.

But most important of all, a simulation model, however elegant, should
never be confused with actual evidence.³³ Relying as they must on a
series of assumptions (even plausible ones), a model cannot prove a
route taken: it can only show whether a hypothesis seems reasonable
given its ground rules. Can it prove a hypothesis wrong? No, though it
can show it unlikely or implausible. As always, the proof must be found
in the ground. A few early, well-dated archaeological sites along either
route would do the trick.

COLONIZATION'S TEMPO AND MODE

Joseph Greenberg was bemused by fellow linguists who insisted it was
impossible to group American Indian languages into fewer than 150 or 200
families. If there were that many, each representing a separate
migration, he joked it would have required “a traffic controller at the
Bering Strait”³⁴ to keep them from bumping into one another enroute to
the Americas. Better, he thought, to reduce the number to a more
manageable three: no stoplights needed. Turner's teeth go along with
that, but not the craniofacial evidence, which at the moment sees just
two migrations, though not always the same two migrations. Geneticists
variously estimate there were anywhere from one to four separate
migrations to the Americas.

In the absence of an answer about the number of migrations, perhaps it's
time to rethink the question. Rather than try to gauge how many
migratory waves are necessary to account for known patterns of
diversity, whether genetic, linguistic, or anatomical, let's instead
look from a Pleistocene perspective.

We know humans reached northeast Asia before the LGM, and were poised to
depart far eastern Siberia by about 14,000 years ago—or possibly earlier
(given what we don't know of the archaeology of Siberia). We also know
(Chapter 2) that throughout the late Pleistocene, there were no
significant barriers to cross-Beringian traffic: no glaciers, no looming
mountains. And although it was cold, dry, and virtually treeless from
before the LGM until at least 13,500 BP, that would not have stopped
hunter-gatherers who'd spent their lives in the frozen north. Like their
brethren on the treeless central Russian plain, they could have used
animal dung, fat, and bones to fuel their fires. Would-be colonizers
were free to move across the land bridge and back over tens of thousands
of years.³⁵

Getting south from Beringia may have posed a more formidable challenge,
at least given our current understanding of the timing of availability
of coastal and interior corridor routes: the interior route apparently
was closed between about 28,000 and 12,000 BP. Long reaches of the outer
coast were evidently ice free between 16,000 and 14,500 BP, and
permanently open to the traveling Pleistocene public only after 13,400
BP. We are entitled to hedge a bit on the dates, given how they have
changed over the last several decades.

Regardless, one point is clear: during the Pleistocene, there were
several wide-open windows of opportunity and routes of travel by which
to migrate from Asia to America (Figure 38). So instead of conceiving of
early migration as a single pulse by a small group made but once, is it
possible to think of it as Hrdlicka did, as a “dribbling over from
northeastern Asia, extending probably over a long stretch of time”?³⁶
Perhaps. But that depends on when people reached Siberia and western
Beringia, on the size of the parent population(s), on the environmental,
climatic, and social catalysts that might have spurred migration, and so
on. These matters are currently poorly known.

Linguists have not precluded the possibility of multiple migrations, for
most are unwilling to assume—as Greenberg does—that the vast majority of
American languages can be telescoped back into a single ancestral
dispersal. Multiple migrations from unrelated source populations would
better account for the diversity most linguists see in the languages of
the Americas.

On the other hand, geneticists at the moment are less inclined to accept
the idea of multiple migratory pulses, and for seemingly good reason:
given the finite number but widespread distribution of founding
haplogroups and haplotypes in the Americas, it seems unlikely that
separate migrations from Asia would introduce the same set (Chapter 5).
Nor should these haplogroups, as Jason Eshleman and colleagues indicate,
show the same level of sequence diversity—as they apparently do.³⁷
Strong rebuttals both, but perhaps not entirely fatal to the idea of
multiple migratory dribbles.

[images]

FIGURE 38.
Time chart for the peopling of the Americas, based on chronologies of
dental, linguistic, and genetic lineage divergence (from text and Tables
7-9); the age of archaeological sites in Siberia; the timing of Beringia
and of the coastal and interior routes south from Alaska; and the ages
of archaeological sites and complexes in Alaska, North America south of
the ice sheets, and South America, including a number of unconfirmed
pre-Clovis claims. Ages are in radiocarbon years BP. The arrows and
figures are not intended to convey actual migrations, but instead to
show possible times and routes of travel, and how the timing of the
migration could have constrained which routes were available (arrows
that span either the coastal or the interior route indicate that route
was not taken at that time). Running figures convey faster migrations—as
supposed for Clovis. The scenarios currently favored are the top two
sets of arrows and figures: an earlier entry down the recently
deglaciated coast in time to reach Monte Verde by 12,500 BP, and/or a
later entry down the newly opened and passable ice-free corridor at the
outset of Clovis time. Obviously, as chronologies are refined and older
sites are discovered and accepted, the favored scenario(s) will change.
(Adapted from Meltzer 1993b.)

Certainly, the recent findings from aDNA confirm suspicions that we have
yet to record the full diversity of haplogroup and haplotype sequences
in America past and present. Consider the Siberian source population: it
is assumed that because modern Asian populations possess a large number
of haplogroups in addition to A-D, then so, too, did ancient
populations. Of course, there is no aDNA evidence on that score.
Moreover, Eshleman and colleagues point out that “a random selection of
even a small group of emigrants from Eastern Siberia today would have a
high probability of including members of haplogroups A, C and D.”³⁸
Those common haplogroups would likely show up in a random Pleistocene
selection as well, perhaps even if these occurred repeatedly over tens,
hundreds, or possibly even thousands of years, as successive groups
departed for America.

So, too, there is the interesting but evolutionarily complicating
possibility of earlier migrants returning to Siberia from Alaska:
geneticists are now seeing evidence of just such back-migrations in the
occasional occurrence of American Indian markers in Asian populations.³⁹
Those back-mixes appear to have occurred recently. Had any occurred when
Beringia was open for pedestrian traffic, groups may have mixed with
distant and possibly unrelated populations that by then had arrived in
Siberia, becoming yet another source populations for migration(s) to
America.

Geneticist Theodore Schurr observes, and rightly so, that “if multiple
expansions of human groups occurred within a limited period of time, the
demographic signals of these events may not be detectable.” Twelve
thousand years or more after the fact, over which populations mixed and
moved, and experienced gene flow and genetic drift, the lines originally
separating a stream of small and related (or even unrelated) groups are
easily blurred. It might prove impossible using modern DNA to
distinguish a single migration with multiple, contributing sources from
repeated splitting from the same ancestral population, or from multiple,
closely spaced dispersals from multiple source populations in Asia
(Chapter 5). Studies of aDNA might help bring those original lines back
into focus.⁴⁰

Kari Schroeder and colleagues likewise admit “the number of migrations
cannot be inferred from genetic data,” but then turn the question on its
head to ask, instead, are all Native Americans descended from the same
founding population? There are certainly strong hints that was the case:
there's D9S1120, that ubiquitous and almost uniquely American autosomal
marker; there are within haplogroup C several founding haplotypes (C1b,
C1c and C1d) so widespread as to indicate common ancestry; and there are
sure signs in mtDNA, NRY, and autosomal DNA of a population bottleneck
(Chapter 5). All of these point to a shared genetic prehistory and
descent from a common founding population, but as Schroeder and
colleagues add, by itself that does not reveal the number of source
populations contributing to the founding population—the streams flowing
into a Beringian funnel—nor exclude the possibility of small genetic
contributions from other populations, which about 400 generations later
hardly appear visible.⁴¹

The archaeological record provides some insight into the number of
migrations, though it is a fairly blunt instrument. There are, for
example, no obvious historical or technological links between the
pre-Clovis-age complexes of South and North America: they form no
coherent patterns, share no specific technologies, and are marked by no
common artifacts. On the other hand, perhaps there is no reason to
expect similarities among artifacts so widely separated in time and
place, especially since it is not yet apparent whether all these sites
are credible.

As for Monte Verde (which is credible), its toolkit seems very different
from Clovis in North America, and from Clovis-age South American
archaeological complexes (again, there is no Clovis, strictly speaking,
in South America). Perhaps Monte Verde and Clovis represent two distinct
archaeological traditions and separate migratory pulses, as opposed to
an outgrowth of the same historically related colonization. At the
moment, the call could go either way.

Filling in the gaps in space and time between Monte Verde and
Clovis—more pre-Clovis sites in North America will surely help—may make
the differences between the two disappear (or, perhaps, grow larger).
Then it will become possible to determine whether they represent the
same or separate migrations. For the moment, the best we can say is that
there are at least two Pleistocene-age migrations into the Americas:
Paleoindian and (later) Paleoarctic (this does not include later
Holocene migrations by, say, ancestral Eskimo groups). It is possible
there were even more migrations, major or minor, including some that may
not have been successful. But to show that, we will need to learn a
great deal more about the earliest archaeology of the Americas.

Given the timing of the opening of the ice-free corridor, and the sudden
and widespread appearance of Clovis soon thereafter, the early peoples
they represent could have come down the newly opened corridor, then
radiated out across North America and even into South America in a
matter of centuries (in actual calendar years, the radiation may have
taken longer since radiocarbon calibration during this period is still
imprecise). That's far faster than the current American record for
prehistoric migration in an empty niche by hunter-gatherers, now held by
the Thule Eskimo, who, starting around AD 1000 (or possibly later⁴²),
flashed from Alaska across the northern maritime region to Greenland, a
distance of more than 5,000 kilometers in a few centuries (there's more
on the Thule below and in Chapter 7 since they represent in many ways
the closest and most interesting comparative case).

But then, Clovis might not represent a separate migration. As previously
noted, there is no well-marked trail of Clovis and Clovis-like fluted
projectile points leading from Alaska down to the Lower Forty-eight,
which one might hope to see from the movement of a people, even one
moving quickly. And if Clovis does represent a separate and later
migration of people, the fact that they moved through North America so
quickly suggests they did not encounter many (or any) other people along
the way. If so, what had become of earlier, pre-Clovis colonizers? It's
a fair question, but one at the moment without a fair answer.

But perhaps the sudden appearance of Clovis and the opening of the
ice-free corridor are mere coincidence, and Clovis represents instead a
new technology that developed in America and spread widely and rapidly
among a preexisting, pre-Clovis population. Given that Clovis sites from
west to east are nearly contemporaneous, the spread must have been
lightning fast, on a scale that would not be seen again until the
invention and spread of the hula hoop, and of a technique (fluting)
that—like the hula hoop—“was not all that revolutionary in the first
place and that died out relatively soon thereafter”⁴³ (fluting, however,
enjoyed a much longer popular run than the hula hoop).

At the moment, the evidence leans against the idea of Clovis as the
diffusion of a preexisting technology. Diffusion demands a faithfulness
in copying the Clovis technology by many widely scattered groups, which
seems unlikely across so large a span of space and time. Further, we
ought to see not just a substantial pre-Clovis presence in North
America, but also evidence of Clovis technologies being grafted onto
(and replacing) “fluteless,” pre-Clovis assemblages. We see neither.
Diffusion seems less likely than an on-the-ground, rapid movement of
people.⁴⁴

On the matter of speed, very recent mtDNA evidence points to a long
pause in Beringia, followed by a rapid expansion across the Americas,
notably in the three founding haplotypes (Qb-Qd) within haplogroup C.
That all three apparently arose in Asia, show similar molecular ages,
and yet are widely and uniformly distributed across this hemisphere—as
opposed to exhibiting a “nested” structure that would imply they had
derived from one another in a serial fashion—points to a “swift
pioneering process, not a gradual diffusion.” In haplogroup C, it would
appear, the lineages took a long time to evolve in Beringia (the
10,000-20,000-year standstill mentioned in Chapter 5), but a very short
time to expand.⁴⁵ In contrast, autosomal DNA displays a north-south
gradient of genetic diversity, but whether that indicates a more gradual
and progressive splitting as the ancestral group moved deeper into the
Americas—or even says anything about the speed of expansion—is
unclear.⁴⁶

CAN WE ALL GET ALONG?

There is only the broadest agreement among the different disciplines on
the central questions related to the peopling of the Americas. But
perhaps that's to be expected, given their very different approaches.
Linguists and geneticists view the process through the present, relying
on known languages and DNA of living Native Americans (aDNA has so far
played a limited role in this investigation). From this they infer
population histories, assuming that modern American Indians are
descendants of the first Americans (we have no evidence, of course, to
indicate otherwise).

Archaeologists and physical anthropologists, working with sites and
skeletal remains, approach from the opposite direction. But we see only
what the Pleistocene left behind, often little more than isolated
snapshots of sites and skeletal remains, which do not occur in
sufficient numbers to allow many conclusions about the populations from
which those samples were drawn.

Accordingly, there are significant differences in data and method, and
advantages and disadvantages to each. That's obvious.

What is often less obvious, especially from the outside looking in, is
whether those discipline-specific results stand on their own merit.
Science in the twenty-first century is a highly insular affair, and it
takes time for knowledge from one field to fully penetrate another. Even
with all the linguists’ ear-piercing criticism of Greenberg's method of
mass comparison, it was more than a decade before geneticists examined
whether mtDNA and NRY haplogroups actually coincided with Amerind,
Na-Dene, and Eskimo-Aleut, as opposed to merely assuming they did. And,
of course, they didn't.

What this means is that although each discipline has a place at the
table, no one gets a free pass: the results of research in one area are
not inherently superior to another (notwithstanding Jantz and Owsley's
claim that cranial morphology will be “more informative” than genetics),
nor can we simply pick results we like. Equally important, we have to
clarify just what different disciplines can and cannot reveal. Take the
matter of chronology. Geneticist Antonio Torroni can say that “genetics
confirms the first Americans were pre-Clovis,”⁴⁷ but can we really know
that? A genetic haplogroup cannot be directly dated; only archaeological
remains can. And at the moment, archaeologists are in the best position
to know when the first Americans have arrived, but we're not yet able to
say. Yet, by joining forces, we can perhaps bracket an answer.

Consider what archaeological ages represent. At the beginning of
American prehistory, there were so few people spread across such a vast
area they could not have left much of an archaeological imprint. The
odds of our finding their sites are correspondingly slim, and people
likely got here much earlier than we see them archaeologically (Chapter
4). Unless we are lucky enough to find the very first site in the
Americas and to know we have found it, the oldest site we do find will
at best provide a minimum age for the peopling of the Americas.

On the other hand, molecular clocks provide a maximum age estimate for
the peopling of the Americas. This is so because—leaving aside all the
technical concerns about the ticking of these clocks (Chapter 5)—if a
haplogroup occurs in both Asia and America, it must have arisen within
the ancestral Asian population prior to the departure of ancestral
Native Americans. That being the case, and using the oldest ages
currently provided by genetics, the first Americans must have arrived
sometime after, say, 40,000 years ago, but before 12,500 years ago
(Monte Verde MVII). A broad window, to be sure, but we may soon close it
considerably if very recent molecular estimates converging on a time
range for both mtDNA and NRY of 18,000-14,000 years ago hold up.⁴⁸

CONTINUITY AND DISCONTINUITY

Whether they do depends in large part on whether we have an accurate
count of the founding lineages on which the molecular clock runs, and
that in turn depends on whether there has been lineage loss over time.
There is strong reason to suspect there has been. Ancestral Americans
were particularly susceptible to mtDNA and NRY lineage loss at two
points in time: the first was immediately after their Pleistocene
arrival. Small, isolated, rapidly moving bands, with attenuated ties to
distant homelands or kin, and without nearby populations with which to
seek mates, could easily disappear in a few tens or hundreds of years
for want of sufficient numbers, or an ability to cope with events in
their environment. Likewise, relatively rare haplogroups can easily
disappear (haplogroup X, for example, very nearly did). There is
evidence from mtDNA among North and South American Indians for at least
a ‘moderate-intensity’ bottleneck and the potential loss of some genetic
diversity.⁴⁹ But that's not surprising: almost certainly over the grand
sweep of world prehistory, groups vanished without descendants. Recall
that the Norse reached Newfoundland 1,000 years ago, only to soon beat a
hasty retreat in the face of extreme circumstances, not least hostile
Native “Skraelings” (likely, ancestral Beothuk Indians). One would
assuredly look in vain for genetic evidence of the Norse presence in
Newfoundland. The first Americans did not have to contend with hostile
Natives (no one else was home), but as newcomers, they faced significant
adaptive challenges (Chapter 7).

The second time American Indian mtDNA and NRY lineages were likely to
have vanished was in the centuries after European contact, which caused
a massive, centuries-long population decline as a consequence of
introduced infectious diseases (more on this in Chapter 10). Although
these terrible scourges devastated Native American numbers, the major
mtDNA and NRY haplogroups (A-D, and C and Q) survived, though
potentially in very different frequencies than prior to 1492.⁵⁰ It is
apparent from aDNA that other minor DNA haplogroups and haplotypes did
not. Languages were assuredly lost, too, as the blank areas on the map
of American languages attests (Figure 30).

Before proceeding any further, let me be clear on a couple of points:
first, lineage loss detected in aDNA is not evidence American Indians
are not descendants of the first Americans. Nor, in fact, does it
preclude genetic continuity in autosomal DNA (again, one has many more
autosomal ancestors than mtDNA or NRY ancestors). What it does mean is
that these single locus markers—the five mtDNA and two Y-chromosome
founding haplogroups of modern American Indians—may not be fully
representative of Pleistocene or even pre-European contact mtDNA and
NRY.

Second, it is only in Pleistocene archaeological sites or skeletal
remains that evidence can emerge of an early but ultimately unsuccessful
migration to the Americas in the form of artifacts or skeletal forms
different from those that followed. Although there are assertions early
American crania are morphologically distinct from those of modern Native
Americans, we cannot put stock in these claims, plagued as they are by
severe sampling and analytical problems (even the dental evidence,
problematic though it is, testifies to continuity between early and late
Americans⁵¹).

Which brings up once more a matter of terminology. It used to be that
the first Americans were referred to as Paleoindians (from the Greek
palaios [naXaio q or old + Indian). In the last decade in some circles,
there has been a none-too-subtle change in language: Paleoindian is now
insistently referred to as Paleoamerican. The terms may be synonymous in
a very general sense. If the ancestors of American Indians are the first
Americans, Paleoindians by definition are Paleoamericans. But the
explicit effort to substitute one for the other is not just a matter of
synonymy. The change corresponded with the Kennewick discovery and
ensuing legal battle, and was made most visibly in the publications of
the Center for the Study of the First Americans, whose director (the
late Robson Bonnichsen), led the lawsuit against the federal government
to gain access to the Kennewick remains. As David Hurst Thomas writes,
naming something is not always a neutral act, and it's not in this
instance.⁵² Calling the first peoples Paleoamerican rather than
Paleoindian is not just a statement about the genuine uncertainty of
identifying ancient remains with modern tribes; it subtly implies the
first people to the New World were not ancestors of the American
Indians.

Although we may not yet know the population history of the peoples of
the New World, and there remains debate about the precise number and
timing of migrations, at the moment all indications are that today's
American Indians are descended from the first Americans. Paleoindians
they were and should be until reliable scientific evidence indicates
otherwise. Using the term Paleoindian helps us not only appropriately
recognize that ancestry, but it also serves as a reminder that the past
is different, and that we are speaking of peoples who—though related to
American Indians—lived at a very different time and in a very different
kind of place. There is reason aplenty to expect their lives to have
been lived in very different ways (Chapter 7).

SEEKING CONVERGENCE

All of which raises a final, much larger question: should we necessarily
expect convergence between archaeological and non-archaeological
approaches? Perhaps, but again only if we see something akin to what
Goldilocks saw: that each group had its own, and only its own,
artifacts, anatomy, language, genes, and teeth, which co-evolved over
time. Sometimes we do.

Take the case of the Eskimo: their languages, as even warring linguists
agree, form a continuum of dialects that stretches from the Seward
Peninsula in Alaska across arctic Canada to the coast of Greenland.
Mutual intelligibility between contiguous dialects is high, though
speakers at the extremes of the range might have difficulty
understanding each other.⁵³ Similarly, biological and genetic evidence
(including mtDNA, Y chromosome, and autosomal DNA) indicates Eskimo
peoples, regardless of geographic location, are quite similar
genetically. That similarity points to a recent and rapid expansion of
their ancestral population.⁵⁴

How recently and rapidly can be tracked on the ground. The ancestors of
Eskimo peoples—known archaeologically as the Thule—are first spotted on
islands in the Bering Sea and around Seward Peninsula about AD 600. They
were skilled bowhead whale hunters (among other things). As the climate
warmed around AD 1000 and reduced summer pack ice across the high
Arctic, they set off in pursuit of western bowhead whales migrating east
into feeding grounds of the Beaufort Sea. Over the next several
warmer-than-average centuries (the Medieval Warm Period), as whale
populations expanded still farther east (ultimately linking up with
North Atlantic pods), the Thule went right along with them, eventually
reaching northwestern Greenland. Their language, genes, and material
culture converge on a common population prehistory, and explain the
biological, linguistic, and cultural similarities of Eskimo peoples
between the Bering Strait and Greenland.⁵⁵

About the same time the Thule were expanding across far North America,
ancestral Polynesians were sailing double-hulled canoes eastward across
vast stretches of the remote Pacific, and settling distant and isolated
islands like New Zealand, Hawaii, and Rapa Nui. One thousand years
later, as Patrick Kirch and others have shown, the linked linguistic,
genetic, and material culture imprint of that expansion from a common
ancestor is still visible.⁵⁶

Among the colonizers of the high Arctic and the remote Pacific islands,
artifacts, language, and genes co-evolved as descendant populations
dispersed over time and space. That's why Captain Cook so readily
spotted the similarities between Alaskan and Greenland Eskimo, and among
the residents of Tahiti, New Zealand, and Rapa Nui. That these two cases
meet the Goldilocks standard is not mere happenstance: the high Arctic
and the Pacific were both peopled in just the last few thousand years,
with populations expanding into remote and largely uninhabited regions
(entirely uninhabited, in the case of the far Pacific), leaving the
archaeological tracks of their dispersals still relatively fresh and
untrampled on the landscape. And they remained largely isolated by
virtue of their remoteness, which also explains why it wasn't until the
late eighteenth century that Europeans made lasting contact, and why the
echoes of their dispersals are still within reach of historical
linguistics, genetics, and even of memory and folklore.⁵⁷

It may be there was comparable convergence early in the peopling of the
Americas, when there were still few of them, and they were maintaining
contact even as they radiated out across their new landscape. Yet, as
time went by, and populations grew, split, reached the far corners of
both continents, and along the way developed new dialects and languages,
artifacts, and their own distinctive genetic lineages, the situation
inevitably became more complex. Matters would hardly get simpler over
the next 400 or so generations as populations encountered one another
and exchanged artifacts, words, and genes, and as culture, language, and
genetic lineages evolved (or were lost).

Once isolation breaks down and interaction re-commences, there is no
longer a reliable correlation between artifacts, language, teeth, and
genes. People can quickly learn a new language or adopt new artifacts;
they cannot quickly “learn” new genes or teeth. And that is why Hunley
and Long found that striking mismatch between language families and
haplogroups on both the mtDNA and NRY sides of the aisle. There's no
reason to assume the genetic ancestry of a group will yield the same
result as a reconstruction based on its linguistic history.

And what of linking modern languages or genes with archaeological or
skeletal remains from the Pleistocene? Strictly speaking, the
archaeological record—artifacts, dental and skeletal remains, sites—only
speaks to the appearance of a colonizing group. At the risk of stating
the obvious, artifacts, bones, and teeth speak no language and have no
genes (unless we recover aDNA). Archaeologists have trouble enough
deciding which stone tool assemblages belong together; we are even
harder pressed to link archaeologically detectable patterns with those
identified among modern languages or genes.

Here, again, is the great potential of aDNA. If we can recover aDNA from
Pleistocene dental or skeletal remains, and see those same haplogroups
in modern populations, we have the potential to firmly link the most
ancient and most modern Native Americans, determine the number of
migrations, from whence and where they came, or even the route(s)
traveled—assuming aDNA is recovered from remains found along the way. As
more ancient and autosomal DNA work is conducted—and it's important to
emphasize that it's going to take many large-scale genetic analyses to
produce a consensus picture of the peopling of the Americas based on
genetic data—the picture of genetic diversity will likely become more
rather than less complicated, but at least our molecular clocks will run
on time.⁵⁸

Until then, questions about how far into the past we can follow the
trail of modern languages or biological populations, or what we can we
say about the biology or language spoken by Clovis or pre-Clovis
peoples, or more broadly, whether American Indians are descended from
groups we see archaeologically as Clovis or pre-Clovis, will remain
loaded questions and strike at the heart of the highly contentious
legal, political, and emotional issues related to the identity and
“ownership” of ancient skeletal material. But that's an issue for later
(Chapter 10). Now that the first Americans have arrived, it's time to
investigate their exploration of what was a truly New World.

7

WHAT DO YOU DO WHEN NO
ONE'S BEEN THERE BEFORE?

The helicopter pilot pointed to the Arctic tundra below, where a pair of
grizzlies were ambling in the distance. His voice came over my headset:
“Did you want to go down for a closer look?”

“Sure.”

We dove for the deck and were soon skimming along fifteen feet above the
surface, headed for the grizzlies. The wind was against us, but the
bears soon enough heard the thumping rotors and raised up on their hind
legs to look around. The instant they spotted us, the female started
galloping away. The big male took off running, too—straight for us.

Right. I'd seen enough. At the last minute, the pilot shoved the
collective, and up we soared in a stomach-churning climb. Though we
passed over the grizzly with room to spare, I looked down in amazement
as he leaped and swatted at the helicopter as we flew past. The snarling
maw of an angry grizzly bear is terrifyingly large when it fills the
Plexiglas window right below your feet.

Up to that moment, as a rookie to archaeological fieldwork in remote
Alaska, I'd not taken very seriously the fact that when surveying for
sites, we always went out in pairs, or that one person always carried a
twelve-gauge shotgun primed with lead slugs in case of a grizzly
encounter. And I'd laughed at the ghoulish jokes: you don't have to
outrun the bear—just your hiking partner. And the gun wasn't to shoot
the grizzly—it was to kneecap your buddy to guarantee you could outrun
him.

But seeing that this grizzly bear—weighing more than 1,000 pounds,
moving at top speed, and capable of giving us a good rattling had he
gotten his paw on the helicopter's skids—thought nothing of charging a
roaring, jet-engine helicopter made it all too clear that when on foot,
humans are not necessarily at the top of the food chain on this
landscape.

Which got me to wondering: what must it have been like more than 12,000
years ago for those Ice Age peoples who first colonized the Americas?
Although adept and well adapted to hunter-gatherer life, they were armed
with little more than wooden or bone spears tipped with stone projectile
points. They were assuredly predators; occasionally, they could be prey.
More challenging still, they were colonizing a landscape far different
and in many ways far more complex, diverse, and dynamic than at present.
Although they were seasoned veterans of life in Siberia, as these
wide-ranging peoples made their way across to Alaska and turned south
into what was truly a New World, the land and its resources became
increasingly unfamiliar. More than that, they were facing those adaptive
challenges alone. It must have been a strange sensation to look around
and realize it had been months, years, decades, or even longer since
they had last encountered people outside their band, or seen telltale
human signs like smoke on the distant horizon, or evidence of a freshly
killed and butchered animal.

Those of us who spend time in wilderness today are afforded only the
tiniest glimpse of what life might have been like for humans on a
continent empty, unfamiliar, diverse, and rapidly changing. Yet, no
matter how remote an area we might find ourselves, we are never truly
alone nor, for that matter, in unknown terrain. Virtuall every inch of
our planet has been charted if not trod upon. We can carry survival gear
and food, guides to plants and animals, maps to water and trails, and
instruments that can tell us precisely where we are, or enable us to
talk to others in distant cities or flying 30,000 feet overhead. In most
any emergency, we can have vital supplies brought in, or people carried
out. We rarely have the sense of being completely out of reach, or
having to survive on our wits and by our hands—except, of course, when
things go badly wrong.

The Pleistocene colonizers of the Americas had no such advantages.

PEOPLE WITHOUT NEIGHBORS

We're about to venture farther into unknown territory and explore
questions about why people may have left Asia for America, what kinds of
adaptive challenges they faced, and how they may have met those
challenges and colonized a continent, possibly at record speeds. We
won't have much help: although there is a rich body of anthropological
knowledge about modern hunter-gatherer adaptations and processes of
migration and colonization, much of it is irrelevant.

The reason? Our world filled up long ago. Nowadays, migration mostly
involves moving relatively short distances over brief periods of time
into already-occupied landscapes—hardly the scale or circumstances of
the colonization of America, which played out much longer and over a
much larger area. Moreover, all anthropologically known hunter-gatherers
have neighbors, near or distant, on whom they can rely for information,
resources, and potential mates (the latter are especially important,
since one can always gain information and resources on one's own), or
against whom they may compete. Either way, having neighbors
fundamentally changes the decision-making calculus of landscape use.
Finally, our anthropologically known hunter-gatherers possess deep
knowledge of their landscape: not complete knowledge (no group ever has
that), but knowledge sufficient that it has reduced much of the
uncertainty in their lives. The process of hunter-gatherers learning a
wholly new landscape has rarely, if ever, been recorded.¹ By the time
anthropologists arrived on a scene, most indigenous peoples were already
long resident on their landscape, had mapped its major features, knew
what resources were available and where to find them, and were efficient
foragers.

All that said, we can still use anthropological knowledge of the
processes of human migration and adaptation observable in the present as
a key to explaining the past: it's the uniformitarian principle,
borrowed from geology and applied to archaeology. That doesn't mean the
present and past are identical, but rather that ideas and explanations
about the past should begin with (and must not violate) what we know of,
say, general principles of human adaptation, or the limits of mobility
or demography. The discussion below aims to do that. And, of course, we
can supplement the anthropological record with what has been learned
archaeologically of other cases in the near and distant past of
hunter-gatherers colonizing new lands

We will likely never find the very earliest sites in the Americas
(Chapter 4), nor see the traces of the very first people who, say,
encountered an angry rattlesnake (no Siberian ever experienced one of
those), ate a poisonous New World plant, or looked around one day and
realized they were alone or lost. Even so, we can broadly surmise how
they may have responded if and when they did, and put such notions to
the test against the archaeological record of the first Americans—or at
least that of Clovis (there's not enough of a pre-Clovis record to allow
such a test). Clovis was the first large-scale occupation of North
America; possibly represents a separate migration; had access to the
continent that appears to have been essentially unrestricted; and even
if not the first to arrive, was the first to make substantial inroads
(Chapter 6). As such, understanding Clovis can yield insight into the
adaptations of early colonizers on what was at the very least a new and
underutilized landscape.

WHY MOVE?

Let's start with motivation. What would prompt a band of
hunter-gatherers to leave Siberia for the New World, or once here,
expand the length and breadth of the continent? Studies of modern
peoples who migrate find they routinely know something about what the
destination has to offer, and decide to move or not accordingly. Indeed,
it is an anthropological truism that people are unlikely to migrate into
areas about which they have no prior knowledge. Yet, at a certain point
in the peopling of the Americas, there was little choice in the matter.
Someone had to be the first to set foot on this continent.

History records many reasons why groups venture from their homeland, and
these can be divided into two broad categories: negative factors in the
home region that push a people out, and positive attractions in a
distant area that pull them in. The push side of the ledger includes a
decline in resources, environmental or climatic stress (such as
drought), overpopulation, exile, strife, or warfare. Groups might be
pulled from their homeland by the lure of preferred resources (such as
in the example of the Thule whale hunters); by the seeking of new
economic or trade opportunities or adaptive “insurance” (ascertaining
where to go when current circumstances deteriorate); or by motives as
intangible as curiosity, a sense of adventure or wanderlust, the joy of
discovery, or the journey to gain prestige or mates.²

Of the peopling of the Americas, we cannot say which push and/or pull
forces were motives, but perhaps we can identify which were not. First
and foremost, it seems highly unlikely that siphoning off overpopulation
in their Beringian homeland—one of the most common forces pushing
historic population out-migration (think of the post-sixteenth-century
desire to escape crowded Europe and make a new life in America)—was a
factor in the colonization of the Americas. There is no archaeological
evidence of population crowding in Siberia or Alaska: quite the
contrary, in fact. And the first Americans traveled much farther and
much faster than they had to if they were merely looking for uninhabited
land to settle.³

Likewise, we have no reason to believe exile, strife, or warfare played
a role. Conflict that creates refugees is a much-later phenomenon in
prehistory, initially occurring when village-based farmers arc past the
tipping point when populations have expanded to the degree they must
compete against others for food or the arable land to grow it.

Still, there are push factors that might be relevant to the peopling of
the Americas. Northeast Asia and Siberia in the late Pleistocene were
not easy places to live, and harsh glacial climates may have driven
human foragers out of the region. They appear to have fled during the
LGM, but toward the south, and not evidently toward the east and the
Americas. Other climate changes at later times may have played a role.
But caution is in order here: throughout prehistory, major changes in
climate have occurred without flinging colonizers outward, and many
colonization events had no environmental trigger.⁴ We must be mindful of
the fact that people can be agents of their own actions.

Another potentially important impetus was economics, though this is not
to be thought of in modern market terms, such as setting up shop in a
nearby town to make and sell widgets because the home widget market is
saturated. Rather, it is akin to cases where, for example, only the
first-born child inherits family land. Later-born children who receive
nothing must seek new territory where they can found their own house and
lineage, and assure their offspring access to quality resources.
Polynesian oral traditions of ancient exploration of the Pacific abound
with stories of younger brothers who left to colonize new islands.⁵

In terms of pull variables, groups headed toward the New World might
have hoped—but could not have known—they would find prestige or prized
resources or trading partners here. Obviously, for the first Americans,
there were no trading partners to find. But perhaps the unknowing hope
there were such partners might have been motivation enough. People
setting off for new lands did not have to be right about what they might
find in order for it to be a reason to go looking for it.

For that matter, one should never downplay curiosity, wanderlust, the
joy of discovery, and the like, even though such motivations are
impossible to see in the archaeological record. Over the tens and
hundreds of thousands of years modern humans spread around the globe,
surely some were motivated by little more than wanting to see what was
over the next hill.⁶

Curiosity, in fact, has an adaptive underpinning. Hunter-gatherers live
off the land, but conditions change over the course of a year, several
years, and longer. Plant and animal density and distributions fluctuate,
particularly as a consequence of human predation or exploitation.
Knowing this, hunter-gatherers routinely scout out places they can go
when local conditions begin to sour (such as when the firewood supply is
exhausted, the animals are hunted out, or the plants are no longer in
season).

MOTIVE TO METHOD…

So how do groups move across empty and unfamiliar landscapes? Clovis
poses a challenging case, since its spread occurred quickly across a
wide geographic area, possibly in a matter of centuries and certainly no
more than a millennium—or so it appears, judging from its narrow range
of radiocarbon ages and the continent-wide similarity of Clovis and
related toolkits.

As a very rough measure of Clovis movement, dividing their maximum
geographic range (in kilometers) against the duration of the Clovis
period puts their expansion at a net 10-20 kilometers per year.⁷ That's
not much by our measures: many of us have longer daily commutes. But
it's extraordinarily fast by hunter-gatherer standards, and furthers the
suspicion Clovis people encountered few (if any) others along the way.
Yet, the question of how fast they moved is not nearly as interesting as
how or why they moved so far, so fast, in a new (or at least
people-free) landscape.

There are examples of archaeological and ethnographic groups moving that
quickly across landscapes and, for that matter, seascapes, but few of
pedestrian groups moving that fast across an empty landscape, let alone
an empty continent. The closest comparisons are to the colonization of
the high Arctic, and that's no surprise: that's an environment that
lends itself to lightning traverses. Consider the cases of the
Paleo-Eskimo and the Thule.

The Paleo-Eskimo (badly named: there is nothing to indicate they are
ancestral Eskimo or spoke an Eskimo language; today's Eskimo refer to
them as the Tuniit) moved across the high Arctic from Alaska to
Greenland between 5000 and 4500 BP. Their origins are uncertain, but
they carried distinctive stone tool assemblages, found in sites that
resemble those of the Siberian Neolithic, where they seemingly
originated. These were groups that exploited seasonally freezing Arctic
coasts and especially the adjacent interior highlands. They traveled
quickly and left little behind: their sites are few, widely spaced, and
sporadically occupied by what must have been small populations. As with
Clovis, vast stretches of ground were crossed but not occupied.⁸

How the Paleo-Eskimo fueled themselves is puzzling, given their lack of
time to accumulate knowledge of complex environments and resources.
Robert McGhee offers the tantalizing hypothesis they could do so by
targeting musk ox, which had evolved the unfortunate defensive strategy
of responding to predators by bunching together, with rear ends inward
and massive heads and sharp, hooked horns aimed outward. That strategy
may have been effective against wolves, their longtime natural enemy,
but proved ill adapted when a new predator came on the scene. To humans
armed with a new and deadly weapon—the bow and arrow—a circle of musk ox
was a hunter's dream: large, stationary targets that could be shot at
relatively close range, and which provided ample food.⁹

The descendants of the Paleo-Eskimo span the northern portion of the
continent, then ultimately disappear from archaeological sight, their
place on the landscape later taken by the Thule, who were ancestral
Eskimo. The Thule also radiated quickly across the high Arctic, but
later in time (Chapter 6). And like the Paleo-Eskimo, the Thule were
apparently following a prey species: bowhead whales, a relatively
slow-swimming and placid species that could yield upward of 50 tons of
meat and blubber. The Thule had hunted bowheads for millennia, mostly
around the Bering and Beaufort seas. There whales and people may have
stayed, save for the Medieval Warm Period, which enabled the whales to
expand east through now-unfrozen seas. The Thule hunters went along for
the ride, metaphorically speaking, along the way leaving artifacts and
sites that are remarkably similar from Alaska to Greenland.¹⁰

There are obvious differences between the Paleo-Eskimo and Thule cases,
and that of the colonization of the Americas. The later peoples were
radiating outward in a familiar, relatively homogeneous, and (in the
case of the Thule) newly expanding Arctic niche. Clovis groups were
pioneering a vastly larger, trackless, and increasingly exotic and
highly diverse landscape, one that ranged from open northern grassland
to closed southern forest. No matter how varied the Late Holocene Arctic
might seem (and no doubt it seemed varied to those who lived there), it
was nowhere as varied, or as environmentally and climatically unsettled,
as late Pleistocene North America (Chapter 2).

The whale-hunting Thule also had at their disposal watercraft for
long-distance travel, making it easy to move far and fast. Paleoindians
surely had rafts as well. They did, after all, cross the Mississippi
River at a time when it was swollen with glacial melt-water, and they
reached the Channel Islands of California. But boats would hardly have
helped them rapidly colonize the Great Basin, the high plains, or any of
the other areas of the continent where they camped far from any lakes or
navigable rivers. The move from Alaska to Greenland across the northern
maritime region was hardly as complicated as the one from Alaska to
Panama.

But there is one apparent similarity in the three cases: the size of
their prey.

…AND METHOD TO MAMMOTHS

Robert Kelly and Lawrence Todd argued in a very influential paper that
Clovis groups moved quickly into and across the Americas by following
the big-game animals of late Pleistocene North America. It's an argument
since elaborated by others, and it has obvious appeal. Preying on large
animals, and especially targeting the Pleistocene megafauna, would have
made it possible—even obligatory, they say—for the first Americans to
move rapidly across long distances and through the continent, and it
would have enabled them to easily hurdle any ecological boundaries. The
journey from open plains into closed forest would not have required a
change in adaptation. Just take aim at mastodons, now that their distant
elephant cousins (the mammoths) had been left behind.¹¹ This idea, taken
to its extreme, roots Paul Martin's belief Clovis groups hunted the
several dozen genera of Pleistocene megafauna to extinction.

Could the colonization of the Americas have been that straightforward?
Unfortunately for them (and us), probably not. Not all animals, let all
alone all elephants (or mammoth and mastodon, in our North American
Pleistocene case) are alike in their behavior. Wildlife biologists and
skilled hunters alike know that finding animal prey requires knowledge
of how they behave on the landscape, and that varies by the animals’ age
and sex; the size and composition of the herd (and where they fit in the
herd hierarchy); whether animals are breeding, pregnant, or lactating;
the season; the availability of forage and water; the topography;
exposure to predation; and so on.¹² As archaeologist (and lifelong
hunter) George Frison observes: “To successfully match wits with wild
animals with the intent to kill them requires a thorough knowledge of
the hunting territory and the behavioral patterns of the species
residing within it.”¹³

A hunter might be able to bring the same weapons to the hunt. A mammoth
or mastodon could be felled just as easily with the same type of spear
point. But how different species responded to stalking or attack surely
varied. While accompanying G/wi hunters of the Kalahari Desert, George
Silberbauer observed that “the bow and arrow are versatile weapons, but
switching from one prey species to another involves more than aiming at
a different animal. Each species calls for a different approach, target
selection, and because of differences in susceptibility to arrow poison,
a different method of pursuit after the arrow has struck home.”¹⁴
Hunting a lone mastodon browsing in the forests of eastern North America
would have posed a very different challenge from hunting mammoth (a herd
animal) grazing on the open plains, or for that matter, from hunting
bison, deer, moose, or any other large animal, each with its own
idiosyncratic behaviors—which probably explains why megafaunal kills
sites are so rare (Chapter 8).

But let's not stop the pursuit of big game just yet, for mammoth and
mastodon were occasionally taken by Clovis groups, and there's reason to
suppose hunting big game was important, even if it did not serve to
propel Paleoindians across the continent. The reasoning goes like this:
colonizers newly arrived in North America were “pre-adapted to hunting,”
most often large game.¹⁵ But that requires qualification.

[images]

FIGURE 39.
Excavations in the Late Pleistocene levels at the Broken Mammoth site,
Alaska. (Photograph courtesy of David R. Yesner.)

One of the important facts to emerge from David Yesner's excavations at
the Broken Mammoth site (Figure 39) on the Tanana River in central
Alaska, dated to 11,800 BP, is what other game was available and
exploited in the far north. Among the approximately 10,000 bones
recovered at the site were those of bison, elk, caribou, moose, mountain
sheep, ground squirrel (the most numerous of the small mammals), hare,
marmot, river otter, and collared pika. But mammals were not the only
thing on the menu: so were birds (fatty birds, too). Most of the bird
bones (65%) were from tundra swan, but there were also three species of
goose (Canadian, Snow, and White-fronted), five species of ducks, and
willow ptarmigan (not only does this tell us something about the menu,
but it also indicates the North Pacific avian flyway had by then been
reestablished in the wake of deglaciation). And then, too, there were
salmon and grayling pulled from the Tanana. Ironically, there were no
mammoth eaten at the Broken Mammoth site. Its name came from ivory
fragments the inhabitants of the site must have found on the landscape
and collected as keepsakes or raw material for making tools, for this
was old ivory, predating the site occupation by nearly 4,000 years.¹⁶

The picture that emerges of high Arctic subsistence, even in Pleistocene
times, is one of broad-based diets. Meat was a large part of it, and not
by fad or choice but by necessity. In the Arctic, there were not many
other subsistence options available. Edible plants were and are rare,
and only seasonally available. That said, even obligate Arctic hunters
in historic times made use of about 140 species of plants.¹⁷

When the first Americans arrived south of the ice sheets in unglaciated
North America, they would have found an environment teeming with
animals, and a far richer supply of carbohydrate-yielding plants,
allowing a wider range of food choices. Even better, the animals had
never before peered down the shaft of a spear, and initially were surely
naive about the danger humans presented. Faced with a full menu of
possible entrees, the first Americans likely did what hunters the
anthropological world over do: they ranked their targets based on their
expected return rate. High-ranked resources, the ones worth pursuing,
are those that provide the greatest payoff for the effort expended.

As a general rule, resource ranking of animals roughly correlates with
body size: large game tends to be a high-ranked resource, smaller game
lower ranked. There's far more return for the effort of killing a large
animal like a bison, say, than a small one like a prairie dog. It takes
an awful lot of effort and time, not to mention an awful lot of prairie
dogs, to match the food and protein equivalent of a single bison. Yet,
like all general rules, as Douglas Bird and James O'Connell explain,¹⁸
this one has exceptions: the very biggest of the big game (whales, say,
or mammoth) might not be high-ranked prey under all circumstances
because of the cost and risk of pursuing and killing these very large
animals. Is your dinner worth your life? Not on a regular basis, though
there are payoffs to occasionally going after even the biggest game.
After all, showing off one's hunting skills has its benefits, too
(Chapter 8).

At the other end of the body-size scale, lowly grasshoppers can be
high-ranked resources during seasons when they are so abundant a forager
can net in an hour enough insect protein to feed a family.¹⁹ And some
resources change in rank as environments change (as, for example, when
drought sets in, and seeds become a viable option), or for want of other
higher-ranked foods, or with changes in technology (the invention of
toggle harpoons promoted the rankings of many marine mammals).

Given a choice between pursuing a high-ranked resource and a low-ranked
one, hunter-gatherers will pursue the higher-ranked one. They do so even
if the lower-ranked resources are more abundant, simply because the
costs of going after lower-ranked resources—capturing, killing, and
butchering all those prairie dogs—tilt the cost-benefit equation in
favor of the one-stop shopping offered by a bison. The number of
lower-ranked resources in the diet is thus not a consequence of their
abundance, but instead of the abundance and availability of
higher-ranked resources (a good thing, too, else we humans would have
spent an inordinate amount of our evolutionary history eating beetles).

The diet breadth model predicts that hunter-gatherers do not simply eat
whatever they encounter, but instead decide on which food(s) to take
based on the search time that must be spent looking for food, and the
processing time needed to pursue, capture, harvest, and process the food
for eating. The optimal diet is a compromise: as more (and lower-ranked)
prey are added to the menu, search time decreases (more potential
targets), but in a see-saw fashion, processing time increases (adding
prey requires different tactics to track, kill [or harvest], and
prepare, and possibly additional, even specialized gear). The goal,
often sought though not always realized, is to find the mix of resources
that minimizes both search and processing time.

What of our newly arrived American colonizers? The diet breadth model,
as Kelly shows, predicts that hunter-gatherers will decide on which food
to take based on a knowledge of the quality of different foods, and on a
knowledge of resource densities (and hence search costs) and processing
costs (return rates). The hunting of the naive prey was likely good at
first, probably so good that the high-ranked resources in an area would
soon decline in the face of hunting pressure, and once the prey realized
this new predator was something to be avoided (this is called resource
depression).²⁰ Faced with diminishing returns, colonists could choose to
move to unoccupied areas where familiar game animals were present, or
stay in place and expand their diet by working their way down the food
chain.

But when to stay and when to leave? Patch choice models hold that
foragers will stay in a place as long as the expected return rate is
above the average return rate for the environment. Once it appears
better return rates can be had elsewhere—when the grass, it's realized,
really is greener on the other side—and after factoring in the cost in
time and energy of moving, the original place will be left behind. But
whether moving or staying, the forager needs information: What other
resources are available in other patches? What other, possibly
less-familiar and lower-ranked animal and plant resources are available?
Where are they?

LEARNING LANDSCAPES

These models assume a forager knows something about resource
availability across a wide area, and can make informed decisions about
what to pursue, how long to stay, and when to leave. Gaining that
knowledge requires extended periods observing how the animal behaves
over the seasons and in different settings and circumstances: the more
time that's invested, the more reliable the chances of success.²¹
Colonizers new to a landscape haven't had the luxury of long experience
learning their prey, and early on would not have the knowledge to
anticipate when and where their prey would be found. Nor can they ask
the locals for help: there aren't any. Each new habitat colonizers
entered would, for a time, have been unpredictable and perhaps
unreliable.

This is not to say—as some have accused archaeologists of saying—that
the first Americans were “timid, tentative, and diffident foragers [who
were] baffled” by this New World.²² They were surely quite the opposite.
The first Americans made it here and thrived because they were anything
but cultural dopes. Granted, they started with a proverbial blank slate,
but they were not completely naive either. They must have possessed
well-honed hunting strategies, a general knowledge of animal behavior,
abroad familiarity with plants, geological prospecting skills, toolkits
adaptable to various contingencies and, in all likelihood, a long
history—by virtue of the vast and empty northern landscapes they'd
already pioneered—of being opportunistic in their adaptations, and of
maintaining a flexible social organization, long-distance kin relations,
and a tradition of information sharing whenever possible (all vital when
there are few of you on the landscape).

Likewise, though they were entering new habitats as they moved across
the continent, as pedestrian hunter-gatherers, they would have done so
(literally) step by step: they could see in the distance, for example,
periglacial environments give way to northern grasslands, and thus would
have had time to scout what was ahead and anticipate some of its
adaptive challenges. Few colonizers (and the first Americans were not
among them) are suddenly thrust into utterly unfamiliar environments
poles apart from where they've been. The English in the late sixteenth
and early seventeenth centuries in America came close, and nearly
perished as a result (it hardly helped that the Roanoke Island and
Jamestown colonies both had the monumental bad luck of arriving and
trying to establish themselves during the worst years of an
extraordinary drought).²³

What America's first peoples therefore needed to build on their prior
knowledge so as to maximize their chances of success were “maps” of near
and increasingly distant lands to know where to move; an understanding
of the seasons and climate to know when to move; and a familiarity with
a region's animals and plants as well as the location of other
necessities like water and stone to know how to move. To be a successful
colonizer of the Americas meant using the neural hardware and cognitive
software with which all humans come equipped, taking cues from the
environment, and above all, paying attention and learning (see Table
11).

TABLE 11 Components of landscape learning

[images]

FINDING THE WAY

Much of our modern world is covered in networks of roads laid out with
signposts of distance and direction, even entering eastern Beringia
(Figure 40). There's little incentive, as geographer Reginald Golledge
observes, to pay close attention to the environment we pass through, and
most don't. We pick routes that may not be the shortest or most direct,
but are good enough to “get me there anyway.”²⁴ Ineffectiveness and
inefficiency seem to characterize our movements across space, yet the
consequences may be little more than socially awkward moments, like
arriving late at a dinner party.

In times past and on unknown landscapes, the penalty for geographic
inattention may have been more severe, as when hunting parties became
lost and failed to retrace their steps, or ocean-going colonists were
not as prudent as they needed to be. Being lost on land was not always
fatal, of course, nor would it carry the same costs as being lost at
sea. Still, even in places like the lush tropics, becoming lost can be
fatal if one fails to recognize the potential foods in that setting; the
Spanish Conquistador Gonzalo Pizarro nearly met his demise in the upper
Amazon in 1540-42 for just that reason.In the unforgiving desert or high
Arctic, the danger is much greater. Hunter-gatherers there take great
measures to avoid getting lost and rarely do, save when ill or overtaken
by bad weather.²⁵

Hunter-gatherers hedge their survival bets by learning the landscape.
Working among the Nunamuit (Eskimo) of northern Alaska, Lewis Binford
observed that an individual hunter might annually range over about 5,400
km² of territory, while together the members of the band might annually
move over as much as 25,000 km². The knowledge of what was seen and
experienced would be widely shared. Accumulate those movements over a
lifetime of hunting and shifting settlement, and an individual Nunamuit
might ultimately travel over an area of about 300,000 km², and if an
individual listens carefully to stories told by others, he or she can
know about places without ever having seen them.²⁶ It's little wonder
that at the turn of the twentieth century, an Eskimo living in the high
Arctic drew maps for an anthropologist that detailed topography,
landmarks, and places over an area of approximately 650,000 km², parts
of which he knew only by hearsay, but accurately depicted nonetheless.
This is geographic knowledge on a vast scale, but given the sparseness
of the Arctic environment (not much food per kilometer here), it is on
the high side for hunter-gatherers. Even so, G/wi hunters of the
Kalahari have detailed knowledge of areas covering 20,000 km², and
similarly scaled geographic knowledge is possessed by native
Australians.²⁷

[images]

FIGURE 40.
Pointing the way to the New World: a sign in downtown Barrow, Alaska, at
the gateway to the Americas. The first peoples of the New World had no
such wayfinding help, but nonetheless were likely skilled at finding
their way out (and back) across unknown landscapes. (Photograph by David
J. Meltzer.)

Within these respective areas, the landscape was known and named with
remarkable detail, all without benefit of maps or instruments (a
traditional knowledge that is fast disappearing in the high Arctic
because of the introduction of GPS technology²⁸). In their absence and
in the face of utterly unknown terrain, colonizers could use a variety
of topographic markers, environmental cues, generic knowledge, and the
cognitive “software” we humans have developed over evolutionary time: a
sense of direction; the capacity to store information; and the ability
to integrate time, motion, and relative position as one moves.
Wayfinding, our universal ability to “determine a route, learn it, and
retrace or reverse it from memory,” enables us to travel across a
landscape without getting (too) lost, while constantly maintaining an
awareness of a position relative to a starting point, and do so despite
the well-documented tendency of humans in featureless environments to
veer (by an average of about 18°).²⁹

Studies of wayfinding suggest that initial colonizers on an unknown
landscape would likely be guided by features that are large, readily
visible, or otherwise distinctive: prominent landmarks, or major
topographic and geographic features (mountains ranges, rivers,
coastlines). This, of course, varies by landscape. Among the
tundra-dwelling Eskimo, directions are figured by the position of the
sun and stars, and by the prevailing wind direction (marked by snow
drifts or sand dunes); their forest brethren orient by topography,
rivers, lakes, and other such features.³⁰

The less familiar the forager is with an area and the greater its size,
the coarser the resolution of the cognitive “map” of the landscape. Over
time, however, knowledge of the region will come to include highly
specific references to particular places, their characteristics, their
use, and their identity (social, geographic, historic, ritual, and so
on), for the events of a place give it meaning.

Human behavior being what it is, mapping a new landscape was likely a
staged process, initially involving scouts or hunters pursuing game
while probing into unfamiliar terrain. The oldest archaeological site in
an area may not represent the first settler, but instead the first
person to scout around.

Not all landscapes are alike in what Golledge terms their
“legibility,”³¹ their appeal, or the ease with which they can be learned
or traversed. In some instances, wayfinding is easy but travel is not
(e.g., across mountainous terrain); in other cases, travel is easy and
wayfinding not (vast, flat, featureless plains); in still other cases,
both travel and wayfinding can be challenges (heavy forest) (Figure 41).
Had colonizers new to a continent followed paths of less resistance, as
Anderson and Gillam suggest (Chapter 6), they might have threaded their
way across the continent, through areas of relatively low-lying
topography, along major river valleys, skirting glacial and pluvial
lakes, or moving along the coastal margin.

In addition to the many and often highly visible or prominent natural
features humans may have used as landmarks for their emerging cognitive
maps of the landscape, colonizers likely also created artificial markers
to help find their way. These would be especially important on
geographically monotonous landscapes like flat, featureless grasslands.
Francisco Coronado, who in 1541 led a small army onto the high plains of
western North America in search of a rumored City of Gold (Quivira),
nervously described the region as so “bare of landmarks [it was] as if
we were surrounded by the sea.” And though he traveled with a few crude
“sea-compasses,” every morning his men still got a fix on the sunrise,
after which arrows were shot in the direction they were heading in order
to maintain their bearing, and piles of bones or buffalo chips were left
behind to mark their trail. Even so, Coronado's entourage meandered, and
regularly leaked stragglers and lost hunters.³²

[images]

FIGURE 41.
Landscape illustrations of the relative ease or difficulty of travel and
wayfinding. These vary in degree of difficulty depending on the
topography, landscape cover, orientation points, and the like, as shown
in these few examples. (Photographs by David J. Meltzer and Ethan I.
Meltzer.)

COPING WITH CLIMATE

Coronado also had the dubious honor of being the first European to
experience the fierce wrath of a plains hailstorm, which hit his company
in the spring of 1541 and destroyed tents, scattered horses, dented
helmets, and broke most of their water containers (pottery and gourd
canteens). It was the last straw: a food shortage, doubts about whether
Quivira truly existed, and strong misgivings about the Natives who
promised to take him there, prompted Coronado to send most of his army
back to New Mexico. With a small force, he continued north and found
Quivira, but it proved to be only a small, gold-less village on the
plains of central Kansas. And at that moment, he illustrated the
consequences for would-be colonists of climatic ignorance: he stayed in
Quivira only briefly, then beat a hasty retreat, fearing the oncoming
winter would be early and arctic, and trap his force amid Natives
growing increasingly hostile.³³

Coronado was right about the Natives, but he had no idea what winters
were like in central Kansas. All he had was a brief glimpse of its
summer weather, and he knew nothing of its climate. That distinction is
important: weather is the sum total of atmospheric variables
(temperature, humidity, precipitation, wind, and so on) for a brief
period of time. Climate is the cumulative picture of weather over a
longer period of time, and of how it changes seasonally, annually, and
over even longer spans (Chapter 2).Humans adapt to the weather, but to
be successful over the long term, they have to know something about the
climate over the course of the seasons.

Colonists expanding into new ranges will not suddenly find themselves in
radically different climate, but as they shift latitude or altitude,
enter regions dominated by different air masses, or expand into interior
areas from the coast, they can encounter conditions that differ in
subtle and sometimes not-so-subtle ways. Those varying climates are part
of the environmental stage on which adaptation and colonization is
played out.

Climate also varies over time, occasionally in relatively predictable
cycles but mostly not. Some of that variation occurs on a scale
detectable to humans, as for example our recurring El Nino. But no one
lived long enough to notice, for example, the onset of a glacial period
(though it has been said the Younger Dryas came on fast enough to be
noticed by people [Chapter 9]). Colonists brand new to a landscape are
mostly in the dark about the local climate, having not been on the
ground long enough to experience more than seasonal or annual changes.
Knowing what climate will bring requires residence.

All of which means that when climates are highly variable (as they were
in late Pleistocene times), more time must elapse before an environment
can seem less uncertain. Colonists who arrive during climatic extremes
(unusually heavy rainfall or prolonged drought) will lack a sense of
whether the conditions they are experiencing are typical or unusual,
short-or long-lived, and predictable or not.³⁴ The Norse experienced
that: their tenuous toeholds on Greenland and Iceland, established
during the several centuries-long Medieval Warm Period, were shaken
loose when the climate changed for the worse, and their meager
farmsteads failed. We assume, however, more mobile colonizers with more
flexible survival strategies were better able to roll with the punches
that nature threw their way.

WHAT FEEDS AND WHAT CURES, WHAT HURTS AND WHAT KILLS

Having made it this far, the first Americans had already figured out
fire, shelter, and clothing. Once here, they needed to find the
materials (stone, wood, bone) suitable to make or maintain those items,
as well as meet their daily requirements of food and water. Learning
where, what, and how to locate those critical resources could be
relatively fast and easy, or not.

Outcrops of stone suitable for tool manufacture, for example, don't
move, and once found become known and predictable points on an emerging
map of a landscape (Figure 42). And those can be relatively easy to
find: the famous Alibates agatized dolomite outcrop near Amarillo,
Texas, prized for its high-quality stone by hunter-gatherers since
Clovis times, is bisected by the Canadian River, which carries cobbles
of the stone as much as 600 kilometers downstream of the outcrop. Anyone
seeing those cobbles in the river gravels would know it was merely a
matter of following the stone trail back to the outcrop source. It's no
surprise Clovis-age sites often occur near where major rivers and
streams (which we presume were Pleistocene travel corridors) intersect
geological outcrops of high-quality stone.³⁵

Locating water can be relatively easy as well, even in dry environments:
there, one follows game trails or the flights of birds. Finding it in
the same spot again is hardly guaranteed, however, at least not in
semi-arid and arid lands where water is neither permanent nor reliable,
or during drought when springs and lakes disappear from the surface, and
stream flow diminishes. Still, where water might be found beneath the
surface or will return after heavy rains generally does not move, and
that can be predicted, too. Surely the first Americans possessed the
knowledge of geology and hydrology to enable them to find water—there's
even tantalizing but unconfirmed evidence of well digging in Clovis
times (Chapter 8).

Neither water nor stone were resources that required new knowledge to be
exploited. Once found, stone could be flaked into useable tools, and
water collected in skin pouches and transported. There wasn't much to
learn.

[images]

FIGURE 42.
Inspecting outcrops of high-quality, knappable quartzite in the Gunnison
Basin, Colorado. Outcrops like this, where the stone occurs in large
blocks, were excellent places to acquire raw material in sufficient
supply and size, and could be readily located by following the trail of
stone washed downhill or downstream. In this case, the quartzite is more
resistant to erosion than the surrounding rock, and so forms a bench
easily spotted from a distance. (Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

Plants and animals, of course, are far more ephemeral and less
predictable on the landscape: game-rich areas may lack edible plants;
plants may not be edible all times of the year; and animals (especially
larger ones) can wander away from a previously grazed habitat, or change
their range altogether. Some resources might also require considerable
study to ascertain their use(s).

This was particularly true of plants. In North America alone, there are
an estimated 30,000 species and varieties of plants, and those in
temperate and near-tropical areas were surely unfamiliar to bygone
Siberians. The process of learning about specific plants, whether they
had food, medicinal, or other value, or possibly were poisonous, must
have entailed observation (watch to see if other animals eat them), and
possibly considerable experimentation (try it…and see what happens).

Yet, daunting as the overall task surely was, the process of botanical
learning was ultimately accomplished in prehistory with astonishing
success: as Daniel Moermann observes, “No one has ever found a plant
native to North America with any medicinal value not known to and used
by American Indians.”³⁶ In Moermann's view, intense periods of plant
research (“research” being an appropriate term here) would likely occur
under two conditions: when new diseases appeared, and when there was a
substantial environmental transformation. Colonizing the Americas met
the first condition and possibly the second, with medicinal plants
perhaps being needed when the tropics were entered for the first time.³⁷

Which is not to discount the role of plants as food. As already
mentioned, the first Americans were pre-adapted to hunting, coming as
they were from an Arctic environment where being a vegetarian was
impossible in the winter and challenging in the summer. Yet, habitual
carnivory can sometimes lead to various ills and even death: individuals
with protein-dominated diets experience higher metabolism, requiring at
least 9% more calories just to maintain basic physiological functions.
Too much protein strains the liver's ability to function, resulting in
what's called “rabbit starvation” (after the dangers of a diet dependant
on this lean animal).³⁸ Rabbit starvation can be prevented by adding
fatty acids or carbohydrates to the menu. This was accomplished in the
far north by preying on animals with high body fat content—like the
birds and fish consumed at Broken Mammoth—and supplemented by plant
collecting in the brief summers. Once in plant-rich, unglaciated North
America, colonists were likely also snacking on carbohydrate-rich plants
to round out their diet (Chapter 8).

As knowledge of a plant's properties was built through observation and
experimentation, there would have been considerable advantage to
maintaining it. Otherwise, each subsequent generation would have to scan
the plants anew. That seems unlikely, given the vast number of plants to
scan. One supposes, instead, that once broad classes were
identified—recognizing it's an oak, say, and not a pine—and their
general properties learned—oaks produce acorns that can be palatable
when leached of tannic acid—this knowledge was broadly shared. Then it
was merely a matter of correctly spotting different species of oak in
new settings. So it was, for example, that in 1492 Columbus's crew saw
few trees on Hispaniola known to them, but they did recognize some pine
and palm trees; however, they readily noticed “the palms were
extraordinarily high, very hard, slender, and straight [and] Even the
fruits they produce in abundance were unknown.”³⁹

Having knowledge at a more general level would be easier to retain
(there are only about 290 families of plants in North America, as
opposed to its 30,000 species and varieties) and transmit to subsequent
generations, especially if the plant in question was a long-lived
perennial. Knowledge at this level would give colonists an entree into
new habitats in which the species might be novel, but where they would
at least recognize the plant as familiar. Just how effective this
process can be is evident in the rich record of plants and plant parts
used for food, medicine, fuel, and raw material by the inhabitants of
Monte Verde's MVII occupation (Chapter 4).

Learning about the New World's unfamiliar animals was perhaps less of a
challenge (there were far fewer of them), but there was still the task
of understanding each species’ habits and habitats, and seasonal and
longer-term patterns in abundance and distribution. Certainly, clues
about animal movements can abound on a landscape, and surely these
colonizers were adept trackers—otherwise, they would have perished
somewhere in Beringia!

They likely could also count on four-footed help. DNA evidence indicates
dogs were domesticated from wolves some 15,000 years ago. Although the
clues are faint, it appears dogs accompanied the first peoples in their
trek to the New World, since dog remains have been found in several
Paleoindian sites. Dogs have held various jobs for humans in the past,
besides being our best friends: they helped in the hunt to bring animals
to bay, served as beasts of burden, were food sources (regularly in some
places, only as an emergency backup in others), and indeed, may have
been vital in the exploration of new lands. Dogs figure prominently in
many American Indian origin stories, acting as helpmates in ritual
passages.⁴⁰

As hunters and their dogs shifted into novel settings, there were
animals never before seen or encountered (Figure 43), making humans just
as naive as their prey, though not as disadvantaged for being so
(although Lewis and Clark's first encounters with grizzlies provide
glimpses of just how disadvantaged humans can be, even when toting
firearms).⁴¹

A generalized knowledge of animal behavior could be extrapolated from
one area to another, and hunting skills and weaponry were (to varying
degrees) transferable from one target to another. Kelly and Todd rightly
argued it is “easier to locate, procure, and process the faunal as
opposed to floral resources of a region.”⁴² That said, it is also true
the location of animals is fleeting and unpredictable (while groves of
plants, once found, can be readily relocated). Exploiting a new,
high-ranked prey species required (as earlier noted) studying its
behavior, learning where and when it might be found (its preferred
grazing or browsing areas), and how best to approach it.

Animal prey can be highly mobile, moving seasonally as forage conditions
change, especially in response to the arrival of hunters on the scene.
Prey quickly get over any initial naivete they might have once the
spears start flying. They either change their behavior or move out of
reach. Finding fewer targets, the hunters themselves need to range more
widely in search of game.

It's a volatile market for hunter-gatherers, and one they monitor by
moving: insurance for hunter-gatherers is knowing where to go next, when
return rates diminish where they are. Colonists entering a new region,
Bird and O'Connell suggest, “should occupy the highest-ranked patch
first,” all other things being equal (and assuming they can find it).⁴³
Whether, when, and where to move is decided after solving a complicated
equation incorporating knowledge about climate, plants, and animals.
Long-time residents of a landscape have relatively complete information
about resources on which to base decisions about how long to stay and
when to leave.⁴⁴ The G/wi, for example, carefully consider

such factors as the severity of the coming winter and the first months
of summer, the prospects for rain and the anticipated date of the first
rains. A floristic forecast is made for each foreseeable set of
circumstances: Should there be a severe winter with sharp frosts but a
not-too-severe early summer then such-and-such locality would be best….
The band considers not only its next move, but the whole series of
migrations in the foreseeable future. The aim is not to plot the coming
season's itinerary in detail but to work out a series of moves that will
permit the band the widest choice of subsequent sites.⁴⁵

[images]

FIGURE 43.
The first Americans occasionally encountered animals they'd never seen
before, such as this rattlesnake waiting beneath a bush. Fortunately, a
rattlesnake often provides a warning of its intentions. (Photograph by
David J. Meltzer.)

But if that landscape is unknown, or populated with exotic plants and
animals, knowing when and where the chess pieces need to move is even
more challenging.

GENDER NEUTRAL?

It has been argued that aspects of landscape learning are not gender
neutral among hunter-gatherers. There is in our shared past an
evolutionarily derived division of labor, in which males hunted and
females foraged. Although the pattern is by no means universal (more of
a guideline, say, than a rule), the trend is rooted in the fact that
hunting—especially of large game—can be very risky. Women tend to be
risk averse, especially when carrying or tending children (though there
may be other reasons why, in general, women tend not to hunt). Moreover,
as Bird and O'Connell observe, women target resources that daily provide
food for themselves and their offspring, while men favor larger prey
that can provision many in the band (but not necessarily their own
family), and draw attention and higher status to themselves. There are,
of course, situations in which women aid or otherwise participate in the
hunt, which, as Elizabeth Chilton points out, readily shift with
adaptive circumstances.⁴⁶

Regardless, by virtue of this difference, there are or might be gender
correlates or patterns in wayfinding skills, foraging knowledge, and the
scale of foraging. This is so because finding and killing highly mobile,
large animals entails different spatial challenges than does foraging
for edible plants. Tracking animals requires the ability to orient
oneself in relation to distant points on a landscape (either visible or
not), *** and being able to constantly and accurately update position
and location while on the hunt. In contrast, gathering involves locating
food plants within complex vegetation communities, tracking their
seasonal changes, and maintaining memory for objects and their
locations.⁴⁷

From this, we might speculate that landscape learning of routes and
resources was similarly gender linked. Much of the “local” knowledge of
plants and small animals, and their patterns and distributions, was
likely learned, acquired, and accumulated by women (and young children).
Broader-scale landscape knowledge, and this includes both routes and
resources, would result from men's more extensive, long-distance
logistical hunting forays across the area.

Our evolutionary history fails to explain, however, why men won't ask
for directions (and that's a rule, not a guideline).

TRUST ANYONE OVER THIRTY

Richard Nelson, working among the Eskimo in the 1960s, was struck by how
the younger generation believed everything it was told by its elders,
quite unlike many of America's youth in the 1960s. He instantly
understood why: an Eskimo hunter devoted “a lifetime to learning more
and more about the habits of the animals and about the mobile sea ice on
which he hunts,” and about the landscape he traverses. For Eskimo youth,
every bit of information they gleaned from their elders’ experience
would enhance their odds of success, and might even save their lives.⁴⁸

Yet, one individual or group can only cover so much ground. By talking
to others and tapping their knowledge about resources available in other
areas, a person can learn about places they've never been, animals
they've never hunted, and plants they've never tasted, not to mention
draw maps of areas far larger than they had ever seen. Not surprisingly,
as Silberbauer observed, when calculating moves on the landscape, all
adults in the foraging group participated in the decision-making
process.⁴⁹

Colonizers new to a landscape haven't got elders, relatives, or
neighbors who can pass along what they have learned over their lifetimes
(though it perhaps goes without saying, they haven't got written records
either). But they have descendants. As groups moved into the new
landscape, knowledge was gained by observation and experience, and
“recorded” in folklore, storytelling, and ritual. But how quickly would
colonizers learn the routes, climates, and resources of a landscape,
particularly a landscape the size of, say, North America? We have no
answers. Most studies agree detailed landscape learning is a prolonged
process, with estimates ranging from 200-1,000 years. Even the early
English colonists in America, with all the relative technological
advantages they possessed, took more than a century before they had
accurate maps of their region.

Learning is cumulative and ultimately can be sustained over multiple
generations, even among people who rely entirely on memory and oral
transmission of knowledge. Naturally, there is some information decay,
and lessons learned at one time can fail to be passed on to others. That
can be seen even as recently the massive failure of Great Plains farmers
during the 1930s Dust Bowl (Figure 44). They had arrived in great
numbers during a relatively wet period and considered those conditions
normal, unaware that a previous wave of settlers had been driven off by
severe drought in the early 1890s. They had no knowledge of that
previous experience, nor appreciation of the inevitability of drought
and the risks of farming in that semi-arid climate. And they could have
read about it.

Knowledge grows exponentially, since it can be transmitted by the
telling (genetic adaptations take longer to pass along) and thus shared
widely within and between generations, thereby rapidly spreading
information about areas, events, and conditions otherwise experienced by
only a few. To be sure, lessons learned in one area may be irrelevant in
different settings, but one never knows.

Landscape learning likely begins at the broadest geographic scale, in
what John Beaton calls megapatches, which are ecological features on the
order of coasts, plains, mountains, deserts, or forests.⁵⁰ The first
occupants of the Great Plains (a possible megapatch), would have seen
large-game animals on a vast grassland. It likely all looked the same to
them, for they would not have known and would have to learn there was
surprising variability in the grasses on which those animals grazed, and
thus differences in their abundance and distribution across the region.
Over time, those came into better focus as colonists saw more of the
details within the plains.

[images]

FIGURE 44.
Arthur Rothstein's iconic Dust Bowl photograph of a farmer and sons
walking in the face of a dust storm in western Oklahoma in 1936. Drought
and other changes in climate can have a significant impact on human
groups, and knowing that such changes occur, even if they are not
predictable, is an important element of landscape learning—which was
neglected or forgotten in this case. This photograph is apt in another
way: the dust storm captured by Rothstein that spring helped expose the
nearby Nall Paleoindian site. (Photograph by Arthur Rothstein, Library
of Congress LC-USF34-4052-E.)

In effect, landscape learning of routes and resources probably took
place from the general to the specific in terms of space, but from the
specific to the general in terms of time, particularly in the case of
climate (which is initially observed as the daily weather).

Landscape learning has costs in terms of time and energy. But those
costs are offset by the benefits of acquiring information that reduces
uncertainty and increases one's odds of surviving and thriving.⁵¹ People
can still get lost, can still starve, and can still run out of food or
water. But they are less likely to do so the more they know.

It's fair to surmise that the greatest effort in information acquisition
would occur in patchy and unpredictable environments, the very situation
in which the first Americans initially found themselves. Accordingly,
early on in the colonization process, there was a great advantage to
learning the local geography, climate, and resources of these unfamiliar
landscapes. Under the circumstances, there was good reason to see what
was over the next hill…and the hill after that.

SEX AND THE SINGLE COLONIZER

Much of the attention of colonization models, such as the one offered by
Kelly and Todd, have focused on how it was possible for colonizers to
move so rapidly across the New World. Their answer was hunting large
game. Yet, as Christopher Ellis puts it, there's more to being a
successful colonizer than “what to eat”—just as important is “who to
meet.”⁵²

We don't know how many people were in the group that first came to
America. It could have been dozens, it may have been hundreds (as Jody
Hey estimates), and it possibly was in the low thousands—but only the
low thousands. This was a colonization, not a swarming invasion. On a
continent the size of North America, such relatively low numbers would
have translated into an extraordinarily low population density, lower
than at any time in American prehistory.

To make that colonization successful over the long term, the group had
to reproduce, which meant that as its children came of age, they needed
to find mates to have children of their own. The task would have been
more or less challenging depending on the group's size, birth/death
rates, age and sex composition, marriage patterns, and how rapidly it
was moving from its geographic homeland and/or other groups. That, in
turn, raises several questions: is there a minimum group size that had
to be maintained in order to stave off extinction? How does an
individual who is a member of a colonizing band that is steadily moving
away from other people find a spouse? And do these demographic demands
suggest how colonizers might have spread across the landscape?

As anthropologist John Moore has shown, there is no magic number that
guarantees survival. A smaller band (of, say, twenty-five) might seem
more vulnerable to extinction, but it can survive as long as birth rates
are high, death rates are low, and there's a relatively even mix of
males and females of reproductive age (assuming, that is, they can find
mates). Likewise, a larger group (in the hundreds, say) can plummet to
extinction if its birth rates are low, death rates are high (especially
if there is high infant mortality), and there's been a long run of bad
luck in the sex ratios of the children—perhaps a string of too many baby
boys and not enough baby girls.⁵³

But even if the mix of ages and sex ratios is just right (there are
enough marriageable males and females), individuals in smaller bands
that have pushed far ahead into unoccupied lands will either have to
track great distances to find a mate in another group, or else marry
within their own band which, depending on how small the band is, might
mean incest or polygamy. Neither of those options is beneficial if
sustained over the long term: incest can have bleak genetic
consequences, while polygamy slows overall population growth (women in
polygamous marriages tend to have fewer children than they otherwise
might). It's best, then, to participate in the larger effective
population (the metapopulation of geneticists). Maintaining links to
distant bands can be accomplished in several ways, not the least of
which are long-distance mating and/or the occasional aggregation
(rendezvous) of smaller groups.

Demography and landscape learning are tightly linked for several
reasons, not least that the decision to stay in place or move is based
on the suitability of a new patch relative to the current one. Those
foragers who have more knowledge can better calculate those costs and
increase their survival odds. The information thus gained helps increase
population growth and reduce mortality.

CONTINENTAL COLONIZERS

How, then, might a colonizing band move into an unoccupied land,
maintain their demographic viability, and thereby minimize their risk of
extinction? John Beaton envisions two strategies that mark the opposite
ends of a continuum of possibilities: Estate Settlers and Transient
Explorers. We'll call them the Cautious and the Bold.⁵⁴

Cautious is the band that moves slowly and over relatively shorter
distances. They settle into a valley, and explore it and the surrounding
region; over time, their numbers build. As this happens, some of the
younger members see the area becoming crowded, minor spats become more
frequent, and once-plentiful game declines. On their increasingly
more-distant hunting forays, hunters spot rich and unoccupied lands down
the valley and beyond the edge of the home “estate.” A decision is made,
and soon a part of the group splinters off, but they don't venture too
far. Instead, they stay close enough to maintain contact with kin, keep
to an environment with which they are familiar and in which they have
become successful, and a place from which—if things go badly—they can
always retreat and find relatives who will help. It's a low-risk
strategy. Over time, the process of population growth followed by
budding repeats itself, and the descendants of the estate ultimately
expand to cover the continent. This process does not happen at a
terribly fast pace. Beaton envisions groups that “moved only slowly
across the latitudes

and longitudes, each daughter colony being spawned by the overflow of a
saturated estate.” Since colonization is ultimately fueled by population
growth, to speed it along would require higher population growth rates,
sometimes unnaturally high rates.⁵⁵

Bold is the band that moves independent of population size. They come
into the country and occupy a habitat, but the moment return rates begin
to decline, they move on, without waiting until crowding forces their
hand. And so they move often. In rich and unoccupied Pleistocene North
America, when hunting returns declined, there was little incentive or
need to stay put, not when there was a better living to be had several
valleys over, down the coast, or over the mountains. This strategy
favors rapid dispersal over a large area, with much of the continent
ultimately passed over lightly, as colonizers leapfrogged from one
high-ranked patch to another. They can make a good living, these
transient explorers, but it's not without risk: small groups that go too
far too fast soon find themselves geographically isolated, alone on a
vast landscape. That can put a severe strain on their ability to
maintain long-distance contacts and an accessible source of mates for
their children, raising the specter of inbreeding and drift (cultural
and genetic), and making the group as a whole vulnerable to disappearing
altogether in the face of drought, blizzard, disease, or accident.⁵⁶
Calamities happen.

Thus, colonizers on a landscape with few other people—and this applies
to both the Cautious and the Bold, but especially the latter—not only
had to be able to find distantmates and marriage partners (and
incidentally exchange information and resources), but they also had to
be able to get along with any groups they encountered, kin or no. Having
large and open social networks, flexible kin relations, and the ability
to move easily between and integrate new individuals and groups, as well
as maintain long-distance exchange and alliance networks, all combine to
diminish differences among peoples who need to stick together under
geographic circumstances that might otherwise keep them far apart for
years at a time.⁵⁷ Strongly territorial behavior, or hostility toward
strangers, would be decidedly disadvantageous to people at this place
and time.

On a diverse and unfamiliar landscape, the risk of extinctions is
greatest soon after dispersal, when population numbers and growth rates
tend to be low. The Cautious hedge their bets and stay close enough to
readily maintain overall numbers, but the price is slow colonizing
progress. The Bold run greater demographic risks, but the rewards are
higher: “with a generalized tool kit, a naive fauna, an unconstrained
social/political environment, and a bit of luck, a lineage might see the
Northern Lights, note the transit of the Equatorial sun, and feel the
chill winds of the southern oceans in the space of ten or fewer
generations. This is its own form of success.”⁵⁸

Arguably, then, colonization of a new landscape likely involved
trade-offs between a series of competing demands, including

 

1.  maintaining resource returns, or keeping food on the table,
particularly as preferred or high-ranked resources declined, and in the
face of limited knowledge of the landscape;

2.  maximizing mobility, in order to learn as much as possible, as
quickly as possible about the landscape and its resources (in order to
reduce environmental uncertainty in space and time);

3.  maximizing residence time in resource-rich habitats, in order to
enhance knowledge of specific changes in resource abundance and
distribution (you learn more by staying longer);

4.  minimizing group size, in order to buffer environmental uncertainty
or risk on an unknown landscape; and, finally and perhaps most
critically,

5.  maintaining contact between dispersed groups, in order to exchange
information, resources, and especially mates.

 

Colonizers had to balance the equation between moving to explore and
staying to observe. So were the first peoples Cautious or Bold? It's a
trick question, since these are just the extreme possibilities, and
there are many variants in between. But I lean toward the Bold and for a
very simple reason. The archaeological record we have, whether of Clovis
of pre-Clovis, is not dense enough to match what we would expect to see
of Cautious estate settlers (even granting all the caveats expressed in
Chapter 4 about the scarcity of sites of this age). That does not rule
out a role for population growth in the New World colonization; it only
means this was not the apparent driving force. If colonizers were more
Bold than Cautious, what might we expect to see in the archaeological
record they left behind?

For one, their traces on the landscape ought to be broad and not deep.
If they were wide-ranging explorers who were leapfrogging over large
areas, their sites would be few, scattered, smaller, and more ephemeral,
marking the brief time spent in any one place—although particular
localities, including sources of high-quality stone or other spots where
permanent resources were available, should see more repeated
occupations. Their toolkits ought to look generalized and ready to be
pressed into service for a variety of tasks and contingencies (later, as
groups settled in to new habitats and encountered new challenges, we
would expect to see new tool forms invented to meet those challenges).

The scale of movement (those leaps) ought to vary in part based on the
richness and complexity of the megapatches the group occupied. For
example, groups on the open, treeless western plains would be expected
to move farther and faster than those in the complex environment of the
eastern woodlands. In either case, their movements can be tracked by
looking at where they obtained the stone to make their tools. Rock types
can often be “fingerprinted” to particular geological formations, and
this provides a rough measure of the distance and bearing from source to
site (but a rough measure only, because it fails to account for the
meanderings of the group or individuals, as explained in the next
chapter).

The type of stone, and the distance and direction it was moved, also
provides a potential key to unlocking an aspect of landscape learning:
namely, how the first Americans may have staged their wayfinding on the
unknown landscape. Hunter-gatherers aim to minimize the number and
weight of tools they have to carry (only they and possibly their dogs
were available as pack animals). But venturing into unknown terrain
poses a particular challenge since the colonists would not know where
suitable stone might be found when they needed to replace tools that
broke (as they inevitably do), nor could they haul months’ worth of
stone with them. One possible solution would be to scatter “supply
depots” of stone on the landscape on their outbound exploring trips, so
at the very least they need not return all the way to the outcrop to
refurbish their tool kit. These caches of stone would be there if
needed, and could be abandoned if not, but either way become fixed and
predictable points on an otherwise unknown landscape for the individual
who leaves them in place, and for all who are told about them.

Although the movement across the continent might have seemed slow on a
human time scale—double-digit generations, say—it will likely look
astonishingly fast to us in archaeological time, for those generations
are easily encompassed in the “wink of a radiocarbon eye” (to use
Beaton's charmingly mixed metaphor⁵⁹). Of course, coupling their speed
with the late Pleistocene radiocarbon plateaus (Chapter 1) may make it
impossible for us to develop a high-precision chronology of
colonization, or track movement within and between megapatches. But if
we ever do, we might expect to see a stutter-step pattern to the
colonization process as groups spent relatively longer periods of
residence within a megapatch, separated by rapid movements between them.

We also expect, as Bird and O'Connell suggest (above), for sites to be
located initially in the highest-ranked patches, but that, too, will not
always be easy to ascertain, demanding as it does evidence of past
animal and plant availability that is more detailed than we can usually
muster.⁶⁰ Likewise, it might be difficult to see patterns and trends in
the diet, such as resources being added to the diet as their rankings
change by virtue of knowledge gained about them, given the vagaries of
preservation of animal bones and plant remains. Nonetheless,
high-ranked, big-game resources ought to be taken, and there should also
be evidence of the exploitation of other lower-ranked resources that
might be in an area. If the archaeological record is sufficiently
detailed, we should be able to spot resource depression setting in as
prey and predators wised up to one another, as human populations grew,
and as animals became more wary and/or fled an area.

The first peoples, to offset their high settlement mobility and
dispersal across their new landscape, had to maintain contact with
distant groups and keep open social systems to help recognize strangers
as friends. Long-distance contacts can be detected archaeologically in
stone exchanged among groups, or in rendezvous sites that brought
together people widely dispersed, which are not as hard to spot
archaeologically as one might imagine (Chapter 9 points to one such
site).

Open social systems are a bit more difficult to detect, but may be seen
in proxy form in what are known as style zones, the widespread
distribution, use, and exchange of instantly recognizable, and sometimes
highly symbolic, artifacts such as Clovis or other distinctive styles of
projectile points. These forms may have had functions, but could also
serve as a currency (a term not to be taken too literally) for social
and ritual functions, and over long spans and large areas could serve to
maintain recognition and alliances—not unlike, say, the custom of
athletes exchanging country pins at the Olympics. In a similar
colonizing situation but very different setting, Patrick Kirch argues
that the exchange of Lapita-style ceramics and other items between
widely separated Pacific island populations served as a social glue that
helped cement long-distance alliances and a supply of suitable marriage
partners in the face of “unpredictable environmental hazards…[and]
demographically small and unstable groups.” Having friends and relations
(real or fictive) might have meant the difference between survival and
extinction on these remote islands.⁶¹

Early on in the Paleoindian period, Clovis points should be broadly
similar in style and technology across a vast area of North America,
more so than any artifact forms in any later cultural period,
Paleoindian or otherwise. The extent of the Clovis point distribution is
a by-product of the size of the colonizing footprint, but their
similarity across that range could reflect the maintenance of a common
symbol of an extensive social and mating network, which helped offset
the effects of distance.

Still, those effects are inevitable, so we expect over the decades and
centuries, as groups spread ever further from another, that there would
be cultural drift over time and space as the initial, “founder styles”
diverged and diversified. Ultimately, new stylistic forms should appear,
and those continent-wide style zones should shrink. As we will see in
the next two chapters, we can catch glimpses of some of these
hypothesized processes and features. We'll start with Clovis.⁶²

[images]

PLATE 1
Folsom fluted point in situ between the ribs of a Bison antiquus. Found
in September 1927 at the type site in New Mexico, it was the first proof
people had arrived in North America by Pleistocene times. (Photograph
courtesy of the Denver Museum of Nature & Science, Denver, CO. All
rights reserved, Image Archives, Denver Museum of Nature & Science.)

[images]

PLATE 2
The Meander Glacier flowing out of the Borchgrevink Mountains toward the
Ross Sea, northern Victoria Land, Antarctica. Although the glacier is
shrouded in snow, its crevasses appear as a corrugated surface atop the
snow. The prominent peak is Mount Kinel at 2,160 m above sea level.
(Photograph courtesy of Steve Emslie.)

[images]

PLATE 3
Glacial ice calving into the Pacific Ocean off Patagonia, South America.
Such would have been a common scene along the Pacific Coast of North
America during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). (Photograph courtesy of
Anne S. Meltzer.)

[images]

PLATE 4
Skeleton of the now-extinct giant ground sloth, Paramylodon harlani.
(Photograph courtesy of Louis L. Jacobs.)

[images]

PLATE 5
View across the Pedra Furada site, showing the great height of the cliff
face looming above the site. The lone figure in the center distance is
James Adovasio. For scale, he stands just over 6 ft tall. (Photograph by
David J. Meltzer.)

[images]

PLATE 6
Looking east from San Miguel Island at Daisy Cave (middle distance) and
the Arlington Springs site on Santa Rosa Island (far distance). Both
sites are nearly 11,000 years old, and though they indicate early
coastal occupations, they are too far south (near Santa Barbara, CA) to
bear directly on the question of whether the first peoples came from
Alaska via a coastal route. (Photograph courtesy of Torben Rick.)

[images]

PLATE 7
Rhinoceros horn foreshaft (left) and two of the stone tools (right) from
the Yana RHS site, Siberia. In its form and scored, beveled ends, the
foreshaft resembles ones found in Clovis sites, though the Yana specimen
is twice as long (but about the same width) as the average Clovis
example. Although reminiscent of Clovis, the Yana artifacts are more
than 16,000 years older, making any historical links between the two
occupations tenuous. (From Pitulko et al. 2004, copyrighted by and used
with permission of Science.)

[images]

PLATE 8
The Clovis tool kit included unifacial (right) and bifacial (far left)
tools, fluted points (second and third from the left), and the
occasional stone blade (above the points). Rarely found but possibly
common were artifacts of bone and ivory, including a mammoth bone “shaft
wrench” (center), perhaps used to straighten spears, and a bone
“foreshaft” (beside it on the right) like that from Yana RHS.
(Photograph by Tom Wolff.)

[images]

PLATE 9
Clovis point (in the approximate center of the image along with some of
the different types of stone—including chert, jasper, quartzite, and
obsidian—used in Paleoindian times. The Clovis point has been reworked
as evidenced by the “shouldering” of the point about midway up both
sides, and was made of Alibates agatized dolomite, a block of which is
in the lower center of the image. (Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

[images]

PLATE 10
A quartz crystal biface, a rarity in Clovis times, from the Simon cache,
Idaho. (Photograph by J. David Kilby, courtesy of the Herrett Center for
Arts and Science, College of Southern Idaho.)

[images]

PLATE 11
The deGraffenried Clovis biface cache, Texas. Note the broad, thin
overshot flakes that extend across all or most of the face of the four
bifaces. The projectile point preform is just over 17 cm long.
(Photograph courtesy of J. David Kilby, used with permission of Mark
Mullins.)

[images]

PLATE 12
Projectile points from the Vail site kill and campground. In the case of
all the broken points, the tips were found in the kill area, the bases
at the camp. (Photograph courtesy of R. Michael Gramly.)

[images]

PLATE 13
Folsom fluted points from the Mountaineer site, Colorado. From left to
right: (1) A preform that broke in manufacture. The two large pieces
were separated, and one ended up in a fire, hence its dark red color. A
portion of the channel flake removed for the flute was found as well,
and is shown in its place on the flute scar. (2) A complete point, but
one that has been used on more than one occasion, and has been
resharpened while still in the haft, producing a slight “shouldering”
toward the tip. (3) A point that shattered on impact—perhaps when bone
met stone at high velocity. The impact flakes were driven off the tip
toward the base, essentially the reverse of the fluting process.
(Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

[images]

PLATE 14
An assortment of Late Paleoindian stone tools from sites in the central
Rio Grande Valley, New Mexico, including scrapers (left and top), finely
pointed gravers (around the knife), spokeshaves (for trimming wood or
bone, above the knife), and cutting tools. The stone for their
manufacture was brought in from all corners of the compass. The Swiss
Army knife, which fulfills many of these same tool functions today, is
just under 6 cm long. (Photograph courtesy of Tony Baker.)

[images]

PLATE 15
Some of the bison bone discarded at Folsom, New Mexico, including a
string of articulated thoracic and lumbar vertebrae (which form the
bison hump and lower back), as well as a skull, jaws, shoulder, and leg
bones, not all of which came from the same animal—the skull is from a
bison calf, the backbone from an adult cow. (Photograph by David J.
Meltzer.)

[images]

PLATE 16
The Mesa site is located atop this pronounced, isolated landform that
juts out on the North Slope of Alaska alongside Iteriak Creek (note the
individuals and equipment atop the rocky ridge). Take away the
helicopter and the field camp (to the right, below the mesa), and the
landscape would look much the same as at the time of its occupation
10,000 years ago. (Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

8

CLOVIS ADAPTATIONS AND
PLEISTOCENE EXTINCTIONS

Edgar B. Howard, of the University of Pennsylvania's museum, had been
ambushed before, so this time he moved fast. He caught a westbound train
on November 12, 1932, alerted to the news a road crew mining gravel from
an old pond on the high plains of eastern New Mexico had struck bones.
Lots of them apparently, and big ones, too: mammoth and bison. That
summer, Howard had seen scraps of the bones and Folsom-like fluted
points ranchers had been finding in wind-scoured “blowouts” in these old
ponds. The road crew had hit the mother lode.

Howard knew the stakes. Earlier, his cordial relationship with
paleontologist Barnum Brown had soured when Brown stole credit for a
fluted point found in Pleistocene bone-bearing sediments in Burnet Cave
near Carlsbad, New Mexico. Howard, who had made the find while Brown was
far away in Montana, had not been happy. Nor was Howard pleased to learn
his idea for a national committee to investigate potential late
Pleistocene archaeological sites had been scooped, and the committee
formed without him. In the years after the Folsom discovery, everyone
wanted in on the action at early sites, Howard most of all. He was, a
disapproving Loren Eiseley observed, “addicted to the pursuit of
terminal ice-age man.”¹

Four days later, from the small town of Clovis, New Mexico, Howard
flashed a telegram back east: “Extensive bone deposit at new site.
Mostly bison, also horse & mammoth. Some evidence of hearths along
edges. Will tie up permissions for future work & spend a few more days
investigating.” But only a few more days. Back in Philadelphia the next
week, he announced in the journal Science the finding of evidence of
humans “at a very remote period,” and staked his claim to the Clovis
site.²

The following spring, Howard and his crew began excavating at Clovis.
They had to work quickly. That summer the world's preeminent geologists
would descend on Washington, D.C., for the International Geological
Congress. There would be field trips out west afterward. Howard wanted
Clovis to be one of the stops, but that meant having something to show:
a fluted point in undisputed association with mammoth bones would do
nicely. Finally, by late July, he had several, “scattered around like a
dog buries bones,” just what was needed to give his visitors “something
substantial to think about.”³

On August 3, in a scene that harkened back to the landmark visit to
Folsom six years earlier, American and European scientists descended on
Clovis, including the eminent Sir Arthur Smith Woodward of the British
Museum (whose keynote address to the congress triumphantly reviewed the
proof “Piltdown Man” was an early Pleistocene human). When they arrived,
the visitors saw spear points, fluted but larger and less refined than
those at Folsom, amid mammoth skeletons (Figure 45). That evening a E.
B. Howard removed some of the more significant finds from the Clovis
site as large blocks, in order to bring them back to Philadelphia for
more careful excavation and cleaning. In the midst of that work, he
posed, pointing to a beveled mammoth bone rod next to the ulna (lower
forelimb) of a mammoth. (Photograph courtesy of The Academy of Natural
Sciences, Ewell Sale Stewart Library, Philadelphia.) jubilant Howard
telegraphed the museum to say “Drs Merriam Stock Woodward and
Vanstraelen have examined excavations here today [and] they agree
evidence obtained indicates association of artifacts with extinct
elephant and bison.”⁴ Howard couldn't sleep that night, happily playing
over the events of the day.

[images]

FIGURE 45.
E. B. Howard removed some of the more significant finds from the Clovis
site as large blocks, in order to bring them back to Philadelphia for
more careful excavation and cleaning. In the midst of that work, he
posed, pointing to a beveled mammoth bone rod next to the ulna (lower
forelimb) of a mammoth. (Photograph courtesy of The Academy of Natural
Sciences, Ewell Sale Stewart Library, Philadelphia.)

Back in Philadelphia the next week, Howard issued another statement in
Science: Clovis, with its artifacts and “matted masses of bones of
mammoth,”⁵ showed America was inhabited some 15,000 years ago. Not to be
outdone, two weeks later Jesse Figgins (of Folsom fame) announced in
Science he, too, could report on a recently completed excavation of
mammoth bones near Dent, Colorado, which had also yielded two large,
fluted spear points like those at Clovis. But he was too late to snag
the naming rights that came with priority of discovery. We speak of
Clovis points and the Clovis culture—not Dent points and the Dent
culture.

Coincidentally, that same summer delegates to the Fifth Pacific Science
Congress in Vancouver, Canada, were presented a volume of essays on the
origin and antiquity of American Indians. The lead chapter, by W. A.
Johnston of the Canadian Geological Survey, for the first time suggested
that during the Wisconsin glacial period, lower sea levels meant a “land
bridge probably existed” between Siberia and Alaska, and that a
migration route south from Alaska through the Mackenzie River Valley had
opened in the wake of ice retreat.⁶

Within just a few months, Howard and geologist Ernst Antevs put all the
pieces together: 20,000 to 15,000 years ago, the Bering Strait was dry
land, and a corridor was open along the east side of the Rockies,
removing all obstacles to migrations from Central Asia to the Great
Plains. Given how neatly this corresponded to their estimated age of the
Clovis site, it seemed a route and a timeline for the peopling of the
Americas was emerging. The precise ages on that timeline, of course,
would not be nailed down until the advent of radiocarbon dating, still
several decades off (Chapter 3).

No matter. The geological evidence of a Pleistocene human antiquity was
secure, and Howard, pleased by what he'd accomplished at Clovis but
anxious to follow the first Americans’ trail back to Asia, soon handed
over the reins of the Clovis site to a graduate student and began
planning an ambitious field program. He would search for sites along an
arc from New Mexico, up along the flanks of the Rocky Mountains, through
the ice-free corridor region, and he hoped, ultimately back to Lake
Baikal in Siberia.

Howard's grandiose plans flopped. But at Clovis, his successor began to
fill in the details of a culture that, within a decade, others would
trace across the continent. Unlike Folsom Paleo-indians, who mostly kept
to the plains, Clovis groups were seemingly everywhere. Their sites have
since been found across the continent and in a variety of environments,
from the coniferous forests of the Pacific Northwest to the desert
Southwest, through the rich grasslands of the western plains to the
complex mixed forests of the American Southeast and near tundra of the
Northeast. No subsequent North American occupation, Paleo-indian or
otherwise, was so widespread or occupied such diverse habitats, let
alone amid the kind of climatic, ecological, and geological upheaval
that was happening in the wake of continental deglaciation. And it
wasn't long before Clovis peoples’ sudden and widespread appearance was
attributed to fast-moving big-game hunters—and blamed for the extinction
of the mammoth, mastodon, and nearly three dozen other genera of
Pleistocene mammals (Chapter 2). It would take another fifty years to
realize matters were not as simple as they appeared. But that's getting
ahead of the story.

MADE IN AMERICA

In 1935 Howard traveled to the Soviet Union via Europe, but got nowhere
near Siberia. Soviet authorities forbid it. Forced to cool his heels in
Leningrad, Howard visited museums, where he examined archaeological
collections from across the country amassed since the time of Czar Peter
the Great. None yielded any Clovis fluted points. That told Howard
something. Fluting may just be an American invention—the first American
invention. Knowing fluting's place of origin and how it spread would be
vital to tracking Clovis movement. But where was that, and when?

The obvious place to start searching was between Alaska and the northern
plains, and many archaeologists have done just that in the decades since
Howard. All together, about fifty fluted points have been found in
Alaska, but mostly in the state's far northern reaches (at or north of
about 66°N latitude, about the latitude of the Arctic Circle), and only
on the surface or in deposits with younger artifacts. About 60 fluted
points also have been found in the one-time ice-free corridor.⁷ Yet, few
of these have secure radio-carbon dates, and those that do are fewer
than 10,500 years old, as they ought not to be if they were left behind
by Clovis colonizers moving south. Stylistically, the Alaskan and
Canadian fluted points don't look much like Clovis points from the Lower
Forty-eight either, but appear more akin to later fluted points. This
gives reason to suspect fluting was invented south of the Laurentide and
Cordilleran ice sheets, and spread from there—including to the north (a
migratory backwash, as it were, which may have carried other types north
as well, as discussed in Chapter 9).

The Great Plains and Southwest are likely places of origin; the oldest
known fluted points occur there. Another possibility is eastern North
America. Since more and more varied fluted points occur there than
anywhere else, Ronald Mason long ago argued they were invented here, on
the principle that diversity reflects age. (Sound familiar? It's the
principle Greenberg invoked to fix the relative antiquity of his three
language families.) Finding eastern fluted points that clearly predate
those to the west would settle the issue, but so far none have been. In
the meantime, Adovasio reminds us the unfluted Miller lanceolate from
Stratum IIa at Meadowcroft would make a fine fluted point precursor.

Once invented, fluting spread over North America, and persisted through
Clovis and subsequent Paleo-indian cultures (Folsom points are fluted,
as are a variety of eastern North American points). But it's hard to
understand why. Fluting is a tricky technology to master, in many ways
one of the most difficult steps in the sequence of making a point. It is
estimated Clovis points broke while being fluted 10%-20% of the time
(failure may have occurred nearly 40% of the time when fluting Folsom
points⁸). Mistakes were costly, especially when stone supplies were
scarce. And for what? Fluting thins and potentially weakens the point,
and served no purpose…that we know of.

Early on, it was thought fluting enhanced bloodletting of the speared
prey, not surprising since in the 1920s, when fluted points were first
found, the memory of World War I bayonets was still fresh. But that idea
fell from favor when archaeologists realized the flutes were sandwiched
between bone (or wood or ivory) foreshafts, or embedded in a socket and
hafted (attached) to the spear. Flutes on hafted points, wrapped with
sinew and possibly coated in tree resin or tar to firmly anchor them,
were too deeply buried to enhance bleeding. Others suggested fluting
helped strengthen the bond of point to haft, or perhaps by thinning
allowed the points to penetrate deeper and become more lethal. Yet, over
the next 10,000 years of post-paleoindian time, hunters managed to
muddle through using unfluted points that were hafted and presumably
just as firmly anchored to a spear or arrow shaft, and equally effective
as penetrating weapons. Maybe, George Frison and Bruce Bradley argue,
the reason we cannot show that fluting directly enhanced the performance
of the point is because it didn't.

If that's so, why did the technique endure for at least half a
millennium? Part of the answer may be inertia: tradition is a potent
force to dislodge. But for a process so risky, so costly, and by
consensus so useless, there must be more to it. Perhaps fluting was
style or art, a symbolic representation of hunting prowess (showing
off!), or part of a pre-hunt ritual: could it be mere coincidence some
fluted points preserve traces of staining by red ocher, a blood-red
mineral paint? In the ritual realm, as we know, costs don't matter.
Admittedly, these possibilities are not easily put to the test, but are
more the sort of explanations we fall back on when we cannot see purpose
in prehistory. As Stanley Ahler and Phillip Geib say, we “sometimes
characterize the unknown as unknowable, just to put our busy minds at
ease.”⁹

Art or ritual it may have been, but whatever fluting was, a great many
paleoindians employed it. Still, not all fluted points are alike, save
in a most general sense: all share a lanceolate shape, are ground smooth
along the base and partway up the sides (which ensured the edges did not
cut the sinew binding or socket haft), and have flutes that extend from
the base partially up one or (more commonly) both faces of the point
(Figure 46). On a “classic” Clovis point, the sides are parallel, the
flutes travel usually less than one-half the length of the face, and the
points are relatively long and thick, though deliberately made Clovis
miniatures are known (children's toys, some suspect). A freshly minted
Clovis point, based on a sample from Texas (and, no, the points are not
necessarily bigger in Texas), would be slightly over 10 centimeters
long, 3 centimeters wide, and 7.5 millimeters thick.¹⁰

[images]

FIGURE 46.
Clovis point from the Clovis type site in New Mexico, displaying the
type's diagnostic features, including fluting and outre passe (overshot)
flaking. This particular specimen is made of Edwards Formation chert,
likely from an outcrop source near Big Springs, Texas, approximately 300
km southeast of the site. It was found near the vertebra and ribs of a
mammoth. (Photograph by David J. Meltzer; line drawing by Frederic
Sellet;
arranged by Judith Cooper.)

There is often surprising uniformity in the size and shape of the lower
portion or base of a Clovis point, where it would have been inserted
into a haft. It appears the aim was to fit the points to a haft, and not
vice versa. That implies the hafts were more difficult or time-consuming
to make, or perhaps the haft material was harder to come by. Regardless,
broken points had to be unwrapped and ejected when they broke, as they
inevitably did, and the haft reloaded.

Beyond that, fluted points vary considerably in their size and shape,
and in the length and depth of the flutes, the number of flutes (though
three flutes per face is about the limit), the kind of chipping used to
fashion the point, the finishing of the edges, and a host of other
minutiae that delight archaeologists. This is true with Clovis, and
especially between Clovis and immediately post-Clovis fluted points, of
which there are many styles (especially in eastern North America
[Chapter 9]). That sometimes makes it difficult to decide what's Clovis
and what's not, particularly in the absence of accompanying radiocarbon
ages. Much of the variation results from the effects of use and
resharpening of the points, but also from the divergence of people,
knapping styles, and techniques over time and space. Think of it as a
kind of “cultural drift,” as kin and descendants experimented with and
introduced their own variations on the Clovis theme.

PACKING THE TOOLBOX

Fluted points are certainly the most recognizable artifact in the Clovis
toolkit, but assuredly not the only important one. It's a generalized
toolkit: suitable for many tasks, not built specifically for any one
(see Plate 8). It includes large bifaces, which could be readily
transported and from which flakes could be struck for use, or from which
points could be obtained. There were also end and side scrapers for
cleaning hides; gravers or flakes with carefully formed small
projections or spurs, possibly used to engrave bone or wood;
spokeshaves, or notched pieces, which may have been used to shave wooden
or bone shafts; and a variety of knives or flake-cutting tools. There is
a certain monotony to the Clovis toolkit, with variation expressed more
in the presence or frequency of certain tools (end scrapers, for
example), or the kind of stone used, than in the types of tools. That
sort of pattern tells us more about what was done than who did what.

However, a few distinctive stone-tool types are known to occur primarily
in some regions but not others. Long, curving stone blades (their length
twice their width) and the multifaceted (polyhedral) cores from which
they were struck, were fashioned by stone workers on the southern
plains, and perhaps into the Southeast: a particularly rich haul comes
from the Gault site in central Texas. Christopher Ellis and his Great
Lakes colleagues show that backed bifaces (perhaps themselves hafted)
were common, and fluted drills absent, in the eastern Great Lakes, while
the reverse seems true in New England.

Where preservation permits, bone and ivory artifacts are occasionally
found. These include ivory hammers or billets, and a mammoth bone shaft
“socket” wrench, possibly used for straightening ivory or bone rods,
from the Murray Springs site (Arizona). No bone or ivory rods
accompanied this particular specimen, but examples have been recovered
in a dozen other sites scattered across the West, and from underwater
sites in Florida.

These bone and ivory rods are usually about 30 centimeters long but
fewer than 2 centimeters wide, and are often beveled at one or both
ends. A glimpse at how these were made comes from the Clovis site, which
yielded a section of mammoth tusk, V-notched at one end as though felled
by a beaver, which at the time it was lost or abandoned was on its way
to being further reduced and fashioned into one of those ivory rods.
These rods have been variously interpreted as spear points, foreshafts
for joining stone points to a spear, tools for fine flaking of stone,
pry bars for dismembering carcasses, sled shoes, or wedges for
tightening up loose haft bindings.¹¹ There's no reason to limit their
function to just one of these possibilities.

Unfortunately, their scarcity reveals little about how bone and ivory
were used by paleoindians, since these were almost certainly used more
frequently and in more ways than we can infer. The spotty distribution,
however, does say a great deal about how poorly bone and ivory are
preserved in the archaeological record.

Which also explains the virtual absence of what may have been their
“perishable” artifacts, those made of plant fibers, or animal hide and
fur. Such items vanish quickly, save in unusual circumstances, such as
where it's extremely dry or perennially wet (recall the string tied
around the tent stakes at boggy Monte Verde). James Adovasio reports
Clovis-age twined bags, mats, burden baskets, and trays, mostly from
Great Basin dry caves (such as Danger Cave, Utah). No Clovis nets have
been found. Yet. Adovasio expects they will, since net hunting has deep
roots in prehistory, as well we might expect: it requires relatively
little expertise, it's effective and nonconfrontational, and animals
trapped in nets (even ones as large as elk) can be killed safely at
close range by stabbing or clubbing by individuals without great
physical strength. Consequently, it's a method that routinely involved
“females, juveniles, and the old.”¹²

Not all Clovis tools and artifacts appear in all Clovis sites, and more
differences in their toolkits and technology will likely emerge as we
learn more of the archaeological record. At present, we lack sites and
assemblages from many geographic areas, and have found relatively few of
their habitation sites where, by virtue of longer periods of occupation
and greater number of activities that took place, a wider range of tool
classes would be expected.

BUT IS IT ART?

A number of Clovis bone and ivory rods are scored with zigzags; parallel
lines; small, curved incisions; and in one instance, zipper-like
markings. The markings are far too systematic to be merely accidental.
They could be art for art's sake, some other symbolic decoration, or
more prosaically, ownership or use marks.

Engraved stones, too, though no more than a few dozen, have also been
found in Clovis-age sites. These are incised with cross-hatched,
parallel, intersecting, or converging lines. All but two were recovered
at the Gault site, and had been made on the locally occurring limestone
(Figure 47). That's not the best artistic canvas to be sure, and what
those scratches represent is anyone's guess. But if one applies a bit of
imagination, some of the Gault engravings appear to represent
stick-figure plants or, letting the imagination go full throttle, maps
depicting rivers and their tributaries.

[images]

FIGURE 47.
Clovis art: two faces of a piece of engraved limestone from the Gault
site, Texas. The meaning of the lines is unknown. Among the
interpretations: they represent plants, or perhaps a map of rivers and
tributaries. (Photograph courtesy of Michael Collins and the Gault
Project, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of
Texas-Austin, of a cast made by Pete Bostrom of Lithics Casting Lab,
Troy, IL.)

Clovis-age cave or rockshelter art is rarest of all, if indeed we've
ever seen any. We're never sure we are looking at what we think we're
looking at, as it is often difficult to determine the age of an image on
a rock wall. Even so, Larry Agenbroad and colleagues have recorded half
a dozen rock panels on the Colorado Plateau in eastern Utah that display
paintings and engravings of what appear to be mammoths. Agenbroad
worries some of these are modern fakes (shades of Hilborne Cresson!),
and none are dated to late Pleistocene times.¹³ As noted earlier, the
extraordinarily rich and expressive art routinely found in Paleolithic
Europe—cave paintings and sculpted figurines of extinct animals and
humans appearing in both natural and abstract forms—is absent from late
Pleistocene North America. Perhaps by then the animals were already
extinct, or possibly people had other things on their minds (or their
walls).

STONE FOR THE TAKING

Which is not to say Clovis people lacked appreciation for the finer
things. In making their stone tools, they relied almost exclusively on
very-high-quality chert, jasper, chalcedony, and obsidian (volcanic
glass) (see Plate 9). All are fine grained and lack cleavage planes or
other natural fault lines, making them easy to chip into a desired form,
and capable of holding razor-sharp edges. Other kinds of stone can be
service able, but Clovis (and, for that matter, later paleoindian)
knappers only went for the best. Why? Higher-quality stone is less
failure prone, which would have been of no small concern to hunters
going after large game at a time when hunting was very much an up-close
and personal activity: no safe firing from long range here. If a point
broke at the wrong moment because of a flaw that weakened the stone's
tensile strength, it was not just a bad day at the office. As Frison
says, it could mean injury or death.¹⁴ Further, a point made of
higher-quality stone lasts longer and can be readily resharpened,
thereby prolonging its use. That would be important to wide-ranging
hunter-gatherers, who could not predict when they would next be able to
resupply at a stone source.

We benefit, too: because these high-quality stone types are often
distinctive in color, fossils, chemistry, or composition, we can
frequently pinpoint where they were obtained and how. It appears Clovis
peoples mostly acquired their stone directly from bedrock outcrops
(Figure 48), where it could be quarried in large blocks, rather than
from picking through the gravels of a river bed or a glacial moraine in
hopes of finding cobbles of suitable size or material. Size was critical
to Clovis knappers since some of the bifaces they made were upwards of
20 centimeters in length and width, and more than 600 grams in mass,
requiring the starting blocks of raw material—cores, they're called—to
be of even greater size.¹⁵

[images]

FIGURE 48.
Map of Canada and the United States showing the location of pre-Clovis,
Clovis, Late paleoindian, and more recent sites discussed in the text.
Only some of the stone sources used by paleoindian groups are located on
the map; the symbol for the outcrops should not be taken as indicative
of their size or shape, but only as indicating an approximate location.

The Clovis knappers’ preference for specific stone outcrops reveals the
depth of their geological knowledge: they found sources we never have.
And they went directly to those sources themselves. No trading was
apparently involved, but then what self-respecting hunter-gatherer wants
to rely on others to supply a material so essential to survival, or
needed in bulk? As open as territories were on this landscape, stone
sources were accessible to all, leaving little incentive for a Clovis
entrepreneur to schlep double the usual amount of stone, one-half for
personal use and the other half for exchange, across great distances on
the off chance of finding a trading partner. That said, their sporadic
encounters on the landscape likely resulted in an exchange of gifts to
mark the occasion and the bonds forged, which may explain why sites
occasionally yield a Clovis point or two made with an unusual style or
material.

Because stone can often be identified to the outcrop from which it was
obtained, the distances between where it was quarried and where it was
abandoned serve as an odometer of paleoindian travels. Sometimes those
distances were great. Alibates agatized dolomite from the Texas
Panhandle, just outside of Amarillo, was used to fashion Clovis points
left in the Drake cache in northeastern Colorado, 585 kilometers away.
Although we routinely use the straight-line distance from quarry to site
as a measure of paleoindian mobility, that takes no account of side
excursions, return trips, or any other archaeologically invisible
travel. Actual mileage may vary.

It certainly did in Clovis times across the continent, the scale
depending on the nature and density of resources being exploited.
Distances of 300-400 kilometers are common on the treeless western
plains, and on the open parkland and tundra of northeastern North
America, where resources were locally clumped but widely separated. In
the closed, ecologically richer forests of northeastern North
America—where, we suspect, groups did not have to be as wide-ranging
(see below)—the sites are dominated by locally acquired stone (picked up
within 50 kilometers of the site, say), though occasionally contain
specimens of more distant or exotic material.

In most sites, exotic material occurs as finished artifacts, or at most,
as prepared bifaces or cores, rather than as raw blocks of stone (at the
Gainey site in Michigan, for example, cores were hauled in from
east-central Ohio's Upper Mercer chert outcrops, some 380 kilometers
away). Mobile hunter-gatherers without benefit of beasts of burden
(save, perhaps, for dogs) would have had their hands full carrying food,
hides, tools, children, and the like. Stone artifacts were heavy enough
on belts or slings without the extra weight of blocks of stone, much of
which was destined only for discard when later flaked into a point or
tool.

How they fashioned their points and tools is captured in the
manufacturing debris left behind, particularly at sites situated close
to stone outcrops, including Gault, Thunderbird (Virginia), and West
Athens Hill (New York). These sites are dominated by the vast numbers of
flakes (debitage) that fly off as a stone tool is chipped. At
Thunderbird, a single, three-inch excavation level of a 10 x 10 foot
square excavation unit (this was the 1970s; we were slow to go metric)
often yielded more than 10,000 pieces of debitage, along with tools that
broke in the process of manufacture, and even glimpses of discrete
moments in time: among them, flakes piled up as though they had rained
down on the sides of a knapper's crossed legs, and the tip of a nearly
finished Clovis point found dozens of feet from its broken base (Figure
49). That point had been just a few flakes away from being perfect, and
one can only empathize with the knapper's frustration when it broke (why
did I have to hit it that one last time?)—and readily imagine seeing the
broken pieces flying across the site.

Occasionally, if the stone wasn't of the highest quality, it might be
slowly heated in sand beneath a hearth to enhance its “flakeability.”
Experimental studies by Philip Wilke and colleagues show that the
optimal method for heat-treating stone is to slowly raise it to a
temperature of 165°C-300°C for several hours, then bring it back down
slowly (heat or cool it too quickly, and the stone will craze or
shatter). Heat-treated stone gains a waxy luster, and depending on its
chemistry, can change color: specimens of the yellow green jasper at
Thunderbird turned pink and red from heating.¹⁶

[images]

FIGURE 49.
Two fluted points from the Thunderbird site, Virginia, which failed en
route to manufacture. The specimen on the left was nearly complete when
it broke during final thinning. Its two parts were found some distance
from one another, hinting that a healthy pitch followed the fatal break.
(Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

After groups departed the quarry, they looped around the landscape, and
over time, artifacts were used or broken, and the stone supply dwindled.
When far from a quarry, the groups conserved their resources: fluted
points that dulled or broke were carefully resharpened, but if broken
beyond repair or whittled to a useless nubbin (say, 4-5 centimeters in
length, barely long enough to peek out from beyond the binding of their
haft), the point might see new life by being recycled into other tools
like scrapers, drills, or wedges.

Just so, groups venturing far into unknown terrain surely kept a
watchful eye for new outcrop sources to replenish their toolkits. And
perhaps, hedging their landscape learning bets, they also had the
foresight to lay in resupply depots along the way.

CACHING ACROSS THE LANDSCAPE

The Clovis-age archaeological record includes a number of stone artifact
caches containing bifaces and blades (see Plate 10). Although these
could have been used “as is,” more likely they were chipped into those
forms for easier transport, and with the idea that from these forms,
they could readily be made into one of a variety of useable tools. These
caches rarely occur at Clovis camps or kills (though there are
exceptions), but instead often turn up in otherwise isolated spots,
giving the appearance of having been stashed, presumably with the intent
of being retrieved later. The cache pieces are generally fashioned of
stone from outcrops several hundred kilometers distant.

We now know of at least twenty Clovis caches scattered throughout North
America, but mostly in the West. A prime example is the Richey-Roberts
site, discovered in the late 1980s by workers installing a sprinkler
system in an apple orchard near East Wenatchee, Washington.¹⁷ Full
excavations revealed some forty Clovis artifacts, including projectile
points, preforms (unfinished points fashioned into a broadly lanceolate
shape), bifaces, scrapers, other stone tools, and a dozen or more bone
and antler rods. The Richey-Roberts Clovis points, some of which are 21
centimeters long and 6 centimeters wide, are among the largest ever
found. Here, as in other Clovis caches, some artifacts were sprinkled
with red ocher. Were they being symbolically infused with life-giving
blood, or was this a blood-colored warning: but to whom—or what? Or was
it something else? No one can say.

At the Anzick cache in Montana, over 100 Clovis stone artifacts, and
bone and ivory rods, accompanied the uncremated, ocher-covered remains
of a child (Chapter 5).¹⁸ Here, the term cache is surely inappropriate,
since the collection of artifacts is likely grave goods, not intended
for later use, at least not in the corporeal world. But for those caches
that are not obviously burial offerings, a more utilitarian explanation
may be sought.

On its face, an artifact cache represents a handy solution to the
logistical problem faced by highly mobile peoples: the gap between where
a stone could be acquired (which is predictable), and where it was to be
used (which is not always predictable, and in any case may be very far
away). Annual moves might bring mobile peoples past quarries
occasionally, but they can only haul away a limited amount of stone. And
yet that stone is “spent” all over the territory, sometimes exhausting
supplies far from the source. One solution to that logistical dilemma
would be to cache supplies of stone in convenient places around the
landscape. When tools broke, wore down through resharpening, or were
lost, as all tools inevitably were, resupply at a cache could save a
long trip back to the quarry. Seems self-evident.

Later paleoindian groups were just as mobile as Clovis groups and just
as reliant on high-quality, distant stone sources. By that reasoning, we
should also see their caches as well, but we don't. Late paleoindian
caches are extremely rare.¹⁹ There are now enough Clovis caches and few
enough from the millennium that followed to suggest this pattern is real
and not an accident of sampling. How, then, can we explain the
preponderance of Clovis caches, and the scarcity (if not absence) of
later ones?

Michael Collins sees an explanation in the predictability of Clovis
movement: he suggests they knew in advance where they were headed, knew
they would be returning to particular spots with perilously exhausted
tools in need of replenishment, and in anticipation, left stone behind
for future use. Later Paleoindians, he argues, could not predict their
future movements with enough confidence to benefit from caching stone.
Perhaps. Yet, the stone used by Folsom groups (Clovis successors on the
plains) comes from a greater diversity of sources, sometimes from even
greater distances. The more complex pattern of Folsom stone acquisition
suggests that however unpredictable their movements, they certainly knew
where sources were, and were highly adept at scheduling their visits.
Moreover, if Clovis groups knew they were returning to a spot and would
need and use the stone, then why were the caches still there 11,000
years later?

I suspect a different strategy might have been in play: Clovis groups
were so new to the landscape they didn't know and couldn't predict where
or when they were next going to find a suitable stone outcrop. By
depositing caches about the landscape as they moved away from known
sources, they created artificial resupply depots, and thus anticipated
and compensated for that lack of knowledge. If they found no stone in
the area where they were headed, they at least would not have to double
back completely to the original outcrop to refurbish their current tools
when those were used up. And if they did find a new stone source, the
cache could be ignored and abandoned.

Is it then a mere accident of sampling that most of the Clovis caches
found so far are on the Great Plains and in the Northwest, far from
stone outcrops? Or could this be telling us that the challenges of
exploring those areas were different? Time and more caches will tell.

Stone is especially suitable for caching, since unlike meat or other
food, it won't spoil, won't be attractive to scavengers, and barring
massive tectonic activity, won't move before you return. A stone cache
has a fixed and predictable location. As such, it serves a useful role
in wayfinding (Chapter 7), for now one's “map” of a landscape includes
not just the natural resources, but some artificially placed ones as
well. This helps make it possible to venture further across otherwise
unknown terrain. Over time, as new sources of suitable stone are
located, and as groups are better able to predict where and when they
will be able to replenish their supplies (presumably in the post-Clovis
period), then caches become less critical to movement, and ultimately
unnecessary.

The obvious flaws to this theory are the occasional caches found close
to a raw material source—like the deGraffenreid cache (see Plate 11),
apparently stashed in the vicinity of the stone-rich Gault site²⁰—and
the likelihood there were multiple purposes for caching stone. And, of
course, one cannot use the absence of caches in later paleoindian
periods as proof landscape learning was complete by then, at least not
without getting dizzy spinning in a logical circle. That said, I think
there is independent evidence—albeit circumstantial—to indicate that
might have been the case, though that's for the next chapter, when other
clues to the process become apparent.

MOBILE HOMES

Befitting their mobile lifestyle, the dwellings Clovis people built were
temporary shelters made of wood or materials that quickly degraded and
disappeared (none were made of stone). Their traces are often little
more than hard-to-spot circular stains in the soil marking where wooden
posts were once planted (postmolds). William Gardner reports one such
structure at Thunderbird, a line of postmolds forming a rough oval 9 ×
12 meters in size.²¹ Other evidence of structures can be as subtle as
slightly hardened earth, or artifacts concentrated around darkened soil
or burned areas.

Although such clues reveal little of the habitations once standing
there, they do hint at site use and the scale of the occupation. In the
Upper Midwest and northeastern North America, for example, a dozen or so
paleoindian sites include discrete artifact concentrations, perhaps 4-6
meters in diameter, yielding a like range of tools. These are thought to
be individual family households and the remains of their domestic
activities. Occasionally, broken artifacts from different concentrations
can be fit together, a strong hint that the households were occupied at
the same moment in time. At Nobles Pond (Ohio), the concentrations were
even neatly arranged in a semicircle.²²A Pleistocene mobile home park,
as it were, but again with the emphasis on mobile. In other sites, the
concentrations are less well defined and overlap, which bespeak
successive occupations in the same spot.

Evidently, these groups did not stay for long in any one place, nor
always return to it: most of their sites were used but once. With a
continent to themselves, the only incentive to revisit a spot was if it
offered a prized resource, whether permanent (the quarry-related sites
of Gault, Thunderbird, and West Athens Hill) or temporary (the Vail site
in Maine seems to have been established alongside a migratory game
trail). Such is the advantage to colonists on a landscape with few other
people and no territorial borders. But as discussed in the previous
chapter, there was also strong incentive for separate families to gather
and socialize, exchange items and information, maintain old kin ties,
and establish new connections through marriage. So far, however, no
Clovis “rendezvous” has been found.

POINTS ON LAND

But Clovis people left behind more than sites; they also scattered their
distinctive points across North America. There has long been something
of a cottage industry among archaeologists devoted to tallying Clovis
points by state (we're approaching 550 in Texas). David Anderson and
colleagues have compiled those into a continent-wide total: it's
currently at over 13,000 points from some 1,500 locations.²³ The great
majority of these are isolates, unaccompanied by other Clovis tools,
bones, or trappings of a site. As David Brose remarked
(tongue-in-cheek), from the looks of it, these groups ate nothing and
lived alone. Yet, where these isolates are found might just tell us
something interesting.

A map of their distribution and density reveals isolates are
particularly thick on the ground across much of the eastern United
States, especially around the Tennessee, Ohio, and Cumberland river
valleys. In contrast, many areas have only sparse and widely isolated
occurrences, including much of the Great Basin, the Columbia and
Colorado plateaus, the northern Great Plains and northern Rockies, and
the uppermost and lowermost reaches of the Mississippi Valley.

Anderson interprets the high concentrations of isolates in the Midwest
and Southeast as “staging areas,” spots on the landscape where groups
slowed down and settled in for a time, before pushing still deeper into
the continent.²⁴ Possibly so. However, these are also regions rich in
high-quality stone outcrops. Is the density of Clovis points there
merely a reflection of the unusually large amounts of archaeological
debris that routinely surround such sources, or were such areas indeed
magnets for longer-term human occupations by virtue of their being
resource-rich and predicable spots on the landscape? It could be both.
And what of the scarcity of Clovis points in places like the lower
Mississippi Valley? Does that mean there were few Clovis inhabitants, or
is it merely a reflection of the last 10,000 years of the river's floods
deeply burying any Pleistocene-age remains?

The distribution of Clovis points is not a map of Clovis people on the
landscape (as Anderson well appreciates), but a complicated result of
many things, including modern land-use patterns (point densities often
correlate with the amount of plowed acreage); deposition, erosion, and
surface age; archaeological activity (not all states have had systematic
surveys for Clovis points); and the presence of high-quality stone
outcrops.²⁵ Few Clovis points does not necessarily mean few Clovis
people.

A more representative sample will surely change the geographic details
of the Clovis distribution, but probably not the essential fact that the
Clovis presence on the landscape was broad and not deep. It's the
archaeological footprint of highly mobile people at low population
densities, further testimony that movement was tied to topography and
terrain, and likely involved leapfrogging across the landscape, rather
than proceeding as a wave of human settlement washing across the land.

IT'S ABOUT TIME

The chronology of the Clovis occupation shifts through time and across
the continent. The oldest sites are those on the Great Plains and in the
Southwest, which range in age from 11,570 BP (the Aubrey site, Texas) to
about 10,800 BP. Significantly, the earliest appearance of Clovis
follows the opening of a viable ice-free corridor (Chapter 2).

There are reliable radiocarbon dates on only a dozen or so Clovis and
Clovis-like (Gainey type) points in the eastern United States, but
despite the long-held suspicion Clovis and fluting originated in this
area, the oldest of these (Shawnee-Minisink, Pennsylvania) is only
10,940 years old. Most of the others fall between 10,600 and 10,200 BP,
a period contemporaneous with Folsom on the Great Plains. Clovis-like
materials occur in the Great Basin and far West, although their ages are
even less certain, and the cultural chronology is confused by the
contemporaneous occurrence of the large, unfluted Western Stemmed
points.

A recent radiocarbon study by Michael Waters and Thomas Stafford shows
that nearly a dozen Clovis sites from Montana (Anzick) to Arizona
(Lehner) to Pennsylvania (Shawnee-Minisink) date to 10,900 BP, give or
take a century. That makes them essentially contemporaneous, at least
within the bounds of radiocarbon dating.²⁶ The styles of Clovis points
at these sites are quite different (though all are still recognizably
Clovis). When the ages of more sites are pinned down as tightly, we'll
finally be able to get a precise gauge of the timing of the stylistic
change and, by extension, the cultural drift (Chapter 7) that occurred
as Clovis people spread across the continent.

In the meantime, the radiocarbon record supports the long-held suspicion
Clovis people radiated rapidly across North America, the process taking
perhaps no more than 500 radiocarbon years. It may have taken longer in
real time. The Clovis period overlaps the early portion of the Younger
Dryas, with its radiocarbon plateaus that defy easy calibration (Chapter
2). Although more and tighter-calibrated radiocarbon ages may ultimately
change the apparent speed of the Clovis dispersal, perhaps “slowing” it
to, say, 1,000 calendar years, it nonetheless will remain one of the
fastest expansions of any culture known in prehistory (Chapter 7).

MURDER IN THE PLEISTOCENE?

The traditional explanation (Chapter 7) for how or why they moved so far
so fast has been that Clovis people were specialized hunters who pursued
wide-ranging big game, including the now-extinct Pleistocene megafauna.
Latching on to prey that paid little mind to ecological boundaries
ostensibly enabled Clovis groups to do likewise, and thereby speed
across the continent without having to learn new adaptive tricks to

survive in different environments. After all, a mammoth was a mammoth,
no matter where it lived, but if the mammoth happened to be a mastodon,
horse, or camel instead, that only required minor adjustments to the
hunting strategy. Or so the argument went.

Gary Haynes (no relation to Vance Haynes) proclaims that nowadays “very
few if any rational archaeologists want to argue that Clovis people
exclusively specialized in megafauna everywhere and at all times.”²⁷ I
wholeheartedly agree (and consider myself rational). Besides,
specialized hunting was rare enough among known foraging groups. A
specialized hunting adaptation that transcended a continent as large and
diverse as Late Glacial North America in less than a thousand years
would be unique. And yet continent-wide hunting is said to have driven
thirty-five genera of mammals to extinction. Specialized, or not, that
certainly makes pressing demands on human hunters. Are Clovis people
guilty as charged?

There is no doubt they co-existed with some of these now-extinct
mammals. Their overlapping distributions place people at the late
Pleistocene crime scene, and at least in some instances, Clovis points
have been found embedded in large mammal skeletons. We have motive,
method, even the occasional smoking gun. Best of all, if Clovis groups
were big-time big-game hunters, that accounts for how they moved so far
and so fast, and why all these animals went extinct.

The idea humans caused late Pleistocene extinctions is not new, but goes
back more than a century. The modern version is due to ecologist Paul
Martin, who attributes extinction solely to human hunting: Pleistocene
overkill, he calls it. That the animals lost were mostly megafauna (with
an adult weight of at least 45 kilograms [about 100 pounds]) he thinks
no coincidence: “Large mammals disappeared not because they lost their
food supply but because they became one.” Their massive size was their
death sentence. Yet, what of the small Aztlan rabbit and the diminutive
pronghorn? Martin supposes these were “large enough” to have been
attractive to Clovis hunters.²⁸ Otherwise, he believes smaller prey were
of no interest to Clovis hunters and were tossed back (Clovis
catch-and-release?).

As Martin envisions the overkill process,²⁹ animal fates were sealed
when a band of 100 highly skilled Clovis hunters emerged out the
southern exit of the ice-free corridor just over 11,500 years ago.
Before them was a vast expanse of territory empty of people but teeming
with immense game. All that meat on the hoof, Martin says, was
irresistible to Clovis hunters, who liked megafauna so much they ate
them to extinction.

Martin crafted an elaborate and imaginative scenario to show how this
could have been accomplished (whether it actually happened that way is
another matter, of course). The way he figures it, overkill was
inevitable: these animals had never before peered down the shaft of a
spear, and would have been fatally ignorant of the danger posed by
humans. Killing such naive and vulnerable prey in this target-rich
environment was easy, he figures, and if just one hunter in four bagged
a trophy a week, it would decimate local animal populations. Slow
breeders, as most of the Pleistocene megafauna likely were, would not
have been able to reproduce fast enough to replace the animals killed,
even if only a third of them were slaughtered by hunters. The hunters
would make short work of the animals in an area, then turn their
attention to the targets in front of them, and ignore the growing pile
of meat and carcasses behind. Martin supposes this gluttonous human
population doubled in size every twenty years, an annual growth rate of
3.4%, and made fast time, fanning outward in a killing wave from which
no animal could escape, and which washed across the continent at a rate
of 16 kilometers a year.

At that rate, within 350 years, Clovis people would have numbered
600,000 and would have reached the Gulf of Mexico. Just 1,200 years
after entering North America, they got to Tierra del Fuego. In their
hemisphere-long wake were tens of thousands of fluted points (smoking
guns?), the rotting carcasses of more than 100 million herbivores, and
carnivore populations that would have boomed with the sudden fortune in
freshly killed meat on the landscape—and then the wave went bust when
the supply ran out (Martin doesn't think the Clovis hunters targeted
carnivores, or needed to in order to cause their extinction: killing off
their prey would do the trick).

A chilling scenario, Pleistocene overkill, and one that has achieved a
celebrity few academic theories enjoy, perhaps not least because this
grim homily of wanton slaughter can be (and often is) preached as a
sermon of our species’ sins. Granted, the human drap sheet is a long
one, but this may be one crime against nature we didn't commit. Overkill
seems unlikely for many reasons, among them:

 

•  It took modern humans over 100,000 years to reach Alaska. Could it
have taken only 1,000 more years to get to Tierra del Fuego? There were
vast stretches of unexplored and highly variable environments to be
traversed, each of which posed radically different adaptive challenges
to groups that were there to make a living and raise families; lacked
maps, convenience stores, and transportation; and had to find water,
other food, shelter, stone, and other resources critical to their
survival. That takes time.

•  Essential pieces of the overkill scenario ring hollow: most
hunter-gatherers reproduce at relatively low rates, generally less than
about 1.5% per year. Is it reasonable to suppose Clovis groups
multiplied at 3.4% in order to reach a population size of 600,000 in
just a few centuries? That's an unusually high rate that Martin plucked
from the Bounty mutineers on Pitcairn Island, who apparently shed their
inhibitions along with Captain Bligh.

•  Likewise, it's doubtful Clovis spread in a wave across the continent,
ignoring environment and topography. Armies, not hunter-gatherers, come
in waves. And indiscriminate hunting of nearly three dozen genera of
megafauna continent-wide demands a comprehensive knowledge of places and
animal behavior few hunters—especially hunters new to a landscape—could
possess. Besides, as Frison explained, no one hunting strategy would
work on all mammoths, let alone all megafauna (Chapter 7).

•  For that matter, when a foraging group's return rate begins to
decline, they move, doing so long before they've burned through all the
available resources in their original habitat (Chapter 7). They stay put
only under unusual circumstances, notably, being hemmed in on all sides.
That was hardly a problem on a late Pleistocene landscape devoid of
other people, with a choice of productive habitats in which to hunt and
gather, and where one could leave a habitat long before its animals were
gone. Its highly unlikely Clovis hunters behaved like Sherman's army in
its scorched-earth march across Georgia.

•  The Pleistocene fauna may have been naive, but studies have shown
that even naive prey populations “process information about predators
swiftly,” and their populations quickly rebound from an onslaught of
predators.³⁰ The Clovis hunters’ advantage would not have lasted long.
Besides, even if unfamiliar with humans, the Pleistocene fauna were
already well familiar with the likes of saber-toothed cats, short-faced
bears, and dire wolves, and could shift their defensive behaviors to
respond to their new threat (humans) just as did African elephants.

•  Finally, overkill requires there were no humans in North America
prior to Clovis times, for then the megafauna surely would have become
accustomed to and developed defensive behaviors to respond to human
hunters, or perhaps would have gone extinct before Clovis times. And as
we now know, there is evidence for a human presence in the Americas
(Monte Verde) that predates 11,500 BP.

 

Reasonable points all, but by themselves they are not sufficient to
reject overkill. After all, it is possible people could have moved that
fast through the hemisphere. They could have reproduced at near
rabbit-high rates and spread in an expanding, earth-scorching wave. And,
they might have chosen to hunt animals well beyond the point foraging
theory suggests they should have abandoned the patch and prey.³¹
America's colonizers may simply have been unlike any hunter-gatherers we
know (admittedly, I'm skeptical, but it's not completely outside the
realm of possibility). And perhaps the Pleistocene fauna were asleep at
the evolutionary switch, and failed to learn how to cope with predation.
That's highly unlikely too, as any zoologist will tell you, but let's
grant the point for the sake of discussion. Nor can we reject overkill
on the grounds people were here in pre-Clovis times. Martin observes
that Clovis “is the time of unmistakable appearance of paleoindian
hunters using distinctive projectile points,”³² and he's right. It is
only then that we have evidence people did, in fact, prey upon
now-extinct large mammals.

For that matter, there is ample evidence that the arrival of humans can
signal the death knell for native animals. David Steadman and others
have shown that the grim reaper of extinctions followed the landings of
the peoples who colonized the islands of the Pacific. The most famous
(or infamous) case comes from New Zealand, where eleven species of moas,
large, flightless birds that ranged in weight up to 500 pounds, went
extinct soon after humans arrived. In fact, at least twenty-five other
species—lizards, frogs, birds, and bats—were also lost. Yet, these
losses are not the result of hunting alone, as Donald Grayson argues,
because in this and in all other island extinctions, multiple causes
were in play. The first New Zealanders hunted, but also set
forest-destroying fires, introduced competitors and predators (rats and
dogs), and even brought in diseases (such as European bird viruses). It
was some combination of these that caused extinctions.³³

Besides, island life is highly susceptible to extinction. Most Pacific
islands are tiny (often no larger than Manhattan), their ecosystems are
easily destroyed (forests can be felled in a matter of years or decades
by humans needing fuel or construction material), and their native
animal populations are small, vulnerable, and cannot be replenished from
distant continents because they had evolved into new species since their
arrival. This was especially true of birds, which on remote,
predator-free islands commonly lost their ability to fly, an
evolutionary change that proved fatal when predators arrived.³⁴

Stuart Fiedel and Gary Haynes proclaim that a continent is “ultimately
just a gigantic island,” but that's true only in the narrow sense that
it's also surrounded by water.³⁵ None of the factors that make island
life vulnerable to extinction apply to North America, which supported
vast animal populations (100 million animals by Martin's own estimate)
and a formidable array of predators (no species could afford to let down
its evolutionary guard), and for which there is absolutely no evidence
Clovis people caused massive (or even minimal) environmental
destruction. No New Zealand moa had to contend with a Smilodon; no North
American mastodon ever had its forest habitat defoliated. If humans
drove North American animals to extinction, it had to have been by their
spears, as Martin said. Is there evidence of that?

CROSS-EXAMINING THE FACTS

For many years, those of us who worked with the archaeology of late
Pleistocene North America confidently asserted there was no widespread
evidence of Clovis megafaunal hunting. Yet, none of us ever demonstrated
that was so. There was no systematic scrutiny of the archaeological and
fossil records to see which—if any—of the thirty-five genera of
now-extinct mammals had been found in Clovis-age sites in such a way as
to suggest they were killed by hunters. Recognizing it was time to stop
arm waving and start analyzing, Grayson and I did just that.³⁶ The
results surprised us.

We began by amassing as comprehensive a list as possible of all alleged
Clovis kills, even ones that offered little more than a fluted point
found in the same vicinity as some fossil bone. There were seventy-six
such sites. However, the mere occurrence of artifacts and animal bones
in the same site or even on the same surface is not by itself testimony
of a predator-prey relationship. Therefore, we evaluated each case to
see if the fluted points or other tools were found in such a way as to
suggest they caused the death of the animal, or if there was compelling
evidence of butchery (cutmarks or pry marks on bone) (Figure 50), or if
the remains were stacked or otherwise arranged in ways that could not be
explained by natural causes. That's the sort of evidence we routinely
find in kill and butchery sites from other times and places in the past.

[images]

FIGURE 50.
A telltale sign of human butchering: cutmarks (the two roughly parallel
lines just left of center, and the nearly straight line above and to
their right; the irregular lines to their right are from root etching of
the bone) on a portion of a bison jaw from the Folsom site, presumably
made while removing the tongue. Not all butchering activities result in
cutmarks, but when present, they provide secure evidence of human
activity. (Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

Vetted in this manner, humans proved to be the agents of death or
dismemberment in only fourteen of those seventy-six sites. And several
of those were unsuccessful kills (animals that were speared, but which
managed to escape), while others appeared to be the result of
opportunistic scavenging of animals perhaps already near death at a
water hole (more on these sites below). Humans undeniably hunted big
game on occasion, but they didn't make a habit of it. In fact, a single
band of hunters may have disproportionate influence on what we see
archaeologically: four of those fourteen sites (Escapule, Lehner, Murray
Springs, and Naco) are within 30 kilometers of one another in Arizona's
San Pedro Valley, and the artifacts found in them are so similar as to
appear to be the work of the same group.

Measure it any way you like, fourteen sites is a tiny number, especially
set against the wanton slaughter of 100 million animals envisioned under
Pleistocene overkill.

But it's not just that it's a pitiful number. In those fourteen sites,
only mammoth and mastodon remains occur. What of the other thirty-three
genera of extinct Pleistocene mammals? There are no Clovis horse kills,
no camel kills, no sloth kills, no Hemiauchinia kills, no tapir kills,
no giant beaver kills, no kills of any of the other genera of megafauna
that went extinct. And it's not because their bones are rare: horses are
the most abundant late Pleistocene fossil we have. That a few horse and
camel bones, or dermal ossicles of the ground sloth Paramylodon,
occasionally end up in archaeological sites is intriguing, but does
little more than show they co-existed with Clovis people.³⁷ If there was
a continent-wide slaughter, someone did a superb job of hiding the
evidence.

WHEN ABSENCE OF EVIDENCE BECOMES EVIDENCE OF ABSENCE

In a brazen bit of rope-a-dope reasoning, Martin insists the scarcity of
Clovis big-game kills proves overkill. This is so, he claims, because
overkill ostensibly occurred in just a few centuries in any one area,
and hence the odds are against a kill site being preserved in the
geological record. And, secondly, because he believes Clovis people were
tidy: after they made a kill, they cleaned up after themselves,
carefully retrieving any stone points buried in the mass of flesh and
gore of the carcasses (having excavated several large animal kills and
the artifacts found in them, I can attest that paleoindian hunters were
not that tidy, but grant the point for the moment).

It is a rare hypothesis that predicts a lack of evidence, but as Grayson
and I observed, we have one here, and we have it only because evidence
for this hypothesis is, well, lacking.³⁸ But perhaps there is reason to
accept Martin's point that kill sites might be rare. After all, in areas
such as eastern North America, where high rainfall and heavy vegetation
conspire to increase soil acidity, bone is quickly destroyed. Maybe poor
preservation accounts for the lack of kills. Or it might be for want of
looking in the right places: Pleistocene-age surfaces are buried now,
deeply in some places—eight meters deep, as Reid Ferring discovered at
the Aubrey site. Large mammal carcasses shot full of Clovis points lying
on those surfaces are often beyond notice or reach, and are usually
encountered only by chance. Gary Haynes would add that African elephants
have been hunted for centuries, yet their kill sites are rare.

But remember New Zealand's moas? They were slaughtered in far greater
numbers than African elephants, and in an even narrower time slice than
attributed to Pleistocene overkill. With no hint of hypocrisy, Martin
points to the abundance of moa kill sites as proof human hunting played
a role in the extinction of these birds.

And consider this: bison were hunted on the Great Plains of North
America for the last 11,000 years, starting in Clovis times. There is
abundant archaeological evidence of planned hunts, bone beds containing
hundreds of slaughtered animals, impact-fractured projectile points, and
skinning and butchering tools. Bison hunting was often highly wasteful.
At Olsen-Chubbuck, 190 animals were stampeded into an arroyo and died,
and fully 25% of the animals on the bottom of the carcass pile were only
slightly butchered or simply untouched, the meat left to rot in the
ground (Chapter 9).³⁹

Yet after 11,000 years of this archaeologically well-documented,
intense, and often wasteful hunting, culminating in the merciless
slaughter of bison by commercial Euroamerican hide hunters in the late
nineteenth century armed with deadly, large-bore Sharps rifles (“buffalo
guns”), bison are still very much alive today—and even on the bill of
fare at many restaurants.

So an animal relentlessly hunted for millennia failed to go extinct,
while thirty-five genera of mammals that were never or only rarely
hunted did. Perhaps, Martin suggests, bison were not as vulnerable to
extinction, because they became “wilier at avoiding hunters.”⁴⁰ Alas,
bison are not that wily: an estimated 10,000-20,000 were trapped and
killed over several centuries in Late Prehistoric times by hunters who
repeatedly stampeded them (at intervals as close as four years) into the
very same 30 meter diameter, 15 meter deep sinkhole on the plains of
northeastern Wyoming (the Vore site).

The widespread slaughter envisioned by Pleistocene overkill should have
left equally unmistakable traces. With 100 million megafaunal victims,
kill sites should be more the rule than the exception. And there's no
hiding behind poor preservation, even in eastern North America. There
and elsewhere thousands of megafauna fossils have been found, yet only
two have associated artifacts. Nor, as noted, could Clovis groups
possibly be that tidy; after all, they must have had teenagers.⁴¹ Kill
sites are genuinely scarce, and not just in North America but in South
America as well (where Clovis, strictly speaking, does not occur).

There is no small irony in this. Martin cheerily dismissed pre-Clovis
for want of multiple sites; Monte Verde alone wasn't enough. “It is
true,” he said of pre-Clovis, that “the absence of evidence is not
evidence of absence—but there are limits to how long and how strongly
one can keep believing when supporting evidence is lacking.”⁴² Agreed.
But doesn't it seem only fair Martin should apply that same standard to
finding evidence of Pleistocene overkill?

IS OVERKILL DEAD?

In the early 1980s, at the annual national gathering of the archaeology
clan, Jim Mead and I organized a symposium devoted to late Pleistocene
environments and extinctions in North America. We invited many of the
aficionados of extinction, including, naturally, Paul Martin. It was a
well-attended session, and so Martin began his talk by taking a poll of
the couple hundred archaeologists in the audience. How many, he asked,
thought climate change was to blame for Pleistocene extinctions? About a
third raised their hands. He then asked how many believed climate change
combined with human hunting was the cause: another two-thirds did. Then
he asked how many thought overkill alone was to blame. His own hand shot
up. Out in the audience a single hand was partly raised, fluttered
briefly, then disappeared—despite Martin's pleading to keep it up. We
never figured out whose hand that was.

Science is not a matter of counting votes, of course; it's a matter of
evidence. Still, there's nothing wrong with polling a room of
individuals at least somewhat familiar with the evidence (though not all
in the audience were paleoindian specialists). Martin was surprised by
the results. I was too: overkill almost got one more vote than I
expected (I knew Martin would vote for it). I would have guessed more
would see climate as the sole cause, and fewer climate plus humans.
There's a curious element in this debate: archaeologists and vertebrate
paleontologists familiar with the archaeological and fossil record tend
to pin extinctions on climate change, while ecologists and zoologists
familiar with climate's impact on animals tend to suspect and blame
humans. The grass is greener on the other side.

But that's not always the case. Recently, on the heels of our
examination of supposed megafaunal kills, Donald Grayson and I published
a follow-up paper, “Requiem for North American Overkill,” which declared
overkill dead. Apparently our report of its death was premature. Stuart
Fiedel and Gary Haynes, both archaeologists, shot back with a vigorous
defense of overkill.⁴³ Although they applauded our “scrupulous” vetting
of the list of megafaunal kill sites, they snarled we had “grossly
misrepresented] the overkill debate,” and provided “outmoded data and
interpretations and ignore[d] or deliberately omit[ted] the most recent
chronological, archaeological and climatic data.” In a later paper
Haynes went on to denounce our “attack” on overkill as “doubletalk.”
Lest there be any confusion, here's a dictionary definition of what
we're accused of: \’dgb-bsl,-tok\ n. deliberately unintelligible
gibberish.

Misrepresentation and doubletalk. Harsh words, these. Leaving aside the
rhetorical posturing (who isn't guilty of that?), the essential issues
at hand are uncomplicated. This dispute is not about speculations about
who might have killed what, when, how fast, and how quickly they
reloaded, but about kill sites and chronology.

Like Martin, Fiedel and Haynes believe an absence of kill sites is to be
expected, and consider fourteen kill sites a “phenomenally rich record”
of human predation in view of the length of time they think it
accumulated—the 300 years Clovis and megafauna ostensibly overlapped on
the landscape. In fact, fourteen is indeed a large number, but not for
the reasons they suppose: given how many of these sites were found bones
first (Chapter 3), fourteen probably inflates their actual importance!
That aside, our point was not just that there were only fourteen sites,
but that there were only two genera in those fourteen sites, and no
horse kills, camel kills, sloth kills, musk ox kills, glyptodont kills,
and so on down the list of the other thirty-three extinct genera.

Haynes immodestly proclaimed he could “speak with authority on this
matter, having devoted 25 years to neotaphonomic studies⁴⁴ of
large-mammal skeletons in Africa, Australia, and North America.” On his
self-appointed authority, he declared that “kill sites of any animal
smaller than a mammoth are never well preserved.” He even tacked a
number to his pronouncement: “kill sites of animals that weigh less than
250 kg will not be preserved and fossilized except in special
depositional ‘traps.’” Ignoring the many kill sites of, say, pronghorn
antelope or mountain sheep that are found on the northern plains
(animals that tip the scales at 70 kilograms maximum),⁴⁵ and not just in
the special traps Haynes lays for them, it is still fair to ask again,
where are all the horse kills, camel kills, sloth kills, musk ox kills,
glyptodont kills, and on down the hefty-animal list? All of them surpass
Haynes’ minimum body mass requirement.

Fiedel and Haynes shift the ground toward smaller animals. Look at
eastern North America, they suggest. There is not a single site with
“the remains of any butchered carcasses of elk, deer, bear, or woodland
bison of Holocene age.” In fact, the remains of deer are extremely
abundant in those sites, as has long been recognized. Unless their
already-dead carcasses were scraped off the landscape and dragged into
archaeological sites (possible, one supposes), they must have been
killed by hunters. If only the bones of the peccary, tapir, Aztlan
rabbit, and other lighter-than-250 kilogram Pleistocene animals were as
widely represented in Clovis-age sites, Fiedel and Haynes's point would
be well taken.

And consider this: North America once had its own flightless bird—the
sea duck, Chedytes lawi—which inhabited the islands and mainland of
coastal California and Oregon. It was hunted by people, even in
paleoindian times (by the inhabitants of Daisy Cave), and ultimately
went extinct. But the sea duck's extinction is a problem for overkill:
it took 7,000 years of human predation before this vulnerable prey
succumbed—hardly the near-instantaneous demise overkill assumes. As
important, human predation of this animal produced an unmistakable
archaeological record: its bones are well preserved in sites along the
coast.⁴⁶ In case there is any question, the sea duck was much smaller
than a mammoth.

Haynes complains it is unfair for critics of overkill to call for “more
and more kill sites.” No one is calling for more and more exactly;
rather, the request is for more of the genera (of the thirty-five) to
have secure evidence of human predation. It's that glaring gap that
needs to be closed, and again one cannot entirely blame the fossil
record here. Horses, camels, and musk ox (all big beasts) are extremely
well represented in the fossil record of North America, far more so than
either mammoth or mastodon, and yet there are no secure kill sites of
these animals.

As for the chronology, Fiedel and Haynes rightly note there have been
great strides in our radiocarbon dating of the extinct animals. Some
fifteen years ago, only seven genera were known to have lasted until
Clovis time. Nowadays, there's more than twice that number (here's where
we stood accused of “deliberately omitting” evidence, ostensibly
ignoring radiocarbon ages produced by Russell Graham and colleagues.
Since we discussed Graham's chronology in detail and explicitly
acknowledged his help, we could only be perplexed by their accusation).
More terminal Pleistocene dates may yet come for other genera. Or they
may not. The point we were making was straightforward: the chronology of
extinctions is yet unsettled. We still don't know whether all animals
disappeared simultaneously or not.

Haynes and Fiedel then accuse us of ignoring the Signor-Lipps effect,
which is the proposition that rare animals tend to disappear from the
fossil record before they go extinct. Thus, the rarer the animal on the
late Pleistocene landscape, the harder it will be to find a latest
Pleistocene age for it. Haynes draws from Signor-Lipps the message that
“the youngest radiocarbon dates on species do not come from the very
last members of those species.” But of course; we're well aware of that
(I use the mirror image of Signor-Lipps in the argument made earlier
about why the earliest dated site in the Americas is not likely to be
the earliest site in the Americas, though it could be, if we get very
lucky [Chapter 4]).

We are also aware, though Fiedel and Haynes are not, that if radiocarbon
dates are indeed scarce on Pleistocene fauna from the 300 years they
shared North America with humans, then that also suggests these animals
were already in decline before or by the time Clovis arrived. To test
this, we need to more fully understand the extinction process. We need
to know when the process began, how long it lasted, and the rate of
population decline over that time.

More to think about: if all 100 million animals of those thirty-five
extinct genera lasted until the very end of the Pleistocene, only to be
suddenly dispatched by human hunters, then why would Signor-Lipps come
into play at all? There ought to be plenty of terminal Pleistocene ages
to go around. There are not.

Haynes portrays critics of overkill as engaging in postmodern
meta-narratives, a “constructed reality.” In some circles, those are
fighting words. Not here. I agree with his point that all the arguments
in this dispute need to be read carefully and critically, and I would
add another: although it's terribly old-fashioned to say, I also think
evidence matters.

Paul Martin in his Twilight of the Mammoths, a long look back at his and
overkill's career, and the vigorous debate over the cause of Pleistocene
extinctions he and it engendered, breathed a sigh of relief that at
least there is agreement about what was not a cause of those
extinctions. Perhaps the one thing most specialists can agree upon, he
explained, “is that the near-time [Pleistocene] extinctions had nothing
to do with a space rock” or asteroid impact, unlike in the case of the
dinosaurs’ demise 65 million years ago. That was too bad, he mused,
since “one would find a highly receptive audience among astronomers and
their public had mammoth extinction shared similarities with dinosaur
extinction.”⁴⁷

As they say, watch what you wish for. (Chapter 2, Sidebar).

TIMING WAS EVERYTHING

Overkill helped Martin solve a vexing problem: what could cause
thirty-five very different animal genera living in very different
habitats to go extinct simultaneously? Let's briefly turn to the
radiocarbon record since the timing of extinctions is often a point of
departure in talking about their cause. Without putting too fine a point
on it, the reasoning here is that if all the megafauna disappeared at
the same time, that suggests a cause that could strike down animals of
very different physiology and adaptation across diverse habitats and do
so instantaneously. Changes in climate and environment, Martin supposed,
varied too much in timing, by area, and in severity to kill off so many
animals at once—but he thought voracious, fast-moving hunters could. But
if humans were not the cause of extinction, then why did all these
animals go extinct at the same time? Or did they?

We often assume as much, but after years of radiocarbon dating fossils
of Pleistocene fauna, we cannot say these animals went extinct
simultaneously. All were certainly gone by 10,800 BP, but Russell Graham
and Thomas Stafford have shown that only sixteen of the thirty-five
genera were alive as recently as 12,000 years ago—that is, up to the
doorstep of Clovis times. The other nineteen genera lack radiocarbon
dates showing they survived until then. In some cases (the Aztlan
rabbit, for example), the latest occurrence predates the Last Glacial
Maximum. Whether that means these animals were already extinct by then
is not clear, since many of those genera are relatively rare in the
fossil record, and we know that the number of radiocarbon dates
available for a particular animal is strongly determined by how many of
its fossils have been found.

Additional radiocarbon dates might bring their terminal dates closer to
12,000 years ago, but then they might not. Until we possess more
radiocarbon dates, we cannot assume all genera disappeared
simultaneously or gradually, or let assumptions about the timing of
extinctions be used to support arguments about its cause.

Perhaps more important, it's not enough to know when the extinctions
process ended; we also need to know when it began, and what was
occurring on the landscape at that time to cause populations to
decline.⁴⁸ That's no easy task with radiocarbon dating. But here, too,
ancient DNA—this time from mammoths, horses, camels, and other
fossils—can potentially yield valuable insight: changes in genetic
diversity over time can reveal population histories. This work is in its
infancy, but it is already yielding results: genetic evidence compiled
by Beth Shapiro and colleagues has shown that Alaskan bison populations
underwent a significant decline starting about 37,000 BP, neatly
coinciding with a warm stretch prior to the LGM, when tree cover peaked,
reducing grazing land and serving as a barrier to movement.⁴⁹

If North American extinctions were, in fact, smeared over many
millennia, this would be no different than the timing of Pleistocene
extinctions elsewhere in the world, and in other New World regions.
North of the ice sheets in Alaska, Dale Guthrie has shown that one
species of horse disappeared by 31,000 BP, another survived until 12,500
BP, and mammoths lasted until 11,500 BP. For the record: there is no
evidence of human hunting of horse or mammoth in Alaska. In fact, and as
noted in the previous chapter, everything else seems to have been on the
menu at Alaska's Broken Mammoth site except mammoth.⁵⁰

CONSIDERING CLIMATE

If different genera disappeared at different times, that opens the
possibility extinctions resulted from a more complicated cause: perhaps
the complex climate changes taking place at the end of the Pleistocene,
which played out across North America over thousands of years in
different ways with different consequences for different species in
different environments.

Indeed, often unspoken in discussions of Pleistocene overkill is the
fact that extinctions were not limited to the very largest,
mouth-watering mammals, though those dominated this particular
extinction episode, but also included storks, vultures, eagles, jays,
and blackbirds, as well as a snake, several genera and species of
turtles, and a spruce tree.⁵¹ Likewise ignored is the fact that
extinctions were merely one element of much larger, sweeping,
end-of-the-Pleistocene changes that, extinctions aside, dramatically
altered the ranges of plants and animals.

Against this backdrop of other ecological changes, megafaunal extinction
seems less an aberration for which a human cause is necessary, and more
a part oflarger, natural changes in climate and environment.
Paleoecologists are busy exploring how these changes may have impacted
habitats, forage, and animal physiology and/or reproduction.

Already, there are several hypotheses, though at the moment (and here
Martin is exactly right), these are not well developed. The reason, as
Grayson and others have emphasized, is that far more needs to be known
about the responses of individual genera and species to the changes that
came with the end of the Pleistocene.⁵² That's not easy, given the
limits of the fossil record and the fact these animals are extinct: our
knowledge of what climatic and environmental changes they could (or
could not) tolerate is limited. We do not know how changes from equable
to seasonal climates, changes in grassland composition, increasing
temperature and decreasing rainfall (especially in western regions), or
changes in growing-season length (it got much shorter in the far north)
would affect each.

We suspect many of the very large mammals had long gestation periods
(comparable to the approximately 22 months in modern elephants), as well
as low and slow reproductive rates (births came late and infrequently,
and rarely produced more than one offspring).⁵³ If successive offspring
died when a long-established birth season suddenly became harsh and
inhospitable, the limited reproductive capacity might leave the animals
unable to respond (indeed, this is one reason large animals have a high
risk of extinction). And it would make them vulnerable to a coup de
grace by hunters who, if they targeted breeding females or young animals
(as they did at the Colby mammoth kill in Wyoming), would have sped an
already-diminished local herd toward extinction.

Further, biotic communities in place for tens of thousands of years
dissolved, and plants dispersed in different directions at different
speeds (Chapter 2). How did that upset the delicate balance of animal
and plant life, and how did each animal respond to the new forage hand
it was dealt? What effect did this have on competition for resources?
All of this has to be understood for each animal genus as it changed in
numbers, range, and distribution across space and through time.⁵⁴

After the LGM, for example, Guthrie shows that Alaskan horses diminished
markedly in body size, shrinking steadily until their extinction around
12,500 BP. Horses are obligate grazers, and as cold, arid, and treeless
northern grasslands gave way to a wetter landscape, with more lakes,
bogs, and tundra vegetation, the horse suffered from lack of food, and
faced increased competition from other large animals such as woolly
mammoth. Mammoth was less of an obligate grazer and outlasted the horse
by a millennium, but ultimately it, too, succumbed to the disappearance
of the northern grassland.

The Alaskan cases are among the few for which we have evidence of animal
populations under stress, and good evidence of possible environmental
causes for their demise. Even though overkill is wrong, there is still
much work to be done to show climate-based explanations are right.

But if Clovis hunters weren't overkilling megafauna, what role did these
animals play in their adaptations? And what was the nature of Clovis
adaptations? A closer look is in order.

BACK TO CLOVIS

At the time of its initial occupation by people 11,300 years ago, the
Clovis site in New Mexico was a spring-fed pond feeding into nearby
Blackwater Draw. The springs attracted plants, animals, and people for
many thousands of years, even into the twentieth century, when the
springs were finally tapped out by irrigation. But just about the time
the site's archaeological riches caught the eye of E. B. Howard, a
quarry company moved in to mine the site's deeper, commercial-grade
gravels. As giant bulldozers dug for the gravel, they ravaged the
overlying layers of artifact and bone. In an awkward dance that
satisfied neither party, bulldozer operators would temporarily suspend
work if they happened to spot bone-rich deposits, and archaeologists
would rush in to salvage what they could. Much was saved, but more was
lost.⁵⁵

Yet, what was found is remarkable, for the late Pleistocene springs
watered frogs, turtles, snakes, mammoth, bison, horse, camel, peccary,
deer, and antelope, as well as saber-toothed cat, bear, and dire wolf.
Not all of these were food. Ironically, bison, and not mammoth, were one
of the most abundant species in the Clovis-age deposits; seven were
found, and at least one had been speared, a Clovis point found lodged
against its scapula (shoulder blade).

Even so, mammoth remains attracted the greatest attention. Over the
years, nearly a dozen were excavated by archaeologists called to the
scene; more probably passed unnoticed through the quarry machinery (it
was very large machinery; one can scarcely imagine how many rabbit or
roasted small-animal skeletons were overlooked).

There is no compelling evidence humans killed all or even most of the
mammoths found here; we know only that the animals died at this spot.
That said, at least three mammoths were found with projectile points and
the tools used to butcher them. They died at different times, some on
the pond's margins, others in its center. Their skeletons were nearly
complete and articulated (the bones lay in proper anatomical position),
suggesting the carcasses were carved where they fell, but only partially
so. Flesh was stripped from the upper skeleton (forelimbs, shoulders,
and ribs) and skulls were smashed to obtain brains, but the remainder of
the carcasses were left to rot.

This pattern of partially butchered mammoth bones in marshy, pond, or
stream settings recurs in many Clovis sites, from Lange-Ferguson on the
northern plains of South Dakota, to Lehner in the San Pedro Valley.⁵⁶
The pattern is so persistent it looks purposeful, as though Clovis
hunters lurked in such places, looking to drive the mammoths into
shallow water, or waiting in ambush for the animal to get stuck in the
mud and become an easier target. But appearances may be deceiving. As
Frison observed, mired animals that large are difficult to butcher and
nearly impossible to extract, as the articulated skeletons at Clovis
clearly attest. For that matter, healthy animals (especially full-grown
adults) are not easily mired. Skilled hunters, Frison argues, would take
mammoth elsewhere and on their terms, perhaps by quietly isolating a
juvenile away from the herd's protection, wounding it, then patiently
waiting for it to become disabled or die—all the while preventing the
animal from staggering to a waterhole to die.

OPPORTUNITIES FOUND

If that's so, why are many Clovis-stabbed mammoths at water holes? In
studying African elephants, Gary Haynes saw that a disproportionate
number of younger animals frequented water holes when ill (as their body
temperature rose) or during drought, often dying there without human
help. Such conditions force animals, especially ones with large,
water-cooled engines like elephants, to gravitate to water, even if they
have to dig to reach it (humans are not the only species that digs water
wells; elephants can, too).

Vance Haynes, in fact, sees hints of a brief but severe drought in
Clovis times across the American West. His evidence is strongly disputed
by others, including Vance Holliday, and at the Clovis site itself: many
artifacts, including three Clovis points, were found in spring conduits
at Clovis. They were placed there, Haynes believes, as offerings. Were
that so, presumably the springs were active at the time or had flowed in
recent memory. Regardless, if there had been a drought, it was nowhere
as severe as the one that for nearly 2,000 years of the Middle Holocene
laid waste to much of the American West. That was a time when humans
were forced to dig deep wells for water, and shift their diet to more
drought-resistant animals and plants. A pit at the Clovis site resembles
such a well, but it was excavated in the 1960s, and observations made at
the time (and when it was reopened in 1993) cannot demonstrate its
purpose.⁵⁷

Drought or no, sick and enfeebled animals of a species teetering on
extinction that wandered into ponds may have become mired, and thereby
became risk-free targets for passing (or patiently waiting)
hunter-gatherers, who took what meat they could, then moved on. Less
danger was involved since the animals could be patiently monitored from
a distance. Killing might even be unnecessary if death was inevitable
and predictable.

James Judge calls this opportunistic scavenging, and thinks it, more so
than deliberate big-game hunting, characterizes Clovis.⁵⁸ That would
explain all those partially butchered animals mired in the mud, and why
so many Clovis mammoth “kills” look like animals that died of natural
causes, but with a few foreign objects (Clovis points) stuck in their
carcasses.

Opportunistic or not, Clovis groups were occasionally quite adept at
snaring big game. In the San Pedro Valley, bones of thirteen mammoths,
mostly calves or young adults, were excavated on the Lehner Ranch by
Emil Haury (Figure 51) and (later) Vance Haynes.⁵⁹ Scattered among
mammoth ribs, hindquarters, and jaws were thirteen Clovis points made of
locally available chert, chalcedony, and quartz crystal, along with
stone scrapers, knives, and a chopper. The wide scatter of mammoth
bones, their unequal preservation, their vertical distribution over
about 1 meter of deposits, suggest the serial killing of animals
isolated from their herds, then dispatched, butchered, and consumed in
the centuries around 10,950 BP.

[images]

FIGURE 51.
Excavations at the Lehner mammoth kill site, Arizona, ca. 1959. Lehner
is one of a dozen sites for which we have secure evidence of human
hunting of mammoth. (Photograph courtesy of Fred Wendorf.) # #

The San Pedro Valley was a ripe field. At Murray Springs, 16 kilometers
north of Lehner and at virtually the same moment in time (around 10,900
BP), at least one mammoth and, nearby, eleven bison were killed. The
Clovis groups camped close by, hauling in a mammoth drumstick (one of
the leg bones) and bison filets, and overhauling broken weaponry. Vance
Haynes recovered Clovis points, a variety of tools (including the
afore-mentioned mammoth bone shaft wrench), and nearly 15,000 flakes
from tool manufacturing and resharpening. Many flakes littered the
kills, evidence of the constant resharpening of tools that dull easily
when carving animal flesh. As was the case at Clovis, the mammoth
carcass was only partially disarticulated (and only the bison bone was
burned). The dead mammoth may have had other visitors, too: Haynes found
mammoth tracks leading up to the skeleton. Perhaps, as elephants do
today, curious mammoths came over to take a look at their dead kin.⁶⁰

The Clovis points used against the bison at Murray Springs were far the
worse for wear. Two of them had flakes driven backward off the point tip
(impact fractures). One point was found in the kill, and its impact
flake in the camp (carried there in the meat, presumably), while the
reverse was true of another. Impact fractures occur when stone hits bone
at high velocity. Such fractures are rare on Clovis points from
mammoth-bearing sites (only one of thirteen points at Lehner was impact
fractured, for example), yet common on points in bison kills of all
ages. The scarcity of impact damage on Clovis points suggests at the
very least that those aimed at mammoths were not penetrating deep enough
to hit bone, and those found as isolates may not have been used as
points (a possibility for which there is some evidence).

At Clovis, Lehner, and Murray Springs, and localities like Colby and
Lange-Fer-guson, there were mammoth opportunities found.⁶¹ At Colby,
hunters took full advantage: eight mammoths, mostly immature animals
(one a fetus), were killed at intervals by hunters some 10,900 years
ago, who then carefully stacked their leftovers into two piles, set
roughly 33 meters apart. The first pile had remains of three immature
mammoths and a few tools. The second yielded the remains of four
mammoths, mostly articulated ribs and shoulder bones, along with an
innominate (pelvic bone), all topped by a skull. Directly underneath the
innominate was a fluted point (an offering, perhaps?). Frison, who
excavated Colby, believes these were meat caches, with the one reopened
and the meat used, but not the other. Stone caches had been placed on
the landscape for use after the hard work; in northern latitudes, meat
was cached for the hard times.

THE BIG ONES THAT GOT AWAY

There were mammoth opportunities lost, too. Just down the San Pedro from
Lehner and Murray Springs was the Naco mammoth, found eroding out of the
sidewalls of Greenbush Creek. Most of the skeleton was there, save the
hindquarters, which had eroded and disappeared. Eight Clovis projectile
points, variable in size, were found with this one animal (a mammoth
pincushion): one lay at the base of the skull, another near the left
scapula, two were wedged between ribs, and one against the surface of
the atlas vertebra. Yet, no butchering tools were found, nor did any
bones show signs of filleting. The Naco mammoth evidently escaped its
killers and died quietly of its wounds with hide intact. But escaped
from whom? The stone by which the Naco points were fashioned was the
same as that used by the hunters who stabbed the Lehner and Murray
Springs mammoths.

Nor is Naco alone. Relatively close by (and still in the San Pedro
Valley) was the Escapule mammoth, a single animal found with two
projectile points. Judging by the stylistic and stone similarities to
the points at the other Clovis sites in the valley, it appears to be
another escapee of the Lehner and/or Murray Springs carnage.

Out on the Great Plains, there's further evidence of
less-than-successful predation. Dent, which sits at the base of a
terrace of Colorado's South Platte River, yielded two fluted points, a
knife, and a dozen mammoths. Found with them were a great many boulders
(some half a meter in circumference), prompting the engaging scenario
that a group of hunters came upon the herd and, for want of adequate
weaponry, grabbed the closest weapons at hand—cobbles from the
terrace—and stoned the animals to death. An engaging scenario, but
probably wrong. More recent work at the site revealed that bones,
boulders, and fluted points all came washing 10-15 meters downslope from
the terrace top about 200 years ago, though the bones themselves date to
10,990 BP.⁶² The boulders were probably not late Pleistocene missiles,
but cobbles that fortuitously came to rest with the mammoth remains. If
there had been a hunt, it was at best unsuccessful, the two points
perhaps coming from the carcass of an animal that had carried them
around for some time, a thorn in its elephant-thick hide.

So, too, the case of Domebo (pronounced like the name of Disney's
big-eared elephant), a mammoth found in south-central Oklahoma. With the
bones (dated to 10,960 BP) were two fluted points, and three small
flakes. The points, though found near the skeleton, did not cause its
death, and there were no signs of butchering. The coroner ruled the
cause of death unknown.⁶³

And then there's the Miami site in the northern panhandle of Texas,
discovered in the 1930s when Dust Bowl drought forced farmers to plow
deeper than usual, thereby exposing an ancient pond bed containing
remains of five mammoths, three of which were mature or nearly mature
individuals. Oddly, there were no bones of other animals in the pond,
but there were several projectile points and a scraper. Yet, there's no
evidence of butchering, so it may be the Miami mammoths were enfeebled
by natural causes or were already dead when a Clovis group came upon the
carcasses and began salvaging what they could, losing a few artifacts in
the process. Or perhaps it was an unsuccessful kill. Two of the points
were found with one of the mature mammoths: could she have staggered to
the basin to die and been followed by her young, who lingered there
after her death until their own?⁶⁴

EAST MEETS WEST

Mammoth altogether eluded the fluted spear points of eastern paleoindian
groups, but then these open-ground, gregarious herd animals were
relatively rare in heavily wooded Pleistocene eastern North America.
Their distantly related, forest-dwelling kin, the mastodon, was far more
abundant in this region, and yet it was even more successful at avoiding
being on the Clovis menu. Except at Kimmswick.

Since 1839, many mastodon skeletons have been mined from this spot, now
the Mastodon State Historic Site along the Mississippi River, south of
St. Louis, Missouri. There was talk early on that ancient artifacts were
there, too. William Henry Holmes himself excavated here in 1901-2, to
lay that dangerous talk to rest. It didn't work. In the 1980s, a team
directed by Russell Graham reopened Kimmswick, and in ancient pond
settings reminiscent of Clovis sites further west, found the remains of
two mastodon, a cow and calf, along with a few fluted points, butchering
tools, and several thousand tiny flakes. The site is undated, but is
assuredly within the paleoindian age range.

There are hints of mastodon being taken at other eastern paleoindian
sites,⁶⁵ but those are strong only at Michigan's Pleasant Lake, where
mastodon bones show cut marks, striations, and polishing suggestive of
human knife work. Curiously, not a single stone artifact has come from
the site (there's that Clovis tidiness again!).

It has not escaped notice that most megafauna kills are found on the
Great Plains and in the Southwest. That most of them are of mammoth
partly explains the pattern: that's where this animal was especially
abundant. Yet, it fails to explain why their forest relatives (the
mastodon) were not taken in comparable numbers. It's not because we
haven't look for mastodon kills in the east. The search has been ongoing
since the 1930s. Nor is it for want of mastodon remains of the proper
age. George Quimby and Ronald Mason long ago pointed to the overlap in
the distribution of fluted points and mastodons in the Upper Midwest
(the Mason-Quimby line, Paul Martin called it).

Rather, the answer lies in the ecological stage on which these
adaptations played out. Late Pleistocene environments in the East were
more complex and changing more rapidly than those in the West (Chapter
2). In turn, plant and animal species and communities were
correspondingly richer in the East, and that made a difference in
Clovis-age foraging. As Michael Cannon and I found, the diets of early
Americans in eastern North America were broader and less dominated by
large mammals than were those of their western contemporaries.⁶⁶

JUST SHOWING OFF

Armed with stone-tipped spears, Clovis hunters could take big game.
Occasionally they were successful, other times not. And sometimes they
got lucky and took advantage of a bad situation—bad for the prey, at
least. That Clovis hunters did not pursue mammoth or mastodon more
regularly or ruthlessly comes as no particular surprise.

Hunting big game has more than its share of risks. Like coming home
empty handed. Or not coming home at all. And if elephants, their modern,
highly intelligent, unpredictable, and vengeful relatives, are any
indication, hunting mammoth or mastodon was especially risky. Elephants,
as Hadza hunters told James O'Connell, do not behave like animals; they
behave like enemies. Yet the Hadza, O'Connell adds, hunt rhinoceros and
sometimes even lions. As George Silberbauer observed, it is “admirable
common sense not to shoot a flimsy arrow into dangerous prey like
elephant and [water] buffalo unless you know exactly what the prey will
do next; both species take their annual toll of hunters [even when]
armed with high-powered rifles and give rise to innumerable tales of
narrow escapes.”⁶⁷

Indeed, when elephants are hunted nowadays, it is at a distance with
high-powered rifles or up close with metal broad swords, both far
superior weapons to Clovis-pointed spears. Spear-toting archaeologists
experimenting on recently deceased zoo and circus elephants have shown
that bone and stone points can penetrate elephant hide (Frison reports
that Siberian freeze-dried woolly mammoth hide was equally thick, if not
thicker, and of course there was hair to contend with, too). A spear
thrust would be most lethal in those spots where the hide thins or, say,
if plunged deep into a lung. Those are easy to target when the animal
lies dead before you, but not so easy after you miss your first shot at
a live and suddenly very angry elephant. As Frison learned during a cull
in Africa, no Clovis point could drop a charging elephant in its tracks.
Teddy Roosevelt, after his own frighteningly close encounter with a
raging bull elephant while on a post-presidential romp through Africa
bagging animals large and small, well understood why smaller prey made
up the majority of the diet for African hunter-gatherers.⁶⁸

In fact, big-game hunting can be a very inefficient means of feeding a
family. Bird and O'Connell record that despite substantial effort, Hadza
men “manage to acquire large carcasses on average only about once every
30 hunter-days,”⁶⁹ a daily failure rate of 97%. When big game is bagged,
most of the meat is shared, producing more for the group than for the
hunter's family. So what's in it for the hunter and his kin? Why would
one specialize in the risky and inefficient pursuit of large animal
prey?

Kristen Hawkes and Rebecca Bliege Bird suspect big-game hunting and the
finely fashioned weaponry that goes with it may be a form of costly
signaling, or showing off, by which hunters gain prestige among peers
and competitors. Hunting success confers status, and marks a hunter as a
powerful ally, a dangerous adversary, or an attractive mate. One key
piece of evidence in favor of their hypothesis: the children of skilled
Hadza hunters do not have better survival odds than other children
(indicating they were not eating any better, despite their father's
success), but they had more siblings, revealing that skilled hunters had
much higher fertility.⁷⁰ (It's hard to ignore the coincidence that
excavating a big-game kill site confers considerable archaeological
status; I'll leave to others to judge its rewards.)

It was long ago suggested, tongue-in-cheek, that each Clovis hunter
probably killed one mammoth, then spent the rest of his life talking
about it.⁷¹ An exaggeration, perhaps. Still, there's a nugget of truth
to it. Humans talk. And as Hawkes and Bliege Bird observe, reputations
are crafted through storytelling. Roosevelt saw the kernel of one such
story emerging just hours after the bull that sideswiped him was killed.
“The gun-bearers, as they walked ahead of us camp ward…began to
improvise a song, reciting the success of the hunt, the death of the
elephant, and the power of the rifles,” one that was soon added to the
stories already told. The elephant, like “no other animal, not the lion
himself, is so constant a theme of talk, and a subject of such
unflagging interest round the campfire…” Yet, at the core of each story
there had to be a kill, for “as in other domains of male contest,”
Hawkes and Bliege Bird add, “‘trash talk’ may have its uses, but
reputations for delivering the goods cannot be built upon it.”⁷²

ROUNDING OUT THE CLOVIS DIET

Smaller game and plants likely do nothing for bragging rights, but they
certainly help fill in the bulk of the diet. That is true among modern
hunter-gatherers, and was likely true in Clovis times as well. But what
else may have been part of the paleoindian diet has only recently come
into view, albeit slowly, as one might expect given how few sites there
are, the traditional attention given to large animal kills, and the
problems of preservation of smaller animal and plant remains—and perhaps
even of the artifacts used to harvest those. A study by Christopher
Ellis revealed that when pursuing small prey, hunters the world over
commonly used throwing sticks; snares; or bone, wood, or antler points,
since those readily stun the animal, do no damage to its skin, nor cause
it to sink (if hunting waterfowl or fish).⁷³ These would leave little
archaeological trace (save under circumstances like those at Monte
Verde, where wooden lances were preserved).

In the far West for all appearances, Clovis-age groups ate nothing, or
at least nothing that's been left behind. There are hints (a few bones
here and there) that mountain sheep were taken at higher elevations in
the Great Basin. These are animals that can be captured and subdued
readily with drop nets, which were available by this time in prehistory.
Another hint of their adaptations comes from mapping the distribution of
early fluted and stemmed points in the Great Basin: they cluster along
the edges of now-dry Pleistocene pluvial lakes, marshes, and springs.
Whatever these Clovis and other paleoindians were doing, Grayson points
out, they were doing near shallow water. If later sites in the same area
bear witness, what they were doing was exploiting small mammals, birds,
fish, and mollusks.

Confirmation that fish were part of a Clovis-age diet in the far West
comes from a study of the bone isotopes from the Buhl skeleton, found in
Idaho and dated to 10,700 BP. The isotope chemistry of bone can reveal
the type and relative proportion of plants and animals in the diet. As
the old saying goes, you are what you eat (to which those who study
prehistoric coprolites are wont to add, “except what you excrete”). In
the Buhl case, her diet consisted of meat and fish—probably salmon, the
isotope signature being that of marine rather than freshwater fish.
There must have been long, lean periods in her life, too, judging by
episodes of arrested bone growth evident in her x-rays.⁷⁴

Moving onto the Great Plains, George Agogino reported finding a turtle
roasting pit at the Clovis site: six or seven Pleistocene terrapins
stacked one atop another and apparently cooked in their shells. Turtles
appear frequently in other Great Plains Clovis-age sites, including
Lubbock Lake in far west Texas, and at Aubrey and Lewisville in
north-central Texas, where turtles were among the most common vertebrate
fossils recovered (at Lewisville they comprised about 90% of the animal
remains). So frequent were turtle bones at Lewisville that many “were
donated to visitors and to Boy Scout groups as mementos”⁷⁵ (“guest
goodie bags” are hardly the norm at archaeological sites, but then
Lewisville was excavated in the late 1950s by amateurs, innocent of
archaeological protocol).

Often larger than their modern relatives and always slow moving,
Pleistocene turtles, many now extinct, were the best kind of game. One
genus, Geochelone (Figure 52), was nearly a meter long, 75 centimeters
wide, and 60 centimeters tall. That's a lot of meat under the hood of a
prey species that could be pursued (leisurely, of course) without threat
to human life or limb. Ultimately, we may discover turtles were a
paleoindian staple, a menu item rivaling faster and bigger game, which
may explain their occurrence even at big-game kill sites like Clovis and
Kimmswick.

A staple, perhaps, but these were not turtle-hunting specialists. At
Aubrey and Lewisville, hunter-gatherers foraged up and down the food
chain: bison and deer are present, as well as a variety of small
animals, including snakes and lizards, frogs and birds. Some of these
smaller remains could be mere background noise, animals that wandered
into the site and died of their own accord. It happens. Yet, many of
their bones were also burned, a sign they were consumed by humans. But
why would hunters on such a rich landscape stoop so low for forage? Were
they that “unfocused,” as Gary Haynes put it?⁷⁶ To be sure, resource
ranking matters to hunter-gatherers, but food is food, and the
lower-ranked items could be collected readily while out on the hunt, or
gathered by other members of the group.

[images]

FIGURE 52.
An intact shell of the extinct North American tortoise, Geochelone,
excavated from the sediments of a Pleistocene pluvial lake bed in west
Texas. The putty knife is 18 cm long. (Photograph courtesy of Richard
Rose.)

Archaeologists have long supposed deer or elk were targeted by groups in
the complex forests of southeastern North America, as they were by
virtually all subsequent hunter-gatherers of that region. The evidence
is meager, though deer bones are abundant just across the academic
border separating the paleoindian and subsequent Archaic period (Chapter
9).

Caribou (a member of the deer family) were apparently prey at several
northeastern sites, although their bones have only been found at Bull
Brook (Massachusetts), Udora (Ontario), and Whipple (New Hampshire);
also apparently consumed at Udora were hare and arctic fox. These
confirmed and suspected caribou kills date to the centuries around
10,600 BP, and are located in what would have been a swath of more open
terrain stretching from Nova Scotia to the Great Lakes. Why caribou in
this setting?

These animals historically moved in great herds, wintering in the forest
and summering on the tundra. In immediate post-glacial times, tundra was
not so extensive (Chapter 2), and caribou ranges and numbers were
probably smaller. Even so, however, their migratory habits and herd
instincts made them a prime resource in northern forests and parklands.

At Maine's Vail site on the Magalloway River, Michael Gramly found a
killing ground, a sandy patch littered with twelve fluted points, some
complete and others with shattered tips, but no other tools.⁷⁷ Some 250
meters away and across the river (Figure 53) was a camp marked by more
projectile points (bases this time), scrapers, knives, gravers, drills,
and wedges, the latter for splitting bone and retrieving marrow. Kill
and camp literally can be joined: seven point tips from the former
re-fit onto bases at the latter, reuniting what had come apart in a
split second of impact 10,500 years earlier (see Plate 12).

No bone is preserved in the acidic soils of this site, but Gramly
observes the Vail killing ground is at a topographic pinch point in the
valley, an ideal spot for waiting hunters to intercept caribou on their
seasonal migrations between tundra and forest. He thinks hunters
positioned themselves here for several years running, since the camp
contained multiple artifact concentrations, possibly from different
stints on-site. And they may have cached their leftovers, both in
shallow pits on the site and at the Adkins site, just a kilometer away,
where Gramly spotted half a dozen boulders, each weighing 100 kilograms
(220 pounds) or more. These were arranged around a pit, creating a
storage chamber about twice the size of an average household
refrigerator (and in Maine at the end of the Pleistocene, easily as
cold). Having a food cache is handy when waiting on the unpredictable
arrival of a migratory herd, especially given how far the hunters had
come.

Their points were made of stone acquired 300 kilometers away in the
Hudson River valley. Not surprisingly, the points were intensively used,
resharpened, and recycled. The hunters must not have found, or had the
time to visit, the outcrop of high-quality Ledget Ridge chert just 30
kilometers distant, where they might have refurbished their weaponry.
But then, hunter-gatherer mobility is not just a matter of the distance
from outcrop to site; it's also about time: the time elapsed since the
last visit to the quarry, say, or perhaps the time it might take one
away from an ambush spot and chance missing the herd as it passed
through. Ultimately, however, they did miss it when, Gramly believes,
the caribou chose another valley for their seasonal trek. Caribou can be
fickle. With that, Vail was abandoned (though not the valley, as Gramly
and his team's subsequent discoveries have shown).

[images]

FIGURE 53.
Aerial view of the Vail camp and kill sites, Magalloway Valley, Maine,
ca. 1980. The clusters of artifacts marking the camp were found on the
sandy beach of what is now (artificial) Lake Aziscohos, just along the
central portion of the tree line; the killing ground was on the prong of
land in the approximate center of the image 90 m away from the camp.
(Photograph courtesy of R. Michael Gramly.)

WHEN HUNTERS GATHER

It has been proclaimed plant foods were “neither a provable nor logical
part” of paleoindian diets.⁷⁸ That's a bit excessive. It is fair to say
the degree of plant use among paleoindians remains unproven. It is both
provable and, as Lewis Binford and others have shown, eminently logical.
Finding that proof requires good recovery techniques since seeds,
berries, and other traces of plants (or even small animals) are not
easily detected, even if they are preserved. A little luck helps, too.

Luck and technique came together at Shawnee-Minisink, Pennsylvania.
During the excavations (Figure 54), 10% of all excavated sediment was
poured into large, water-filled washtubs; minute organic remains (bits
of bone, wood, charcoal, seeds) floated to the surface and were
collected with a tea-strainer, while the remainder of the sediment was
passed through fine mesh screens. Flotation captured acalypha,
hackberry, blackberry, chenopod, hawthorn plum, and grape seeds, as well
as tiny fish bones, from meals 10,900 years ago. Shawnee-Minisink,
however, is an exception. Most other paleoindian sites were excavated
before flotation became customary, and even today, flotation or some
form of water screening is not always incorporated in fieldwork.

[images]

FIGURE 54.
Excavations in the main block of the Shawnee-Minisink site,
Pennsylvania. The three individuals in the deepest part of the
excavation are just above the Paleoindian-age stratum. (Photograph
courtesy of Richard J. Dent and the Department of Anthropology, American
University.)

Indirect evidence of plant consumption comes from paleoindian teeth
(what few there are), some of which, Gentry Steele reports, are heavily
worn—a sign of the grit that gets chewed along with the greens.
Wandering into more circumstantial territory, there are possible
seed-grinding stones at Clovis, and cutting tools with polished edges at
several other sites (including Gault). The polish appears to be “sickle
sheen,” which develops when tools are repeatedly used to harvest
grasses, which are suffused with tiny silica bodies (opal phytoliths)
that abrade and burnish the stone.

Although this is a meager record of recognizable plant-processing tools,
a bit of context is helpful. First, many plant-processing implements
recorded historically (for example, among the Iroquois) are
biodegradable. Second, the scarcity of tools might reflect the intensity
or, better, the lack of intensity of plant use. Plant foods are
routinely lower-ranked resources, since harvesting and processing them
is time consuming and difficult (Chapter 7). Consequently, they are
added to the diet mostly in times of stress (such as during drought),
and become a staple only later in prehistory, when human populations
increase and opportunities to move to new territories decrease. At those
times, plant use becomes more intensive, and with it comes the
heavy-duty tools for large scale plant processing: earth and rock ovens,
bedrock mortars, and grinding stones (manos and metates). The absence of
these tools from Clovis sites may only indicate plant use was not
intensive, not that plants were unused. Collecting nuts, berries,
fruits, and green vegetables requires little more than a basket or skin
pouch. The chances of building up a visible archaeological record from
exploiting such resources is vanishingly small.⁷⁹

Finally, it may be the evidence is right in front of us. Gary Haynes
believes Clovis sites show “no attraction to nut-tree-wooded areas or
seed rich grasslands.”⁸⁰ Of course, we cannot say exactly where nut-rich
woods or seed-rich grasslands were over 10,000 years after the fact, but
we can say that a vast number of Clovis isolates do occur in what were
the complex forests of Late Glacial eastern North America, which
included nut-bearing trees such as walnut and hickory. Like prehistoric
Swiss Army knives, Clovis points were useable for various tasks, whether
skinning rabbits, prying open turtle shells, or even digging out
stubborn, edible roots. Many isolates examined in eastern North America
show wear patterns indicative of use as multipurpose, hafted knives,
while very few display impact fractures from hunting damage.

Haynes, in fact, inadvertently (and probably unintentionally)
underscores the importance of plant collecting, suggesting it was the
trigger to Clovis settlement mobility. He reasons that since the men
were off hunting while the women stayed close to camp to gather, the
women must have had a strong voice in making the “executive decisions”
about when camp should be moved. This was so, he surmises, “because they
were the most sensitive to the exhaustion of resources that were within
reasonable walking distance of camp.”⁸¹ As plant gatherers, they would
be.

And move they did. Within a few centuries, Clovis groups were scattered
throughout North America. So why did Clovis groups radiate so far and so
fast? It's surely not because they were chasing mammoths (or being
chased by mammoths!), or because the extinction of those animals left
Clovis people with so little to eat they had to constantly press on.
More likely, it was because they found themselves on a vast and empty
landscape that was unknown and unpredictable, yet rich and untapped, in
which there was a great adaptive incentive and benefit to ranging
widely.

As they dispersed cross-country, and their knowledge of the landscape
and its resources became ever-more detailed, their foraging systems
became more stable, their populations increased, and their odds of
vanishing diminished. And with that, broad changes were in the offing.

9

SETTLING IN

Late Paleoindians and
the Waning Ice Age

In the 1930s, the United States was staggering from a wicked one-two
punch. The Great Depression, fast on the heels of the 1929 stock market
collapse, halved the country's industrial output, flung nearly a quarter
of its workers from their jobs, and led to the failure of thousands of
banks, and with them the disappearance of millions of savings accounts.
Homes and businesses were foreclosed, displaced people hit the roads and
rails, and even organized crime foundered when Prohibition's repeal
dropped the bottom out of the bootleg liquor market. Evidently the
distressed nation needed a drink more than it needed temperance.

Then conditions got worse. In early 1932, rain stopped falling across
much of the American West, and the consequences of decades of
short-sighted agricultural practices hit hard. Having stripped away tens
of million of acres of native grassland, and unable because of drought
to plant crops to protect the naked land from erosion, a horrified
nation watched as massive dust storms carried tons of Great Plains
topsoil east across the continent, shading the midday sun in Chicago,
and dusting the decks of ships hundreds of miles off the Atlantic coast.
Plains residents fled in the opposite direction, their journey to
California's farm fields immortalized in John Steinbeck novels, Woody
Guthrie ballads, and Dorothea Lange and Arthur Rothstein photographs.

Yet, grim as the combination of Depression and Dust Bowl drought was for
the country, it was a boon for archaeology. Large-scale archaeological
surveys and extensive excavations were a vital part of President
Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal recovery programs. (Why? They cost little
in tools and supplies, employed thousands, and produced scientific
results.) Moreover, the scouring of land across the West exposed deeply
buried late Pleistocene deposits—and Paleoindian sites long hidden from
view. Nearly two dozen were found in the span of the Dust Bowl decade.¹

But the more sites that appeared, the more complicated matters became.
Some had projectile points reminiscent of Folsom, others like those at
Clovis. Occasionally the newfound points were fluted, but many were not.
Clovis and Clovis-like points proved to be widespread, implying the
“existence over a wide terrain of a common culture horizon,”² but most
appeared more geographically restricted. All were obviously Paleoindian
in age—they'd been found alongside remains of extinct bison or mammoth
(the lesson from Folsom about what and how to look for Paleoindian sites
had been well learned). But how old were they, exactly? There was
clearly a great deal more to the Paleoindian occupation than anyone had
imagined, but how did these forms relate to one another in time and
across the continent? Did they represent different adaptations to
different environments? Different peoples? Different styles of
fashioning stone weaponry? It was hard to say.

Certainly, by the 1930s, American archaeologists appreciated that
cultures in the past must have varied, as did those of the present. In
1939 the eminent American anthropologist Alfred Kroeber showed them just
how complex that variation could be. In his Cultural and Natural Areas
of Native North America, he brought to fruition an ambitious effort to
map all the cultures of North America and show their “environmental
relations.” It was an effort borne of Kroeber's frustration at his
colleagues who'd been giving steadily less attention to the role of the
environment. As a consequence, much of anthropology had become
“virtually a sociology of American Indian culture.” Kroeber did not
intend that as a compliment. Anthropologists could speak at length about
native ceremony, social organization, art, and myth, but hardly at all
about how groups made a living—a glaring omission, he complained, since
“no culture is wholly intelligible without reference to
the…environmental factors…which condition it.”³

And so Kroeber defined a half-dozen major and over fifty minor culture
areas, correlated those with their environment, and attempted to
understand the challenges and opportunities in those settings, which
might in turn help explain the historical trajectories of different
groups and, more broadly, the grand cycles of human history. Cultural
and Natural Areas of Native North America became an instant classic.

Kroeber rightly appreciated that mapping culture areas provided at best
a brief snapshot of a changing human phenomenon (in his case, cultures
as they were constituted at first European contact). Yet, though he was
aware of the dynamic nature of culture, he took the stability of the
environment for granted, and perhaps reasonably so, since he was only
looking back several centuries.

In fact, even though it was generally appreciated in 1939 that the Ice
Ages had happened, their effects on ecological communities and how these
might have changed over time was poorly known. Knowledge would improve,
however, as studies of fossil animals and plants, and glacial geology,
painted an ever-more-detailed canvas of past climates and environments.
By 1954 archaeologist George Quimby voiced what many were thinking:
Kroeber's landmark study might be invaluable for understanding the
ecological stage of recent cultures, but “it has become increasingly
evident that the cultural and natural areas of the neo-Indian were not
necessarily those of the paleo-Indian.”⁴

So Quimby tried his hand at describing what might have been the
environments of late Pleistocene peoples. “Cultural and Natural Areas
before Kroeber” he called his paper, and asked Kroeber for permission to
use his name in the title. The great man seemed mildly amused.

With a series of maps, Quimby illustrated the changing North American
landscape over the final millennia of the Pleistocene, and suggested
where and how Paleoindians may have adapted to that emerging New World.
It was, he admitted, a preliminary effort. Even so, fellow archaeologist
Homer Aschmann insisted Quimby's hypotheses demanded “immediate
examination before they become established dogma.” Quimby assured him he
needn't worry: “The mortality rates on my previous dogma are too high.”
Besides, Quimby added, it would be some time before there was a
“generally accepted reconstruction of cultural and natural areas in late
glacial times.”⁵

Quimby was right. We're still working on it.

FILLING IN THE LANDSCAPE

The broad outlines by now are evident, however. As Clovis populations
increased in number and expanded into new habitats, cultural drift
(Chapter 7) became more pronounced. It's a process that, once begun,
continued over the next 10,000 years as environments changed and
populations expanded, dispersed, adapted, and evolved. As Clovis
descendants settled into different regions of North America, the links
between them—so vital when there were few people on the landscape, and
they needed to keep in contact with one another—began to break down. It
is perhaps no coincidence that a few centuries after the initial Clovis
dispersal, there was a shift from the early, broad, and relatively
homogeneous projectile-point style to multiple Late Paleoindian point
styles in different regions (Figure 55). Although the precise timing
varied by area, sometime after 10,900 years ago in the central and
western portions of the continent, and after 10,600 years ago in eastern
North America, Clovis and its related forms disappeared. By 10,500 years
ago, the Clovis fluted form had been supplanted by a variety of
regionally distinctive projectile points.

Archaeologists know not to place undue weight on stylistic change in
projectile points, for like selectively neutral traits (such as mtDNA
mutations), their style can be arbitrary and change randomly, so long as
style does not interfere with the workings of the point (which is why
invoking a point style change as evidence of the Younger Dryas
extraterrestrial event is meaningless [Chapter 2]). That said, point
styles are often emblematic of a group, just as boy scouts and street
gangs have their emblems. Assuming Late Paleoindian point types mark
cultural groups (however defined), and different forms mark different or
evolving groups in time and space, we can use them to refer to time
periods—the Folsom period, for example—much as historians refer to, say,
the Middle Ages.

[images]

FIGURE 55.
A sample of Late Paleoindian projectile point types in North America,
ca. 10,500-10,000 BP. From left to right, the types (by region) are Lake
Mojave (Great Basin), Agate Basin (primarily northern plains), Plainview
(primarily southern plains), Barnes (northern Midwest), Dalton (central
Mississippi Valley and east), and Simpson (southeast). (Arranged by
Katherine Monigal.)

Let's keep with that analogy for a moment. It's easy to put one's finger
on the middle of the Middle Ages, less so on its beginning or end. But
at least with historic periods, one can identify specific tipping
points: the Middle Ages ended with the beginning of the Renaissance in
fourteenth-century Italy. An arbitrary demarcation to be sure, and hard
to pin down tighter than a century, but it makes for a relatively clean
break (in Europe, anyway). Not so with archaeological periods based on
projectile point styles. They do not have discrete boundaries in time
and space, and can overlap on their edges. Moreover, though we often
assume a point type is unique to a group—the Folsom folk, or the Agate
Basin people, we say—that may not be the case either.⁶ A point style is
just what the term implies: it's the current fashion. And fashions
change, even within a population. Perhaps in those Paleoindian sites
where more than one point type occurs (and there are many), we are
glimpsing the transition from one style to another. The bottom line:
styles probably do mark broad periods in time and space, just don't look
too closely for well-defined and discrete boundaries.

On the Great Plains and in the Rocky Mountains, Folsom points follow
Clovis, a fact made certain when Folsom points were found in deposits
stratigraphically above Clovis points at the Clovis site (thank you,
Nicholaus Steno), and later bolstered by radiocarbon ages that showed
Folsom appeared just after 10,900 BP and lasted until about 10,200 BP.
Makers of Folsom points ranged over the North American plains from
Canada to Texas, but also ventured west into the Rockies and as far east
as Wisconsin. Those who followed Folsom had smaller ranges: some
occurred primarily on the southern plains (e.g., Midland, Plainview,
Milnesand), others on the northern plains (e.g., Goshen, Agate Basin,
Hell Gap), and some in the central plains (Firstview).

Most of these point forms are rare, if not absent, in far western North
America where, curiously, Clovis is not followed by multiple styles over
time and space, but instead by the Great Basin Stemmed Series, points
like Haskett, Parman, Lake Mohave, and Cougar Mountain, which are mostly
geographic variations on the same lanceolate theme (with stems for
hafting, not flutes). And a long-lived theme it was, persisting over
nearly 4,000 years, appearing as early as 11,200 (though most are at
least a millennium younger) and lasting as late as 7,000 years ago.⁷

Those relatively few varieties hardly match the explosion of point
styles in eastern North America in the millennium after Clovis, though
for want of radiocarbon dates their precise ages have in most cases
proven difficult to pin down. It appears the early Clovis-like Gainey
style is followed in the Upper Midwest and Great Lakes by Barnes points
(lanceolates with long, Folsom-like flutes), and in New England by
Michaud forms. In turn, these are evidently succeeded (west to east) by
Holcombe, Crowfield, and Nicholas points.

South of that region, across northern Alabama, Tennessee, Kentucky, the
dominant post-Clovis form appears to be the Cumberland point, which also
has long flutes but is much thicker and heavier than Folsom or Barnes.
Prevailing in the Carolinas are triangular and elongated Redstone
points; Quad points occur in the piney woodlands of Mississippi,
Alabama, and the Florida panhandle; and Simpson and Suwannee forms
fanned out across much of the rest of Florida and into Georgia. This
stylistic proliferation slowed in the centuries after 10,500 BP with the
appearance of Dalton points across a broad swath of the Southeast,
though there are plenty of variations on the Dalton theme (such as
Hardaway points in the Carolina Piedmont, Greenbrier in
Alabama-Tennessee, and San Patrice in Louisiana and east Texas).

Lots of types, but no need to fret the details. Instead, let me paint
some broad brush strokes. First and most notably, the post-Clovis
projectile point sequences west and east do not correspond to one
another. After Clovis, Paleoindians go their separate ways
stylistically, if not literally. Second, with the exception of the far
West and Great Basin, these style zones become progressively more
numerous as well as smaller over time. Third, that process seems fastest
in eastern North America, where the stylistic landscape is more
variegated, and by the end of the Paleoindian period has more style
zones in smaller areas than any other region of North America (David
Anderson calls the East a “center of technological and social
innovation”⁸). Finally, we're now squarely in the midst of the Younger
Dryas (11,000-10,000 BP) with its radiocarbon-confounding plateaus
(Chapter 2), which means that 900 radiocarbon years of Late Paleoindian
time from 10,900 to 10,000 BP translates (with current calibrations) to
1,360 calendar years. That apparent explosion of styles and the process
of settling-in wasn't quite so fast as it appears.

As in Clovis times, later Paleoindians used high-quality stone, and out
on the open plains and in the Great Basin went great distances to
acquire it, at least initially. The closest of the outcrops used by the
occupants of the Folsom site, for example, was 190 kilometers to the
southeast, and the most distant was 450 kilometers due north. The
oblique triangle formed by just these three stops on their rounds (they
made more)has an area of around 90,000 km². That's a substantial
territory, but hardly excessive by Paleoindian standards. Comparable
ranges are known from the far West and parts of eastern North America
(particularly the Upper Midwest). These ranges shrink over Late
Paleoindian time, though more slowly on the plains.⁹

Moreover, and also unlike in Clovis times, Late Paleoindians had “home”
ranges. As Daniel Amick has shown, Folsom groups on the plains primarily
used stone found on the plains and to the east, while those in the Rio
Grande Valley obtained their stone mostly from the valley or the
mountains to the southwest. Groups in the Great Basin, George Jones and
colleagues show, likewise collected obsidian from within clear-cut
geographic areas that were roughly oblong in shape and extended some 450
kilometers north to south, and about 150 kilometers west to east.
Little, if any, stone moved between those tracts.¹⁰

Such patterns suggest that territories—if we can use the term without
conveying the sense these were jealously guarded—were recognized by this
time in prehistory. And, as was apparent with the style zones, the stone
“conveyance zones” vary in size across the continent. They are larger on
the open terrain of the far West and plains, smaller in eastern North
America. Such differences are surely tied to the way in which Late
Paleoindian hunter-gatherers used their habitats, and indeed, in some
areas they appear to correspond to region-specific or even prey-specific
foraging strategies. These were occasionally accompanied by new
technologies, presumably in response to the different adaptive
opportunities and challenges in these diverse settings. Broadly
speaking, Folsom and later Paleoindians of the plains and Rocky
Mountains of western North America had a subsistence strategy tied to
exploitation of Bison antiquus. Dalton groups were thorough-going
denizens of the resource-rich forests of eastern North America. Many
Great Basin peoples had lifeways focused on animals and plants available
in or near marshes and wet meadows. And, in the Pacific Northwest and
along the California coast, groups were dining on shellfish.

Taking all this at face value, the increasing stylistic diversification
and the ever-shrinking style and stone-conveyance zones, can be read as
a relaxation in the pressure to maintain contact with distant kin, a
reduction in the spatial scale and openness of the social systems, and a
steady settling-in and filling of the landscape. Later Paleoindians no
longer spanned the continent as their ancestors had, and their universe
had become much smaller.

All this played out in varied ways across the continent. I'll begin
(and, admittedly, spend much of my time) on the Great Plains, where
Clovis is earliest replaced, and where the subsistence strategy came to
center on the largest mammal left standing in the wake of Pleistocene
extinctions.¹¹

BISON TO THE FORE

Pleistocene extinctions had a profound impact on plains Paleoindians,
though it had little to do with depriving them of their favorite foods,
but much to do with providing an alternative food source. In the warmer
and drier millennia of the late Pleistocene, the plains grassland became
less diverse and increasingly dominated by warm-season grasses, which
(recalling Chapter 2) grow during the summer and are available well into
the fall and winter (in contrast to cool-season grasses, which grow in
spring and require cooler and wetter habitats, and were more prevalent
in the Pleistocene).

The shift from cool-season-to warm-season-dominated grassland at the end
of the Pleistocene would have spelled trouble for most herbivores, since
warm-season grasses taste lousy (they produce anti-herbivory enzymes)
and for animals that are not ruminants, these grasses have limited
nutritional benefit. If mammoth, horse, camel, and other grazers
depended on cool-season forms, there would have been less to eat, more
competition, and overgrazing of dwindling patches, all of which could
spell trouble for individual animals, local populations, and perhaps
even species. But what of bison? The answer is buffalo grass and
blue-grama grass. These are both warm-season grasses, were among the
main constituents of the newly forming late Pleistocene grassland and,
most important of all, are a favored food of bison, which as ruminants
have the digestive tools (including a four-chambered stomach) to
maximize the nutritional value of these grasses.

Although intriguing, there is no direct evidence that the expansion of
the warm-season grassland, triggered by changing climates and benefiting
from bison grazing (which helped the grasses spread), led to the
extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna. Regardless, with the
disappearance of the last of the Pleistocene animals, bison had the
plains virtually to themselves. Lacking competitors or significant
predators (the mega-carnivores were gone, too, replaced by the gray
wolf), bison populations on the plains skyrocketed.

It is surely no coincidence that bison hunting began in a significant
way in Late Paleoindian times, for here was a high-ranked resource that
could be dispatched at relatively low risk, and one that was becoming
increasingly numerous, predictable, and reliable. Paleoindian bison
kills were modest, at least at first. We know of only a dozen or so
bison killed by Clovis hunters (and virtually all of those met their
death at Murray Springs). Folsom-age bison kills typically netted an
average of fifteen animals. But just a few centuries later, bison kills
averaged nearly sixty animals, a four-fold increase. Had hunters become
more adept, or were bison more abundant and easier pickings? Maybe both.
Regardless, bison became a primary resource for Paleoindians, and would
continue in that role for plains peoples over much of the next 10,000
years, ending only with the animal's near destruction in the nineteenth
century.

We have no reliable numbers of the size of bison herds in the late
Pleistocene. In fact, there are few reliable tallies of the size of
bison populations in historic times. It has been said that in the 1800s,
before commercial hide hunters took to the plains, there were upwards of
60 million bison. The reality was probably half that.¹² That's still a
lot of bison, and stories abound of single herds—like one seen in Kansas
in 1871 said to contain some 4 million animals—that could blacken the
plains well into the distance, and take days to pass by.

[images]

FIGURE 56.
Life-size reconstruction of Bison antiquus at the Lubbock Lake Landmark,
Texas, with Ryan Byerly (who is over 6 ft tall) for scale. (Photograph
by David J. Meltzer.)

Bison are wide ranging, traveling hundreds of miles season to season.
They are gregarious herd animals, and arrange themselves in groups
according to sex, age, season, and habitat.¹³ Cow-calf herds are
composed of females, males under 3 years of age, and a few older males.
Males live either individually or in herds that may be as large as
thirty animals.

Modern bison (Bison bison) are huge animals: males are upwards of 3.8
meters in length, are over 1.86 meters at the shoulder, and weigh on
average 820 kilograms. The largest bull on record weighed about 1,350
kilograms (that's 1.5 tons). Females range up to 3.2 meters in length,
are just over 1.6 meters in shoulder height, and weigh on average 450
kilograms. Yet, the species roaming the Paleoindians’ landscape, Bison
antiquus (Figure 56), was 15%-20% larger and boasted horns about 30
centimetersm longer.¹⁴

Despite their massive bulk and deceptively sluggish behavior, bison are
powerful runners, capable of reaching speeds of 65 kilometers/hour and
turning on a dime. At least on dry land. They don't do as well on ice or
in deep snow, but are surprisingly sure-footed in shallow water. They
tend to stampede when frightened, a trait often exploited by human
hunters, for the bison's speed, combined with its poor eyesight and
tendency to run with head low to the ground, makes it very difficult for
animals at the front of a stampede to change direction, or for followers
to stop suddenly in the event they unexpectedly encounter a deep arroyo
or cliff edge. But hunters had to be careful. As Dale Lott observes, the
bison's speed, quickness, massive head (a formidable battering ram),
hooves like sledgehammers, sharp horns (in both sexes), and, he adds, a
“very short fuse,” made it a dangerous adversary for people and other
animals (wolves, mostly) that intended harm. Almost certainly, if
Pleistocene bison were as fast, nimble, and unpredictable as bison are
now, they challenged the wits and skills of pedestrian hunters.¹⁵

HUNTERS AND HUNTED

But Paleoindians met that challenge with sometimes-spectacular success,
killing hundreds of animals in a single, deadly slaughter. These large
kill sites are the iconic images of Paleoindian times, conjuring visions
of stampeding animals crashing chaotically into an arroyo, massive
bodies cracking and bones snapping, spears flying in thick clouds of
dust, a sound wall of painful bellows of dying animals, and blood and
gore everywhere. Symbolic these images may be, but representative
they're not. Killing just one or two bison at a time, quietly, away from
the herd, and with less fanfare, was probably the more-common
strategy—George Frison suggests it was the best strategy. The smaller
kills could have been accomplished by small family bands; the large
kills likely required a multi-band, communal effort, though what that
translates to in actual numbers is anyone's guess. It is certain a lone
hunter could not drive 200 animals to their deaths: many hands (and
spears) were needed.

Naturally, the smaller-scale kills are not as readily spotted
archaeologically as the larger ones, and—I must confess having worked on
both—are not nearly as interesting, with the result we know less about
them (and the corollary: large, communal kills probably distract us from
seeing other aspects of Paleoindian adaptations). Yet, Jason LaBelle and
colleagues show that large kills, despite their archaeological
visibility and influence on our interpretations of Paleoindian
adaptations, represent less than 3% of all known Folsom sites, and
perhaps an equal measure of later Paleoindian sites as well.¹⁶

Whether setting off on a communal hunt or not, Paleoindian hunters
surely aimed to reduce their risks—always a good idea when pursuing
animals this large—and were highly skilled at trapping, hindering, or
otherwise disabling their prey, using the topography to great advantage.

But it's not the topographic feature you think, although that does make
an engaging scenario: a herd of bison rushing toward a near-invisible
cliff, seeing it too late to change direction, flying over the edge
“Wile E. Coyote” style (legs grabbing wildly for firm ground) and
smashing on the rocks below. Any broken-bodied survivors would be
finished off by armed hunters. This hunting trick can be deadly
effective and almost risk free when the topography and the animals
cooperate, but it's hardly foolproof. Bison are too nimble to always
play their assigned role.

More telling, no Paleoindians appear to have used the tactic. The first
jump kills are no more than 5,000 years old (the oldest is
Head-Smashed-In, Alberta). The only purported Paleoindian bison jump is
Bonfire Rockshelter (Texas), where some twenty-five animals were found
at the base of a twenty-three-meter-high cliff. How they died seemed
obvious enough: it was from the plunge over the precipice. But just as
in a good murder mystery, the obvious clues are deceiving and the crime
scene not as it appears: the bison seem to have been killed elsewhere,
and carcass parts moved here afterward. Analysis of the bison remains by
Ryan Byerly and colleagues revealed the bones at the site are those
meaty parts of a carcass normally transported back to a camp, and not
the ones discarded at the spot of a kill. Bonfire may have been an ideal
bison-jumping spot (and was so used nearly 7,000 years later), but its
protected overhang also made it an ideal place to camp, providing a cool
respite for a Paleoindian summertime bison kill.¹⁷

[images]

FIGURE 57.
The base of the arroyo at Olsen-Chubbuck, jammed with bison bones.
(Photography by J. B. Wheat, courtesy of University of Colorado Museum
of Natural History.)

BACK TO FOLSOM

The Folsom site in New Mexico is one of the best known sites in North
America: it's routinely mentioned in archaeology texts, regularly
appears on maps of notable localities, and of course, bestowed its name
on the Paleoindian culture.¹⁹ All this because excavations here in 1927
uncovered fluted points between the ribs of what became the type
specimen of Bison antiquus. That these extinct animals were hunted at
Folsom demonstrated for the first time and after decades of controversy
that American prehistory began in the Pleistocene (Chapter 3). That
distinction earned the site a spot on the very exclusive National
Register of Historic Places.

But while Folsom is one of the best-known sites in American archaeology,
for a time it was also one of the least known—scientifically speaking.
The initial goal of the 1920s work was to recover bison skeletons for
museum display, and once its significance became apparent, to document
the association of the artifacts with the bison and thereby determine
the site's age. That was done well. As the decades passed, our knowledge
of these Paleoindians grew with the discovery of other sites of this
antiquity. Yet, knowledge of Folsom itself lagged behind, owing to the
narrow goals of the 1920s work, the methods in place at the time, and
the few publications that resulted. Everyone had been so keen to link
artifacts to bison that scarcely little more was learned about Folsom
than bison were killed here a very long time ago

Nor was any significant work done at Folsom in the decades afterward.
That was Barnum Brown's legacy, for he claimed that after his crews
finished excavating in 1928, there was nothing left of the site. Yet,
Brown often said such things about sites he excavated to keep others
from “poaching” them, and while investigating Folsom's archaeological
history, I saw clues Brown just might have been bluffing. Even if he
wasn't, we knew so little of Folsom something surely would be learned by
working there. Besides, at 2,100 meters above sea level, in the cool and
green Dry Cimarron Valley, Folsom is a much nicer place than the
blistering hot sand dunes in west Texas where I'd been excavating much
of the previous decade. When opportunity knocked with the chance to work
at Folsom, it was impossible to resist.

In 1997 I began a multiyear, interdisciplinary project at Folsom,
working off the edges of the 1920s excavation where, as it turns out,
intact deposits remained (Brown was bluffing). With the help of
colleagues, the thousands of bison bones and two dozen artifacts found
in the 1920s investigations were also analyzed. Although separated by
seventy years, the work was complementary. The value of our
less-extensive excavations was enhanced by joining our finds with
theirs, just as making sense of what was found in the 1920s was improved
by interpreting their results in light of what we learned of the site's
archaeology, geology, and environment.

And what we learned was this: the site is set within the ancestral Wild
Horse Arroyo, where it was joined by a now-buried tributary. The
paleovalley and paleo-tributary had cut deeply into the Smoky Hill Shale
bedrock, but by 11,500 BP had begun to fill with a fine-grained silt or
loess—wind-blown dust (Chapter 2). By the time the Paleoindian hunters
arrived, which we have now pinned down to 10,490 BP (Chapter 4), a meter
of loess had built up.

Even so, the paleovalley and paleotributary were still flanked by steep
bedrock walls, and almost certainly the Paleoindian hunters put the land
form to use. We don't know exactly what their tactics were, but we do
know, based in part on reconstructions of the 1920s work, that the
greatest density of bison remains occurred at the
paleotributary/paleovalley junction. If carcass parts were left where
the bison were dropped, it would appear the animals died bunched against
the high bedrock walls. Although it is tempting to suggest the
paleotributary is the main area of the kill, bison bones were also found
in the paleovalley, raising the possibility some bison managed to
scramble down and out of the paleotributary, only to be killed by
hunters waiting in the paleovalley. Or vice versa.

The hunters’ weapons included at least twenty-eight fluted points, the
majority made of high-quality stone from the Alibates and Tecovas
outcrops in the Texas Panhandle, the remainder of Flattop and Black
Forest chert from outcrops in eastern and northeastern Colorado,
respectively. No source was closer than 190 kilometers. The hunters’
last resupply probably occurred at Alibates, since most of the points
were made of this stone. The low number and intensive resharpening of
the points made of Flattop chert are more distant echoes of sources
visited earlier. By the time the hunters arrived at Folsom, over 25% of
their points had been resharpened and reused. Once there, the assemblage
suffered badly: most broke on the spot, a third from impacts.

By all measures, this was a successful hunt. A cow-calf herd of
thirty-two bison were killed in the fall when the animals were at their
peak of body fat. With a complement of flake tools and a quartzite
skinning knife, the hunters dismembered the bison, and packed up the
meaty parts for transport (they made off with lots of rib racks). Given
the time it takes to butcher animals this large, the process must have
lasted several days, during which time the hunters must have camped
nearby.

And so we searched for their camp, walking the surrounding area,
excavating test pits, machine-drilling sediment cores, and
found…absolutely nothing. Was there no camp, or no camp preserved? Part
of the answer came from a test pit dug on the uplands immediately
overlooking the bone bed. The excavation bottomed out on Smoky Hill
Shale, and charcoal on that bedrock surface yielded an age of 9820 BP.
That told us the uplands had been swept clean by heavy rains sometime
after the kill, along with any Folsom-age camp debris that might have
been there. But perhaps the camp was not up top but down below, in the
paleovalley where the hunters would have been less exposed to the wind
and elements. No traces of one were found, so if it's there, it's deeply
buried, lurking undetected beneath 4-5 meters of sediment.

Yet, I'm not sure there ever was a camp of any significant duration
here, given what we learned of the climate at the time. The kill
occurred amid the Younger Dryas, when temperatures at Folsom were cooler
than they had been a thousand years earlier, or would be just centuries
later. The bone bed yielded nearly a dozen snail species that today can
only survive at elevations 600-900 meters higher (though it was not cold
enough for long enough that alpine trees moved down into the area). It
was also drier, judging by that thick drape of loess and the absence of
aquatic snails.

In Younger Dryas times, the Folsom landscape was open, grassy parkland
with scattered trees, with more heavily wooded areas on the edge of
Johnson Mesa to the west, and in the valley of the Dry Cimarron below.
Isotope analysis of bison bones and snail shells revealed the grassland
was rich in warm-season grasses. It must have been prime bison habitat,
at least in summer and early fall, when these grasses covered the
landscape. But what of the rest of the year? Today, this is an area of
harsh winters and heavy snowfall, as it likely was in the Younger Dryas.
Bison don't do well in snow, and there is no isotopic evidence they were
grazing on the cool-season grasses of late winter and spring.

This is not an area humans likely overwintered in either. Folsom today
is a mix of grassland and woodland scrub, with ample plants for snacking
and tea, but almost none that provide the return in fatty acids or
carbohydrates that are vital during the winter and spring months. There
is no indication foraging conditions were any better in the Younger
Dryas. Without the promise of sufficient food, and with winter coming,
this would not have been a place for hunters to linger long after their
kill.

So why were they here? By the numbers and condition of the stone used to
make their points, they'd arrived at Folsom from the Texas Panhandle.
It's easy to see how: many of the rivers and streams that flow through
the Panhandle have their headwaters in this corner of New Mexico. If the
hunters were following those drainages, they would have found themselves
in the general vicinity of Folsom. This is not to say all rivers lead to
Folsom, only that coming into the area may not have been altogether
random, especially if the group left the Panhandle heading north by
northwest to areas where we know—based on their stone tools—they'd been
before.

Once in the Folsom vicinity, there are only a few places where
northbound traffic can easily traverse the high mesas and broken terrain
that extend across the boundary land between New Mexico and Colorado.
One is Raton Pass, through which the Santa Fe Trail (and now Interstate
25) travel; the other is Trinchera Pass, just 8 kilometers north of the
Folsom site, through which Charles Goodnight once trailed cattle to
Montana. Perhaps the Folsom hunters were aiming for Trinchera Pass when
a herd of bison was spotted, plans were made, and the kill took place.
The bison were butchered, meaty parts were readied for transport, and
the hunters left before winter set in.

Although it was a highly successful kill, beyond the food these bison
provided I suspect the long-term consequences of this episode were
insignificant. The hunters’ stay was brief, and there is no evidence
they ever returned to this spot, though they or others may have come
through Trinchera Pass on later occasions. Within a few years, all
traces of the kill were buried, and mostly remained so until a
town-breaking flood over 10,000 years later brought an astute cowboy out
to check his cattle, and spot something unusual in the bottom of the
arroyo where he broke wild horses (Chapter 3).

Ironically, however fleeting, ordinary, or even inconsequential this
episode may have been in the lives of the Paleoindian hunters who killed
those bison some 10,500 years ago, their actions had enormous and
lasting impact on American archaeology.

Most commonly, Paleoindians stampeded or maneuvered animals into
arroyos, where steep walls, injuries, or both prevented their movement
or escape, giving the hunters time and a safe vantage from which to
spear the bison. At the Folsom site, 32 animals were killed in an arroyo
where it joins one of its tributaries, the former flanked by bedrock
walls 5-6 meters high, the latter by 2-3-meter-high walls. Bison can
scramble up a slope, but not a nearly vertical one ringed by armed
hunters. At Olsen-Chubbuck in Colorado, the trap was hit harder and
faster when 190 bison were stampeded into an arroyo over 2 meters deep
(Figure 57). The animals in front had no time to stop or change
direction when they finally saw the trap before them (remember: they
don't see well), and the herd behind pushed forward oblivious of their
doom. The result was a thrashing, bellowing pile of bison, with some of
those at the bottom wedged head first into the arroyo floor, others
violently twisted and contorted from being crushed by the mass and
impact of those that followed them in. Survivors were finished off by
the hunters.¹⁸

Elsewhere, other types of landforms or features (natural and artificial)
were used, but with the same principle in mind: at the Casper and Horner
sites (Wyoming), and Jones-Miller (Colorado), the bison were trapped and
killed amid, respectively, sand dunes, an artificial corral, and
(possibly) snow drifts.

Trapping the animals was only the first step; keeping them bottled up
and speeding their death was the second and sometimes harder task. A
wounded wild animal is dangerous and destructive, and bison did not
necessarily die immediately on being speared. Modern bow hunters will
tell you that even after a direct lung shot, a bison may struggle for
life for 30 minutes or more.²⁰ And from time to time, some animals
surely escaped the hunters’ traps to live or die elsewhere (like the
Naco and Escapule mammoths). All of which meant the weaponry had to be
in top working order.

TOOLS OF THE TRADE

The weapons of choice were lanceolate spear points. The earliest of
these in the post-Clovis sequence on the plains, Folsom points, like
their immediate predecessors, were fluted (see Plate 13). Unlike Clovis,
Folsom fluting often extended the full length of the point, which
entailed removing a flake upwards of 5 centimeters long yet less than
1.5 millimeters thick, typically from both faces of a point that was
itself no more than 4 millimeters thick. That was no mean feat of
flintknapping, and it has been the envy and challenge of generations of
modern knappers seeking to replicate how it was done. They've tried
every technique imaginable, realistic or otherwise (Folsom groups did
not have rock-cutting band saws), and there is no consensus on how it
was done, or even if there was a single technique. As with all
experiments, these reveal how points may have been fluted, but not
whether they actually were fluted in the tested manner.

Once fluted, the tip and edges of a newly minted Folsom point were often
carefully trimmed with tiny flakes, to give the point symmetry, and the
lower edges and base were ground smooth—again, presumably, so they would
not cut the sinew used in firmly hafting the point to a shaft.

Folsom points were smaller and more delicate than Clovis, averaging just
over 5 centimeters long and 2 centimeters wide (Clovis points are wider,
longer, and nearly twice as thick [Chapter 8]). This was so,
conventional wisdom had it, because they were aimed at bison, not
mammoth, and bison could be taken down with smaller-caliber shot (though
as Emil Haury observed, several “small caliber” Clovis points speared
some of the Lehner mammoths). Of course, stone projectile points are not
bullets, which aim to kill instantly and from far away, the larger
caliber being more efficient against big game with tough hide, muscle,
and especially, thick-boned skulls.²¹ Still, even a small-caliber bullet
(or projectile point) propelled at high velocity can be lethal: in Late
Prehistoric and Historic times, bison were killed by tiny triangular
arrowheads. Fired by a bow, velocity more than compensated for their
size and weight (remember Newton's second law: force = mass x
acceleration).

There were probably very few circumstances in which a spear thrust or
thrown at an animal would kill it instantly, although these could be
propelled with accuracy and force. A Folsom point was found embedded
deeply in the neural arch (which encloses and protects the spine) of a
bison vertebra at the Lindenmeier site (Colorado).²² Rather, these
sharp-edged weapons were likely designed to tear a hole in the hide
large enough for the point and foreshaft to penetrate and cause
bleeding.²³ Aim, fire, and be patient: the animal would die in time. In
this regard, the only “caliber” that might have mattered was point width
(critical to enabling the point and foreshaft to enter) and not length.
Clovis points are a mere 6 millimeters wider than Folsom points, hardly
a ballistically meaningful difference.

Fluting disappears from the Paleoindian repertoire after Folsom times,
though later Paleoindian points retain other ancestral vestiges: a
lanceolate form, sharp tips and upper blade edges, and ground lower
edges, where the point had been nestled within its haft. Paleoindian
point aficionados argue the merits of the various forms as weapons, but
Frison, who has experimented with virtually all point types on game
animals large and small, was unable to establish that any one was
significantly more lethal than another. Like all hunters, however, he
has his preferences: he'd arm himself with an Agate Basin point.²⁴

Whatever the point type, breaking on impact was common. The broadside of
a bison is a picket fence of wide, thick ribs. Weapons failure could be
dangerous if the hunter thrust the spear from close by and was still
holding on when it broke, leaving no chance for a second stab—and it
could take multiple stabs to kill a large animal (which requires quickly
pulling the spear out of a moving animal, increasing the chances it will
break). Not surprisingly, Christopher Ellis found that among the
majority of spear-using hunter-gatherers, their weapons were more often
used as javelins (thrown) than as lances (thrust), and when used as
lances, mostly served to deliver the close-in coupde grace to a dying
animal.²⁵

Throwing might have been accomplished by hand, or perhaps with the aid
of an atlatl, a throwing stick with a hook at the end that temporarily
holds the base of the spear. An atlatl and spear are hurled in an arc
that starts behind the thrower's head and comes overhand (much like the
motion of a baseball pitcher). As the spear travels the arc, it flexes
and stores energy, which is then explosively released, flying from the
atlatl at velocities that can average 135 kilometers/hour and exceed 200
kilometers/hour (in contrast, a hand-thrown spear averages about 90
kilometers/hour). A native hunter with an atlatl, one sixteenth-century
Spanish chronicler wrote (with a mixture of awe and fear), could throw a
spear completely “through a man armed with a coat of mail.”²⁶ With
velocity comes distance, which if the modern record for atlatl-aided
spear throwing—nearly 300 meters—is any indication, could have been
considerable.

Maximizing velocity and distance might require the hunter's entire body
be brought into play by standing to throw. That's not always easy or
desired if one is crouched behind rocks or brush, or trying to keep an
animal or herd from spooking and scattering, but of less concern when
animals are trapped.²⁷ Regardless, the hunter better keep back-up spears
close at hand, because once launched, a spear is not easily retrieved,
especially from an injured and dangerous animal. In some sites, and
Folsom is a good example, one can spot sets of points that are so alike
in material and workmanship it appears they were made by the same hand,
and possibly launched from the same quiver. But launched by hand or
atlatl? Because atlatls were made of wood or bone, they are rare
archaeologically, and unknown from Paleoindian times. Evidence of their
presence is strictly circumstantial. Studies by Karl Hutchings of
fracture velocities on Paleoindian points show some shattered from being
propelled at velocities only attainable with an atlatl.

After the kill was made, points were sometimes pressed into service for
butchering, but only if tools better suited to the task were
unavailable. Often used were skinning knives customized for the task. At
Folsom-age sites, these include palm-sized, exquisitely made, ultra-thin
bifaces (often no more than 5 millimeters thick), which must have been
highly prized, judging by the quality of their material, workmanship,
and scarcity. At later Paleoindian sites, the oddly asymmetrical Cody
knife served a similar function.

The toolkit found at a kill site can be relatively uncomplicated:
points, knives, and perhaps bone butchering tools, the latter often
fashioned on the spot for use in dismembering the carcass. But then,
kill sites offer only a small window into the full range of activities
engaged in by Paleoindians. In their longer-term residential camps (of
which, more below), the tools found include scrapers, knives, cores,
flakes, wedges, spokeshaves (tools with a concave edge for trimming
spear shafts), gravers, drills, and awls, as well as a complement of
bone and antler artifacts (see Plate 14).²⁸

PRODUCTS OF THEIR LABOR

Paleoindian hunters pursued bison throughout the year, but as Matthew E.
Hill shows, there are seasonal trends to the large kills, which partly
sort by geography. On the southern and central plains, the peak period
for bison hunting was in the late summer and early fall; it was later in
the year on the northern plains.²⁹ Why the difference? Winters are
longer and harsher on the northern plains, and meat from kills made at
the onset of the cold months could be stored frozen. (We can ascertain
when a kill was made because bison calve between mid-April and late May,
and their teeth have a regular eruption and wear sequence. Calves found
in a site that have only early stage lower first molars, say, were about
4-5 months old at death, so the kill likely took place in late summer or
fall, assuming calving and tooth eruption schedules of Pleistocene bison
were roughly the same as those of their modern counterparts.)

There's a related fact as well: kills made later in the year often
targeted cow-calf herds. Why them, then? In the fall, body fat and
nutritional value of cows and calves are at the peak from a summer of
grazing; bulls, in contrast, burn off much of their body fat in the fall
rut. At the same time, cow-calf herds are less dangerous and more easily
manipulated than bull herds. Cow-calf herds are otherwise difficult to
hunt during and immediately after spring calving: when frightened, very
young calves commonly bolt from the herd, and their mothers follow,
creating a chaotic situation that reduces the chances of success.³⁰

Although bison was a prime food, not all animals that were killed were
butchered, especially at large communal kills, and not all parts of all
animals were used. On occasion, Paleoindians practiced gourmet
butchering, as Lewis Binford calls it, with select cuts of meat removed
and eaten on the spot, or dried or frozen (depending on the season), and
then taken off-site. In any case, it's unusual to find all the animals
at a Paleoindian kill to have been completely butchered, or to have had
their bones smashed for marrow, or rendered for grease in hearths and
boiling pits. Bone grease is a key ingredient in making pemmican, a
highly nutritious, long-lasting, and easily transported food of pounded,
dried bison meat mixed with fat, berries, and bone grease in skin bags
(which historically was a valuable food for the lean winter and spring
months).³¹ That Paleoindians were not making pemmican, nor apparently
transporting or storing of quantities of meat (practices common among
later bison hunters), indicates their food needs were more easily met,
perhaps in no small measure because they were able to move freely over
great distances, and could exploit bison when encountered.

And sometimes they encountered and killed more animals than they could
possibly eat, especially in the near chaos of a communal hunt in which a
large herd was being stampeded into a trap. This was not like rounding
up slow, dopey cattle. Naturally, there was waste. Olsen-Chubbuck's
excavator, Joe Ben Wheat, estimated that 16% of the 190 animals killed
here were only partially butchered, and at least 10% of the animals at
the bottom of the pile were untouched. Even so, there was still an
enormous payoff. Based on the number, sex, and age of the bison in the
kill, and using meat weights of modern bison, Wheat calculated the
hunters butchered over 21,700 kilograms (23.8 tons) of meat. If
Pleistocene bison were 25% more massive than their modern counterparts
(his estimate), the harvest would have been 27,100 kilograms (29.8
tons).³²

If one assumes a single person could butcher an animal every 1-2 hours
(the figure varies depending on a host of factors), and that the
Olsen-Chubbuck hunters worked steadily at the task, then the butchering
process would have taken anywhere from half a day (if, say, 100
individuals were on the job) to several days (if there were only 10
people at work). Whatever the timing, Paleoindians needed to move
quickly, particularly in warm weather. Animals had to be disemboweled to
prevent internal fluids from spoiling the meat, and the meat filleted
and dried before blowflies came to lay their eggs. In cold weather,
spoilage would have been less an issue, but butchering more difficult as
carcasses froze and hands grew numb. And if there were carnivores or
scavengers within smell of the kill, they would have soon become
unwelcome guests.³³

If the hunters were en route elsewhere, the carcasses had to be cut into
segments for transport along with the tools, water containers, fire
starters, and other gear already being toted. Drying the meat surely
helped make it easier to transport, since it would shrink by about 30%
and be as much as 75% lighter.³⁴ Parts hauled away commonly included the
high-meat-yielding bones such as ribs, upper forelimbs and hind limbs
(bison drumsticks—easily hefted!), and shoulder meat, possibly still
attached to the shoulder blade for easy carrying. Often taken, too, were
the tail bones (caudal vertebrae), which at first glance makes little
sense. There's hardly any meat on these bones. But then it probably
wasn't meat the hunters were after, but what was attached to the tail:
the hide, which could be made into robes and shelter covers. As the old
saying goes, the “tail follows the hide.” Routinely discarded at these
kills were the low-meat-yielding parts such as skulls, lower limbs and
feet, and jaws (see Plate 15), but the jaws were usually not discarded
until after the tongues were cut out, these being delicacies often eaten
raw on the spot.

If the group was in less of a hurry, or the season and place was right,
instead of moving meat to camp, they might move camp to meat. There are
several Paleoindian kills with adjoining camps, such as Cattle Guard
(Colorado), excavated by Margaret Jodry. Nearly fifty bison had been
killed amid sand dunes (Great Sand Dunes National Monument is nearby) in
one late summer or early fall. At an adjacent camp, Jodry found that the
carcasses had been thoroughly butchered and roasted. Unusual for a
Paleoindian site, but perhaps indicative of the longer time spent here,
the bones had been smashed for marrow. Over 90% of the 200 projectile
points at Cattle Guard were broken and showed impact damage, or had been
used and reused so often they were worn down to slugs barely 3
centimeters in length. While enjoying the fruits of their labor, the
Cattle Guard hunters refurbished and replaced their broken weaponry,
leaving behind more than 18,000 waste flakes, several hundred point
preforms, and some 275 channel flakes (created in fluting) indicative of
point manufacture.³⁵

Cattle Guard was occupied longer than many Paleoindian kill sites, but
“longer” is strictly a relative measure based on the density and
diversity of archaeological remains. All things being equal, both
increase with a longer stay. Unfortunately, we have no means of gauging
the actual time that a longer stay represents, though it was probably
measurable in weeks. As mobile as these groups were, they likely did not
dwell in one spot for very long, except perhaps in winter when movement
across the plains and through the mountains was far more difficult, and
groups may have slowed or for a time stopped all together.

COPING WITH PLEISTOCENE WINTERS

At Agate Basin, on the high plains of eastern Wyoming, a Folsom group
camped on the floodplain of an arroyo some 10,800 years ago, near where
at least eleven bison and five pronghorn were trapped and butchered. The
people were here through the harsh, cold late winter until early spring,
judging by the presence of fetal and neonatal bison remains. They
pitched hide-covered structures (with one “tent peg”—a bison rib—found
still stuck in the ground), around which was a dense litter of
projectile point manufacturing debris, end and side scrapers, cutting
tools, gravers, knives and choppers, a crystal-studded abrader (for hide
softening?), bone and antler artifacts (including eyed needles), and the
slab used to pulverize the red ocher that covered many of the bones and
artifacts.

The site's inhabitants had plenty of time on their hands, which they
devoted to preparing bison robes—the scrapers are telling us that—and
gearing up for hunts that would take place when spring came. Frederic
Sellet estimates they fashioned a minimum of thirty-eight new points,
more than needed to replace the three broken ones they left behind. That
they intended to make camp for a long period is apparent in the stone
they used to make those points: it was hauled in from the Knife River
chert outcrops about 400 kilometers distant, a trip that would have been
extraordinarily difficult once winter set in. And it was a harsh winter:
Matthew G. Hill's analysis of the bison remains revealed that the
near-starving residents smashed open bison foot and toe bones to suck
out the meager marrow they contained.³⁶

Folsom groups stayed as long and weathered even harsher climes at the
Mountaineer site in the Colorado Rockies, where Mark Stiger uncovered
the foundation stones of a couple of Folsom-age structures (Figure 58),
the walls of which were made of aspen poles, smeared over with clay
mud.³⁷ To archaeology's good fortune, one of the houses burned after it
was abandoned, which fired the mud brick hard, preserving aspen bark
imprints on the clay. Within the houses are hearths and artifacts
indicative of various domestic chores, such as cleaning hides, fixing
tools, and making points. Bison bones from one of their meals yielded an
age of 10,400 BP, making Mountaineer one of the oldest home places in
America.

[images]

FIGURE 58.
The “floor plan” of one of the Folsom-age house structures at the
Mountaineer site. The larger dashed oval represents the approximate
outside edge of the structure, based on the distribution of artifacts
and features; the smaller dashed circle indicates the location of an
interior hearth. (Photograph by Mark Stiger.)

At first glance, it's in an odd spot for one. Mountaineer sits atop
Tenderfoot Mountain, a tabletop mesa that looms nearly 330 meters above
the surrounding valley, which is itself already 2,400 meters above sea
level. There is no permanent water atop the mountain, and most of the
game to hunt or plants to gather would have been in the valley below,
where the Gunnison River and several large streams flow. But two aspects
of the mesa might have made it attractive: It's got a stunning and
unobstructed view of the landscape below, making it a great vantage
point to spot animals grazing in the valley and plan a hunt (even this
fifty-something college professor can make it down the rocky slopes to
the valley below in under 20 minutes). Second, in winter, the top of
Tenderfoot Mountain is warmer and sunnier than the valley floor, since
no mountains shade it and the cold air sinks into the lower-lying basin.
And it almost surely was a winter occupation. Why else take the trouble
to build insulated, mud-walled huts atop a waterless mesa? In winter, of
course, melting snow would provide ample freshwater.

Perhaps not surprisingly, the majority of the artifacts from Mountaineer
were made of locally available, fine-grained quartzite, not the usual
chert, and bespeak movement restricted to this basin, at least for the
period they were at Mountaineer. Judging by the investment they made in
their housing and the amount of debris left behind, it was a lengthy
stay: weeks or even months (year-round settlement only occurs much later
in North American prehistory).

In fact, recent investigations in the Gunnison Valley, as well as
similar intermountain basins such as the central Rio Grande Valley (New
Mexico), as well as the San Luis Valley and Middle Park (both in
Colorado), suggest Paleoindian groups overwintered in these more
protected places, rather than spending the cold months on the open
plains. “Protected” is something of a loose term. The Gunnison Basin is
one of North America's coldest spots today, and likely was in the late
Pleistocene, though at least one would not have to contend with the
bone-chilling winds of the plains.

A BALANCED MENU

Staying put for long periods has its drawbacks, resource depression most
obviously. Food runs away or runs out, as the smashed-for-marrow bison
feet and toes at Agate Basin testify. A band of twenty-five families
living on bison alone, Frison estimates, would need to kill five or six
bison a month for their sustenance. Those might be hard to come by in
the dead of winter in a high-mountain basin.³⁸

But then, their diets were not dependent on bison alone, however highly
these were ranked and prized—especially on the open, treeless high
plains, where there are fewer food choices. Most large, communal bison
kills made in Late Paleoindian times were made in that setting, but
that's not necessarily what the majority of Late Paleoindian sites look
like or where they are found. As Jason LaBelle shows, most Paleoindian
sites are kills of smaller game or of fewer bison, quarry localities,
small artifact scatters (overnight bivouacs, perhaps?), or the
occasional isolated point. More telling, many of these occur not on the
open plains, but instead in mountain and foothill settings, which
provide a greater variety of food resources than the plains proper. The
high-ranked food (bison) is there to be sure, but also deer, pronghorn
antelope, other smaller animals, and plants.³⁹

The conclusion LaBelle draws is that Paleoindians engaged in large,
communal hunts on occasion, but for most of the year, the monitoring and
hunting of bison was a task left to hunting parties, which would kill a
few animals, then transport the meat back to camps. Otherwise, camps
were established around less mobile and more predictable resources like
water, small game, plants, and stone. These, as Douglas Bamforth
observes, often were used repeatedly over time (unlike bison kill
spots), and show a far greater reliance on locally available stone.

At these non-bison kill sites, we get a glimpse of the wide range of the
Paleoindian diet. One of the more striking examples comes from the Allen
site along Medicine Creek in southwestern Nebraska, where Bamforth and
colleagues have shown that Paleoindians consumed bison, deer, pronghorn,
jackrabbit, cottontail, and prairie dogs, as well as freshwater mussels
and fish. Likewise, on the far side of the plains in Wyoming's Big Horn
Basin, inhabitants of the Hanson site exploited mountain sheep, deer,
marmot, and cottontail rabbit. Even on the plains proper, at Lubbock
Lake (Texas), a permanent freshwater spring and pond attracted
hunter-gatherers, who took bison, deer, pronghorn, jackrabbit,

muskrat, and a variety of ducks that were also drawn to this setting.⁴⁰

GATHERING THE CLAN

During the Late Paleoindian period, we get our first archaeological look
at a phenomenon that must have occurred in earlier times and certainly
did later: the rendezvous. Such events would have been especially
important in the Paleoindian era, since groups likely spent much of
their time widely scattered in small family bands. From time to time,
they must have gathered to exchange information, resources, and mates;
initiate adolescents into adulthood; provide proper ceremonial attention
to the sick or recently dead; or just enjoy the company of other people
(Chapter 7). How often? No one knows for sure, but among mobile
hunter-gatherers of the Arctic, Lewis Binford reports aggregations were
timed to children's coming of age: when they were ready to be initiated
or married, it was time to gather the clan.⁴¹

Given the distances bands may have had to travel to the rendezvous, and
all they had to carry under normal circumstances, it would have been
difficult to come bearing large stores of food (no pot luck dinners
these). So we suppose gathering spots were selected for the richness of
the local food resources rather than, say, the presence of abundant
stone. The location also had to be well known or easily found, so no one
missed the event.

The Lindenmeier site in northern Colorado fits the bill. As LaBelle
observes, it is tucked into a topographic corner near where a set of low
hills comes in perpendicular to the Front Range, and is immediately
adjacent to a multistory geological exposure of red and white rocks—a
gigantic barber pole that can be spotted from 30 kilometers away.⁴² The
area was well watered, and there were stands of trees nearby to fuel
hearth fires and locally available stone to replace broken tools.
Because the site is at the intersection of two biotic communities (the
plains and the Front Range), it likely provided ample and diverse plant
and animal food for those who gathered here. At the very least, we know
Lindenmeier's occupants fed on bison, pronghorn, deer, jackrabbit, wolf,
coyote, fox, and turtle.⁴³

As Edwin Wilmsen showed, several areas of the site were simultaneously
occupied by groups with stylistically distinctive Folsom points, made of
different types of stone evidently carried in from different points on
the compass, all at least 150 kilometers distant.⁴⁴ While here, the
groups kept busy making projectile points: several hundred point
preforms and nearly 1,000 channel flakes were found. Looking at some of
the failed preforms, it's hard not to suspect they were made by novices
learning to fashion a Folsom point, or mimicking the activities of the
elders.

There was plenty of hide working, with many of the scrapers heavily worn
and resharpened, as well as wood, bone, and stone working, judging by
the notched stone tools and coarse sandstone blocks for carving and
sanding spear shafts and other tools. Delicately made bone needles hint
at the manufacture or repair of tailored clothing, which may have been
dyed with red ocher (imported from the Laramie Mountains to the north)
and decorated with bone “sequins” or stone beads (Figure 59), which were
frequently incised on their faces, notched on their edges, and
occasionally stained with ocher. But were those bone and stone items
more than ornaments? As Wilmsen admits, there may be more to these
pieces than we can see or even imagine.

Indeed, more surely occurred at Lindenmeier than we will know from the
archaeology, for most of the activities that would take place at a
rendezvous may have had little material expression—like conversation—but
were a vital part of their lives all the same. So, too, was this
particular rendezvous spot. Wilmsen reports Folsom bands periodically
returned here to complete the important ritual cycles of their lives.
Cycles and movement. Paleoindians were highly mobile some of the time,
less so at other times.

And one time they traveled out of archaeological sight.

BACKWASH

The Late Paleoindian period witnessed one final pulse of movement
between Alaska and unglaciated North America, only this time populations
were not just headed south, and the movement didn't just involve humans.
By 10,500 BP, the ice-free corridor was wide open and blanketed by a
rich grassland that formed a virtually uninterrupted greenbelt from the
Yukon to the Rio Grande.

[images]

FIGURE 59.
A stone drill and engraved stone bead from the Lindenmeier site,
Colorado, shown separately and showing how the drill may have been used
to fashion the bead. This particular drill may not have been the one
used to craft this bead—though it fits precisely in the center hole of
the bead—but the images show how it might have been. (Photographs
courtesy of Jason M. LaBelle; arranged by Katherine Monigal.)

Ancient bison DNA reveals what happened next. As Beth Shapiro and
colleagues have shown, bison populations in eastern Beringia and
unglaciated North America, which had been kept apart since the onset of
the Late Wisconsin, began to move. Those in the north headed south,
getting as far as the Peace River in northwestern British Columbia by
10,200 BP. In turn, those in the south moved north, hitting their
high-water mark near Athabasca, northern Alberta, by 10,400 BP. For a
brief period, the two populations of bison overlapped in the center of
the ice-free corridor region. Oddly, there was virtually no gene flow
between the two, and the southern bison never reached Alaska, nor did
any Alaskan bison ever graze in Montana.⁴⁵

However, the people who hunted them may have gone the full distance,
judging by the sites of the Mesa Complex, which are found primarily on
Alaska's North Slope (the region between the Brooks Range and the Arctic
Ocean). These sites were occupied in the several centuries leading up to
10,000 BP, putting their occupation at the tail end of the Younger Dryas
and making them essentially contemporary with, but slightly later than,
the Paleoarctic sites of interior Alaska (those microblade and microcore
sites described in Chapter 6). That also makes them the same age as Late
Paleoindian Agate Basin complexes on the northern high plains of the
Lower Forty-eight, to which, as it happens, the Mesa projectile points
bears more than a passing resemblance.⁴⁶

Michael Kunz discovered the original Mesa site on a large, isolated
ridge some 225 kilometers north of the Arctic Circle (but still 290
kilometers south of the Arctic Ocean), which rises 60 meters above the
surrounding plain (see Plate 16). Most of the other Mesa Complex sites
occupy similar high spots on the landscape. They are in an area of harsh
climate, with a mean annual temperature of -9.5°C (15°F) and annual
precipitation of just over 20 centimeters. Winds can whistle in excess
of 65 kilometers/hour, sometimes for days on end, which has the virtue
of keeping the ever-present mosquitoes at bay, but makes for chilly
conditions in summer and especially in winter. During the Younger Dryas,
it was even drier and colder, which likely explains the nearly twenty
small hearths found at Mesa. These were small hearths, for this was not
a habitation site but a hunting lookout. The hearths would have warmed
hands and feet as hunters sat atop Mesa and took advantage of its 360°
view of nearly 100 km² of the surrounding terrain, watching for prey.

The artifacts from Mesa are mostly projectile points (over 125) in
various stages of their life histories. As Michael Bever has shown, the
hunters sitting up here busied themselves making new points from
preforms of locally available cherts, sharpening still useable ones, or
discarding those too exhausted to salvage (sometimes first heating them
in the fire, likely to loosen the haft that bound them to a spear), and
otherwise retooling their weaponry and making ready for the hunt (and
incidentally littering the site with more than 20,000 pieces of
debitage). There were also some seventy gravers, indicative of working
bone. That not much else was going atop this hill is indicated by the
scarcity of habitation debris. The rest of the artifact inventory
includes a meager collection of flakes pressed into service as cutting
tools, scrapers, some hammers and anvils, a few quartz crystals, and
small bits of red ocher.

A similar toolkit appears in the other Mesa Complex sites of the far
north, the similarity likely reflecting the fact that they were all the
by-products of related, wide-ranging, rapidly moving hunters. Hunting
what is uncertain. Kunz and colleagues suspect the prey was bison or
perhaps musk ox, but not caribou, the denizen of the modern
tussock-tundra of the North Slope. The reason? In the late Pleistocene,
this was dry grassland better suited to bison, the bones of which are
abundant in nearby fossil localities of this age.

Watching for bison and other game may have been something these groups
had been doing for some time, and over a large area, for as mentioned,
Mesa projectile points bear a striking resemblance to points found on
the northern high plains, notably Agate Basin forms, which are
approximately the same age. Agate Basin and Mesa appear related, but
how? That's unclear, since there are but a couple of sites in the
intervening areas of Canada that look like either. Whether Mesa
represents Agate Basin hunters moving north up the recently deglaciated
ice-free corridor following bison herds in a still-expanding grassland,
or the reverse, we cannot say. Yet. But the betting money is on the
former.

As such, this may be the most contrarian population movement in human
prehistory. During cold intervals, and it was surely cold in the Arctic
during the latter part of the Younger Dryas, humans routinely abandoned
the far north, not migrated into it.⁴⁷ Indeed, while these Paleoindians
were following open grasslands to the north, there was southbound
Paleoarctic traffic down the Pacific coast and through the adjacent
forested interior of British Columbia (Chapter 6). But over on the
southbound lanes, the traffic moved more slowly: descendants of
Paleoarctic groups would not approach the Lower Forty-eight until many
thousands of years later.

Over on the northbound lane, Mesa groups traveled much faster
(centuries, not millennia), but it was a brief and short-lived movement
of people (and bison). Soon after 10,000 years ago, wetter and warmer
conditions came to the far north, and in their wake tundra took over the
North Slope, spruce forest and peat bogs spread across western and
northwestern Canada (Chapter 2), and the grassland corridor between
Alaska and the Lower Forty-eight was closed. With that, northern bison
populations declined, caribou numbers surged, and the Mesa Complex
disappeared.

That disappearance neatly correlates with climate changes that mark the
end of the Younger Dryas. As such, it may be one of the few instances of
a causal link between Younger Dryas climates and Paleoindian
adaptations. Not that we haven't sought others.

LOOKING FOR THE YOUNGER DRYAS

Archaeologists often invoke changes in climate and environment to
explain changes in culture. It's a tricky exercise: not all climate
change causes culture change, nor does all culture change have a
climatic trigger. But if there was a moment when people might have been
caught by changing climates, the Younger Dryas certainly seems a likely
one. Archaeologists have most assuredly noticed the possibility: the
“unexpected onset” of the Younger Dryas is blamed for Pleistocene
extinctions (remember overchill?), the “fragmentation of Clovis culture
and the emergence of more localized regional…cultural traditions,” and
evidently required Florida Paleoindians to dress in furs.⁴⁸ But did
Paleoindians notice the Younger Dryas? There are reasons to be
skeptical.

The most rapid and severe plunge in Younger Dryas temperature occurred
at high latitudes, which for the most part were still lacking human
occupants. Elsewhere across North America, climates varied, and in
places were relatively benign (Chapter 2). Vegetation change was not as
abrupt as climate change (there is that century or more lag), and though
those changes could be significant, they were most pronounced in more
northern regions.

We must be mindful, too, that Paleoindians were highly mobile, still
relatively new to the landscape when the Younger Dryas began, had yet to
experience relatively stable climates or environments, and weren't fully
settled in or dependent on particular resources in specific
environments. Adapting to changing environmental conditions was nothing
new to them. It was what they did. Only in this case, as Metin Eren
aptly notes, instead of people moving to different environments, if
anything the Younger Dryas brought different environments to people.⁴⁹

So the notion that the Younger Dryas somehow caught Paleoindians
flat-footed seems overly dramatic if not simplistic (especially the
stereotype of a suddenly devastating global Big Chill). But even if
Paleoindians were not constantly scrambling to keep up with Younger
Dryas changes, which mostly occurred on a scale of multiple decades or
centuries (still possibly not fast enough to be noticed by people, who
directly respond to daily, weekly, and seasonal conditions), the
cumulative effects of the Younger Dryas nonetheless may have required a
response. The best place to look is on the northern margins of the
Paleoindian world: perhaps Mesa in Alaska, or in northeastern North
America.

Paige Newby and colleagues observe that during the Younger Dryas, the
northeast was largely open tundra, as spruce woodlands (and the northern
tree line) had shifted south in response to colder and drier climates.
But as the Younger Dryas came to an end and climates warmed, both tundra
and spruce woodland retreated north, replaced by closed, mixed pine
forests. They “guarantee” that vegetation change had an impact on herd
size and migratory behavior of large mammals, namely caribou.⁵⁰

Guarantees aside (there's no fossil record to back it up), that's
probably right. Caribou live in arctic and subarctic environments,
summering on open tundra and wintering in sheltered forests. The Younger
Dryas would have suited them well. When those habitats shifted northward
as the Younger Dryas came to an end, caribou likely went along with
them, ending up where they were found historically: in far northern
Labrador. Moving into now-forested New England and the Canadian
Maritimes were non-herd animals like moose and deer.⁵¹

Newby and colleagues see a correlation between this ecological change
(caribou to moose and deer) and the near-simultaneous transition from
fluted to non-fluted points (the radiocarbon dating of that transition
is a bit wobbly, but we'll grant the point). They think that's no
coincidence, but reflects hunters adapting to new prey (that point's
harder to grant).

Bear in mind, however, that projectile points were but one element of a
much larger toolkit in use. Newby and colleagues admit the changes in
the rest of the Paleoindian toolkit over that transition were “more
incremental,” which is another way of saying there were virtually none,
despite apparently changing prey types. Nor is there compelling reason
why the method of hafting a point to a spear (whether fluted or not)
would change if the target was caribou as opposed to moose or deer. All
the points in question were lanceolate spear points, so their killing
potential was essentially the same.⁵²

More likely, Newby and colleagues are correct in their suspicion that
the correlation in the changes in hafting and landscape resources may
simply be fortuitous. After all, point styles were changing throughout
eastern North America at this time. It is no surprise one landed on this
moment of ecological change, especially when that “moment” extends over
several centuries.

Still, let's not give up on a possible Younger Dryas influence just yet,
for there is no denying the end of this period brought significant
ecological change to the northeast and New England, and there was an
apparent human response: it's not in the hafting technology, but instead
in the number and types of sites. In northeastern North America, tundra
and spruce forest gave way to mixed pine forests about 10,000 years ago
(depending on location). When that happened, the archaeological record
across much of the region essentially went blank. Although there's
debate as to why, the most compelling explanation is that the emerging
pine-dominated woods, a notoriously unproductive habitat, so limited
food options that there was little incentive to stay—and few did.⁵³

Those who remained situated themselves close to the area's lakes and
rivers, which would have attracted game, migratory birds, and possibly
fish (depending on the timing of natural, postglacial re-stocking).
Others of their sites are on the floors of what were recently drained
glacial lakes, open meadows where moose, deer, and elk would have
grazed. These sites are much smaller than those from earlier times
related to caribou hunting. The reason, Christopher Ellis and Brian
Deller suggest, is that these people were not participating in communal
hunts of migratory herds, but rather were targeting individual animals
roaming in smaller numbers in these open settings.⁵⁴ All the while, the
groups were using the same basic toolkit they had in earlier times,
though the points themselves changed hafts.

THE DALTON GANG

The biotic communities of northeastern North America were in flux as the
Pleistocene came to an end, but that was far less the case in
southeastern North America, where the forests were essentially already
modern looking, and which provided a much richer variety of foods. The
Late Paleoindian presence in this region was correspondingly much more
abundant, and characterized by a plethora of point style zones in
different regions. In general, all these groups exploited a wide range
of animals and plants, though across southeastern North America, there
were subtle differences in adaptation, depending on local resources and
environment.

The most complete record we have of Late Paleoindian forest adaptations
comes from Dalton period sites, which are concentrated in the central
Mississippi Valley, but extended from the Ozarks into the Carolinas and
date between 10,500 and 10,000 BP.⁵⁵ These sites are readily recognized
in their Mississippi Valley heartland by the presence of Dalton points,
and elsewhere by related types: Colbert, Greenbrier, Hardaway, Nuckolls,
and San Patrice. These generally have a lanceolate shape, a slight to
deeply concave base, which is thinned in what appears to be a last-gasp
effort at fluting, and are often finely serrated (saw-toothed). Over
their use lives, Dalton points were frequently resharpened in a way that
led to strongly beveled edges, giving them a trapezoidal cross-section.
Studies of wear patterns indicate these were multifunctional, serving as
projectile points as well as knives and saws for woodworking—which in
the late Pleistocene southeastern forests would have had no small
importance.

Nor are the points the only woodworking tools in use. Newly invented at
this time was the Dalton adze, a large, thick, triangular, and
relatively heavy biface, presumably used to rough out wooden artifacts
from food bowls to dugout canoes (in Historic times, canoes were
fashioned by carefully burning the surface of a log, then chipping out
the charred portions with an adze; microscopic bits of charcoal have
been found adhering to the bits of some Dalton adzes).⁵⁶ Given Dalton
sites are often located along rivers and streams, and in the bayous of
the Mississippi bottomlands, canoes would have been handy transport.

Dalton groups made a good living in the forest. By now all the
Pleistocene mammals going extinct had gone, but there was still plenty
of food to be had. Dalton peoples exploited mammals from small (chipmunk
and cottontail) to large (deer and elk), as well as birds, including
turkey and prairie chicken, quail and passenger pigeon, ducks and swans.
They pulled muskrat, fish (catfish, gar), aquatic turtles, and shellfish
(mussels) from the rivers and streams. They collected walnuts,
chestnuts, hickory nuts, persimmons, and acorns from the forest to
balance out the diet. And balanced it was: as Joseph Caldwell observed
of the remains at one Illinois Dalton site, with only slight
exaggeration, “Everything that walked, flew, or crawled” was swallowed
by the inhabitants of Modoc Rockshelter.⁵⁷

The Dalton diet speaks, if indirectly, to the matter of landscape
learning. Acorns contain high concentrations of tannic acid, and when
eaten raw have a bitter taste. To make them palatable, the acid must be
removed by leaching, which in prehistory involved placing mashed acorns
in a basket and running water through them. No baskets preserve, but
Dalton sites have grinding tools that would have served the mashing
purpose. Evidently, experimentation by Dalton times had shown how to
make acorn meal suitable as food, perhaps as bread flour.

Processing acorns and, for that matter, eating from top to bottom on the
food chain indicate diet breadth was expanding in these post-Clovis
times. This dietary expansion was traditionally credited to eastern
Paleoindians’ gradual and increasingly successful adaptations, enabling
them to plan more intricate movements across the landscape so as to
catch plants and animals at their seasonal peaks of availability or
productivity. Archaeologists termed this “primary forest efficiency.”

But that's a misnomer. As more food types are added to a diet,
efficiency actually drops. Think about all that time that must be
invested to make acorns edible, or to juggle all the tactics for
pursuing, killing, butchering, and processing very different prey.
“Primary forest inefficiency” may be a more apt term. Furthermore,
expanding the diet is not necessarily a sign of good times.

Unlike their Clovis predecessors, Late Paleoindians in eastern North
America were not ranging so widely across the landscape, judging by the
fact their stone was mostly acquired from local sources, not exotic
ones. And we suspect—based on a greater number of sites—that population
density was higher in the later period than it had been earlier. When
larger populations and smaller territorial ranges collide,
hunter-gatherers have a problem. Mobility is their first order of
response to cope with food shortages (Chapter 7): if one hunts out all
the local deer or gathers up the available plants, the best option is to
pack up and move. That option was readily available when the landscape
was still mostly empty and territories had yet to emerge. However, when
mobility is no longer possible because someone else is already occupying
the adjacent valley, the next option is to stay put but expand the diet,
eating more lower-ranked foods.

It still was a good idea to stay on friendly terms with the neighbors,
and Dalton groups apparently did. Among the sites in the central
Mississippi Valley there occur a small number of points that are longer,
wider, thinner, and more finely made than most garden-variety Dalton
points, and are routinely fashioned of high-quality Burlington chert,
obtainable only at a small outcrop just west of St. Louis. So unusual
are these the Dalton label doesn't quite fit, so they are called Sloan
points. Points that long and thin break too easily to be useful, and
befitting their impractical nature, Sloan points are rarely found in
everyday Dalton sites. Instead, they occur as isolates or in caches, a
half dozen of which are known from the central Mississippi Valley. Don't
think of these as being comparable to Clovis-age caches, for Sloan
points could not readily be pressed into service as points or raw
material sources, as could a cache of Clovis points, bifaces, and
blades. So why the investment in making these fancy, if unusable
artifacts?

John Walthall and Brad Koldehoff suspect these had a role in ceremonial
exchange, as indicators of wealth or status, or perhaps as symbolic
representations of hunting prowess. If the anthropological record is any
indication, the Sloan points were cached to stay hidden from view, only
to be displayed during public rituals or a when ceremony required their
appearance: for example, when rendezvousing with another group and
looking to cement an alliance with the exchange of a ritually valuable
item.⁵⁸

A SHELTERED EXISTENCE

Just when this process of decreasing mobility and increasing diet
breadth began is uncertain, though it was well underway by Dalton times.
But a caution here: Dalton sites yield a wide range of food remains in
part because many are domestic sites occurring in settings that preserve
bones and plant parts: namely, in rockshelters and caves (for
archaeological purposes, a rockshelter is a cliff overhang or hollow
into which sunlight penetrates; caves go deeper underground and have
chambers of permanent darkness).

Curiously, it is only in this period that Paleoindians took up regular
residence in nature's indoors. And in the grand scheme of human
evolutionary history, it's about time. The world over and deep into the
human past, people have occupied caves and shelters, and for good
reason. They provide protection from the elements so residents do not
have to contend with rain or snow or high winds; in summer they are cool
in daytime and warm at night (rock walls absorb heat, then radiate it
back); they can be good settings to stash food from the elements,
rodents, and vermin; and if one has reason to worry about such things,
they can provide a measure of protection from predators. With all those
advantages, it is reasonable to ask why, with the obvious exceptions of
the Meadowcroft and Paisley caves, no cave or rockshelter in eastern or
western North America was inhabited earlier than 10,500 years ago? Why
are the oldest and most common artifacts at the bottom of these natural
shelters so consistently Late Paleoindian in age?

One school of thought (Chapter 4) attributes the absence of earlier
remains to the newcomers’ unfamiliarity with the landscape. They did not
know where the caves were, and were moving so rapidly they did not
linger in an area long enough to find out.⁵⁹ Leaving aside the fact
these fast-moving and wide-ranging groups found many isolated and
obscure stone sources, it is certainly true that where the Clovis
presence was thin and shelters are rare, one would not find the other.
But what of eastern North America, where Clovis was abundant, and thanks
to the porous limestone that rules much of the bedrock geology, the
region is pockmarked with caves and shelters? Clovis people may have had
reasons for not moving indoors, even when they knew where the indoors
were. What those reasons might have been, we cannot say.

Or perhaps there's another explanation. Caves and rockshelters are
geologically active features: they weather and erode, fill with
sediment, collapse, and retreat. That activity is driven by water and
sharply fluctuating temperature, especially freezing and thawing. In the
cooler and wetter Pleistocene, there was plenty of that; less so in
warmer and drier Holocene climates.

The consequences for archaeology? Michael Collins suggests only a
fraction of caves open for occupation by Clovis people are still around
today, and those that have not entirely collapsed or filled have
nonetheless experienced repeated episodes of erosion and roof fall that
have deeply buried their Pleistocene surfaces. Recall that at
Meadow-croft Rockshelter, the oldest artifacts were found only after
looking under large blocks of sandstone that had crashed from the
ceiling (Chapter 4). In other instances, shelters were unopened prior to
Late Paleoindian times. Sarah Sherwood and colleagues showed that the
Tennessee River near Dust Cave flowed 6 meters higher during the
Pleistocene than at present, and its flood sediments choked the cave. It
was only after the Tennessee River fell that springs flowing out of Dust
Cave flushed it of sediment, and only after the springs dried (after
10,590 BP) that the shelter was open for human occupation (Figure 60).⁶⁰

Archaeological field techniques may be partly to blame here as well,
since excavations often take place where the shelter is today, and not
where it was in Pleistocene times, which can be somewhere in front of
the present entryway. Or, the excavations were unable to penetrate below
massive fallen roof blocks. In any case, the result is that the
“basement” culture found in the caves and rockshelters is almost always
Late Paleoindian in age, and in eastern North America that means Dalton.

There are, by John Walthall's count, at least forty-five rockshelters in
eastern North America—from the Ozarks to the southern Appalachians—that
have yielded Dalton remains. Most of these are relatively small (say,
less than 100 m² of floor area), but a dozen or so are quite large. The
largest, Stanfield-Worley (Alabama), is 55 meters wide and 17 meters
deep, with a 9-meter-high ceiling, and with more than 800 m² of floor
area suitable for occupation—not bad for a Paleoindian starter home.

[images]

FIGURE 60.
Excavations in the Paleoindian levels in Dust Cave, Alabama. (Photograph
courtesy of Boyce Driskell.)

These shelters were used repeatedly, for they were fixed and predictable
spots on the landscape. The smaller ones served as brief overnight
bivouacs for hunting parties, the larger ones accommodated bands for
weeks at a time, and both appear to have been preferred residences in
the cold and rainy months of fall and winter when it was better to be
indoors. The inhabitants slept inside and stayed warm and dry behind
slow-burning hearths, but went out front for most other activities,
presumably so as not to carpet their floors in sharp-edged debitage and
other debris.⁶¹

The larger shelters have yielded a rich collection of food remains (as
earlier noted) and a wider range of artifacts, including scrapers,
gravers, flake knives, blades, and wedges used in the activities with
which people passed the time. As is true elsewhere, artifact production
was high on that list. At Rodgers Shelter (Missouri), the inhabitants
stockpiled trumpeter swan bones and stone cobbles from the nearby Pomme
de Terre River, in order to fashion bone and stone tools. Found as well
were hammer stones and anvil flakers for making the tools, and the worn
and broken projectile points that had been brought back from the hunt,
unwrapped from their hafts, and discarded.

But it wasn't just tool manufacture and maintenance taking place here: a
large number of end scrapers, side scrapers, and awls hint at extensive
hide working. Similar tools, along with bone needles, have been
recovered at other Dalton shelters, such as the Graham and Arnold caves
in Missouri, revealing that clothing manufacture or repair was a regular
occurrence. It was colorful clothing, too, if the red ocher that was
ground in pitted anvil stones at these sites had been applied as a dye.

PALEOINDIAN OR PALEOARCHAIC?

On the other side of the continent, caves and rockshelters in the Great
Basin, although rare, are equally rich sources of information on Late
Paleoindian occupations, which in this region are marked by Great Basin
Stemmed points. These, as earlier noted, appear in terminal Pleistocene
times, but last well into the Early Holocene.

Over that time, the Great Basin experienced far-reaching climatic and
environmental changes (Chapter 2). After the jet stream retreated to the
north in the wake of the retreating ice sheet, rainfall was no longer
funneled into this region, and by late Pleistocene times, the once-deep
pluvial lakes had been replaced by shallow ponds and marshes, and
occasional springs and streams. The vegetation was changing as well:
alpine trees had begun their ascent to higher elevations and cooler
temperatures, while the lowlands—first in the south then toward the
north—increasingly took on a more scrub-steppe cast of grasses and bushy
plants, including sagebrush, saltbrush, creosote, rabbitbrush, and
shadscale.

As Charlotte Beck and George Jones have observed,⁶² fluted point groups
in the Great Basin spent most of their time in the lowland marshes and
wet meadows, and on or near the terraces of now-extinct Pleistocene
pluvial lakes (Chapter 8). Not so the makers of the Stemmed points, who
ranged widely into upland settings and, presumably, exploited a broader
range of resources and environments. By virtue of the extraordinary
preservation of organic remains in caves and rockshelters in this very
dry environment, archaeologists have gotten a rather personal glimpse
into what individuals were eating, for these sites yield what they were
excreting. In the human coprolites in the late Pleistocene levels in
Danger Cave, Utah (Figure 61), for example, were the traces of
well-rounded meals that included pronghorn (identified by bits of hair
and crushed bone), pickleweed seeds, prickly pear fruits, bulrush, pine
nuts, and many insects. This was hardly an atypical case.

Of course, these are just scatological snapshots of individual meals,
and not representative of the full range of foods exploited by people
who, from the animal bones found in their sites, were also hunting elk,
deer, bighorn sheep, the occasional bison, a variety of smaller mammals
(especially rabbits), waterfowl, and fish, as well as eating plants. It
was a thoroughly mixed diet, the ingredients depending on what was
locally available. That diet varied little in the centuries before or
the millennia after 10,000 BP (it changed appreciably only later, when
climatic conditions deteriorated in Middle Holocene times between 7500
and 5000 BP, and the role of seeds—drought and starvation food—jumped
dramatically). So seamless is this record of generalized subsistence
across the Pleistocene-Holocene boundary that Great Basin archaeologists
have given up any pretense that Paleoindians in this setting were
big-game hunters, or somehow distinct in adaptation from later Archaic
groups. They refer to all peoples from this span of time as
Paleoarchaic.

[images]

FIGURE 61.
Danger Cave, Utah, taken from the floor of the basin, which would have
been a salt marsh at the time of the earliest occupation. (Photograph by
George T. Jones, courtesy of Charlotte Beck.)

[images]

FIGURE 62.
A serrated bone harpoon or leister made of mammoth rib dated to 10,340
BP, from the site of Pyramid Lake, Nevada. (Photograph courtesy of
Eugene Hattori and the Nevada State Museum, Carson City, Nevada
Department of Cultural Affairs.)

Mammoth appear, if briefly, on the Paleoarchaic stage. A point fashioned
of mammoth ivory and a serrated mammoth bone harpoon, or leister (Figure
62), were found on the shores of Pyramid Lake, Nevada, a lake that
historically was home to a giant species of cutthroat trout (which
weighed upward of 28 kilograms). Both artifacts date to a statistically
identical 10,350 BP, opening the possibility they came from the same
animal.⁶³ Since the elaborate carving of the leister is the sort of
thing best done when bone—mammoth rib, in this case—is relatively fresh
or well preserved (bone becomes less malleable as it dries and cracks),
these were likely not pieces scavenged from a fossil skeleton, but
instead obtained from a recently dead mammoth. There's no small irony in
the fact that mammoth survived in the Great Basin until well after
Clovis (and overkill) times, and that in the Paleoarchaic at Pyramid
Lake, mammoth fishing tackle was used to go after a mammoth-sized fish.

Great Basin fluted points were made with the usual preference for
high-quality chert or obsidian. Yet, in fashioning their Stemmed points,
knappers often used crystalline volcanic rocks such as basalt and
andesite. Projectile points fashioned of such stone can be deadly,
though are too coarse grained to allow the razor-sharp edges possible
with chert or obsidian. More significant, perhaps, many Great Basin
Stemmed points have rounded edges and tips, which Beck and Jones
attribute to their use as projectile points as well as tools for cutting
and scraping.

Other elements of the Paleoarchaic toolkit included knives, gravers,
scrapers, spoke-shaves, a few milling and grinding stones (signaling the
use of plant foods), and crescents, a tool largely restricted to the
Great Basin. As the name implies, these are shaped like a crescent moon,
flaked on both faces, often heavily ground along both convex and concave
sides, and crushed and abraded on their ends. When first found, they
were interpreted as surgical instruments, prompting William Clewlow to
wryly observe that if that were so, there must have been “a vast
pre-Columbian medical center on the shores of the Black Rock Desert.”
More likely, he supposed, crescents were used to cut or carve animal
hide and flesh, or slice plants such as tule reed, which was used to
make fibers for fashioning burden baskets, fish nets, sandals, and the
other rare, perishable items found in many of these dry caves and
shelters.⁶⁴

It is by virtue of that extraordinary preservation we also glimpse some
of the rarest of the perishable artifacts, those related to burial
practices. A partially mummified man found in Spirit Cave (Nevada), was
laid to rest some 9,500 years ago in a sagebrushlined pit, wearing a
rabbit-skin robe and leather moccasins, and had been carefully wrapped
and sewn into a death shroud of woven fiber mats.

THINKING ABOUT LIFE AND DEATH

In fact, in the Late Paleoindian period across North America, we are
able to peer further into ritual and ceremony than was possible in
earlier times. This is not to say such matters were previously
unimportant, only that our knowledge of them is limited to a very few
sites, exemplified by the ocher-covered bones of the child buried at
Anzick, or the Buhl skeleton with its small collection of grave goods
(including stone and bone tools, and a badger baculum).

Part of ritual and ceremony in Late Paleoindian times was related to the
food quest, particularly the hunt. At the Folsom-age Lake Theo site
(Texas), for example, a small “shrine” (for want of a better term),
consisting of several bison jaws, two tibia (the lower and larger rear
leg bone), a femur (upper leg), and the spine of a thoracic vertebra
(the spine serves as the cantilever for the bison hump), were found set
standing vertically in a carefully dug, small, round hole in the midst
of a bison kill. It was likely created following the successful hunt.⁶⁵

Some 10,000 years ago at the Jones-Miller site, a wooden post
(identified archaeologically by a circular stain in the ground) was set
in the earth, and placed alongside it was a miniature Hell Gap point, a
fragment of a bone flute or whistle, the jaw of a wolf, and leg parts of
what might have been a dog. Soon thereafter, a great bison kill was made
over this spot. Coincidence? In historic times on the plains, when a
hunt was planned to trap bison in a surround of brush, snow, or some
other material, bets were hedged by a shaman planting a “medicine post”
in the center of the surround, where offerings were made for a
successful kill. If the Jones-Miller feature had the same intent, this
was a ritual with very deep roots, and it worked like a charm: some 300
bison were killed at Jones-Miller, possibly on two separate occasions.⁶⁶

At other sites, ritual was less obviously related to empty stomachs. At
Powars II in southeastern Wyoming (just 16 kilometers from the Hell Gap
site, which was occupied throughout Paleoindian times), a rich outcrop
of red ocher was mined by Paleoindians (and only Paleoindians), starting
in Clovis times.⁶⁷ Recovered at Powars II were many of the usual
Paleoindian tools, but they were not necessarily there for the usual
reasons. Half a dozen fragments of bison forelimbs and ribs had been
pressed into service as digging implements to wrest blocks of red ocher
out of the ground. Several dozen flakes had been employed as scrapers to
shave red ocher blocks, possibly to put it into a powdered form to be
mixed with water, sap, or some other liquid to make a paint (though
ocher is an effective coloring agent even as powder). Also found at the
site: a few seashell beads, which had been carried (or traded?) a great
distance, since the Pacific Ocean is at least 1,600 kilometers away
(there used to be a saltwater sea in this area, but that was at least
570 million years earlier).

As intriguing are the forty-two projectile points at Powars II. This was
no kill site, yet all the points had been heavily used, worn, and
repeatedly reworked; more than half were broken. Virtually all were made
of locally available stone. Evidently they'd traveled far and wide, been
used often, and were even rendered useless; but instead of being
abandoned where they had broken, they were kept and ultimately returned
to the red ocher mine near where the stone was first quarried. But why?
Michael Stafford and colleagues, puzzling over the matter, drew the
reasonable (if hard-to-verify) conclusion the points and beads were left
as offerings. Ocher is a potent symbol of life and death, and offerings
made at its source a correspondingly powerful ritual act. But why used
points? Stafford and colleagues wonder if these broken bits had once
been the hunters’ most successful weapons. Although their hunting value
had long since been spent, perhaps some of their power and accuracy
could be conveyed to newly-minted ones by the act of their ritual
offering.

From sustaining life to accompanying those after death: at the Sloan
site, on the summit of an old sand dune in northeast Arkansas,
excavations by Dan Morse recovered some 200 small, badly eroded pieces
of bone, spread over an area of about 144 m². On careful analysis, the
bone appeared to be human, from both adults and children. With the bones
were nearly 450 Dalton artifacts, arranged in twenty-nine discrete
clusters, perhaps having been placed into pits dug into the dune sand.
In some instances, the artifacts were so close together it appears they
were buried in leather bags or some other containers.⁶⁸ The pattern of
artifacts and bone suggested individual graves, but demonstrating that
(given the poor preservation) is no easy task, as Morse admits. But if
one assumes they were, then about thirty people had been interred here,
representing at least a couple of generations.

Fully one-third of the artifacts were Dalton points, the remainder
bifaces, adzes, scrapers, abraders, and a variety of other cutting and
scraping tools. And then there were a dozen or so Sloan points made of
Burlington chert, quarried about 300 kilometers away. Most of those were
newly minted or refurbished. In so far as these represent grave goods
that accompanied in death what individuals might have used in life, they
reveal the toolkit carried by a well-equipped Dalton person. The adzes
and bifaces with traces of red ocher on them symbolize something more.

Among societies that are sharply differentiated by social rank, one's
standing in life is often carried into death. High-status individuals
are buried with expensive grave goods marking their standing (think King
Tut). Yet, the grave goods at Sloan—the finely crafted points and tools
made of high-quality and hard-to-obtain stone—were evenly spread across
individuals of different ages or sexes. Morse concludes there was only
minimal social differentiation among the Sloan populace.

Sloan is North America's earliest known cemetery. Cemeteries, of course,
are sacred spaces, and this one is no exception: it is located well away
from other Dalton sites. There were no distractions or profane acts to
take away from any solemn rituals enacted here. Cemeteries were also
places to which people repeatedly returned. Of course, that was true of
other spots on the landscape, such as stone quarries, for example. But a
cemetery was a place of meaningful return as no quarry could ever be.
And so it is that after a millennium or more of wide-ranging and
untethered mobility, the first peoples have at last become firmly
attached to place. They could and, in the end, did come home.

THE END OF THE BEGINNING…

Geologists set the date for the end of the Pleistocene at 10,000 BP.
Doing so was arbitrary (Chapter 2), but as arbitrary numbers go, it's
not bad, coinciding as it does with the end of the Younger Dryas, as
discrete a climatic boundary as one could find. Once the Younger Dryas
was finished, there was no turning back toward the Ice Age, though the
Pleistocene was still in the process of wrapping up. In the far north
10,000 years ago, the once-vast ice sheets continued shrinking; sea
levels worldwide were still rising. In the Upper Midwest, the Great
Lakes were just reaching their present configuration, and throughout the
continent, plants and animals continued shuffling toward their modern,
postglacial positions on the landscape. North America as we recognize it
would finally appear around 5,000 years ago.

Likewise, archaeologists have traditionally divided the Paleoindian from
the subsequent Archaic period around 10,000 BP as well, using as a
benchmark the separation of highly mobile Paleoindian “big-game hunters”
from the “broad-based foragers” of the Archaic. As should now be
apparent, that's an equally arbitrary division. Paleoindians were not
strictly big-game hunters, and it was they who first established some of
the adaptive themes of the Archaic: use of a wider variety of food
resources, smaller territories and mobility, and the advent of new
technologies.

In fact, the most significant differences between Paleoindian and
Archaic adaptations emerge only much later in the Holocene, when new
communities began living in semi-permanent villages, manufacturing
pottery, burying their dead in artificially constructed earthen mounds,
and domesticating a wide range of plants. The timing of these
developments varies by region, and in some the vestiges of ancestral
adaptations linger for a very long time.

Although the narrative of North America's first peoples stops here with
the end of the Pleistocene and the dawn of the Holocene (doing more goes
far beyond the scope of this volume), prehistory in North America does
not stop. The descendants of North American Paleoindians weathered
severe drought on the Great Plains; bartered Wyoming obsidian for Great
Lakes copper and Gulf Coast shells in Midwest commodities exchanges;
teased wild plants until they bore seeds and fruits fit to eat, drink,
or smoke; dug thousands of kilometers of canals across the arid
Southwest and made desert gardens bloom; settled down from their
ancestor's mobile ways, and built towns of stone, earth, and wood; and
much, much more. Over those 10,000 years, populations boomed, people
moved, put down roots, then moved again; environments and adaptations
changed, sometimes dramatically; new languages, genetic lineages, and
cultures emerged. All independent of any contact with Old World peoples.

…AND THE BEGINNING OF THE END

Around AD 1000, the long separation of Old World and New came to an end,
though only in one far corner of North America. Thule Eskimo and Norse
Vikings, moving east and west (respectively), finally closed a circle
that had been open since the Pleistocene.

The first signs of their encounters appear in the eleventh century in
Thule sites around Baffin Bay, which yield iron, copper, and bronze
tools, and even (from a Thule site on Ellesmere Island) chain mail
armor, woolen cloth, smelted iron rivets and tools, a carpenter's plane,
and a bronze bowl and balance scale fragment. Whether these items moved
via peaceful trade (metal for ivory), mutual plunder, or both, we cannot
say. But then an exchange of goods was not vital to either party. Norse
and Native Americans were evenly matched in technology. The artifacts
and scrap metal the Thule got from the Norse merely supplemented their
own supplies of native copper and meteoritic iron.

Indeed, it's strongly suspected the contacts between the groups were
brief, misunderstandings common, and violence occasionally the end
result.⁶⁹ A stone arrowhead, like those made by Newfoundland's natives
in the centuries around AD 1000, was found having fallen out of a grave
in a Norse cemetery in Greenland, possibly carried there stuck in
someone's flesh or bone. At the very least, Norse and Native Americans
were unsure what to make of one another. The Norse puzzled over
Vinland's “Skraelings” in their sagas,⁷⁰ and a Thule on southern Baffin
Island tried to capture the image of a Norse figure in wood.

Perhaps their only chance for extended interaction was on the northern
tip of Newfoundland, where at the site of L'Anse aux Meadows, the
Norse—under the leadership of Leif Eriksson according to the sagas—built
three timber-and sod-walled long houses (up to 25 meters in length) and
several smaller outbuildings overlooking a shallow bay, sometime between
AD 980 and 1020. Excavations by Helge Ingstad and others also uncovered
remains of a smithy for smelting and forging, a carpentry shop, and a
boat shed. Norse ringed pins, loom weights, iron tools and debris,
wooden artifacts, hearths, and cooking pits were found amidst the
structures.

The very same spot had been used before and after by Native Americans,
although there is no evidence they and the Norse were there
simultaneously. But then the Norse were not on the ground for very long,
as both the sagas and the archaeology attest. The Norse did not plant
the farms they had in Greenland, but instead used the site as a winter
camp and summer base of exploration.⁷¹ It appears to have never housed
more than 100 people, was not kept in good repair, and burned soon after
it was abandoned.⁷²

It's the only settlement the Norse apparently tried to establish in
North America. Their exploration, which possibly reached as far south as
Quebec City (judging by butternuts found at L'Anse aux Meadows), never
became colonization. The sagas hint they put down no deeper roots in
North America because of the Natives, for when Leif Eriksson, his
shipmates, and kin landed, and the Old World and New came face to face,
the Old World contingent got the worst of it. The Norse were hamstrung
by having smaller forces (their ships could not carry large numbers),
tenuous lines of support, and no advantage in weaponry—and they faced
Natives possessing superior homeland knowledge and survival skills.

Losses at the hands of the “Skraelings” were a fatal blow to Norse
intentions: their plans for western expansion died with the Vinland
settlement. Later visits to the continent—likely to satisfy the demand
for timber back in Greenland—were fleeting and sporadic. As Leif's
brother Thorvald, fatally shot in a skirmish with “Skraelings” on the
Labrador coast, gasped in the end, “We've found a land of fine
resources, though we'll hardly enjoy much of them.”⁷³

This initial contact loomed large in the lives and deaths of the players
who were immediately involved. But for the vast majority of American
Indians living far from the front, those brief encounters in the distant
North Atlantic were completely unknown and utterly inconsequential. All
that would change with the next round of contact, beginning that October
night in 1492 when Old World sailors once again caught sight of the New.
For this time, the Europeans brought with them something far deadlier
than mere weapons.

10

WHEN PAST AND
PRESENT COLLIDE

On March 18, 1835, Charles Darwin disembarked the H.M.S. Beagle at
Valparaiso, Chile, and set off with “two Peons & 10 mules” on a
three-week round trip over the Andes to Mendoza, Argentina. Mules and
weather cooperated, the mountains enchanted. He wrote his sister, Susan,
that it was all so new and spectacular he “could hardly sleep at nights
for thinking over [his] day's work.” Best of all, what he saw of Andean
geology promised “a very important fact in the theory of the formation
of the world” (and, incidentally, inspired his explanation of the
Parallel Roads of Glen Roy). Little wonder he ranked this Andean
excursion his most successful since leaving England three and a half
years earlier.¹

But in the end, a night spent in Luxan, a small village south of that
“stupid, forlorn” town of Mendoza, had far more lasting consequences.
There, on the night of March 26, 1835, Darwin was attacked by the giant,
blood-sucking Vinchuca bug, Triatoma infestans, the “great black bug of
the Pampas.” It was, he said, “most disgusting to feel soft wingless
insects, about an inch long, crawling over one's body. Before sucking
they are quite thin, but afterwards they become round and bloated with
blood, and in this state are easily crushed.” Still, no pain was caused
by the wound, and though Darwin and his fellow shipmates were mildly
amused by the insect (one of them allowed it a meal), he thought little
of the attack then, and not at all later. He left Mendoza the next
morning and re-crossed the Andes.² Six months later, Darwin was on the
Galapagos Islands, where he glimpsed, but could not yet appreciate, the
meaning of its wonderfully varied life forms.

No matter. The seeds of the theory of evolution by natural selection
were planted, and when they bore fruit a few years later, Darwin could
look back at the Galapagos Islands and see what a marvelous laboratory
of evolutionary divergence these were. But it was a laboratory to which
he could never return. Crippling headaches, dizziness, nausea, stomach
pains, and fatigue began just a few years after his return to England,
and dogged him the rest of his life. His night in Luxan had caught up
with him.

The bug that bit Darwin is the primary vector for Trypanasoma cruzi, a
microorganism causing Chagas’ disease, which attacks the heart, stomach,
and intestinal system. Those bitten rarely escape Chagas. Even today,
despite concerted efforts to eradicate it (using insecticides, in heavy
doses, to kill off Vinchuca populations), Chagas causes more deaths in
the Americas than any other parasitic disease, and more than 18 million
people are affected by it.³ The Vinchuca does its work at night, and
those bitten often hardly notice the bite or its effects—at least at
first. Chagas is a time bomb, Sir Peter Medawar explains: years
afterward, the victim suddenly drops dead or, like Darwin, becomes
chronically ill with diagnosis-defying symptoms. It was worse for
Darwin, since Chagas was then unknown, and his physicians suspected he
suffered from hypochondria. And, as Medawar adds, “ill people suspected
of hypochondria or malingering have to pretend to be iller than they
really are and may then get taken in by their own deception.”⁴

Darwin fell prey to one of America's pathogens, a victim of the exchange
when an Old World host met a New World parasite. But he was an
exception. Old World populations were not overrun by Chagas, nor any
other New World pathogen. Through it all, using the excuse his illness
provided to free him from Victorian society's distractions, Darwin
produced the Origin of Species and more than a dozen other books that
introduced the concept of evolution, and in so doing forever changed our
view of life on earth.

Not so fortunate were the untold millions of anonymous American Indians
who died from imported Old World diseases in the decades and centuries
after the last discovery of America in 1492.⁵ The successors of Columbus
brought to America an arsenal of lethal pathogens, including smallpox
(Variola major)—the most horrific killer by far⁶—measles, influenza,
bubonic plague, trachoma, diphtheria, malaria, amoebic dysentery,
typhoid fever, cholera, chicken pox, yellow fever, scarlet fever, and
whooping cough. In many instances there were repeated epidemics of each.
Since these diseases were not endemic to Native American populations,
each new breakout proved just as deadly to those born in between
episodes of epidemics.

But why, asked Antoine Le Page du Pratz, who lived among the lower
Mississippi Valley's Natchez in the 1720s, should “distempers that are
not very fatal in other parts of the world, make dreadful ravages among
them?” American Indians were dying from what were childhood ailments in
other parts of the world. Even at its worst in Western Europe during the
1700s, smallpox accounted for just 10%-15% of all deaths, and 70% of
those, Alfred Crosby reports, were children under the age of two.⁷

Why were Native Americans of all ages vulnerable to what were in Europe
mere childhood diseases? And why had they no epidemic diseases of their
own that might have devastated Europeans, and perhaps even checked their
advance into America?

The answers to these questions have little to do with events after 1492.
They have a great deal to do with events that occurred before 1492. They
have everything to do with the peopling of the Americas.

THE BEHEADING OF PREHISTORY

Precisely how many Native Americans died in the decades and centuries
after 1492 is impossible to know, since early on, no one was keeping
census records. But Thomas Jefferson suspected the worst. After
comparing a tally of Virginia's forty tribes from 1607 when Captain John
Smith made contact, to a count made in 1669 by the Virginia assembly,
there was no mistaking the “melancholy” message. In only sixty-two
years, the tribes had been reduced to one-third their former number.⁸

Jefferson believed diseases were not entirely to blame: “spirituous
liquors,” war, and land grabbing had played their insidious roles.
Still, he knew the fearful toll of disease and, already aware of Edward
Jenner's newly discovered vaccine for smallpox, instructed Meriwether
Lewis and William Clark to carry on their expedition west “some matter
of the kinepox [cowpox fluid] [and] inform those of them with whom you
may be, of its efficacy as a preservative from the smallpox; & instruct
& encourage them in the use of it.”⁹ Well intentioned to be sure, but
inevitably Lewis and Clark discovered smallpox had arrived long before
they did. Even along the Columbia River in the far Pacific Northwest in
April 1806, Clark came upon a large, ruined village and the few,
pox-scarred survivors of a terrible smallpox epidemic that had roared
through three decades earlier. Disease had reached this remote corner of
North America long before European liquor, war, or land grabs—and well
in advance of any Europeans.

That was hardly an unusual occurrence. Nearly three centuries earlier,
in the spring of 1540, Hernando de Soto entered the chiefdom of
Cofitachequi (in present-day South Carolina). Although his was the first
significant European presence in the region, he saw several “large
uninhabited towns, choked with vegetation, which looked as though no
people had inhabited them for some time.” He learned that “two years ago
there had been a plague in that land and they had moved to other
towns.”¹⁰

Disease, the enemy no one saw, traveled much farther and frighteningly
faster than the Europeans who brought it to America. The reason was
deadly simple. Take smallpox: it has no known nonhuman host, but it can
survive for extended periods outside its human host in a dried state,
including on infected blankets or clothing, where it can remain viable
for more than a year. It is also readily spread by breath. With an
incubation period of 10-14 days, that's plenty of time for an apparently
healthy person to flee a stricken area when the first gory symptoms
break out, and unwittingly spread the virus to others in neighboring
villages.¹¹

So it was that the disease spread among American Indians with
astonishing speed and deadly efficiency. Just how far and how fast it
could burn through Native populations can be seen in the smallpox
epidemic of 1775-82 (which took a small share of the colonial population
as well). As Elizabeth Fenn has detailed, that bout began in Mexico
City, and by the time it exhausted itself of victims seven years later,
it had killed American Indians trading at remote Hudson's Bay Company
outposts in far northern Canada (probably reaching there via
long-established trade networks).¹²

By the time Europeans arrived on a scene, native populations were often
already devastated. Under such circumstances, counts of native
populations can be highly suspect, and we must rely more on
archaeological evidence—of site and regional abandonment, for
example—than on any historic records. Even where Europeans showed up
before disease hit (Hernan Cortes in the Valley of Mexico in 1519, for
example), reliable numbers are elusive. The earliest explorers,
conquistadores, and missionaries could be notoriously bad census takers,
often overestimating or underestimating native populations, depending on
whether they were in the business of converting native souls (report
high numbers to testify to one's good work) or capturing native lands
(report low numbers to justify a land grab).¹³

We may never know how many Native Americans were here on the morning of
October 12, 1492. Indeed, no one knows how many people lived just about
anywhere in those days (census records are a phenomenon of more recent
centuries). One school, championed by Henry Dobyns, estimates Native
America numbers using a “depopulation ratio,” the difference between the
“known or confidently estimated preconquest population” in an area
against the estimated nadir population for that same area. After
examining multiple cases, he concluded that a “sound, if conservative”
estimate would put the ratio at about 20:1. It would be even higher if
the preconquest population had already suffered a wave of disease. From
that, he concluded, the New World pre-European contact population
numbered 90 to 112 million, of which 18 million people occupied North
America north of Mexico.¹⁴

These astonishing figures are orders of magnitude higher than all
estimates before or since, and have been hotly disputed. Too many
unsupportable assumptions, critics say, are behind the numbers, not
least Dobyns's belief that there were multiple epidemics, each with
extremely high mortality rates, and that most populations had already
declined before any Europeans arrived to make a count. It is better, the
critics say, to tread cautiously and use more direct evidence.

Douglas Ubelaker, drawing on tribe-by-tribe census figures and available
archaeological evidence, puts Native North American populations at the
time of European contact at a far more conservative 2.4 million.¹⁵
Carefully derived as it is, this estimate is also suspect since it is
based on counts that came in, Ubelaker readily admits, too low and too
late. Recall that by the time Rene-Robert de la Salle arrived in
southeastern North America in the late 1600s, the region was virtually
depopulated. He saw only remnants of once-teeming communities that had
greeted de Soto a century earlier (Chapter 6).

The actual number surely lies somewhere between these two extremes, but
no one really knows. What we do know is that American Indian populations
bottomed out in the late nineteenth century, the timing varying by tribe
and area. At the nadir, there were an estimated 514,510 Native North
Americans (their numbers have since rebounded).¹⁶ Here's the root of the
claim that from European colonization until the twentieth century, more
Native Americans died than were born.

Overstatement, maybe. But no matter the actual number, imported
pathogens caused Native deaths in fearful numbers. By Dobyns's estimate,
it was a decline of 97%; by Ubelaker's lower figures, at least 78%.
Those are staggering losses either way. Even in the 1960s and 1970s,
more than four centuries after initial contact, mortality rates for
remote Amazonian tribes exposed to measles for the first time were
upwards of 75%.¹⁷

The post-European contact population history of Pecos Pueblo is probably
typical in microcosm of what was happening continent-wide (although
atypical in that we have record of it). By 1927 Pecos was a
long-uninhabited archaeological site (Figure 63) where A. V. Kidder was
excavating when he was called by Frank Roberts to come see the first
Folsom point found in situ (Chapter 3), and from which Earnest Hooton
thought he spotted so many varieties of human crania (Chapter 5). Yet,
300 years earlier, Pecos Pueblo had been a thriving community, with a
population of more than 2,000 people (as estimated by a Franciscan friar
living among them). The numbers might have been higher still if the
Pueblo hadn't already experienced one (or perhaps more) epidemics. In
the intervening centuries, Pecos was battered by repeated smallpox
epidemics—possibly a dozen altogether—and weakened by raids from mounted
Comanche warriors; the loss of labor for planting and harvest, and the
famine that followed; out-migration and social disruption (especially as
the older leaders of the community, its rituals and ceremonies, who
would have been more susceptible to disease, died off); and the other
grim collateral consequences of a village reeling from recurrent and
cumulative waves of death. By 1838 only 18 survivors remained. That
year, they packed up their belongings and abandoned the Pueblo.¹⁸

[images]

FIGURE 63.
Pecos Pueblo. The rooms in the foreground were part of the South Pueblo.
The large building in the background is the ruin of the church built by
Spanish missionaries in the early 1700s (an earlier church was razed
during the Pueblo Revolt of 1680-92). (Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

Depopulation on a scale of 78%—let alone of 97%—inevitably had
far-reaching and devastating effects on people (of which more below),
and possibly even on nature itself. As millions died, farm fields
returned to forests, bringing about an artificially induced ecological
succession (what European colonists in eastern North America described
as pristine woodlands were often second-growth forests). Animals whose
numbers had previously been reduced by hunting pressure returned; the
chroniclers of de Soto's expedition make no mention of bison, but when
de la Salle arrived the next century, many villages and farms had been
supplanted by large bison herds grazing areas of open parkland.¹⁹

Human population losses might even have been large enough to alter
global climate—a not-uncontroversial suggestion made by William
Ruddiman, who plotted changes in atmospheric CO₂ concentrations from ice
cores against historical epidemics. The sharpest decline in atmospheric
CO₂ over the last 2,000 years occurred between the 1500s and the 1750s.
That suggested to him that the decimation of American Indian populations
during these centuries, when abandoned farm fields were overtaken by
carbon dioxide-consuming forests, temporarily checked rising atmospheric
CO₂ levels. He even supposes this was the trigger for the Little Ice Age
(Chapter 2).²⁰ That CO₂ levels rose again in the late eighteenth century
is less a testimony to the rebound of Native American populations than
it is evidence of the influx of Old World colonists clearing
then-vacated New World forest lands.

THE CHILDHOOD OF DISEASE

European colonists thrived in the New World, while around them, American
Indians died. Blame that disparity on evolution and the contingencies of
history.²¹ Many of humanity's deadliest diseases come from species with
whom we come in contact, for viruses or pathogens that might be
relatively benign in one organism can turn deadly in another (e.g.,
Ebola or HIV/AIDS). When a pathogen first appears in a human population,
neither young nor old are spared a bout with the illness, and the result
is either death or lifetime immunity. Early on in many cases, the result
is fatal. But as individuals most vulnerable to the pathogen are
eliminated from the gene pool through natural selection, it is the genes
of the hardier survivors, who mature and reproduce, which over time come
to dominate the gene pool. Humans co-evolve with the disease. As a
result, diseases once deadly to both adults and children eventually
become just childhood ills. The longer a community has lived with a
disease, the less destructive its epidemics.

Old World communities did not start out riddled by disease. For the
first few million years of human prehistory, our collective ancestors
were few, subsisted by hunting and gathering, and were mobile, much like
the first Americans. That had to change in order to spark the evolution
of epidemic diseases, for these require two essential ingredients: a
pathogen source—usually animals living close by—and a large supply of
victims to sustain a chain of infection (measles, for example, requires
a minimum of 200,000 to 300,000 hosts to ensure its survival). In the
Old World, these vital ingredients only appear with the advent of
agriculture, pastoralism, and settled village life.

When humans began to settle in place, clearing land for farming, piling
up trash, and fouling their water, they created breeding grounds for
rats, lice, worms, mosquitoes, and all manner of disease-causing or
carrying organisms. And when they began living with their newly
domesticated animals, drinking the same water, breathing the same air,
and using animal waste to fertilize their crop fields, they unwittingly
shared a volatile mix of pathogens from which sprang potent new
diseases. Domesticated animals are a major source for many of
humankind's most deadly diseases, like smallpox, which is similar
genetically to other orthopoxvirus forms hosted by camels, cows, and
rodents;²² measles appears to be derived from bovine rinderpest or
canine distemper; influenza seemingly originated in avian influenza or
hog diseases. In all, humans inherited dozens of diseases from animals,
domesticated and wild.

Lots of people began living in close contact with one another around
9,000-10,000 years ago, earliest in Mesopotamia and then later
throughout the Old World from Africa to Asia. Within a few thousand
years, they had tamed wild cattle, sheep, pig, and goat (among other
animals), and the combination of farming and herding fueled a steep rise
in human populations. More mouths demanded more farmland and pasture.
Sanitary conditions declined: it was life cheek by jowl with other
people and other animals. In involuntary experiments taking place in
countless early villages and towns, new diseases were born and spread.
Their arrival went unchallenged.

Epidemic diseases make their archaeological debut some 3,000 years ago,
in smallpox pustules visible on Egyptian mummies, though this was
apparently a milder form of the virus. The earliest historic record of
pandemic smallpox comes from fourth-century AD China (suggesting, as has
since been shown in a study of the smallpox genome, that two separate
strains of this virus made the jump to humans).²³ Diseases, of course,
figure as biblical plagues. A wave of typhoid fever struck Athens during
the Peloponnesian War, while the Antonine (smallpox) and Justinian
(plague) pandemics, nearly 400 years apart, crippled the Roman Empire.
These infectious pathogens reached the distant corners of Europe by
Medieval times.

By 1492, having been exposed for thousands of years to dozens of
pathogens, Old World populations had effectively “adapted.” Natural
selection had done its work well. Old World populations still suffered
occasionally spectacular epidemics, like the Black Death of the
fourteenth century (1347-51). Yet, their populations emerged, sometimes
deeply scarred but largely intact. Mortality rates during the Black
Death were a mere 30%.

Not so the Americas, where neither old nor young were spared. American
Indians were so utterly defenseless against imported European diseases
that it was taken by some as a sign of higher authority. “The natives,”
John Winthrop wrote in 1634, “are neere all dead of small Poxe, so as
the Lord hathe cleared our title to what we possess.”²⁴ The Natives
themselves, discouraged by their losses and the seemingly stunning good
health of the invaders, were often convinced their own deities were no
match for the European God.

Others blamed native health care: “When a nation is attacked by the
smallpox,” du Pratz wrote in 1758, “it quickly makes great havoc; for as
a whole family is crowded into a small hut, which has no communications
with the external air, but by a door about two feet wide and four feet
high, the distemper, if it seizes one, is quickly communicated to all.
The aged die in consequence of their advanced years and the bad quality
of their food; and the young, if they are not strictly watched, destroy
themselves, from an abhorrence of the blotches in their skin. If they
can but escape from their hut, they run out and bathe themselves in the
river, which is certain death in that distemper.”²⁵ Du Pratz could not
understand why native physicians, otherwise quite skilled, could not
cope with these common ailments.

They were quite skilled, but their skills were honed against
long-familiar ills and were no match for alien pathogens. They were
understandably baffled by disease transmission. When smallpox broke out
among the Piegen Blackfoot, one survivor reported, they had no idea
“that one Man could give it to another, any more than a wounded Man
could give his wound to another.”²⁶ More to the point, in those
centuries, no one on either side of the ocean understood disease
etiology, let alone could have stemmed the viral and pathogenic assault
on New World peoples.

The obvious answer, then, to why Native Americans suffered so terribly
from introduced infectious disease is because they had no previous
exposure and hence had built up no immunity. And when a group with adult
immunity spreads the disease to one without, mortality is nearly
universal. Crosby likens the process to a forest that has not burned for
a very long time: when ignited, burning is swift, and destruction is
nearly total.²⁷

So we know the immediate cause for the catastrophic population loss
among American Indians: a lack of immunity. But that begs the larger
question: why did they lack immunity? It's not that they didn't have the
ability to develop immunity to diseases. It's that they didn't have
immunity to these specific diseases. For that, they needed exposure time
and proximity. They had neither, which brings us back to the peopling of
the Americas.

FROM SIBERIA TO SMALLPOX

No matter the haggling over the precise homeland of the first Americans,
archaeological, dental, genetic, linguistic, and skeletal evidence
indicates American Indians were descendants of Asian populations, not
groups emigrating directly from Europe or the Middle East. Moreover,
their ancestors had left Asia and the Old World thousands of years
before the first cow, pig, camel, or sheep was ever penned, and well
before village life hatched the first epidemic diseases. No ancestral
American suffered through the thousands of years of agony and illness as
diseases jumped species and then co-evolved with human hosts.

The port of entry for America's first peoples was the Bering Sea region.
They could, and likely did, walk across from Siberia to Alaska when
expanding continental ice sheets dropped sea levels worldwide and
Beringia surfaced. Crossing its Mammoth Steppe, blanketed by parkland
and grazed by mammoth, horse, and bison, was possible anytime between
27,000 and 10,000 years ago (during the last millennium, when the breach
was still narrow enough to freeze in winter). The recent genetic
evidence of a possible Beringian standstill (Chapter 5) suggests the
first peoples may have been relatively isolated in this region for much
of that time.

From there they traveled south, either between retreating margins of the
Laurentide and Cordilleran ice sheets, or down the Pacific coast. Both
entry routes were blocked for much of Late Wisconsin time, and may have
been biologically impassable when first opened (the coastal route
opening sooner). In any case, it appears from the evidence at Monte
Verde that the first Americans were here by at least 12,500 BP and
possibly earlier still. Certainly by 11,500 BP, Clovis Paleoindians were
widespread, possibly representing a second migratory pulse to the New
World, one that may have spread across the continent in less than a
thousand years.

Beringia and the routes south served as more than just passageways.
These were also, in physical anthropologist T. Dale Stewart's words,
“germ filters”²⁸ that would have effectively stripped away any diseases
lurking among the colonizing populations. For as Stewart observed, the
harsh Arctic cold would have killed off the vectors (carriers) of many
infectious diseases (such as snails, worms, or mosquitoes), along with
any of their diseased hosts. If a pathogen somehow infected a small band
on this thinly settled landscape during its journey, the group would
have been naturally quarantined, and would have disappeared with little
notice and no widespread effect. All diseases are parasites: they need
hosts to sustain their deadly work. Beringia did not then, as the Arctic
does not today, support dense populations that would prolong a disease's
run.

Once the first Americans made it here, their rear flank was well
protected by the vast distance between the source regions of disease and
northeast Siberia. Smallpox only reached this far corner of Eurasia in
the seventeenth century. Given more time, infectious epidemic diseases
might have crossed the Bering Strait and entered the Americas from the
west, or perhaps not. The small and scattered populations that lived in
far Northeast Asia and the relatively low level of traffic across the
Bering Sea would have made it difficult for Old World diseases to sneak
up on New World peoples from behind (the Bering Sea would have been just
as effective a barrier preventing the backwash of diseases from the New
World to the Old, were there any New World diseases to wash back).

The timing, route(s) of entry, and subsequent geographic isolation of
the first Americans helped ensure there were no opportunities for them
to adapt and co-evolve with Old World diseases.

But there's more to their lack of immunity than just geography—there's
genetics, too. Whether Clovis or pre-Clovis, the first Americans came
here as a relatively small founding population, possibly having passed
through a population bottleneck, the signature of which is apparent in
the small number but widespread distribution of mtDNA and NRY founding
lineages among Native Americans, and in the frequency differences of
those lineages here relative to Asia (Chapter 5). A founder effect is
also apparent in other aspects of their genome, most importantly on
chromosome 6, which houses the large cluster of genes that comprise the
major histocompatibility complex (MHC).

The MHC is one of our main lines of defense against viruses or other
pathogens that have found their way into our cells. Once embedded inside
the cell walls, the pathogen is invisible to the body's other defenses
(lymphocytes, for example). To scan for those, the MHC encodes human
leukocyte antigens (HLAs) to bring to the cell's surface bits of peptide
antigens lurking within, enabling them to be scanned by the immune
system. It's a constant “news scroll” across a molecular screen of cell
health. If the antigens detected are the body's own, they are ignored;
if they are foreign (say, fragments of a growing virus or traces of a
malignancy), the body's T-cells go on the attack, and destroy the cell
and all within it.

The susceptibility of New World populations to epidemic disease, as
epidemiologist Francis Black carefully explained, “was not [because
they] had inappropriate genes or, individually, deficient immune
systems,” but because the people of the New World were unusually
homogeneous in their MHC antigens (by one estimate, Europeans have
thirty-five classes of HLAs, Native Americans fewer than seventeen).
That genetic homogeneity, of course, is an echo of their “bottlenecked”
Pleistocene population prehistory. And because of that smaller diversity
of HLA alleles, there was a far greater chance that a deadly virus
introduced into a population would encounter the same allele in
successive hosts. Having survived one host, it was essentially
pre-adapted to the next, and so was able to readily sustain its deadly
progress through the population. Black reports, for example, that there
is a 32% chance that a virus passing between two Native South Americans
will not encounter a new MHC type, but only a 0.5% chance when it passes
through a more MHC polymorphic African population.²⁹

Population history matters, and though it helps explain why American
Indians lacked immunity to Old World diseases, it fails to account for
the flip side of the question: why they had no evolutionary experience
of their own with epidemic diseases on this continent, nor infectious
pathogens that could be passed to Europeans. Those answers, too, are
found deep in prehistory.

When the first Americans arrived, the North American landscape was
crowded with now-vanished animals. A common feature of all, aside from
their mostly enormous size, was that all were extinct by the end of the
Pleistocene. Paleoindians were assuredly contemporaries with more than a
dozen of the greatest of these beasts, and Paul Martin has argued
vigorously, though not persuasively, for a human hand (or Clovis point)
in their extinctions (Chapter 8). More likely, the climatic and
ecological changes at the end of the Pleistocene—when it became warmer
and more seasonal, and summers grew longer—ultimately did in these
Pleistocene mammals, just as it caused the extinction and range changes
in a wide range of other animals (and plants).

These were the very same changes occurring halfway around the world that
set the stage for the domestication of cattle, goat, pig, sheep, camel,
ass, elephant, horse, duck, goose, water buffalo, yak, and cat. In sharp
contrast, indigenous animal domestication was insignificant in the New
World: just three species of South American camel, the turkey, possibly
the muscovy duck, and the guinea pig (they'd brought their dogs with
them).

There are two reasons for that striking imbalance in the number of
animal domesticates. First, the New World fauna was impoverished.
Pleistocene extinctions had wiped out thirty-five genera of animals:
that was 80% of North America's large mammals. Gone were horses,
elephants (mammoth and mastodon), and camels, animals whose Old World
relatives survived the end of the Pleistocene, thereby allowing Genghis
Kahn to gallop on horseback to global empire, Hannibal's army to ride
elephants over the Alps, and camel caravans of the Persian Empire to
travel the Silk Road. All that remained of North America's large mammals
were bison, moose, elk, deer, musk ox, mountain goat, and pronghorn
antelope. This was a narrow pool from which to seek potential animal
domesticates.

Second, not all animals, especially not those North American survivors,
are easily domesticated. Animals so suited, Jared Diamond argues, must
be social and display dominant and submissive behaviors. They should not
compete with humans for food and, better still, should be a potential
food source. They cannot have an instant flight reflex when startled.
They must breed readily in captivity. And, they must be adaptable to a
wide range of climates and environments.³⁰

Of the surviving New World large mammals, only bison come close to
meeting those strict requirements. But penned bison are unruly animals
(Chapter 9). Besides, what's the incentive to domesticate? Domestication
is partly a response to food shortages. For more than 10,000 years,
bison were an abundant, predictable, and reliable food source. Why take
the trouble to corral them? No one did.

The combination of Pleistocene extinctions and the difficulty or
disincentive for taming surviving mammals produced no significant New
World animal domesticates with which to share and hybridize deadly new
pathogens. Only in South America, where several camel species were
herded, was there a likely animal source for disease strains. These
animals and their herders, however, lived high in the Andes in small and
dispersed groups, and were too few and too isolated, William McNeill
explains, to sustain infections in the wild. Guinea pigs, also
domesticated, served as the primary reservoir for Chagas’ disease, but
Chagas does not have the pandemic power of smallpox or measles.³¹

However, New World peoples did domesticate a cornucopia of plants (more
than in the Old World, in fact), from acorn squash to yams, as well as
avocado, cocoa, chili pepper, cotton, gourd, lima bean, manioc, potato,
peanut, pumpkin, sunflower, tomato, and tobacco (virtually all of which
were carried across the ocean, indelibly altering Old World menus). The
most important, however, was the triumvirate of corn, beans, and squash.
These plants fed the great pre-Columbian towns of North America, and the
Mesoamerican civilizations of the Olmec, Maya, Toltec, and Aztec.
Potatoes, peanuts, and yams did the same for South America's Chavin,
Moche, Wari, Chimu, and Inca.

So successful was food production in the New World that by 1492, there
were cities and towns in the Western Hemisphere to rival in size and
complexity any in the Old. The Aztec island capital of Tenochtitlan (now
Mexico City) had broad avenues lined with palaces, temples, and houses,
and was surrounded by a lake filled daily with canoes, bringing to its
markets goods traded near and far. It had a pre-European contact
population estimated at over 150,000, with perhaps 1 million in the
surrounding valley.³² That's about as many people in one valley as there
were in all the British colonies on the eve of the American Revolution.
A city on the scale of Tenochtitlan testifies that crowds are necessary
but not sufficient for the evolution of epidemic disease, though they
can spread one with lightning speed and deadly efficiency.

But there were no epidemic diseases for the city's inhabitants to
spread. The manner and timing of their ancestors’ journey to the New
World, the long-term genetic consequences of their having passed through
a population bottleneck, the more than 12,500 years of prehistory they
spent in isolation from the rest of the world's populations, and their
lack of animal domesticates, all rendered their descendants defenseless
against the infectious diseases introduced on these shores in the
decades and centuries after Columbus.

It was an unfair fight. The New World had its native infections,
particularly in the tropics of Central America, including Carrion's
disease, tapeworm, hepatitis, encephalitis, yaws, and venereal syphilis
perhaps, and of course, Chagas’ disease—the bane of Darwin's later
life.³³ Although all could be debilitating, none seem to have done well
outside the Western Hemisphere (with the possible exception of syphilis)
or against arriving Europeans. Certainly none of these ills changed the
demographic course of Old World colonial history in America.

For European colonists, the New World was a vast, rich, and so far as
they were concerned untapped land (never mind that it was already
inhabited) in which they thrived. Time and again, Crosby relates,
Europeans in America remarked on the healthiness of their new homes, and
their claims are probably true, despite their Chamber of Commerce ring.
To be sure, the English colonies of Roanoke Island and Jamestown got off
to terrible starts because of their stubborn disinterest in Native
adaptations, an inordinate amount of time spent searching for gold, an
initial refusal to learn their new landscape but instead attempt to
impose their knowledge of English landscapes and land use practices on
Tidewater Virginia, and—not least—their arrival in the midst of record
drought years.³⁴ But even in the Tidewater, the colonists’ lives soon
improved, and indeed, with a bit of learning of their new landscape, and
a few concessions to the ecological differences between Europe and
America, it was soon apparent that many Old World plants and animals
could also thrive in this new setting.

As early as Columbus's second voyage, “the Admiral [Columbus] took on
board mares, sheep, cows and the corresponding males for the propagation
of their species; nor did he forget vegetables, grain, barley, and
similar seeds, not only for provisions but also for sowing; vines and
young plants such as were wanting in that country were carefully
taken.”³⁵ Later colonists imported crops like wheat, oats, and rye, as
well as (perhaps unintentionally) dandelions, ferns, thistles, plantain,
clover, stinging nettles, crab grass, and other weeds. These plants
exploded in areas now cleared of forest, and overgrazed by the
domesticated animals the Europeans brought with them both intentionally
(pigs, cattle, sheep, and horses) and not (rats).³⁶

Walking larders of pigs and cattle often accompanied Spanish entradas.
Horses came too, serving as transportation and beasts of burden and
providing a lopsided military advantage. The animals that came with
Europeans may also have had another, more insidious role.
Fast-multiplying and rapidly spreading pigs may have been equally to
blame for the transmission of diseases such as trichinosis,
tuberculosis, and leptospirosis—first to the native fauna, then to
native peoples.

Within a few centuries, introduced plants and animals, coupled with
imported farming and land use practices, utterly changed the American
landscape. Ecological imperialism, Crosby calls it, and it was almost
entirely one-way. Virtually no New World animals gained a toehold in the
Old World, although as mentioned many plants domesticated by American
Indians were carried to Europe and became successful staples—corn,
potatoes, peppers, and tomatoes—or addictive vices, like tobacco
(tobacco may be a small measure of retribution for European depredations
in the New World, but it was at best a pyrrhic victory: the great demand
for labor to tend the New World's tobacco fields was one of the sparks
that set off the slave trade³⁷).

European colonists and their descendants in America found themselves
free from crowds, possessing plenty of farmland and pasture, and
enjoying higher living standards than they had back home. They could,
and usually did, build far better lives.³⁸ For the descendants of the
first peoples of the New World, it was a very different story.

THE CONSEQUENCES OF CONTACT

Although their numbers were decimated, Native Americans ultimately
survived the waves of disease and depopulation, and the collateral blows
of warfare, famine, enslavement, and exploitation. But they did not
survive unchanged. The consequences of European contact for American
Indians were many and deep, often cascading in unpredictable ways
through native culture. Consider, however, a few critical aspects that
bear directly on our study of the first Americans.

In the aftermath of epidemics, survivors abandoned old towns and
regions: sixteenth- and seventeenth-century documents hint of extensive
refugee movements throughout North America. Refugees banded together
with other survivors, who were often from previously unrelated
communities, possibly speakers of different languages, and occasionally
even traditional enemies. Naturally, as cultural and linguistic
strangers came together, the social and political rules that once
governed their lives—often deeply rooted in kinship networks since
shaken or destroyed—had to change. Established relationships and
alliances as well as ritual and ceremonial systems were abandoned,
oftentimes because disease disproportionately killed the older members
of a community, who were the repositories of those traditions and lore.
The old rules no longer applied.

The Natchez of the lower Mississippi Valley were, in their heyday, one
of the most powerful tribes on the river. As de Soto and his entrada
approached the seat of their chiefdom (Quigaltam), he sent a Native
emissary ahead to announce to the Natchez chief that he (de Soto) was
the “son of the sun and that wherever he went all obeyed him and did him
service.” The chief would have none of that nonsense, since he believed
he was the brother of the Great Sun, and would not travel to pay homage
to anyone. If de Soto was who he said he was, let him prove it by drying
up “the great river” (the Mississippi). Unaccustomed to rebuke, a
furious de Soto vowed to “lessen that arrogant demeanor” and sent
horse-mounted shock troops to slaughter hundreds of innocents in a
nearby village.³⁹ The Natchez managed to survive, but not de Soto, who
was already ill from fever and died shortly thereafter.

The Natchez were still a powerful tribe two centuries later when visited
by du Pratz, but what he reported of their “peculiar” social
organization puzzled generations of anthropologists. According to him,
the Natchez had two major social classes, “stinkards” (the unflattering
name assigned by du Pratz) on the bottom, and “nobility” on the top. The
nobility, in turn, were comprised of three classes: “suns,” “nobles,”
and “honored people,” in that order. Du Pratz described elaborate rules
of intermarriage, descent, and inheritance among the classes that—if
they actually had been followed—would in a matter of generations have
caused the extinction of the so-called stinkards. Yet, they were the
largest class among the Natchez. Later attempts to explain the numerical
instability of the system included the possibility that the stinkards
were disproportionately fecund; that the system was demographically
unstable, and if allowed to play out, the stinkards would ultimately go
extinct (one source estimated within ten generations); or that maybe du
Pratz and other observers simply got it wrong.⁴⁰

As Jeffrey Brain and others argue, however, the reports were correct,
and the system was unstable over the long term, largely because it
represented an agglomeration of two separate social systems. As du Pratz
observed, the stinkards spoke “a language entirely different from the
nobility.”⁴¹ It appears that between the time de Soto first traveled
through the Southeast and when du Pratz arrived a century and a half
later, the Natchez population had collapsed, and their territory had
contracted as a consequence of introduced epidemic disease. The Natchez
that du Pratz encountered were different from those who had stood up to
de Soto, for the latter-day group included a fusion of Tunica-speaking
Chitimacha, Koroa, Tiou, and Grigra refugees.⁴²

The Natchez had become a haven for refugees, and by du Pratz's time
nearly half their villages were made up of Tunican peoples and speakers.
Their own population decimated, their territory abridged, and their
numbers composed of people who did not speak their language, the Natchez
had to adapt. And so they altered their definitions of status and rank,
and made up new rules regarding marriage, kinship, and inheritance.
Deeming the Tunica-speaking refugees lower-class but allowing
intermarriage enabled the Natchez to assimilate these once-strangers,
bolster their own sagging numbers, and ensure the continuance of their
nobility.⁴³

The Natchez are but one example of how a group was re-shaped as a
consequence of the ripple effects of European contact, and an
illustration of how genetic exchange may well have occurred far more
rapidly than linguistic or social assimilation. There is good reason to
suspect that the amalgamation that took place in the lower Mississippi
Valley was not unique, but repeated often and elsewhere in the Americas
as remnants of peoples and villages banded together in order to survive.

The inevitable result of all this was a post-1492 mismatch between
language, genes, and culture of a ‘group’, one that played out across
North America as survivors amalgamated, creating entities very different
from those previously extant (and with it, decreasing any possibility of
seeing Goldilocks-level consistency in artifacts, genes, and
languages).⁴⁴

Indeed, a sharp and deep divide separates American Indian populations
before and after 1492. The peoples whose customs and cultures were
systematically recorded in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries are the biological and cultural descendants of what were once
much larger and differently constituted populations now known only
archaeologically from pre-European contact times.

THE PRESENT MAY NOT BE KEY TO THE PAST

But tracing those lines of descent is complicated, since cultural,
linguistic, physical, and genetic lineages were likewise casualties.
Many languages simply died out along with their speakers in the
centuries after European contact. Lewis and Clark were explicitly
charged to record what they could of the languages they encountered, for
Jefferson well realized and deeply lamented the rapid disappearance of
Native languages. There had been a “profusion” spoken in the Carolinas
when John Lawson traveled through there in 1701. By 1743 these had been
reduced to about twenty languages and dialects. By 1760 there was but a
single tongue remaining, Catawba, the last speakers of which died out in
the 1950s.⁴⁵ For many Native languages, particularly in eastern North
America, no more than a few words were ever recorded.

Even where speakers survived, languages were altered or had disappeared.
To communicate with each other, refugees from different groups had to
adopt a single tongue, and over time lost their own. On the heels of the
1837-38 smallpox epidemic, the Arikara living in villages along the
Missouri River in what is now South Dakota—remnants of a farming people,
who may have once numbered 20,000—were down to just 380 members. Their
numbers were so devastated they were “compelled to come together for
protection” with Mandan, Hidatsa, and other surviving Missouri Valley
peoples, despite the fact that “the Different Villages do not understand
all the words of the others.” Arikara is in the Caddoan language family;
Mandan and Hidatsa were Siouan.⁴⁶ A similar scenario played out in many
areas, with the end result that overall American Indian linguistic
diversity plummeted in the centuries after European contact.

Yet, it is on that record of Native American languages that Greenberg's
Amerind family is constructed. By itself, this says nothing of whether
the specific words and grammatical forms he used to group languages
within Amerind are correct. That is for linguists to decide. But the
loss and borrowing of words does give pause to our accepting his Amerind
family, given the vulnerability of the method used to construct it and
the potential for errors in word lists. There may be much less to
“Amerind” than meets the ears.

Cultural changes were no less profound, as native peoples became
incorporated into or dependent on European economies, which imposed a
sapping demand for labor (now itself a commodity), opened a ravenous
market for items not previously valued, such as fur, gold and silver,
and tobacco, while it shut down demand for others, such as trade in
high-quality stone, feathers, and marine shells. Likewise, changes
occurred as Indians adopted Old World plants, animals, artifacts, and
technologies; as they were forced into unfamiliar environments, new
adaptations, or slavery; and as their rituals, ceremonies, traditions,
and bonds of kinship and society were torn apart and reconstituted in
the chaos of demographic collapse and the loss of lore and knowledge.

So, too, the rules of conflict and warfare were forever changed, and not
just by the shifting alliances and factionalism that accompanied the
jockeying of the European powers for New World dominance or the need to
offset population losses from disease. Europeans brought new weapons of
war—guns and horses—which made it possible to do battle on a much larger
geographic scale (horses greatly increased the combat reach), and also
made it far more deadly (one might be able to dodge an arrow, but not a
lead ball).⁴⁷ To be sure, there was continuity in elements of both
culture and material culture amid all these changes, but their contexts
changed in the centuries after European contact.

If the linguistic and cultural ties before and after 1492 were frayed,
no less so were physical and genetic links. Depopulation from epidemic
diseases created a population bottleneck in the decades and centuries
after contact, quite unlike any experienced by American Indians since
they had left northeastern Asia over 12,000 years earlier. Most of the
people responsible for the prehistoric record, as Robert Dunnell
observed, have no living descendants.⁴⁸ Yet, a population bottleneck may
not be a genetic bottleneck if losses from diseases were random with
respect to the founding haplogroups and haplotypes. However, the
lineages harbored among Native American populations surviving contact
are in some sense a sample—of indeterminate size—of lineages that were
present in the New World in early October 1492. Haplotypes and even
haplogroups that may have existed as recently as 1492 could have been
lost in the decades and centuries that followed. This is why aDNA has
such great potential in the study of the first Americans, and has
already begun to add in previously unknown lineages.

What then of modern American Indians, who today contribute their mtDNA
and Y chromosome DNA to our efforts to understand their ancestry? Can we
trace modern tribes back to Pleistocene ancestors? Or trace Pleistocene
artifacts, skeletal remains, or ancient DNA up to modern tribes? These
are no longer just academic questions.

TO WHOM DOES THE PAST BELONG?

Under the terms of the Native American Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act (NAGPRA), skeletal remains found in the United States
must be returned at the request of a “lineal descendant” or, shy of
that, the tribe with the “closest cultural affiliation.”⁴⁹ NAGPRA is a
complicated law, but at its core calls for repatriation when two
criteria are met: first, the skeletal remains must be demonstrably
Native American. That's defined as “of, or relating to, a tribe, people,
or culture that is indigenous to the United States” (italics mine: and
keep an eye on that is—it becomes important). Second, and if such
remains are deemed Native American, then NAGPRA requires they be
returned on request to the descendants of that person, as identified by
“geographical, kinship, biological, archeological, anthropological,
linguistic, folklore, oral tradition, historical, or other relevant
information or expert opinion.”⁵⁰ Under the terms of NAGPRA, all those
lines of evidence are equally weighted. Demonstrating affiliation only
requires a preponderance of evidence, not scientific certainty.

Where the skeletal remains come from a recently occupied site,
demonstrating affiliation is relatively straightforward, and remains
have been returned without dispute over their identity. All the
skeletons (nearly 2,000) excavated at Pecos Pueblo by Kidder and
described by Hooton (Chapter 5) were returned in 1999 for reburial at
what is now Pecos National Monument. There was no question they belonged
to the descendants of Pecos.

Kennewick, on the other hand, hits NAGPRA right where it is weakest:
establishing biological or cultural affiliation across a vast span of
time. An individual who lived nearly 10,000 years ago could be an
ancestor of many modern individuals and tribes and not just one, or
related to none at all. Directly linking past to present across that
long span is no simple matter. Geneticists have the best chance, if they
can identify in ancient mitochondrial or Y chromosome DNA a lineage that
can narrow down the potential population(s) of descendants. However, it
would have to be a very specific haplotype rather than, say, Haplogroup
A, which is found in 40% of all American Indians (of course, if that
haplogroup were found in an ancient skeleton, it would fulfill NAGPRA's
first requirement of establishing that an individual was Native
American). But even if such a specific haplotype is found in a skeleton
of that age, it will still prove difficult to identify one (and only
one) tribe of descendants—unless that group was largely isolated over
that entire time span. And, of course, this assumes the lineage was not
lost in the depopulation that followed European contact.

What of the other approaches? Archaeology can trace (and date) the
cultural evolution of artifacts, but the trail from past to present is
poorly marked, and one can hardly follow a single people through time by
their artifacts and tools, or by their skeletal or dental remains. In
fact, even where those appear morphologically unlike modern American
Indians—as is said to be the case for certain crania—we are still unable
to state conclusively that no historical relationship exists, or that
physical remains of an individual are not those of an American Indian.
Remember: such a conclusion is based on a tiny (and assuredly
unrepresentative) sample, from individuals that may have been members of
populations that were small and isolated, and that are separated from us
by 400 generations of population and evolutionary change. Linguistics
fares worst of all. The record of Native American languages is woefully
incomplete, and there is a limited time depth over which one can still
hear the echoes of a distant language (the radical historical linguists
notwithstanding).

In a sense, then, it's a good thing NAGPRA doesn't require scientific
certainty, since insisting on that standard for lineal descent at such a
span of time is scientifically impossible. For that matter, as David
Hurst Thomas reminds us, given what we know of modern population
biology, the “idea of tracking fixed, enduring, bounded ethnic groups is
outmoded and quaint, if not a little racist.”⁵¹

Yet, NAGPRA demands affiliation be established all the same. And that
sets scientific evidence on a potential collision course with tribal
traditions, and American Indians against archaeologists and physical
anthropologists, for NAGPRA allows “lineal descendants” to be identified
not just by physical remains but by equally weighted evidence from
folklore, oral traditions, and geographic proximity. To be sure, Native
American traditions of origins (and there are many) have rich and deep
resonance, but they cannot be uncritically accepted as detailed
population histories either.⁵² Under the ambiguous terms of NAGPRA, both
sides of the Kennewick dispute could be right, even if both were wrong.

And they were. The filing of the Bonnichsen et al. lawsuit in October
1996 blocked the Army Corps of Engineers from returning the Kennewick
skeleton to the five Pacific Northwest tribes that were claiming him as
one of their own. In 1998 the Corps instead handed Kennewick over to the
Department of the Interior, which was better prepared to deal with such
matters. The Interior Department, in turn, brought in a team of
scientists, conducted an investigation, and in 2000 they concluded from
their interpretation of the evidence and the law, that Kennewick was
indeed Native American (based on the skeleton's great age) and was
affiliated with the five tribes (based on their oral histories and
geographic proximity).

Although it was recognized there were “both cultural continuities and
cultural discontinuities between the modern day claimant tribes and the
cultural group that existed during the lifetime of the Kennewick Man,”
Bruce Babbitt, then secretary of the interior, declared that the
“preponderance of evidence” tilted in favor of the tribes.⁵³ There were
hushed, conspiratorial whispers that this decision had been made inside
the White House for raw political reasons.

No matter. Bonnichsen and his fellow plaintiffs challenged the ruling,
and thanks to the lawsuit Kennewick was by then under court control. Two
years later, federal Judge John Jelderks ruled that the secretary of the
interior had no grounds for concluding Kennewick was Native American
based merely on its antiquity, which simultaneously rendered moot the
conclusion that Kennewick was affiliated with the five tribes (moot or
not, the judge criticized that conclusion as well, citing the “difficult
challenge” of demonstrating affiliation over so many millennia).⁵⁴
Jelderks's ruling was appealed by the federal government (as well as by
a California man who claimed he was a descendant of Kennewick—this case
has never wanted for comic relief), but in 2004, the Ninth Circuit Court
of Appeals upheld Jelderks's ruling. The plaintiffs in Bonnichsen et al.
could proceed with their study of the Kennewick remains. They have,
though their results have yet to be published.

The Court of Appeals judgment pivoted on a single word. NAGPRA defines
remains as Native American if they are “of, or relating to, a tribe,
people, or culture that is indigenous to the United States.”⁵⁵ The Court
took the present tense of the verb “is” to be “significant”—being a
Native American meant bearing some relationship to “a presently existing
tribe, people or culture.”⁵⁶ But does “is” mean a present-day tribe only
or, as Babbitt argued, could “is” and “was” be used interchangeably? The
Court did not think so. This wasn't the only time during the Clinton
administration that a point of law depended on what the definition of
“is” is.⁵⁷

The Appeals Court ruled Congress's purposes would not be served by
requiring the transfer of human remains to modern tribes without
evidence of a clear-cut relationship. But does that mean this ancient
skeleton is not a Native American? Or, more generally, that there is no
relationship at all between ancient and modern individuals? Hardly: just
as we are hard pressed in the case of ancient skeletal remains to link
past to present, so, too, we cannot prove there is no affiliation at
all.

The battle over Kennewick was waged in federal courts—certainly not the
usual venue for debates over skeletal remains—and at a cost of several
million dollars. It also sparked plenty of fights within the
anthropological community about how, by what methods, or even whether
more ancient skeletal remains can be linked with modern peoples; about
the relationship between American Indians and those of us who study
their past; and about the peopling of the Americas. There's no small
irony here, since a skeleton that's only 8,400 years old (as Kennewick
is) may in the end say very little about the first peoples of the
Americas (Chapter 5).

But it certainly jangled nerves. Alan Schneider and Robson Bonnichsen,
lead attorney and plaintiff, respectively, in the Kennewick lawsuit,
paint the effort to repatriate ancient skeletal remains as nothing less
than an assault on Western Enlightenment thinking by the forces of
“ignorance, intolerance, and superstition.” They angrily railed against
the government officials in Kennewick, accusing them of having agendas
but no expertise, of conducting secret studies and dodging peer review,
and of imposing a “monopolistic control over research opportunities…to
promote the theories they favor and discourage investigation of theories
they oppose.”⁵⁸ One would almost think they lost the Kennewick case. But
they won, and gained the right to conduct radiocarbon dating, metric
analysis of the crania, DNA and isotope analyses, examination of the
site sediments—essentially the same studies performed earlier by the
government-selected scientists, putting the lie to the claim that the
government's “desire to promote personally favored theories of New World
human origins appears to have influenced the selection of the studies
conducted by the government in the Kennewick Man case.”⁵⁹

Yet, their voices were no less strident than those on the other side of
the repatriation aisle. Vine Deloria could hardly disguise his anger—and
glee—that Kennewick had finally exposed to the world that archaeology
had become little more than a discipline in which there is a “triumph of
doctrine over facts.” Like any other group of “priests and politicians,”
he snarled, “scientists lie and fudge their conclusions as much
as…lawyers and car dealers.” And there were scientists who agreed with
him. Kennewick was “never an issue of Indian beliefs versus science,”
Jonathan Marks wrote, “but of Indian beliefs versus pseudoscience.”⁶⁰

So to whom does Kennewick or, for that matter any skeleton of great
antiquity belong? Is it possible he/they has no living descendants at
all among any modern American Indians? Of course. Does that mean he is
not Native American? Of course not.

But that still leaves hanging several questions: In the absence of
demonstrable descendant groups, who should take custody when remains
surface? Should analysis be allowed? What should be the proper ultimate
disposition? How should the wishes of very distantly related or
unrelated modern American Indians be measured against the value of
knowledge about the human experience that might be gained by scientific
study of the remains? At what point, as David Hurst Thomas asks, do
ancient bones stop being tribal and become simply human?⁶¹ Put in the
most general terms: who owns the past?

There are many answers to these questions, depending not just on whom
you ask but how you ask, for there is no clear solution, and there are
several positions that can be reasonable (though perhaps not always in
the Kennewick case) and right. An answer can be sought in statute and
law, but there is enough ambiguity in NAGPRA one can arrive at several
different interpretations, all of which can be legally justified. Yet,
the legal answer NAGPRA provides may not be the ethical answer, let
alone the scientifically defensible one.

Thomas argues, rightly, that judges should be freed from having to carry
the burden of defining the future of America's past. We should try to
solve our problems ourselves, by having conversations across the divide
between American Indians and archaeologists, and seek common ground.⁶²
On this point even Schneider and Bonnichsen, and Deloria and Marks
agree. Grudgingly.⁶³

Common ground has been found before. In early July 1996, several weeks
before Kennewick turned up on the shores of the Columbia River, human
remains were discovered in On Your Knees Cave along the Alaskan coast
(Chapter 5). The excavators, who had a longstanding relationship with
the local tribes, immediately notified them of the discovery, and within
a week, a cooperative agreement for the excavation and analysis of the
remains was in place. The investigation proceeded over the next several
years without incident, rancor, or attorneys.

Outcomes like Kennewick are not inevitable, but they do show how much
the past can matter, and have consequences for those who study it and
those whose ancestors lived it. But that's not all.

REPLAYING THE TAPE OF PREHISTORY

Broad principles, such as Darwin's evolution by natural selection,
govern our collective human past, but they alone cannot explain why
human prehistory unfolded the way it did. That depends on a swarm of
factors, large and small, specific to the circumstances in which our
ancestors found themselves at a given moment in time, the decisions they
made to move forward, and even in no small measure to chance: such as
spending the night of March 26, 1835, in Luxan, Argentina.

There is, as a result, a contingency to prehistory. One supposes it was
“inevitable” that humans, once evolved (which was itself hardly
inevitable), would one day reach the Americas. But who the first peoples
were, why they came, when they arrived, where they came from, how large
the group was, and how quickly they spread, was not inevitable at all.
It only looks that way afterward, after a long and singularly
unpredictable string of choices made under a variety of circumstances
brought them to the western edge of Beringia at the end of the
Pleistocene.

But replay the tape, Stephen Jay Gould argued, change a few of the
quirky details, let their effects cascade over time, and the past would
have unfolded very differently, producing historical trajectories that
would be “equally explicable, though massively different in form and
effect.”⁶⁴

What if the first Americans hadn't left the Old World when they did. Or
if they had brought diseases or an immunity conferred by Old World
ancestry with them. Or if they had not come via Beringia, or gone
through a population bottleneck. Or if 80% of North America's megafauna
had not gone extinct at the end of the Pleistocene. Or if the remainder
had been more readily domesticated, or if there had been strong
incentive to do so. Or even if all those savants had been right, and the
American Indians had been the Lost Tribes of Israel. And what if Native
Americans had not been devastated by disease, or had their own to give
Europeans in return.

We cannot say. But consider this: in the spring of 1519, a Spanish force
under the command of Hernan Cortes landed on the Mexican mainland.
Cortes had been sent by Diego Velazquez, the governor of Cuba, to trade
and explore, but not to conquer. The governor wanted that plum for
himself. Cortes pretended to care. Trained in law and devious of mind,
the moment he touched the mainland he promptly side-stepped the
governor's orders by incorporating a town (Veracruz): according to the
canons of medieval Castile, that entitled him to shed any obligations to
the governor and appoint himself an agent of the Spanish king. The way
Cortes figured it, King Charles (recently elected Holy Roman Emperor)
would surely approve Cortes extending his ecumenical and imperial reach,
especially if it made them both rich.⁶⁵

Cortes learned from native Totonacs, who greeted him, of the great Aztec
Empire to the west and, more important, that the Empire's rule over the
region was riddled with pockets of violent resistance.⁶⁶ He headed
inland over the mountains, alternately fighting and gaining key allies
among the Aztecs’ sworn enemies (like the Tlaxcalan). The Aztec ruler,
Montezuma II, heard Cortes was coming. Runners streaming in from
outlying areas reported a procession of strange, “chalky faced” men atop
bizarre, deer-like beasts (thanks to Pleistocene extinctions, of course,
only the Aztec's most remote ancestors had ever seen a horse).⁶⁷ Worse,
he heard they had machines that could blow up mountains (cannons), kill
from great distance (guns), and wore impenetrable clothing (chain-mail
armor).

There had been prophecies the feathered-serpent god Quetzalcoatl would
return, which the strangers’ impending arrival seemed to match.
Uncertain whether the Spaniards were gods or enemies, Montezuma hedged
his bets: he'd treat them as gods, but try to keep them at a distance in
case they were enemies. Couriers bearing exquisite gifts of gold,
silver, and precious stones were sent to Cortes, hoping that would be
enough, and make him turn away. Montezuma must have soon regretted the
gesture, for it had precisely the opposite effect.⁶⁸

On November 8, 1519, as much of the city watched in astonishment, Cortes
led his army down one of the causeways across Lake Texcoco into
Tenochtitlan. Montezuma and his courtiers were there to greet him.
Cortes, knowing little and caring less what he actually heard, took
Montezuma's welcoming remarks as an abdication speech.⁶⁹ On behalf of
King Charles, he accepted the transfer of authority over the Aztec
Empire, then quietly put Montezuma under house arrest. For the next six
months, Cortes commanded the increasingly restless city, steadily
looting its treasuries of gold and silver.

While Cortes was pilfering Aztec riches, back in Cuba it finally dawned
on Governor Velazquez that Cortes was long past due, and was likely
playing him for a fool—or, worse, getting rich at his expense. Velazquez
dispatched a force under Panfilo de Narvaez to bring Cortes to heel.
Hearing from his native allies that another Spanish ship had landed on
the coast and guessing what was up, Cortes hustled away with most of his
army to confront Narvaez, leaving behind a small force under the command
of an unsavory lieutenant, Pedro de Alvarado, with orders to keep a
tight lid on Tenochtitlan.

By now, however, the Aztecs were acutely aware Montezuma was being held
against his will, and they were becoming openly defiant. Alvarado,
outnumbered and apprehensive, agreed to allow some 600 Aztec priests,
noblemen, and worshippers to use one of the great courtyards in the
palace complex for the feast of Huitzilopochtli. But while they were
inside, Alvarado's men sealed the doorways, trapped the unarmed
worshippers, and butchered them with broadswords. If Alvarado thought
the slaughter of these Aztec leaders would quell the unrest, he was as
foolish as he was cruel.

Word of the bloody massacre flashed through the streets of Tenochtitlan,
and the city exploded in open battle. The Spaniards were soon trapped
inside the palace when Cortes, having defeated Narvaez and receiving
desperate bulletins from his men in Tenochtitlan, quick-marched back and
reentered the city on June 24, 1520, this time with over 1,000 Spaniards
(now including many of Narvaez's men), and many thousand Tlaxcalan
warriors. Yet, Cortes was still vastly outnumbered, and his attempt to
use Montezuma to manipulate his people failed when the native ruler was
killed—though by which side, neither agreed, save to blame the other.

Seven days later the Spaniards and their allies were pinned down and on
the verge of annihilation. Cortes called for retreat under the cover of
darkness. But as his troops tried to sneak off, Native spotters sounded
the alarm, and fierce fighting broke out along the dangerously narrow
causeways across the lake. The Aztecs speared Spaniards into the water
where, weighed down by their chain-mail armor and looted gold and
silver, they sank and died. Cortes managed to survive, though he'd been
badly whipped, losing all but a third of his army that night.

[images]

FIGURE 64.
An image from the Florentine Codex, which was compiled in the latter
half of the sixteenth century, which shows Aztec victims of smallpox.
(Image courtesy of the American Museum of Natural History, Negative
number 286821.)

The Spaniards fought their way out of the valley, but the Aztecs didn't
pursue their advantage. Instead, they allowed Cortes to escape and take
refuge among the Tlaxcalan on the far side of the mountains. The
following spring, reinforced by more Spaniards and nearly 150,000 native
warriors, Cortes returned to lay siege to Tenochtitlan. After more
bloody fighting, he conquered the city in August 1521. It was an
astonishing victory against overwhelming numbers, especially since it
came so close on the heels of devastating defeat.

Some credit victory to Cortes's superior weaponry and horses, and the
terror these created in foes who'd seen neither. Others speak of his
missionary zeal, courage, and military genius in exploiting the strife
between the Aztecs and their native enemies, and using boats on Lake
Texcoco to choke off the canoe traffic that brought supplies to the
island capital. Zeal and courage Cortes had plenty of, but so did the
Aztecs. They hadn't his weaponry, but could a small number of firearms,
cannons, and horses make a difference? The previous June it hadn't. Once
the tactical surprise wore off, as it did quickly, the Aztecs began
mounting razor-sharp obsidian blades on long pikes to skewer
horse-mounted Spaniards.

In the end, what brought Cortes victory at Tenochtitlan was neither arms
nor tactics, but smallpox. One of Narvaez's men had been infected, and
in June 1520, the disease jumped to the Native population. While Cortes
and his mauled force were off licking their wounds a horrific, if
unintended, and utterly one-sided bout of germ warfare began. Smallpox
raged through Tenochtitlan, killing young and old alike. By the time
Cortes returned in 1521, the Aztecs were devastated by disease, hunger,
and death, and could offer little significant resistance. The siege was
the final blow. Spanish chroniclers tell of stepping over piles of
smallpox victims (Figure 64), whose rotting bodies choked the streets.

Cortes was badly whipped in June 1520. And though he returned a year
later with his horses, firearms, cannons, Tlaxcalan allies, a makeshift
navy and a grand strategy, it's doubtful he could have retaken
Montezuma's Aztec kingdom with its one million souls. The numbers were
against him. But with smallpox having cut a wide swath through the
native population, he could—and did—conquer the Empire.

Tenochtitlan's fall was unusual, but only because the devastation by
introduced epidemic disease was rarely so militarily decisive.⁷⁰ Still,
the triumphs of the conquistadores and all who followed were, as Crosby
put it, ultimately the triumphs of smallpox.⁷¹ We may not be able to say
what would have happened if we could replay the tape of prehistory, but
we can say that were it not for introduced diseases and their dreadful
effect on Native American populations, American history after 1492 would
have been very, very different.

And the triumphs of smallpox and other introduced epidemics had been
foreordained over 12,500 years earlier when a group of hunter-gatherers
stepped onto the western edge of the vast, grassy plain of Beringia,
then headed toward the rising sun.

FURTHER READING

There is a vast literature on the early archaeology of America.
Relatively recent overviews, which provide details on many of the sites
in question, but are pitched for a broader audience, include James
Adovasio and Jake Page's The First Americans: In Pursuit of
Archaeology's Greatest Mystery (2002, Random House, New York), Tom
Dillehay's The Settlement of the Americas: A New Prehistory (2000, Basic
Books, New York), James Dixon's Bones, Boats and Bison: Archeology and
the First Colonization of Western North America (1999, University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque), Daniele Lavallee's The First South
Americans: The Peopling of a Continent from the Earliest Evidence to
High Culture (2000, University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City), and the
papers in The First Americans: The Pleistocene Colonization of the New
World (2002, University of California Press, Berkeley), edited by Nina
Jablonski.

Recent scholarly works on the topic include the edited volumes by
Michael Barton, Geoffrey Clark, David Yesner, and Georges Pearson, The
Settlement of the American Continents: A Multidisciplinary Approach to
Human Biogeography (2004, University of Arizona Press, Tucson); Robson
Bonnichsen, Bradley T. Lepper, Dennis Stanford, and Michael Waters,
Paleoamerican Origins: Beyond Clovis (2006, Center for the Study of the
First Americans, College Station, Texas), David Madsen's Entering
America: Northeast Asia and Beringia before the Last Glacial Maximum
(2004, University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City), and Douglas Ubelaker,
Handbook of North American Indians, Volume 3, Environment, Origins, and
Population (2006, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.).

For a recent and highly readable discussion of the causes and
consequences of ice ages and climate change, see Wallace Broecker and
Robert Kunzig's Fixing Climate: What Past Climate Changes Reveal About
the Current Threat—and How to Counter It (2008, Hill and Wang, New
York). Other fine discussions include Doug Macdougall's Frozen Earth:
The Once and Future Story of Ice Ages (2004, University of California
Press, Berkeley), Richard Alley's The Two-Mile Time Machine: Ice Cores,
Abrupt Climate Change, and Our Future (2000, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, New Jersey) and (though now a bit dated) John and Katherine
Imbrie's Ice Ages: Solving the Mystery (1976, Enslow, Berkeley Heights,
New Jersey).

Dale Guthrie's Frozen Fauna of the Mammoth Steppe: The Story of Blue
Babe (1990, University of Chicago Press, Chicago) and the recently
published Human Ecology of Beringia by John Hoffecker and Scott Elias
(2007, Columbia University Press, New York) summarize Beringia's
geological, climatic, and environmental history. The most recent
syntheses of the Pleistocene glaciation, climate, and environment of
North America appear in the volume The Quaternary Period in the United
States (2004, Elsevier Science, New York), edited by Alan Gillespie,
Stephen Porter, and Brian Atwater; the articles, however, are written
for a more technical audience.

On Native American languages, the best single source is the Smithsonian
Institution's Handbook of North American Indians, particularly Volume
17, Languages, edited by Ives Goddard (1996, Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.). Joseph Greenberg presented the results of his
analysis in Language in the Americas (1987, Stanford University Press,
Stanford). Merrit Ruhlen's The Origin of Language: Tracing the Evolution
of the Mother Tongue (1994, John Wiley and Sons, New York) is a staunch
defense of Greenberg's (and his) method of mass comparison, and a
readable discussion of what that method yields for a linguistic history
of America and the world. For a thorough history of historical
linguistics and a synopsis of Native American languages, including a
relentless critique of Greenberg's method and results, see Lyle
Campbell's American Indian Languages: The Historical Linguistics of
Native America (1997, Oxford University Press, Oxford).

Turner has summarized his dental evidence in multiple places, most
recently in “Teeth, Needles, Dogs, and Siberia: Bioarchaeological
Evidence for the Colonization of the New World,” which appeared in
Jablonski's The First Americans: The Pleistocene Colonization of the New
World (cited above). See that same volume for a thoughtful and
accessible appraisal of the cranial evidence by Gentry Steele and Joseph
Powell, “Facing the Past: A View of the North American Human Fossil
Record,” as well as Powell's valuable book, The First Americans: Race,
Evolution, and the Origin of Native Americans (2005, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge). For an entertaining and appropriately
skeptical look at how the cranial evidence is sometimes presented, there
is Jack Hitt's “Mighty White of You: Racial Preferences Color America's
Oldest Skulls and Bones” (2005, Harper's Magazine, July, pp. 39-55).

The genetic evidence emerges so quickly that a book devoted to the topic
would be obsolete before it ever appeared in print; most discussion on
this topic is restricted to technical journals, but a few good summaries
for a broader audience are available, including Colin Renfrew's edited
volume, America Past, America Present: Genes and Languages in the
Americas and Beyond (2000, MacDonald Institute for Archaeological
Research, Cambridge); Andrew Merriwether's “A Mitochondrial Perspective
on the Peopling of the New World,” in the Jablonski volume (cited
above), and Theodore Schurr's “The Peopling of the New World:
Perspectives from Molecular Anthropology” (2004, Annual Review of
Anthropology 33:551-83).

David Hurst Thomas’ Skull Wars: Kennewick Man, Archeology, and the
Battle for Native American Identity (2000, Basic Books, New York) is a
superb and eminently readable treatment of Kennewick, NAGPRA, and the
relationship between archaeology and American Indians. Roger Downey
takes a journalist's look at the Kennewick controversy in Riddle of the
Bones: Politics, Science, Race, and the Story of Kennewick Man (2000,
Copernicus Books). James Chatters has his say in Ancient Encounters:
Kennewick Man and the First Americans (2001, Simon & Schuster, New
York). The National Park Service maintains an informative Kennewick
website with many of the primary documents at
www.cr.nps.gov/archeology/kennewick/index.htm; another valuable source
is the Tri-Cities Herald's Kennewick Man Virtual Interpretive Center at
www.kennewick-man.com/index.html.

Questions of landscape learning have only recently come to the fore in
discussions of colonization. In the past, we too often made simple
assumptions such as “it was just like the Thule,” and paid it no more
mind. The single best scholarly source is Marcy Rockman and James
Steele's edited volume, Colonization of Unfamiliar Landscapes: The
Archaeology of Adaptation (2003, Routledge, London). It's also a topic
of interest for several papers in the volume edited by Barton and others
(cited above). “Behavioral ecology and archaeology” by Douglas Bird and
James O'Connell (2006) and “Evolutionary foraging models in
zooarchaeological analysis: recent applications and future challenges”
by Karen Lupo (2007) provide excellent, if technical, discussions of
foraging theory.

Useful volumes on Clovis include those edited by Robson Bonnichsen and
Karen Turnmire and published by the Center for the Study of the First
Americans, including Clovis: Origins and Adaptations (1991) and Ice-Age
People of North America: Environments, Origins, and Adaptations (1999).
I find much to disagree with in Gary Haynes's The Early Settlement of
North America: The Clovis Era (2002, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge) but recognize it as a useful and detailed summary of the
Clovis archaeological record. Likewise, however much I disagree with my
friend Paul Martin, there is much to recommend in his Twilight of the
Mammoths (2005, University of California Press, Berkeley)—just not the
parts about overkill! The best single source on Pleistocene extinctions
is a volume edited by Martin and Richard Klein, Quaternary Extinctions:
A Prehistoric Revolution (1984, University of Arizona Press, Tucson).
Although a bit outdated, the book nonetheless presents a comprehensive
look at the issues involved. So, too, does Ross MacPhee and Hans-Dieter
Sues's edited volume, Extinctions in Near Time: Causes, Contexts, and
Consequences (1999, Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New York).

A deeply knowledgeable treatment of Paleoindian hunting is George
Frison's Survival by Hunting: Prehistoric Human Predators and Animal
Prey (2004, University of California Press, Berkeley). I relied heavily
on it here. Bonnichsen and Turnmire's edited volume Ice-Age People of
North America: Environments, Origins, and Adaptations (cited above)
provides a valuable, region-by-region look at Paleoindian adaptations,
not just Clovis. A handy, one-stop source for many of the Paleoindian
papers that appeared in American Antiquity is Bruce Huckell and David
Kilby's Readings in Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene Paleoindians:
Selections from American Antiquity (2006, Society for American
Archeology, Washington, D.C.).

More region-specific treatments include Haida Gwaii: Human History and
Environment from the Time of Loon to the Time of Iron People (2005,
University of British Columbia Press, Vancouver), edited by Daryl Fedje
and Rolf Matthewes, a thorough reporting of their cuttingedge
investigation into the human history of the Queen Charlotte Islands, and
the islands’ place in the colonization of the coast and continent. Still
focusing on Beringia and Alaska are the edited volumes by Michael Bever
and Mike Kunz, Between Two Worlds: Late Pleistocene Cultural and
Technological Diversity in Beringia (2001, Arctic Anthropology 38), and
Frederick West's edited volume American Beginnings: The Prehistory and
Palaeoecology of Beringia (1996, University of Chicago Press, Chicago).
Coming closer to mid-latitude North America is the volume edited by R.
Carlson and L. Bona, Early Human Occupation in British Columbia (1996,
University of British Columbia Press, Vancouver). David Anderson and
Kenneth Sassaman's co-edited volume The Paleoindian and Early Archaic
Southeast (1996, University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa) covers much of
the Southeast. There's been a great deal written about Folsom and later
Paleoindian adaptations and occupations of the plains, but few grand
syntheses or even edited compilations (though lots of articles and books
on specific sites and Folsom technology). We could use one. The early
archaeology of the Great Basin is covered in Donald Grayson's The
Desert's Past: A Natural History of the Great Basin (1993, Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.). The latest word on early
Californians can be found in California Prehistory: Colonization,
Culture, and Complexity, edited by T. Jones and K. Klar (2007, Altamira
Press, Lanham, Maryland).

For discussions of the impact of disease among Native Americans, see
Alfred Crosby's classic Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion
of Europe, 900-1900 (1986, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge), and
Elizabeth Fenn's Pox Americana: The Great Smallpox Epidemic of 1775-82
(2001, Hill & Wang, New York). For a more technical summary, see the
multivolume set edited by David Hurst Thomas, Columbian Consequences
(Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.). A readable treatment
of the pre- and post-European contact period is Charles Mann's 1491: New
Revelations of the Americas before Columbus (2005, Knopf, New York).
William Ruddiman's Plows, Plagues, and Petroleum: How Humans Took
Control of Climate (2005, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New
Jersey) is a provocative look at the impact of humans on global
climates, including the possible connection between disease
de-population and atmospheric CO₂ levels.

Finally, to see how the peopling of the Americas fits in the larger
context of world prehistory, excellent single sources are Steven
Mithen's After the Ice: A Global Human History 20,000-5000 BC (2003,
Weidenfield & Nicholson, London), and the more technical but nonetheless
valuable book, The Human Past: World Prehistory and the Development of
Human Society, edited by Chris Scarre (2005, Thames & Hudson, London).

NOTES

PREFACE

1. Like this. Some notes will be little more than names, dates, and page
numbers. Others will elaborate on matters in the text. All can be
ignored without penalty if one is so inclined.

2. Deloria, quoted in D. Thomas 2006:222. Zimmerman (1997:53) considers
our suppositions about the Bering Land Bridge to be dogma. For
thoughtful discussions of the differences between archaeology and oral
history, and relations between archaeology and Native Americans, see
Anyon et al. 1997, Ferguson, Watkins, and Pullar 1997, McGhee 2004, and
D. Thomas 2000 and 2006. Archambault (2006) summarizes the main themes
among the origin traditions of Native American groups, and some of the
variations on those themes. Echo-Hawk (1997) identifies some of the
elements in oral tradition that he believes might represent distant
memories of a Pleistocene world.

3. Elliot 2006:9.

4. The term “New World” appears to have been coined by Peter Martyr, an
Italian scholar attached to the court of Ferdinand and Isabella,
probably in late 1494, which he subsequently used in the title to his
collected letters and essays about Columbus's voyages, De orbe novo: The
Eight Decades of Peter Martyr D'Anghe, first published in 1516.

CHAPTER 1: OVERTURE

1. Schlederman 2000; Wallace 2000.

2. Unless otherwise noted, all ages given in this book are in
radiocarbon years.

3. By using high-precision Uranium/Thorium (²³⁴U/²³⁰Th) and
corresponding ¹⁴C ages from cores drilled into coral formations, the
calibration curve has now been extended to approximately 26,000 years
ago.

4. Broecker 2003; see also Hajdas, Lowe, and Newnham 2006; Hughen et al.
2000; Muscheler et al. 2008; Robinson et al. 2005.

5. Broecker 2006:1146.

6. For the record, in making these calculations I used round numbers and
made the arbitrary assumption that the radiocarbon ages had a standard
deviation of ± 100 years. I then took the resulting 1 sigma calibrated
age range, found the median, and rounded to the nearest 5 years.

7. Kittler, Kayser, and Stoneking 2003.

8. Noonan et al. 2006.

9. Goebel 2004; see also Hoffecker and Elias 2003.

CHAPTER 2: THE LANDSCAPE OF COLONIZATION

1. As it happens, Glen Roy was the scene of the last inter-clan battle
fought in Scotland; the MacDonells defeated the Mackintoshes here in
1688.

2. Darwin 1839a.

3. Darwin to Lyell, August 9, 1838, and Lyell to Darwin, September 6 and
8, 1838, in Burkhardt and Smith 1986; Darwin 1839b.

4. Darwin to Lyell, September 6, 1861, in Burkhardt et al. 1994.

5. Ruddiman 2005.

6. Macdougall 2004.

7. Buckland 1823.

8. Agassiz to Buckland, ca. 1838, in Agassiz 1887:289.

9. Krajick 2002.

10. Matters are slightly more complicated, since foraminifera
disproportionately fix ¹⁸O in colder water. Fortunately, ¹⁸O shifts in
both cases in the same direction, thereby amplifying the effect. Were it
to do otherwise, the matter would be even more complicated. Regardless,
the influence of water temperature must be accounted for in the
analysis, and can be to a degree. For a discussion, see Macdougall
2004:173.

11. Alley 2000a.

12. The International Commission on Stratigraphy defines the Pleistocene
thusly: It begins “just above top of magnetic polarity chronozone C2n
(Olduvai) and the extinction level of calcareous nannofossil Discoaster
brouweri (base Zone CN13). Above are lowest occurrence of calcareous
nannofossil medium Gephyrocapsa spp. and extinction level of planktonic
foraminifer Globigerinoides extremus,” and its end is defined by
“exactly 10,000 Carbon-14 years BP. Near the end of the Younger Dryas
cold spell” (www.stratigraphy.org/). The feisty response from the
Quaternary community is in Clague 2006.

13. The number ofglacial episodes tallied in the marine isotope record
met the Milankovitch model's predictions, but the timing proved not
quite right. In a now-classic 1976 paper, James Hays, John Imbrie, and
Nicholas Shackleton used spectral analysis (which can tease apart
multiple, superimposed cyclical curves) to plot the amplitudes and
frequencies of changes in global ice volume occurring at cycles of
100,000 years, 42,000 years, and 23,000 years. These matched the
predicted Milankovitch orbital frequencies to within 5% (Hays, Imbrie,
and Shackleton 1976). This was too close for coincidence. Yet, Hays and
colleagues were puzzled: their spectral analysis only explained about
60% of the variance in the marine oxygen-isotope curve. More
troublesome, why were peaks in global ice volume coincident with the
relatively weak forcing of the 100,000-year eccentricity cycle, and not
the more powerful solar forcing of the obliquity and precession cycles?
They were uncertain. Over the next several decades, glacial history was
teased out in ever-finer detail in ocean sediment and ice cores, which
revealed occasions when deglaciation occurred nearly 10,000 years before
an insolation rise (we are justifiably baffled when effects precede
their cause). Equally perplexing, peaks in global ice volume proved to
be on a 100,000-year eccentricity cycle for only the second half of the
Pleistocene. Before that, ice sheets kept pace with the much stronger
41,000-year obliquity cycle. Climate change also proved to have occurred
at much faster rates—on the order of decades, centuries, and millennia
(the sorts of changes that can have a more direct impact on humans)—than
could be explained by changing insolation. But perhaps most puzzling,
glaciation occurred in the Northern and Southern hemispheres
simultaneously—at least on a long time scale—and yet orbital forcing
ought to have opposite effects in the two hemispheres. The earth's
climate was proving to be far more complicated than could be explained
by a single variable such as insolation. As it turns out, at shorter
time scales the northern and southern hemispheres do see-saw in their
climates, which reveals that changing the amount of sunshine is vital,
although only part of the equation: also important are other factors,
including the volume of ice on Earth's surface, its reflectance, Earth's
adjustments to ice sheet loading, climatic effects of the ice sheets
themselves—both by their sheer mass, as well as what happens as they
grow or come apart—and perhaps most important of all, circulation
changes in the world's oceans that drive carbon dioxide, which is
proving far more influential in climate change over the Pleistocene than
previously imagined (Alley 2007; Broecker and Kunzig 2008; see also P.
Clark, Alley, and Pollard 1999; Karner and Muller 2000; Marshall et al.
2004; Rind 2002; Schrag 2000).

14. Alley 2000a:n8-20, 2000b.

15. In LGM times the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets were larger,
though not by much: there are limits to how far ice from these
island-continents could extend over the ocean. Although there were many
glaciers that expanded in LGM times, the other major continental glacier
on the planet was the Fennoscandian ice sheet, which covered northern
Europe and extended into northern Asia.

16. Dyke 2004.

17. Clague, Mathewes, and Ager 2004.

18. Macdougall 2004:165.

19. There is an ongoing and sometimes testy dispute over relative sea
level history, driven by disagreements over how to interpret coral
terraces in the Bahamas and New Guinea (which ‘record’ water depth at
times past), and incorporate those data into complex models that account
for—among other variables—the surface mass of water and ice, and
alteration of the rotational state of Earth as it adjusted its shape to
those shifting masses (e.g. Lambeck et al. 2002; Peltier 2002).

20. Brigham-Grette et al. 2004; Keigwin et al. 2006.

21. Guthrie 1990.

22. The battle lines over the Productivity Paradox were drawn in the
chapters in Hopkins et al. 1982.

23. P. Anderson, Edwards, and Brubaker 2004.

24. Dyke 2004:393.

25. Fedje et al. 2004; Fedje and Josenhans 2000.

26. D. Mann and Hamilton 1995; D. Mann and Peteet 1994; also Clague,
Mathewes, and Ager 2004; Mandryk et al. 2001.

27. The details of Pleistocene climates are revealed in multiple
sources: ice and deep sea cores, fossil records of plants and animals,
and various geological indicators (sediments, past lake levels, and the
like). These inform at different spatial and temporal scales. Take the
Greenland ice cores: past temperature can be read from them directly
from the ice (surprisingly, it still hasn't warmed from its LGM
cooling), or via captured 8¹⁸O (which varies by 1%o every time
temperature changes 1.5°C). Yet, the temperature is that of ice and air
over Greenland, not of temperate and tropical regions. Those ice cores
also contain salt spray and dust, and though these record climatic
phenomena beyond Greenland, these, too, may have little bearing on
other, more distant regions. Those cores also track changes in
greenhouse gases, and though these reveal global patterns in warming and
cooling, precisely how these played out in specific areas of North
America depends on local insolation patterns, atmospheric circulation as
modified by elevation, snow cover, to mountains, oceans, ice sheets,
among other factors. The bottom line: climate reconstruction requires
suites of evidence—and careful attention to the time scales at which
these are relevant.

28. P. Clark, Alley, and Pollard 1999; Marshall et al. 2004.

29. Denton et al. 2005.

30. Grimm and Jacobson 2004.

31. Benson 2004.

32. The hydrological mechanics of the Lake Missoula flooding are
explained in Waitt (1985:1280-1283).

33. Baker and Nummedal 1978; Booth et al. 2004.

34. J. Brown 1971; Grayson 2006a; Lawlor 1998.

35. S. Webb et al. 2004.

36. Grayson 2006b; also Kurten and Anderson 1980.

37. Poinar et al. 2006.

38. Why the lag? Joerg Schaefer et al. (2006) hypothesize that initial
warming triggered the return of thermohaline circulation, but so
destabilized the Laurentide ice sheet that its outer edges began
breaking off, and armadas of icebergs floated into the North Atlantic:
deep ocean sediment cores from that time are clogged with ice-rafted
rocky debris. That influx of freshwater from melting icebergs may have
slowed or stopped the thermohaline conveyor, stymieing Northern
Hemisphere warming: further testimony that insolation alone cannot force
climate's hand, but is amplified or diminished by other factors.

39. How fast does a surge, surge? In 1986 the Hubbard Glacier in Alaska
shot forward at the nearly visible rate of approximately 10 meters per
day across the mouth of Russell Fiord; by 2002 it had dammed the fiord
and turned it into a lake, trapping seals and porpoises in it.

40. Dyke 2004.

41. Caves dug into the thick loess bluffs of Vicksburg, Mississippi,
sheltered the town's inhabitants during Ulysses S. Grant's siege in the
Civil War summer of 1863. When Vicksburg fell, a much-relieved Abraham
Lincoln was moved to write that “the Father of Waters again goes unvexed
to the sea.” He had no idea how the “Father of Waters” had in
Pleistocene times built those bluffs, making Vicksburg an important
strategic spot on the river, and enabling the city to withstand Grant's
lengthy siege.

42. During the first of these pulses approximately 16,000 years ago,
global seas rose 10-15 meters in just 100-500 years (2-15 meters per
century). The second major melt-water pulse—named, incongruously enough
for those of us counting since the LGM, Meltwater Pulse 1A—at about
12,500 BP contributed a 20-meter rise in global sea level over a period
of 500 years (4 meters per century). See Bassett et al. 2005; P. Clark
et al. 2002, 2004; Lambeck, Yokoyama, and Purcell 2002.

43. Isostatic rebound continues to this day. It takes the land a very
long time to recover from the former presence of ice.

44. Fedje et al. 2004. As one might imagine, the combination of
isostatic rebound, tectonic uplift, and sea level rise make
reconstructing the sea level and shoreline history in a particular area
quite complicated (see Fedje et al. 2004:102).

45. Broecker and Kunzig 2008; Broecker 1995; Broecker and Denton 1990.

46. In hydrographic parlance, that's a flow of 20 Sverdrups, where 1
Sverdrup equals a flow of 1,000,000 m³/second. For comparison, the
Amazon River moves at 0.2 Sverdrups; the Mississippi River in flood is
downright sluggish at a mere 0.016 Sverdrups.

47. Salinity is so critical, in fact, that deep water does not form in
the north Pacific because the water there is too fresh. Instead, Pacific
cold water moves north at depth, rises and warms, then moves south on
the surface.

48. See Alley 2000a and Broecker and Kunzig 2008. Thermohaline
circulation is sensitive to freshwater perturbations even as slight as
just 0.1 Sverdrup; the hypothesized Younger Dryas flood (at .305
Sverdrups) came in at three times that amount—about 1.5 times the flow
of the Amazon (P. Clark et al. 2004:1141; Ellison, Chapman, and Hall
2006).

49. Alley 2007. There was an Older Dryas, but it was a very brief and
far less consequential episode of cooling.

50. Alley 2000a:105-6; Kohfeld et al. 2005. Other facts in play include
the degree iron or other nutrients that can increase phytoplankton mass
and thus the amount of carbon fixation, changes in water temperature
(CO₂ is dissolved more readily in cooler water), and sea-ice cover
(which can stymie ventilation of CO₂ from the abyss).

51. Raynaud et al. 2003; Siegenthaler et al. 2005. Climatologist William
Ruddiman argues that anthropogenic CO₂ first appeared as early as 8,000
years ago when Neolithic farmers began clearing and burning forests and
releasing CO₂ (Ruddiman 2005:88-94). Regardless, the precise links
between atmosphere, ocean, CO₂, and temperature are yet to be fully
understood. Scientists across the globe are working on it, and it is
more than a strictly academic exercise. Gaining insight into what drives
climate over geological time will enable us to gauge which ongoing
changes are natural, and which are the result of human activity. Doing
so will perhaps allow us to predict how the earth's climate will respond
to future forcing, both natural and human. That information is coming,
and none too soon.

52. Broecker 2003:1519. More specifically, during the first major
post-glacial meltwater release, when freshwater was returned to the
ocean, there was a rise in atmospheric ¹⁴C of as much as approximately
100 parts per million (%), followed by a decline of nearly 150% (after
the second major meltwater discharge), and then just plain radiocarbon
confusion for a period of about 200 years before 11,100 BP when the
clock stalled again (from a decline in atmospheric ¹⁴C), followed by
about 200 years when the radiocarbon clock ran three times too fast,
owing to a sharp rise (approximately 70%) in atmospheric ¹⁴C likely the
result of the MOC shutdown and decreased uptake of ¹⁴C by the deep
ocean. Over the remainder of the Younger Dryas there was a gradual
decline in the ratio of ¹⁴C/¹²C, followed at the end of that period with
an abrupt drop in that ratio (Alley 2007; Broecker 2003:1519; P. Clark
et al. 2004:1142; Hughen et al. 2000:1951-53; Muscheler et al. 2008).

53. Alley et al. 2005; P. Clark, Mathewes, and Ager 2002, 2004. There is
debate over the timing and magnitude of these pulses of sea level rise,
as well as which melting ice sheets are to blame, whether in the
southern or northern hemisphere—see Peltier 2005.

54. The BØlling-AllerØd is also marked in the Greenland ice cores by
higher [images] levels (Severinghaus and Brook 1999:930; Jouzel
1999:911). However, the timing is so tight it is not clear if the
BØlling-AllerØd followed the 12,500 BP meltwater pulse or preceded it
(Alley et al. 2005).

55. MacDonald et al. 2006; Raynaud et al. 2003. During colder periods,
tropical wetlands are the primary source of methane (Alley 2007).
Methane (CH₄) is a more-efficient greenhouse gas than CO₂, but
thankfully for our modern circumstances, it only has about a ten-year
residence time in the atmosphere. Otherwise, our world would be heating
up a great deal faster than it already is.

56. Shuman, Bartlein, and Webb 2005; T. Webb, Shuman, and Williams 2004;
Williams, Shuman, and Webb 2001.

57. Grimm and Jacobson 2004; T. Webb, Shuman, and Williams 2004.

58. FAUNMAP 1996; D. Mann, personal communication.

59. Curry 2007.

60. Teller 2004.

61. On the bond between thermohaline circulation shutdown and the
Younger Dryas, see Alley 2007; Broecker and Kunzig 2008; McManus et al.
2004. Fisher et al. 2008, Lowell et al. 2005, and Teller et al. 2005
summarize the geological and hydrological complications with the
eastward-draining Lake Agassiz hypothesis. But if it wasn't Lake
Agassiz's water flowing out the St. Lawrence seaway that's to blame,
where might the freshwater have come from? Alternative possibilities
include a large meltwater discharge from the Keewatin ice dome into the
Arctic Ocean via the McKenzie River (Tarasov and Peltier 2006), or
perhaps Arctic sea ice flushed out into the North Atlantic as global sea
levels rose (Bradley and England 2008). Perhaps. But Lake Agassiz water
remains in the mix, as the timing of its drainage is still far too
poorly known to preclude a meltwater pulse down the St. Lawrence, and a
fascinating recent study of sediment cores from the St. Lawrence estuary
revealed evidence of a Younger Dryas-age spike of chemical elements that
could only have come from western Canada, and hence had to have flowed
east with Lake Agassiz's water (Carlson et al. 2007).

62. Firestone and Topping 2001.

63. Southon and Taylor 2002.

64. Firestone, West, and Warwick-Smith 2006.

65. Becker has worked on such claims before. She and colleagues claimed
there had been an ET impact at the Permian-Triassic boundary that killed
off most of life then on earth. Their claim hasn't fared well: “three
Science papers later,” one observer noted, and Becker's group has still
“failed to make its case” for an impact (Kerr 2007).

66. Kennett, quoted in Pringle 2007.

67. For a recent review of the geological evidence for that impact and
its consequences, see Kring 2007.

68. The sites reported here are mostly the ones in The Cycle of Cosmic
Catastrophes. There's sleight of hand here, however unintentional: the
authors note there are more than fifty sites with a black mat—implying
all are evidence of a great fire, contain extraterrestrial elements, and
so forth. But black mats are never defined, they examined fewer than ten
of those particular sites, and not all the sites they examined even had
black mats or radiocarbon ages to indicate they actually dated to this
time period. There is also debate about whether there are fifty sites
with a black mat; further, it has been shown that not all black mats are
late Pleistocene in age, so if they are impact markers, there were a lot
more impacts over time.

69. An event of this magnitude ought to have a global signature, so its
evidence needs to be found in a great number of sites across the planet,
not just a sprinkling of Clovis sites and one in Belgium. On the other
hand, since the proposed impact was atop the Great Lakes, there also
needs to be a concerted effort to examine sediment cores from the tens
of thousands of lakes in that region.

70. Firestone et al. 2007; Ivester et al. 2003; West, quoted in Pringle
2007. Geologists in the Carolinas flatly dismiss the idea the Carolina
Bays are related to impacts (Pringle 2007). See also Pintar and Ishman
2008.

71. Koeberl and Gabrielli quoted in Kerr 2008; Kring, quoted in Kerr
2007; Pintar and Ishman 2008.

72. Kennett, quoted in Dalton 2007; Firestone et al. 2007.

73. The post-Clovis so-called decline is nothing more than a small
number of post-Clovis Redstone points in South Carolina. Yet, points are
not people, and point counts are hardly a valid proxy of population
(were it only so simple), but instead a function of many things, not
least the availability of stone (Chapter 8). More telling, no Redstone
point has ever been radiocarbon dated, so it's not known whether they
directly follow Clovis. And as one of the Firestone team admits, few
Clovis sites anywhere in eastern North America have been radiocarbon
dated, and all of them might postdate the time of the ET impact
(Goodyear 1999). Finally, on the Great Plains, there are many Clovis
sites and, more importantly, many more well-dated Folsom sites, which
follow Clovis directly in time. If there was massive population
collapse, Folsom people failed to get the memo.

74. Firestone et al. 2007.

75. Berger and Loutre 1991; Denton et al. 2005; Yu and Wright 2001.

76. Alley 2000b; MacDonald et al. 2006; Raynaud et al. 2003. The
atmosphere of the Younger Dryas had upwards of seven times more dust and
three times more salt in the air than in the millennium that followed,
which was itself twice as dusty and salty as the atmosphere was in the
preindustrial era (Alley 2000a:112-15).

77. Shuman et al. 2002:1786-7; see also Grimm and Jacobson 2004; Yu and
Wright 2001.

78. Shuman et al. 2002; Reasoner and Jodry 2000; Fall 1997.

79. Shuman, Bartlein, and Webb. 2005:2197.

80. Alley 2000a:114-16.

81. Broecker 2006:1147.

82. Shuman et al. 2002; Shuman, Bartlein, and Webb 2005; T. Webb,
Shuman, and Williams 2004. The Younger Dryas saw the most abrupt and
widespread changes in North American biota of any time since the LGM,
but it is important to add that it was mostly the pace of change that
was so noteworthy; otherwise, the vegetation changes that occurred
during the Younger Dryas account for less than 25% of the total changes
that took place in North America's biota over the millennia between the
LGM and the onset of the Holocene.

83. Alley 2000a:182. By the most recent evidence, the peak of the 8200
BP event spanned only 60-70 years, and evidence of its geographic impact
seems largely restricted to the circum-North Atlantic region (the
British Isles, Norway, and Newfoundland).

84. Dyke 2004; Alley, quoted in Kerr 2006.

CHAPTER 3: FROM PALEOLITHS TO PALEOINDIANS

1. Jefferson 1788.

2. Haven 1856:3.

3. Jefferson 1788:226.

4. Jefferson 1788:227.

5. The story of the establishment of human antiquity in Europe has been
told many times; good general treatments include Grayson 1983 and Van
Riper 1993.

6. Haber 1959.

7. Cuvier's demonstration of extinction, and the role played by American
fossils as well as information from American Indians, is discussed in
Mayor 2005.

8. Cuvier 1796, in Rudwick 1997.

9. Bowler 1976:31.

10. Grayson 1983; Meltzer 2005.

11. Lubbock 1865:269.

12. Buckland 1823:90; Pettitt 2000.

13. Lyell 1863:68.

14. Darwin to Hooker, June 22, 1859, in Burkhardt and Smith 1991:308.

15. Quoted in Evans 1943:103.

16. Lyell 1860:94.

17. Dawkins 1863.

18. Lubbock 1865.

19. Quoted in Grayson 1983:217-18.

20. Darwin 1859:488; the Boucher de Perthes quote is in Darwin 1871:3.

21. There are no book-length treatments of human antiquity in the
Americas; the discussions here are drawn mostly from my own published
articles, particularly Meltzer 2005 and 2006b. Both of these provide
reasonably comprehensive summaries with references, for those who wish
to pursue the topic in more detail.

22. Abbott diary, February 14, 1877, Firestone Library, Princeton
University.

23. Wright 1912:228.

24. Wright 1890; Abbott 1889.

25. Holmes 1890.

26. Henshaw to Abbott May 21, 1890, Charles Abbott Papers, University
Museum, University of Pennsylvania.

27. Undated sketches, William Henry Holmes Papers, Smithsonian
Institution Archives, Washington, D.C.

28. Abbott 1892a.

29. Holmes 1893a, 1893b.

30. Abbott 1892a:271.

31. Abbott 1892b:344-45.

32. Holmes 1893a.

33. Chamberlin 1892; McGee 1893; reviewing Wright 1892.

34. The material in this sidebar is drawn from Meltzer and Sturtevant
1983, and Meltzer 1990.

35. Abbott to Wright, April 5, 1899, George Frederick Wright Papers,
Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio.

36. Meltzer 1983, 2005.

37. Hooton 1930.

38. Upham to Holmes, August 23, 1902, Upham to Chamberlin, August 23,
1902; Warren Upham Papers, Minnesota Historical Society Minneapolis,
Minnesota.

39. Chamberlin to Upham, November 12, 1902, Thomas Chamberlin Papers,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

40. Abbott to Wright, April 20, 1904, George Frederick Wright Papers,
Oberlin College, Oberlin, OH.

41. Hay 1918.

42. Gilder 1911.

43. Kidder 1936; Roberts 1940; N. Nelson to O. Hay, April 5, 1920,
Oliver Hay Papers, Smithsonian Institution Archives, Washington, D.C.

44. Sarah Rooke's grave marker is—rightly—one of the largest in the
Folsom cemetery, erected by her fellow operators; it reads, in part,
“With heroic devotion she glorified her calling by sacrificing her own
life that others might live.” It's a fitting monument.

45. Osborn 1922; see Skinner, Skinner, and Goorhis 1977.

46. Cook 1925.

47. W. D. Matthew to J. C. Merriam, November 27, 1925, John C. Merriam
Papers, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.

48. Hrdlicka scrawled his opinion across his copy of Cook's paper.

49. Cook 1927:117.

50. Evans to Figgins, October 17, 1929, Figgins Papers, Denver Museum of
Nature and Science.

51. Cook 1927:116.

52. Figgins to Howarth, July 22, 1926, Papers of the Director, Denver
Museum of Nature and Science.

53. Figgins to Cook, December 28, 1926, J. D. Figgins Papers, Denver
Museum of Nature and Science, Denver, Colorado.

54. Figgins to Brown, June 8, 1927, Vertebrate Paleontology Archives,
American Museum of Natural History, New York.

55. Carl Schwachheim diary, September 4, 1927, Department of
Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX.

56. Meltzer 1983.

57. Cook to Loomis, November 12, 1928, Harold Cook Papers, Agate Fossil
Beds National Monument, Agate, Nebraska.

58. Meltzer 2006b.

59. Hull 1988:31.

60. Abbott to Robins, June 28, 1897, C. C. Abbott Papers, Academy of
Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, PA.

61. Rudwick 1985:420.

62. Kidder to Figgins, October 13, 1927, Papers of the Director, Denver
Museum of Nature and Science, Denver, CO.

63. Cook to Hay, December 23, 1926, Oliver Hay Papers, Smithsonian
Institution Archives, Washington, D.C.

64. Lucas to Figgins, November 18, 1927, Papers of the Director, Denver
Museum of Nature and Science, Denver, CO.

65. Figgins to Gregory, December 30, 1927, Papers of the Director,
Denver Museum of Nature and Science, Denver, CO.

66. N. Nelson to Figgins, August 16, 1927, J. D. Figgins Papers, Denver
Museum of Nature and Science, Denver, CO.

67. Cook to Hay, January 25, 1928, Oliver Hay Papers, Smithsonian
Institution Archives, Washington, D.C.

68. Kidder to Figgins, October 13, 1927, Papers of the Director, Denver
Museum of Nature and Science, Denver, CO.

69. Boneless Paleoindian sites are more difficult to find, though not
impossibly so. Archaeologist Reid Ferring, equally skilled as a
geologist, found the Aubrey Clovis site while walking the outlet channel
below an Army Corps of Engineers’ dam in north Texas. No large bones
called him to the locality, just the knowledge that a Pleistocene-aged
surface was exposed there. On that surface, he found the tip of a fluted
point, and beneath it an iceberg of a Clovis site. It is all a matter of
knowing the right place to look. Ironically, after three years of
meticulous excavations resulting in an extraordinary archaeological
record, the Aubrey site finally did yield one mammoth rib fragment
(Ferring 2001).

70. Simms 1996.

71. Krieger 1953:238-39.

72. Krieger 1964:44.

73. C. Haynes 1964.

74. C. Haynes 1969.

75. C. Haynes 1967.

76. Abbott to Putnam, June 20, 1888, Peabody Museum Papers, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA.

CHAPTER 4: THE PRE-CLOVIS CONTROVERSY AND ITS RESOLUTION

1. Ironically, questions were later raised about Senga's antiquity,
stratigraphy, and context.

2. Guidon 2002; Guidon and Arnaud 1991.

3. Krieger 1964; MacNeish 1976; Morlan 1988. The five on Morlan's list
were Bluefish Caves, Yukon Territory; Meadowcroft Rockshelter,
Pennsylvania; Taima-Taima, Venezuela; Tagua-Tagua, Chile; Los Toldos,
Chile. None has yet to be fully accepted.

4. Martin's low opinion of pre-Clovis archaeology, expressed in his
Twilight of the Mammoths (2005) among other places, is biased—even by
his own admission—by his strong opinions about the role the first
Americans played in the extinction of the Pleistocene fauna. I'll take
up that matter in Chapter 8.

5. Hrdlicka 1907; C. Haynes 1969.

6. The dispute over the utility of the criteria played out in several
places, most especially in two of the volumes edited by pre-Clovis
proponent Alan Bryan (1978, 1986).

7. Leakey et al. 1969.

8. For further reading on Calico, see the chapter “Misadventure at
Calico” in Virginia Morrell's Ancestral Passions (1995), and also Mary
Leakey's Disclosing the Past: An Autobiography (1984). The Calico
Conference proceedings were published in Schuiling 1972 (from which the
Simpson quote is drawn, page 36).

9. Toth 1991.

10. Leakey 1984:143.

11. Stalker 1977; Wilson, Harvey, and Forbis 1983; R. Brown et al. 1983.

12. Good introductions to the various radiometric dating methods are a
series of papers in Evolutionary Anthropology, including Dieno, Renne,
and Fisher 1998; Feathers 1996; Grun 1993; Kappleman 1993; Schwarz 1992;
Taylor 1995; and Wagner 1996.

13. Summarized in Gonzalez, Huddart, and Bennett 2006; see also
Irwin-Williams 1981; Steens-McIntyre, Fryxell, and Malde 1981.

14. Renne et al. 2005.

15. Hardaker 2007.

16. Gonzalez et al. 2006.

17. Renne et al. 2005; Duller 2006; Schwenninger et al. 2006; see also
the “Mexican footprints” webpage,
http://www.mexicanfootprints.co.uk/default.htm.

18. Lynch 1991a. The same argument is made by Martin (2005:136), who
observes that Australia has lower rainfall, and hence supported fewer
people creating fewer sites, and yet Aussies found them despite not
having the massive CRM programs we have here in North America. But flip
this around: lower rainfall means better surface exposures, and though
we do an awful lot of CRM work (Martin calls it by the old-fashioned
name “salvage archaeology”) how much of it has exposed Clovis age sites?
Hardly any. Although there has been, as Jelinek notes, an “enormous
amount of earth” in the United States moved by construction, providing
“a random sampling of the topography and environments of the continent”
(Jelinek 1992:346), it's doubtful that sample is truly random. It is
true it hasn't yielded any pre-Clovis sites. But then it has not turned
up very many Clovis sites either. The issue is not the amount of earth
moved, but the amount moved that exposes surfaces of the proper age. We
need an age-representative sample, not just a random one; then the
absence of evidence becomes evidence of absence.

19. O'Connell and Allen 2004. After re-dating, Jinmium turned out to be
only 20,000 years old. For a broader summary of Australia's dating
controversy and discussions of peopling of that continent—including the
debate over the role of the first Australians in Pleistocene extinctions
there—see Hiscock (2008).

20. Martin 1987:11.

21. Hassan's analysis of population growth rates appears in his
Demographic Archaeology (1981). A similar point is made by Bettinger and
Young (2004).

22. Irving 1985; Stanford, Bonnichsen, and Moran 1981.

23. See, for example, Lyman 1984; Myers, Voorhies, and Corner 1980.

24. A colorful, if not wholly one-sided precis of the Meadowcroft
controversy can be found in Adovasio and Page (2002), which is
accompanied by a thorough bibliography of the Meadowcroft team's work on
the site. Publications by the site's critics are not listed.

25. Adovasio and Page 2002:186.

26. C.V. Haynes 1991b.

27. Adovasio and Page 2002:224.

28. Adovasio and Page 2002:186.

29. Guidon and Arnaud 1991:170

30. Guidon and Arnaud 1991:177.

31. Meltzer, Adovasio, and Dillehay 1994.

32. The Pedra Furada debate took place in the pages of Antiquity. See
Meltzer, Adovasio, and Dillehay 1994; the responses by Guidon and Pessis
1996 and Parenti, Fontugue, and Guerin 1996, with additional thoughtful
comments by Borrero 1995; and an almost-tongue-in-cheek commentary by
Dennell and Hurcombe 1995 on how to test whether nature flakes stone
(they also raise the Shakespeare-typing monkey analogy).

33. Recent radiocarbon and TL analyses on material from Pedra Furada
appear in Santos et al. 2003 and Valladas et al. 2003, respectively.

34. The Monte Verde evidence is laid out in the two volumes (Dillehay
1989, 1997). Lynch's critique and reply appeared in American Antiquity
(Lynch 1990, 1991b) along with Dillehay and Collins's (1991) rebuttal.

35. Dillehay 1989xx.

36. Dincauze 1991:116.

37. Lynch 1990:26.

38. Dillehay, personal communication, 2007.

39. Dillehay and Collins 1991; Lynch 1991b.

40. Saunders 1998:145.

41. The Monte Verde site visit was reported in the October 1997 issue of
National Geographic, which sent a writer and photographer along with us.

42. Wilford 1997.

43. A point raised by Haynes, but one he himself would later demonstrate
to be a nonissue; see Taylor et al. 1999.

44. Adovasio and Page 2002:224.

45. D. Thomas 2000:166.

46. See On Monte Verde: Fiedel's Confusions and Misrepresentions
(www.uky.edu/Projects/MonteVerde/). In the course of their response,
Dillehay's team discovered that many of the errors Fiedel cited had
actually been corrected by them in their page proofs, but the
Smithsonian Institution Press (which published Monte Verde) failed to
make the corrections before printing the book. The net result of all the
brouhaha? Grayson put it this way: “The only substantive thing Fiedel
accomplished was forcing the Smithsonian to issue a volume correcting a
bunch of typos.”

47. The assertion of Paul Martin—who wasn't a part of the site
visit—that “not all in the group agreed on the claims of antiquity” is
merely his wishful thinking.

48. Meltzer et al. 1997.

49. C. Haynes 1999.

50. Dillehay et al. 2008; D. Sandweiss, quoted in Balter 2008.

51. J. Johnson et al. 2002; Rick, Erlandson, and Vellanoweth 2001. The
precise age of the Arlington Springs specimen is not fully settled,
since this individual may have fed on marine resources, which can skew a
radiocarbon age. That possibility can be taken into account by careful
study of the skeleton's isotopic composition; however, that's not yet
been done.

52. Davis 2006.

53. Fedje et al. 2004. See also Davis 2006; Mandryk et al. 2001.

54. Dillehay 2000:128-31.

55. Gilbert et al. 2008; Jenkins 2007.

56. Pitulko et al. 2004.

57. Martin (2005:136-37) essentially argues thus: If humans were here
before 11,500 years ago, they would have killed off the ground sloths.
Ground sloths do not become extinct until ca. 11,000 BP. Therefore,
humans were not here before 11,000 BP. But whether humans were here and
what caused the extinction of the ground sloths are independent issues.

58. Butzer 1991.

59. Collins 2002. See also Davis 2006; Dillehay and Meltzer 1991; Fedje
et al. 2004; Punke and Davis 2006.

CHAPTER 5: NON-ARCHAEOLOGICAL ANSWERS TO ARCHAEOLOGICAL QUESTIONS

1. Goddard 1927.

2. Goddard 1927:263.

3. Holmes 1919:55; Hrdlicka 1925:485.

4. Sapir 1916.

5. Greenberg, Turner, and Zegura 1986.

6. Details on the number and status of American Indian languages come
from Kaufman and Golla 2000:47-48; Nichols 1990, 2002; and Goddard 1996.

7. Goddard 2004.

8. For a good summary of language change, see Kaufman and Golla 2000;
Golla 2000; and Ringe 2000 in Renfrew. For recent efforts to push back
the time depth in which one can still see shared ancestry (now at
8,000-10,000 years), see Dunn et al. 2005 and Gray 2005. The change has
striking parallels to the evolution of biological species: they split
into new languages, mutate, and go extinct.

9. Nettle (1999) argues that as small colonizing groups fill new niches,
linguistic diversity increases sharply, and as population density
increases and isolated groups rejoin, linguistic diversity decreases.

10. Ruhlen 1994.

11. J. W. Powell 1891:26.

12. Sapir 1921.

13. Greenberg 1987. Greenberg provides an overview of this history of
linguistic classification, as does Campbell 1997. For reasons that will
shortly become clear, they differ in their take on that history. It
might be added that Greenberg didn't stop with the Americas: whereas
most linguists grouped the world's approximately 6,000 languages into
about 300 families, he collapsed them into about 18 families (Pennisi
2004; Ruhlen 1994).

14. Which is why some of our words are obviously from German (foot =
fuss, as opposed to the French pied), while others are clearly French in
derivation (human = humain, as opposed to the German menschlich). To
complicate matters, English and French were also related in the more
distant past: both are Indo-European derivatives, and both have elements
of Latin, which was the primary language of formal discourse and thus
also parachuted directly into English without first being filtered
through French.

15. Ringe 2000.

16. Numbers from Golla 2000, Kaufman and Golla 2000; Algic distribution
from map in Goddard 1996; also Foster 1997:97; Goddard 1996:4; Campbell
1997:152.

17. J. Hill 2004:39.

18. J. Hill 2004:39.

19. See Greenberg 1987 for a description of his method.

20. That connection was recently drawn tightly by Edward Vajda,
comparing tonal forms, words, and sound shifts between Ket (which is in
the Yeniseian language family), with several Na-Dene languages
(including Tlingit and Eyak) (Holden 2008).

21. Greenberg 1987:55.

22. Quoted in Lewin 1988.

23. As Lyle Campbell announced in his comments that immediately followed
the paper by Greenberg et al. 1986.

24. Ringe, quoted in Pennisi 2004:1321.

25. J. Hill 2004. For searing criticisms of Greenberg's Language in the
Americas, see Campbell 1988, 1997; Matisoff 1990; for a more recent
summary, see J. Hill 2004. Greenberg responded to his critics in
Greenberg 1990.

26. Greenberg 1987:ix.

27. Campbell 1997. The lack of a tally for just how often n/m and m/t
occur or fail to occur in both American and non-American languages,
makes it impossible to judge whether there are statistically significant
differences in the frequency of the n/m pronoun here as opposed to
elsewhere. Greenberg insists the n/m pattern is real, citing as evidence
on this point the fact the n/m discussion takes up “five full pages” of
Language of the Americas (1987). That's a rather unconventional measure
of the strength of evidence. In the book, however, he reports “over one
hundred” n/m occurrences. If, as it happens, n/m and m/t are both
abundant, and not the result of common ancestry, it raises interesting
questions: Why are there only a limited number of pronoun forms? Could
these reflect sound patterns basic to all human language?

28. Campbell 1997:254.

29. Greenberg's defense has been carried forward by his one-time student
Merritt Ruhlen, who has taken the tack that the critics have it all
wrong: Greenberg wasn't trying to present a finished product, but rather
was merely classifying like languages as a first step, from which
traditional historical linguists could then do sound correspondences,
reconstructions, and the like. And one could do so even with meager
evidence—as in the case of Shebayo, a language that vanished in the
1600s for which only fifteen words are known. In effect, Ruhlen argued,
Greenberg was doing American linguists a favor by pointing to where
detailed connections might be found (Ruhlen 1994:130-32). The critics
still weren't buying: multilateral comparison, Ringe snarled, is “not
even a reasonable heuristic for interesting similarities deserving
further study; it ought to be abandoned” (Ringe 2000:155).

30. Turner 1985:36.

31. Turner, Manabe, and Hawkey 2000. Ages approaching 30,000 years ago
are provided in Chen, Hedges, and Yuan 1989; favoring a younger age are
Wu and Wang (1985).

32. Turner 1986. There may be less here than meets the eye, since in
many cases the independent divergence ages were based on the presumed
association of the teeth with archaeological complexes that were
dated—but which are not necessarily associated with a dental group—or in
another case, on the breaching of Beringia, which is assumed to have
separated northeast Asians and ancestral Aleutians. Why a seafaring
people would have been stopped cold in their tracks by rising
post-glacial seas is unclear; for that matter, the ages used for the
breaching (i.e., 14,000-12,000) are incorrect (Turner 1985:37-40).

33. Greenberg, Turner, and Zegura 1986.

34. Ruhlen 1994:166.

35. Greenberg, Turner, and Zegura 1986.

36. Turner 1985.

37. Turner 1985:43.

38. Hanihara and Ishida 2005.

39. Paabo 2003.

40. Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi, and Piazza 1994.

41. Greenberg, Turner, and Zegura 1986:487.

42. Wang et al. 2007.

43. Turner 2005:171.

44. Or so we thought. There has been some recent work that hints at the
possibility that bits of the father's mtDNA might infiltrate the mtDNA
of the child. That claim has been hotly disputed, and it is still not
clear just how much of a problem, if any, exists. It seems reasonable to
operate as if there is no recombination of maternal and paternal genes
in the mtDNA molecule until proven otherwise.

45. For those keeping count, the human replication error rate is between
10⁻⁹ and 10⁻¹⁰ base pairs per nucleotide per generation (Zegura,
personal communication, 2007).

46. This example is not entirely arbitrary: the mutation at np 16327 (C
→ T) happens to be the defining mutation for haplogroup C. The mutation
at np 16325 (C → T) is the defining mutation for the subset of
haplotypes C1b, C1c, and C1d within haplogroup C, while the mutation at
np 16356 defines haplotype C1a. As it happens, C1a is the haplotype
within that haplogroup that remained in Asia; C1b-C1d represent New
World founding haplotypes (Tamm et al. 2007).

47. Eshleman, Malhi, and Smith 2003; Merriwether 2002; Schurr 2004a:237.

48. Torroni et al. 1993:581-82; see also Forster et al. 1996:938;
Merriwether, Rothhammer, and Ferrell 1995:425. Kemp et al. 2007 recently
added that founding lineages in theory should be detected in ancient
DNA, and the older the sample, the more likely the lineage is a founder.

49. Seielstad and colleagues sparked an intense debate in the late 1990s
when their survey of African and European populations showed mtDNA
markers were more widespread, while NRY variants tended to be more
restricted geographically. Their conclusion: women tend to marry out
(Seielstad, Minch, and Cavalli-Sforza 1998). They assumed this was a
universal pattern, but others were quick to criticize: differences in
mutation rates between mtDNA and NRY and in the sample sizes they
analyzed meant that Seielstad's team were comparing “apples and pears.”
Michael Hammer and colleagues subsequently better aligned the mtDNA and
NRY data and samples, and found no evidence of higher (or lower)
migration rates for females on a global scale (Wilder et al. 2004).
Locally, of course, there could be significant differences in movements
of males and females, depending on cultural practices: for example, in
farming societies where land was inherited father to son, and the oldest
son (who often stood first in line to inherit) stayed put while younger
brothers left to find new lands, joined new groups, and married out.

50. It's the divergence method that does pair-wise comparison of all
haplotypes within groups, and multiplies the distance by the mutation
rate to estimate the time required to produce this much diversity. The
coalescent method estimates the amount of time necessary to track two
groups that are genetically separate today back to their most recent
common ancestor; in effect, it can be viewed as genetic drift run
backward. Ages derived by the divergence method require firmer control
on sequence diversity than coalescent ages, while coalescent ages will
not provide as clear a picture of the process of diversification over
time (Schurr 2004a:200-201).

51. Mutation rates of mtDNA and NRY are calibrated using cases where the
moment in time when two populations split from one another is dated
independently. Ironically, one of the splits originally used to
calculate the mtDNA mutation rate was based on the genetic distance
between Asians and American Indians, which was assumed to have occurred
12,000 years ago. It yielded a mutation rate of 2% -4% per million years
(Cann et al. 1987; Schurr 2004a:229-30).

52. Schurr 2004a:229-30, 2004–559; see also Ho and Larson 2006.

53. In part for this reason, more recent studies have focused on
sequencing complete mtDNAs (Tamm et al. 2007). Full details on the
mitochondrial molecule are available on the web at MITOMAP: A Human
Mitochondrial Genome Database (www.mitomap?org), which includes a
compendium of polymorphisms and mutations of the human mitochondrial
DNA.

54. Wallace's pathbreaking work appeared in D. Wallace et al. 1985. A
bottleneck is also apparent in autosomal DNA (Wang et al. 2007).

55. Torroni collaborated with Wallace, and together they published a
number of the central papers on American Indian mtDNA during this time.
Torroni (2000) summarizes the evolution of their results and thinking
during the first dozen years of their work. The first four letters
(haplogroups) of the mtDNA alphabet were based on this work (Tamm et al.
2007).

56. Fix 2005:432.

57. Torroni 2000.

58. At one point, Torroni and colleagues suspected there might have been
four migrations to account for migration of Eskimo-Aleut.

59. Merriwether, Rothhammer, and Ferrell 1995; also Eshleman, Malhi, and
Smith 2003; Mulligan et al. 2004.

60. For a helpful discussion of “The Curious Case of Haplogroup X,” see
Eshleman, Malhi, and Smith 2003:10.

61. Haplogroup X was recognized as a founding lineage by several
laboratories in the latter 1990s. It was M. Brown et al. (1998) who
speculated it might have been brought to America by Europeans in
Pleistocene times, a possibility subsequently discounted by Smith et al.
(1999) and others (e.g., Mulligan et al. 2004). The presence of
haplogroup X in Siberia was documented by Derenko et al. 2001, but more
recent work indicates that the Altai-American Indian haplogroup X
connection is not as close as once thought (Zegura, personal
communication, 2007).

62. To be more precise, the five Native American haplogroups are A2, B2,
C1, D1, and X2a (Tamm et al. 2007; Fagundes et al. 2008).

63. See, for example, Karafet et al. 1997, 1999.

64. Bolnick et al. 2004; Hunley and Long 2005; Zegura et al. 2004.

65. Hunley and Long 2005:1316.

66. Studies of autosomal DNA likewise document a DNA mismatch with
Greenberg's language families (K. Schroeder et al. 2007) and, in more
general terms, a low correlation between genetics and linguistics (Wang
et al. 2007).

67. Distribution data summarized from Merriwether 2002; Schurr 2004b;
Smith et al. 2006.

68. Schurr 2004–555-56. Smith et al. 2006:248

69. Torroni et al. 1993.

70. Tamm et al. 2007; for slightly different age estimates of the
haplogroups, see Achilli et al. 2008. On Paisley Cave DNA, see Gilbert
et al. 2008.

71. Eshleman, Malhi, and Smith 2003; Mulligan et al. 2004; Schurr 2004a;
Tamm et al. 2007.

72. Merriwether et al. 1996; Schurr 2004a.

73. Malhi et al. 2002:905-6; Merriwether et al. 1996:205, 210; Schurr
2004a.

74. A good introduction to NRY work is provided in Hammer and Zegura
(1996), from which this discussion is largely drawn. Over 95% of the Y
chromosome is non-recombining; overall, the Y chromosome possesses about
forty separate functional genes (S. Zegura, personal communication,
2007), essentially giving it fewer targets for natural selection.

75. Nomenclature was standardized by the Y Chromosome Consortium in
2002.

76. Zegura et al. 2004:Table 1.

77. NRY data from Lell et al. 2002; Zegura et al. 2004:170. The quote is
from Zegura et al. 2004.

78. Seielstad et al. 2003:704; Zegura et al. 2004:1720.

79. Hey 2005; Kitchen, Miyamoto, and Mulligan 2008; see also Fagundes et
al. 2008; Moore 2001; Wang et al. 2007.

80. Merriwether, Rothhammer, and Ferrell 1995.

81. Malhi et al. 2007:642. Also A. Merriwether 2002:299.

82. For a variety of reasons, however, American Indians have been
reluctant to participate in the Geonographic Project (Harmon 2006).

83. That potential, however, may be truly tiny: Nick Patterson
calculates that of the 65,536 ancestors one has sixteen generations
back, approximately 99% of them might have contributed nothing to your
genome (Patterson, personal communication, 2007). Of course, that still
leaves about 1% who did, and their histories can be quite varied
genetically, and not necessarily concordant with the two persons who
were one's mtDNA and NRY ancestors.

84. Malhi et al. 2007:642. Kemp et al. 2007.

85. To date, none of the samples of earliest occurrences of ancient DNA
have had sequences deposited in GenBank, the National Institutes of
Health genetic sequence database, an annotated collection of all
publicly available DNA sequences (Noreen Tuross, personal communication,
2007).

86. Mulligan 2006.

87. Malhi et al. 2002:906; Schurr 2004a; On Windover, see Doran 2002.
Given the scarcity of aDNA samples, it would be meaningless to compare
frequencies of aDNA haplogroups with modern frequencies (Mulligan 2006).

88. Kemp et al. 2007; K. Schroeder et al. 2007.

89. Tamm et al. 2007. See also Fagundes et al. 2008.

90. Kitchen, Miyamoto, and Mulligan 2008; Tamm et al. 2007. The
standstill inference might be correct, Noreen Tuross observes, but
before concluding it is, we must ensure that the sample on which it is
based is large, representative, and comprised of nonrelated individuals
(otherwise we run the risk of underestimating genetic diversity); that
there was no lineage loss (which would also reduce diversity); that the
haplotypes are robust (repeatable) and not rare random mutations; and
that the same signal is seen in NRY and autosomal data (Tuross, personal
communication, 2007).

91. Hooton 1933.

92. Powell and Neves 1999:168.

93. Marks 2002:235. For the opposing view, see A. Nelson 2006:287 and
especially Sparks and Jantz (2002), who argue that Boas misinterpreted
his immigrant data—largely for want of adequate quantitative methods—and
that the differences between the crania of immigrants and those of their
children were insignificant, save in a small number of cases. Rightly
so. But then Sparks and Jantz leap to the conclusion that this result
“supports what morphologists and morphometricians have known for a long
time: most of the variation is genetic variation” (Sparks and Jantz
2002:14637). It does no such thing. Showing that change fails to occur
over the few years of Boas's study is not tantamount to proving that
craniofacial change cannot happen as a consequence of selection, genetic
drift, and the like on a scale of centuries or millennia. Boas may have
erred on the side of mutability, but Sparks and Jantz err on the side of
stability. See also Gravlee, Bernard, and Leonard 2003.

94. G. Steele and Powell 2002:101; also Powell and Neves 1999:163.

95. Powell and Neves 1999:156, 161, 178; Turner 2002:126; Williams and
Armelagos 2007. Zegura observes that the global F_(ST) for crania is
approximately 0.09 or 9%, which means that about 10% of cranial
variation occurs between groups, while 90% occurs within groups (F_(ST)
measures variation within a species, ranging from F_(ST) = 100%,
indicating variability occurs entirely between groups, to F_(ST) = 0%,
which suggests that all variability occurs within the group) (Zegura,
personal communication, 2007).

96. Owsley and Jantz 2006.

97. Roseman and Weaver 2004.

98. Powell and Neves 1999:161.

99. Brace et al. 2001.

100. Neves and Hubbe 2005; Gonzalez-Jose et al. 2003.

101. Jantz and Owsley 2001:149-51

102. G. Steele and Powell 2002:98-101, 112; Powell and Rose 1999; Powell
and Neves 1999:162.

103. Jantz and Owsley 2006:291; G. Steele and Powell 2002:100.

104. The Kennewick story's been told in several places: Chatters (2001)
offers a firsthand account; others, which include interviews and
comments from others involved, are Downey (2000) and D. Thomas (2000).

105. Egan 1996.

106. Downey 2000:11.

107. Quoted in Preston 1997.

108. Chatters 2001:69, 72-73.

109. Downey 2000:42.

110. Bonnichsen et al. v. United States 1996.

111. Powell 2005:11.

112. Lahr 1995; Powell and Neves 1999; G. Steele and Powell 2002.

113. Marks 2002:235. Powell and Rose (1999) make the same point in their
analysis of the Kennewick remains.

114. Smith et al. 2006; Jantz and Owsley 2003.

115. Van Vark, Kuizenga, and Williams 2003.

116. Jantz and Owsley 2003:187.

CHAPTER 6: AMERICAN ORIGINS: THE SEARCH FOR CONSENSUS

1. My discussion here comes from Nicholas Thomas's superb,
anthropologically informed Cook: The Extraordinary Voyages of Captain
James Cook (2003).

2. Eshleman, Malhi, and Smith 2003; Merriwether 2002; K. Schroeder et
al. 2007; G. Steele and Powell 2002; Straus, Meltzer, and Goebel 2005;
Turner 2002; Wang et al. 2007.

3. Eiseley 1942:417.

4. Bliss 1940a, 1940b; Brand 1940; Hibben 1941.

5. Preston 1995; Crane 1955.

6. Bradley, quoted in Preston 1995.

7. Tony Hillerman's Dance Hall of the Dead (1973).

8. Stanford and Bradley (2002) early on enthusiastically hyped
haplogroup X as proof of a genetic link between America and Europe.
After haplogroup X was spotted in groups living in Asia, and geneticists
showed the haplotype distinctions between American and European X,
Bradley and Stanford (2004) chose to quietly ignore the genetic
evidence. Funny thing, that.

9. The discussion that follows is based on Straus, Meltzer, and Goebel
(2005), responding to Bradley and Stanford 2004 (also Stanford and
Bradley 2002).

10. Stafford et al. 2003:81.

11. Schledermann 2000; Wallace 2000.

12. Bradley and Stanford observe that the distance from Siberia to
Clovis is greater than the ocean span separating Europe to America. Yes,
it's a shorter distance, but it's also a silly comparison. Fall down
16,000 years ago on the grassy plains of Beringia and you can get back
up, dust yourself off, and keep walking. Fall out of a raft 16,000 years
ago into the frigid Pleistocene North Atlantic, and most of the possible
story endings are fatal.

13. Quoted in D. Thomas 2000:170.

14. King and Slobodin 1996.

15. Goebel 2004; Straus, Meltzer, and Goebel 2005.

16. King and Slobodin 1996.

17. Pitulko et al. 2004.

18. Hoffecker, Powers, and Goebel 1993:52.

19. Jeffrey C. Long, personal communication, 2007. See K. Schroeder et
al. 2007; see also Wang et al. 2007.

20. Zegura et al. 2004; Mulligan et al. 2004:302.

21. Nichols 1990; Nichols quoted in Petit 1998.

22. Bever 2001:128; Hamilton and Goebel 1999:156; Slobodin 2001:39-40;
Clark 2001:68; Dumond 2001.

23. So who were the bearers of the Paleoarctic assemblage? As it
happens, this archaeological distribution overlaps nicely with the
historic range of northern Na-Dene speakers. But then it also overlaps
with the distribution of some Eskimo and the eastern Aleut peoples.
Although such linguistic-to-archaeological correspondences are
intriguing, we don't know which language was spoken by makers of those
artifacts, only when the makers arrived where, and by what route.

24. Fedje et al. 2004.

25. Mandryk et al. 2001; see also Clague, Mathewes, and Ager 2004.

26. Fladmark, Driver, and Alexander 1988; Fedje et al. 1995.

27. California may have harbored as many as 80 mutually unintelligible
tongues, and the northwest coast another 45, for a total of 125 out of
the 330 estimated to have been spoken in North America (Shipley 1978;
Thompson and Kinkade 1990).

28. Nettle 1998; Rogers, Rogers, and Martin (1992) consider the possible
role of population density leading to great language diversity, but
dismiss it saying, “China has a vastly larger population than Siberia
but is not any more diverse linguistically” (1992:289). Even if this
undocumented assertion is true, the point backfires, since China was
unquestionably occupied far earlier and longer than Siberia; by their
own reasoning, it ought to have much greater linguistic diversity.

29. Eshleman, Malhi, and Smith 2003:12. Recently detected patterns in
autosomal DNA indicate greater genetic diversity in coastal regions of
South America, relative to eastern South American populations, which
suggest a west-to-east movement of people, and hence are also compatible
with a population starting out on the west coast of the continent (Wang
et al. 2007). But that does not mean they entered the continent down the
coast; that's a separate issue.

30. Anderson and Gillam 2000.

31. Surovell 2003.

32. Fix 2005.

33. Fix (2005:433) rightly stresses this point.

34. Greenberg, Turner, and Zegura 1986:478.

35. Meltzer 1989.

36. Hrdlicka 1926:9.

37. Eshleman, Malhi, and Smith 2003:8-9. See also Fagundes et al.
2008:586.

38. Eshleman, Malhi, and Smith 2003:8.

39. Including autosomal marker D9S1120, mtDNA haplotype A2, and NRY
lineage Q-M3 (see Karafet et al. 1997; Schroeder et al. 2007; Tamm et
al. 2007). The idea of back-migrations is not the “novel” scenario
geneticists paint it to be (e.g., Tamm et al. 2007); the possibility of
two-way traffic across the Bering Sea or Beringia was a hypothesis
raised decades ago (e.g., Hrdlicka 1926; also Meltzer 1989).

40. Schurr 2004a. See also Eshleman, Malhi, and Smith 2003:8; Fix
2005:431; Merriwether, Rothhammer, and Ferrel! 1995.

41. K. Schroeder et al. 2007. See also Fagundes et al. 2008.

42. New radiocarbon evidence suggests the migration may have started
even later, perhaps as late as AD 1200 (Friesen and Arnold 2008).

43. C. Haynes 1971:10.

44. Meltzer 1995:29; Storck 1991.

45. Tamm et al. 2007; Mulligan, personal communication, 2008.

46. Kitchen, Miyamoto, and Mulligan 2008; Wang et al. 2007.

47. Quoted in Gibbons 1993.

48. Tamm et al. 2007.

49. Fagundes et al. 2008:589; Hey 2005.

50. Fix 2002:3-4; Meltzer 1995:30. Such changes likely render
comparisons of the frequency of haplogroups between ancient and modern
DNA meaningless.

51. Recall that teeth are less susceptible to evolutionary change than
crania (Chapter 5). The problems with the dental evidence are primarily
ones of analysis and results, not inherent ambiguity.

52. Thomas 2000.

53. Woodbury 1984:56. Not surprisingly, the greatest dialect diversity
occurred at the extremes of the range (Alaska and Greenland), while the
middle (Canada) had relatively low dialect diversity, this a by-product
of the greater population density and interaction with non-Eskimo
peoples.

54. Eskimo groups are, for example, primarily mtDNA haplogroups A and D,
but as Saillard et al. found, “there is an Eskimo-specific mtDNA
subgroup characterized by nucleotide position 16265G within mtDNA group
A2. This subgroup is found in all Eskimo groups analyzed so far and is
estimated to have originated 3,000 years ago” (Saillard et al. 2000; see
also Forster et al. 1996; Shields and Jones 1998; Szathmary 1984, 1996).

55. McGhee 1984:376; see also Dumond 1984; McGhee 1984:370, 373; Odess,
Loring, and Fitzhugh 2000; Park 1993. For a recent discussion of the
timing of the Thule expansion and the possible climatic trigger for it,
see Friesen and Arnold 2008, and Chapter 7.

56. Kirch 2000:211-16.

57. In general, it's thought there was no significant genetic exchange
between Eskimo populations and other groups, save perhaps on the
extremes of their range (Szathmary 1996). Helgason et al. (2006) have
shown that some genetic exchange is likely to have occurred. See also
Fix 2005:431.

58. Tuross, personal communication, 2007.

CHAPTER 7: WHAT DO YOU DO WHEN NO ONE'S BEEN THERE BEFORE?

1. Making it rather odd that some colleagues complain about models for
colonization of the Americas that lack ethnographic examples (G. Haynes
2002). Of course they do. That's hardly a fault of the model—just a
reflection of reality.

2. Anthony 1990; Irwin 1992:211-12; Keegan and Diamond 1987:69; Kirch
1997:64-65.

3. Expansion beyond what's needed to settle an expanding population
seems true of Oceania as well, as noted by Kirch 1997:64; Irwin
1992:212-15

4. Gamble 1994:94.

5. Kirch 1997:65.

6. Irwin 1992:214; also Gamble 1994:182, 241-42, 245.

7. For example, Barton et al. 2004:149.

8. McGhee 2005.

9. McGhee 2005:44-49. Musk oxen fell victim to one of evolution's nasty
tricks: successfully adapting to one set of circumstances is no
guarantee of success when the circumstances change. An organism has to
keep evolving in order to survive. The Red Queen Hypothesis it's called,
because, as the Queen told Alice in Lewis Carroll's Through the Looking
Glass, “It takes all the running you can do, to keep in the same place.”

10. McGhee 1984:370-73. After advocating for many years the idea the
Thule expansion was driven by the movement of whales and Thule whale
hunters, McGhee recently (2005:121) admitted he “no longer believed” the
thesis. He changed his mind based on his belief that humans “do not
behave in such a deterministic manner,” but then went on to suggest
there was a singular motive, just not whales: the discovery of iron in
the eastern Arctic. He also suggested that sea-ice conditions never
fully opened passage for the bowhead whales, a suggestion not supported
by recent glacial geological work in the Arctic (Arthur Dyke, personal
communication, 2007). Friesen and Arnold (2008) discuss the implications
of the new radiocarbon ages for the timing and cause of the Thule
migration and make the point that if the new radiocarbon dates for the
onset of the Thule expansion (AD 1200 as opposed to AD 1000) prove
secure, it would remove the onset of the Medieval Warm Period as the
trigger for Thule expansion but still preserve a role for an expanded
bowhead whale range in the cause of that expansion. See also Odess,
Loring, and Fitzhugh 2000:198-200.

11. Kelly and Todd 1988; also Kelly 1996. Kelly and Todd expressly
disavowed the exploitation of Pleistocene megafauna, but their model
essentially demands it—and most others accept the notion that these were
the prey in question (see Meltzer 2004 for a fuller discussion).

12. Van Dyne et al. 1980: 285-98; also Frison 1991:141; Johnson et al.
1992; Winterhalder et al. 1988.

13. Frison 2004:226.

14. Silberbauer 1981:292-93.

15. Much of the discussion that follows comes from Meltzer 2002 and
2004, and references therein.

16. Yesner 2001:320-23.

17. Andre, Karst, and Turner 2006.

18. Bird and O'Connell 2006; also Lupo 2007.

19. Bird and O'Connell 2006:150. Grass seed, by contrast, is routinely a
very low-ranked resource because it takes so much time and energy to
gather and process the seeds for consumption; this is why it is in the
diet only in times of stress when other, higher-ranked resources are
unavailable.

20. Resource depression, as more formally defined, is “the situation in
which the activities of a predator lead to reduced capture rates of prey
by that predator” (Charnov, Orians, and Hyatt 1976). As Donald Grayson
explains, “These reduced capture rates may result from ‘behavioral
depression,’ in which prey adopt behaviors—for instance, increased
vigilance or altered periods of activity—that decrease the likelihood
that they will be preyed upon. They may also result from ‘microhabitat
depression,’ in which prey decrease their vulnerability by moving out of
geographic reach of their predators, or from ‘exploitation depression,’
in which numbers of prey individuals decrease because harvest rates
exceed both reproductive rates and rates of in-migration. From the point
of view of the predator, all have the same impact—reduced prey
availability” (Grayson 2001:5).

21. Van Dyne et al. 1980:286, 320.

22. Martin 2005:138; G. Haynes (2002:28) offers a similar caricature of
how archaeologists—but not he—have portrayed the first Americans. They
think, he says, the first Americans were like the “pictures of stone age
people migrating to Antarctica [sic]—step by step bands barely move
forward in the face of horribly alien landscape. The people stumble and
fall on the ice. They bleed from the bottoms of their feet; they have to
eat the dogs. After a couple thousand years someone invents skis.”
Right.

23. Stahle et al. 1998. Drought aside, the English colonists were put in
that vulnerable position by virtue of having crossed a vast distance in
short period of time, but also because they assumed Virginia was
England, only warmer, ignoring the great differences in the ecosystems.
That's the downside of prior knowledge. Because your knowledge as a
colonist on a new landscape is limited, there can be a strong temptation
to assume things about the new place based on experiences in prior,
seemingly similar environments: false analogy, McGovern (1994) calls it.
When doing so, colonizers run the risk of applying preconceived and
perhaps faulty models to a landscape, and in so doing, fail to consider
the actual patterns on that landscape and may make bad predictions about
anticipated changes, which can have disastrous consequences. This might
prove particularly disadvantageous to colonists on a new landscape, for
reliance on generic knowledge will assuredly be greatest during the
early phases of movement into a region, and it is at those stages in the
colonization process that snap judgments about a landscape or habitat
are often made. Making a snap judgment with imperfect knowledge can be
fatal (Orians and Heerwagen 1992:562-63).

24. Golledge 2003.

25. See R. Nelson (1969:99-104) on being lost in the Arctic; Silberbauer
(1981) on desert foragers.

26. Aporta and Higgs 2005:731-32.

27. Binford 1983:110, 115; Kelly 1995:Table 4-1, 2003.

28. Aporta and Higgs (2005) document the loss of traditional wayfinding
skills because of the introduction of satellite technology—and the
consequences when instruments or batteries die.

29. Golledge 2003.

30. R. Nelson 1969, 1986; also Kelly 2003.

31. Golledge 2003.

32. Bolton 1949; Weber 1992. Coronado designated a soldier to count his
every step in order to track the distance they had travelled.

33. Bolton 1949:298-99.

34. Epstein 1999; McGovern 1994:149; Stahle et al. 1998.

35. Wyckoff 1993; Anderson and Faught 2000.

36. Moermann, personal communication, 2000. Also Berlin and Berlin
1996:53. Moermann estimates the number of medicinal plants among the
North American flora at approximately 2,700 species.

37. Dillehay (1991) examines the role of disease in the colonization of
America.

38. The medically proper conditions are known as hyperammonemia and
hyperaminoacidemia, marked by excess ammonia in the urea and amino acids
in the blood (respectively), which trigger nausea, diarrhea, and death.
Hunter-gatherers, though unaware of the physiological basis of rabbit
starvation, were nonetheless acutely aware of its effects; as Speth and
Spielmann (1983) have shown, they avoided excess protein in their diets
and sought animals high in body fat or carbohydrates from plant foods.
Virtually every western explorer, from Lewis and Clark's Corps of
Discovery onward, recorded experiencing rabbit starvation at one time or
another.

39. MacNutt 1912, letter of November 1493.

40. Snyder and Leonard 2006.

41. Lewis and Clark had heard tales of bear and were anxious to see one,
mostly, it appears, to see if a bear could possibly be that fearsome.
Their first encounter was with a 300-pound cub, which impressed Lewis
but hardly intimidated him. American Indians might fear this animal, he
said, since they were equipped with bows and arrows, but “in the hands
of skilled riflemen they are by no means as formidable or dangerous as
they have been represented.” He changed his tune over the next two weeks
following four more encounters with full-grown grizzlies. On May 5,
1805, Clark killed the largest one they'd yet seen, an animal 8.5 feet
long, weighing 500-600 pounds, and with 4.5-inch claws. Not only was it,
as Lewis described, “a most tremendous looking animal,” it proved
“extremely hard to kill notwithstanding he had five balls through his
lungs and five others in various parts[:] he swam more than half the
distance across the river to a sandbar & it was at least twenty minutes
before he died; [he] made the most tremendous roaring from the moment he
was shot.” “I find,” Lewis wrote in his diary on May 6, 1805, “that the
curiossity of our party is pretty well satisfyed with rispect to this
animal” (sic) (Moulton 2003:122-25).

42. Kelly and Todd 1988:234.

43. Bird and O'Connell 2006:155.

44. Kaplan and Hill 1992:186; Kelly 1995:96-98; Stephens and Krebs
1986:75.

45. Silberbauer 1981:247-48.

46. On gender differences in wayfinding among moderns, see Lawton
1996:141; on division of hunting labor, see Borgerhoff Mulder 1992:363;
Chilton 2004; Foley 1988:218-20; Kelly 1995:269; and Silberbauer
1981:93; on costly signaling and the role of men's hunting, see Bird and
O'Connell 2006:154, 159, 163-65; Hawkes and Bliege Bird 2002.

47. Silverman and Eals 1992:534-35.

48. R. Nelson 1969:374.

49. Silberbauer 19 81:24 9.

50. Beaton 1991:220-21.

51. Binford 1983:34; Kelly 1995:150-51.

52. Ellis 2008:310; also Harpending 1999:517.

53. Moore 2001; see also Keegan and Diamond 1987:78; S. Black 1978:67;
McArthur, Saunders, and Tweedie 1976:322-23.

54. Beaton 1991.

55. Beaton 1991:223; see also Martin 1973; Szathmary 1993.

56. Borgerhoff Mulder 1992:341-42; MacArthur and Wilson 1967:78, 80, 88;
Meltzer 1995, 1999; Whallon 1989:434-35.

57. Anderson 1995; Meltzer 2002; Lourandos 1997:28.

58. Beaton 1991:224.

59. Beaton 1991:224.

60. Bird and O'Connell 2006:155-56.

61. Kirch 1988:113-14, 1997:254.

62. One of my archaeological colleagues has proclaimed, with great
gravitas and a just hint of melancholy, that the “absence of permanent
records doomed…to anonymity” the Paleoindian achievements in landscape
learning. Hardly. After all, ours is a business routinely conducted
without permanent records, and though many of the details are surely
long gone, we can nonetheless see archaeologically some of their broad
strategies to learning the new landscape, and certainly witness the
results.

CHAPTER 8: CLOVIS ADAPTATIONS AND PLEISTOCENE EXTINCTIONS

1. Eiseley 1975:95. Eiseley was by then embittered with Howard, whose
presence at the University of Pennsylvania had attracted Eiseley east in
the first place. Howard had been uninterested in a find Eiseley made,
ostensibly because it wasn't old enough: “We've got to go deeper, much
deeper,” Howard had exhorted.

2. Howard 1932.

3. E. Howard to H. Jayne, July 28, 1933. General Correspondence, Academy
of Natural Sciences Archives, Philadelphia.

4. E. Howard to H. Jayne, August 3, 1933. Curatorial Correspondence,
University Museum Archives, University of Pennsylvania.

5. Howard 1933.

6. Johnston 1933.

7. Bever 2001; Reanier 1995 on Alaska; Gryba 2001 on Clovis in the
ice-free corridor.

8. Sellet 2004.

9. Ahler and Geib 2000:803.

10. Bever and Meltzer 2007.

11. Lyman, O'Brian, and Hayes 1998.

12. Adovasio, Hyland, and Soffer 2001:213.

13. Agenbroad and Hesse 2004.

14. Frison 2004:58.

15. Frison and Bradley 1999.

16. Wilke, Flenniken, and Ozbun 1991:254.

17. Gramly 1993.

18. Wilke, Flenniken, and Ozbun 1991.

19. A half dozen or so caches of Dalton age have been reported from
eastern North America, and these are discussed in Chapter 9.

20. Collins, Lohse, and Shoberg 2007. Unfortunately, the deGraffenreid
cache was collected in the 1930s or 1940s, and its exact find-spot is
unknown. It may have come from the Gault site, or not. The stone is
virtually the same as that at Gault, but then such stone outcrops
elsewhere in this part of central Texas.

21. Gardner 1974.

22. Seeman 1994:237.

23. D. Anderson and Faught 2000; Bever and Meltzer 2007. The
“Paleoindian database of the Americas” with accompanying distribution
maps can be found on the web at http://pidba.utk.edu/.

24. On staging areas, see D. Anderson 1995; Dincauze 1993.

25. Lepper 1983; Meltzer and Bever 1995; Shott 2002.

26. Waters and Stafford 2007.

27. G. Haynes 2002.

28. Martin and Steadman 1999:34.

29. Martin 1973 remains the classic statement, but see his Twilight of
the Mammoths (2005).

30. J. Berger, Swenson, and Persson 2001.

31. In an ingenious twist on this theme, Gary Belovsky (1988) argues
animal extinctions are more likely to occur when hunting-gatherers are
able to exploit rich plant resources: more-abundant, gathered foods can
support larger human populations, which in turn will be more likely to
overexploit local animal prey. Case in point: the extinction of gazelle
by Neolithic farmers in the Middle East. Of course, a Clovis diet
dominated by plant foods is hardly what overkill envisions.

32. Martin 1984:363.

33. Grayson 2001.

34. The lack of predators on remote oceanic islands results from the
fact that few can cross long stretches of open ocean, and also need
large islands and correspondingly large prey populations to support
them. Animals that could reach these islands arrived by flying or
floating (in the air or water), which largely restricted the classes of
animals that can make the trip (birds, mostly). And once there, they no
longer needed to “invest energy in the embryogenesis and maintenance of
functional wings” (MacArthur and Wilson 1967:158). Simply put, over
evolutionary time, they lost their ability to fly.

35. Fiedel and Haynes 2004.

36. Grayson and Meltzer 2002.

37. The ossicles adhere to the skin, not the skeleton, of the animal,
and were recovered at the Kimmswick site (Missouri). Russell Graham
(personal communication) argues they came from hides of animals brought
to the sites. The ossicles testify to humans skinning Paramylodon, but
where the deed was done has not yet been discovered.

38. Grayson and Meltzer 2003.

39. Wheat 1972.

40. Martin 2005:155.

41. My son's room inspired this observation.

42. Martin 2005:133; compare to his comments on absence of evidence for
overkill (2005:157).

43. The exchange plays out in Grayson and Meltzer 2003; Fiedel and
Haynes 2004; Grayson and Meltzer 2004; and G. Haynes 2007. We did not
bother to respond to G. Haynes 2007.

44. Taphonomy is the study of the processes that affect organic remains
after the death of the individual as, for example, when the bones of the
carcass are scavenged, scattered, weathered, become buried, and so on.
Neotaphonomy, in Haynes's usage, refers to the study of fresh elephant
kills, bison kills, and the like.

45. Frison 2004 discusses these at length.

46. Jones et al. 2008.

47. Martin 2005:52.

48. Meltzer and Mead 1985:147-48

49. Shapiro et al. 2004.

50. Guthrie 2003, 2006.

51. Grayson 1977; Martin and Steadman 1999; Jackson and Weng 1999.

52. Grayson 2007; also Barnosky et al. 2004.

53. We don't know the details of the reproductive strategies of these
now-extinct animals; after all, they are extinct. But it is not
unreasonable to surmise, given the size of these animals and some basic
facts of biology, that they must have had long gestation periods (like
elephants), had only single births (twins are rare among large mammals),
and had reproductive spans. Elephants typically do not reach sexual
maturity until 10-12 years of age, and will only give birth every 4-9
years. Animals with this kind of reproduction pattern are known as K
strategists, and are particularly vulnerable when their young die before
reaching reproductive maturity, since it took so long to breed another.
On large mammal susceptibility to extinction, see Cardillo et al. 2005;
C. Johnson 2002.

54. Grayson 2007; also Barnosky et al. 2004.

55. After several failed attempts, the Clovis site was finally sold in
1979 to Eastern New Mexico University, and the gravel operations ceased.
By then, most of the original pond had been mined out. Still, intact
deposits cling to the side walls of the gravel pit, and even today,
those produce valuable data on Clovis and later occupations. The site,
now open to the public, is on the National Register of Historic Places.

56. Huckell and Judge 2006:151.

57. C. Haynes 1991; C. Haynes et al. 1999; Holliday 2000.

58. Huckell and Judge 2006.

59. Haury, Sayles, and Wasley 1959.

60. C. Haynes and Huckell 2007.

61. Colby is one of the very few mammoth Clovis sites in which the point
was found before the mammoth bones, in this case more than a decade
earlier (Frison 2004:44).

62. C. Haynes et al. 1998.

63. Leonhardy 1966.

64. Holliday et al. 1994.

65. Western New York's Hiscock site has yielded mastodon bones and a
fluted point, but the point proved to be closer to some elk bones than
to mastodon bones. In fact, the site's excavator, Richard Laub (2002),
wonders if the association was of a different kind: that the mastodon
were dead by the time humans arrived, and their remains were quarried by
people to fashion bone tools.

66. Cannon and Meltzer 2004.

67. O'Connell, personal communication; Silberbauer 1981:292-93.

68. Frison 1991:146-47, Frison 2004:54-58; Roosevelt 1910:299. Roosevelt
was hunting for display specimens for the Smithsonian Institution's
National Museum of Natural History; times were different then for
ex-presidents, and for museums.

69. Bird and O'Connell 2006:160.

70. Hawkes and Bliege Bird 2002:59-61; Bird and O'Connell 2006:164-65.

71. G. Haynes (2002) thinks this statement a caricature and “nonsense,”
and that “perhaps professional archaeologists in the modern world are
frightened to death of hunting proboscideans…but real people foraging in
the world today do not think that way.” O'Connell and Silberbauer, and
Roosevelt, of course, show that's not necessarily so.

72. Roosevelt 1910:289. Roosevelt was not unaware of the analogy of
Africa to the Paleolithic, though naturally he conceived of it in highly
simplified and typically Victorian fashion: his opening chapter
describing his travels through Africa was entitled “Through the
Pleistocene.” The trash-talk quote is from Hawkes and Bliege Bird
2002:64.

73. Ellis 1997:47-50.

74. Harris lines were spotted in the femur, which are normally caused by
seasonal nutritional deficiencies or serious illness. She was between 17
and 21 years of age at the time she died. Green et al. 1998:448-49.

75. Crook and Harris 1957:17.

76. G. Haynes 2002:179.

77. Gramly 1982, 2005, and personal communication, 2007.

78. West 1983.

79. Which is not to say nut collecting leaves no record under any
circumstances: in Late Prehistoric times in California and the Great
Basin, when resource depression had set in and there was intensive
exploitation of foods such as acorn and pinon, substantial
archaeological records built up. But then these were harder times, those
were critical resources, and villages were often established on the
spot.

80. G. Haynes 2002:236.

81. G. Haynes 2002:270. See Hollenbach 2007 for an interesting and
nuanced discussion of the role of plant gathering among Paleoindians.

CHAPTER 9: SETTLING IN: LATE PALEOINDIANS AND THE WANING ICE AGE

1. Meltzer 2006b; Seebach 2006. One of the most famous of the Dust Bowl
photographs, so emblematic that the U.S. Postal Service used it as one
of the images to symbolize the decade, was Arthur Rothstein's Fleeing a
Dust Storm, which showed a father and his two young sons (the Coble
family) running for cover in the panhandle of Oklahoma, ground zero of
the Dust Bowl. As it happens, that corrosive storm and others like it
soon exposed the Nall Paleoindian site just a few miles away from where
that photograph was taken.

2. Shetrone 1936:4.

3. Kroeber 1939:3, 205.

4. Quimby 1954:317.

5. Aschmann 1955:377; Quimby 1955:379.

6. This can get confusing, since the time periods are named after point
types, which in turn are named after the sites in which they were first
found. Thus, there is a Folsom site, a Folsom point, a Folsom period,
and a Folsom culture. Confusion is compounded at sites occupied at
different times: the Agate Basin site has Folsom, Agate Basin, and Hell
Gap points and periods represented (among others).

7. Beck and Jones 1997:189-97.

8. D. Anderson 2002:44.

9. Meltzer 2006a; Stanford 1999.

10. Amick 1996; G. Jones et al. 2003. See also Stanford 1999:303.

11. This emphasis is also strongly influenced by my own research
interests and fieldwork over the last two decades on the plains and
Rocky Mountains, which has included investigations at the sites of
Bonfire Rockshelter, Folsom, Lindenmeier, Midland, and Mountaineer
(among others). For those looking for comparably detailed coverage of
other areas, my apologies.

12. Lott 2002:69.

13. As Lott explains it, bisons’ natural predators are wolves, and
wolves hunt mostly by sight: the best way to avoid them is to hide, no
easy task on a treeless landscape where the grass is ankle high, so “the
only thing big enough to hide behind is another bison—or better still, a
bunch of bison” (Lott 2002:33).

14. Lott suggests the long, hooked shape and forward orientation of
Bison antiquus horns indicates it may have met its Pleistocene predators
by standing its ground and fighting. But then two new predators—humans
and gray wolves—appeared on the scene, one that could kill at a distance
and the other a pack hunter that could overcome a lone bison. Massive
horns were not as valuable as being able to make a fast getaway. Lott
2002:65-66; also Frison 2004:62-64

15. Frison 2004; Lott 2002:102.

16. LaBelle 2005; also Andrews, LaBelle, and Seebach 2008; M. E. Hill
2007.

17. Byerly et al. 2005. Depending on the route a herd was stampeded, the
cliff edge at Bonfire might not have been visible until the animals were
within 24 meters; traveling at top speed, they could cover that distance
in less than 2 seconds.

18. Meltzer 2006a; Wheat 1972.

19. The material in this sidebar is drawn from Meltzer 2006a.

20. Don Yeager, personal communication, 2007; Frison 1991:167-70.

21. Haury, Sayles, and Wasley 1959:15. See also Ellis's study of
ethnographic weaponry, which shows that point size or form varied little
with the size of the game animals being hunted (Ellis 1997:65).

22. Wilmsen and Roberts 1978:171, 176. In this instance, it's suspected
the point was thrust into the animal, and had it been standing at the
time, the point would have come in from behind and below.

23. Frison 2004:107 discusses the requirements of a projectile point.

24. Frison 2004:110.

25. Ellis 1997:61; but see Churchill 2002:186 for a different result.

26. Data on velocities and the quote from Garcilaso de la Vega come from
Hutchings

1997:136.

27. Frison 1991:211-12; Frison 2004:213.

28. Bamforth 2002.

29. M. E. Hill 2007.

30. M. G. Hill 2001.

31. Reeves 1990:170.

32. Wheat 1972:114. Olsen-Chubbuck had 110 females, of which 63 were
adult, the remainder immature and calves; and 80 males, of which 46 were
adult, the remainder immature bulls and calves.

33. Frison 2004:113-14.

34. Lawrence C. Todd, personal communication, 2005.

35. Jodry 1999. Similar activities took place at Shifting Sands, though
not on as large a scale (Hofman, Amick, and Rose 1990).

36. Sellet 2004; M. G. Hill 2001.

37. Stiger 2006.

38. Frison 2004.

39. LaBelle 2005. See also M. E. Hill 2007.

40. Bamforth 2007; E. Johnson 1987.

41. Lewis Binford, personal communication, 2005.

42. Jason LaBelle, personal communication, 2006.

43. Wilmsen and Roberts 1978:45-48.

44. Wilmsen and Roberts 1978:114.

45. Shapiro et al. 2004.

46. The discussion of Mesa Complex comes from Kunz, Bever, and Adkins
2003; Bever 2001; Mann et al. 2001.

47. Hoffecker 2005.

48. Anderson 2002; Dansie and Jerrems 2006:72; Dunbar and Vojnovski
2007.

49. Eren 2008.

50. Newby et al. 2005. Their “guarantee” comes on page 150.

51. Newby et al. 2005:151.

52. Newby et al. 2005:145, 150, 152.

53. Ellis and Deller 1990:62, 1997.

54. Ellis and Deller 1997:17. On postglacial fish restocking, see Curry
2007.

55. Goodyear 1982; Walthall 1998.

56. Goodyear 1999:378; Yerkes and Gaertner, in Morse 1997.

57. Walthall 1998:232; Grover 1994:126. At Dust Cave, a variety of birds
dominate the recovered animal bones, and that includes a cache of humeri
(upper wing bones) of Canadian geese, presumably stored there for later
toolmaking (Walker 2007:105-6). On the plant side, hickory nuts were a
mainstay of the diet the fall that the site was occupied (Hollenbach
2007).

58. Walthall and Koldehoff 1998.

59. Kelly and Todd 1988.

60. Collins 1991; Sherwood et al. 2004.

61. Walthall 1998.

62. Beck and Jones 1997; much of my discussion is taken from this
important source, but see also Aikens 2006.

63. Dansie and Jerrems 2006:68.

64. On crescents, see Beck and Jones 1997:206-7 (from which the Clewlow
quote comes) and Amick 1999.

65. Harrison and Killen 1978.

66. Stanford 1978. Whether it was a single or multiple occupation is
unclear; a detailed report on Jones-Miller has never been published.

67. Stafford et al. 2003.

68. Morse 1997.

69. Sutherland 2000.

70. Skraeling was a pejorative Norse term for a weakling, which the
Norse applied without distinction to all Native Americans they
encountered, which likely included both Thule (Paleo-Eskimo) and
Algonquian speakers, and perhaps the Beothuk Indians (Schledermann
2000:192).

71. Schledermann (2000); Wallace 2000.

72. Wallace 2000.

73. Odess, Loring, and Fitzhugh 2000:203.

CHAPTER 10: WHEN PAST AND PRESENT COLLIDE

1. C. Darwin to S. Darwin, April 23, 1835, in Burkhardt and Smith
1985:445-48. Darwin saw in the sandstone of the Uspallata Range
petrified trees at 7,000 feet in elevation; for thousands of feet above
the sandstone were sedimentary beds bearing fossil shells and atop them
a lava that had been spewed into deep ocean. The trees had once “waved
their branches on the shores of the Atlantic, when that ocean (now
driven back 700 miles) came to the foot of the Andes,” while the marine
sediments were testimony that the once dry land had been “let down into
the depths of the ocean,” by at least as many thousands of feet as the
top of the marine deposits (Darwin 1839a, notes of March 30, 1835).

2. Darwin 1839a, notes of March 25, 1835.

3. Barrazo and Lazzari 2004.

4. Medawar points out that Darwin also suffered from the treatments
administered by his physicians, including low levels of chronic arsenic
and mercury poisoning (1982:146).

5. The earlier Norse contact did not involve any disease transmission,
since infectious pathogens like the plague and smallpox did not reach
Norway, Iceland, or Greenland until the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, long after the Norse had abandoned their Vinland enterprise
(Crosby 1986:52).

6. In 1967, the World Health Organization resolved to eradicate smallpox
from the world's diseases. Through an ambitious program of vaccination
and treatment, that goal was met, eradication being possible because
smallpox has only one host: humans. The last “natural” case occurred in
Somalia in 1977, and the last laboratory death occurred in 1978, when a
photographer in a British University (Birmingham) lab was accidentally
infected. In October 1979, the world was declared free of smallpox. All
remaining stocks of smallpox virus were transferred to two laboratories:
at the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in Atlanta, and at the Research
Institute for Viral Preparations in Moscow. The virus stocks have been
there in hermetically sealed containers since 1983 (at least the hope is
that the Moscow samples remained protected after the breakup of the
former Soviet Union). The samples were slated for destruction over a
dozen years ago, but for a variety of reasons never were. Now, with
fears of global bioterror, their “execution” has been stayed
indefinitely, so as to better cope with the virus (and understand its
extraordinarily ability to evade the natural human defense mechanisms)
in the event it re-emerges—especially if in a variant form.

7. Le Page du Pratz 1758; Crosby 1986:200.

8. Jefferson 1788.

9. Jefferson, Instructions to Captain Lewis, June 20, 1803, in Jackson
1962. Cowpox, from which Jenner derived his vaccine, has multiple animal
hosts (unlike smallpox), including humans, cat, mice, cattle, and
elephants. It's far less deadly than smallpox, though a mild bout with
cowpox would confer immunity from smallpox. Fenn (2001) details the use
of variolation (the administration of cowpox) in colonial America.

10. Gentleman of Elvas 1686, Chapter XIV: “How the governor left the
province of Patofa and came upon an uninhabited region, where he and all
his men experienced great vicissitudes and extreme need.”

11. Crosby 1986:201; Li et al. 2007.

12. Fenn 2001.

13. Which is not to say that reliable population numbers are
unavailable. The Spanish colonial censuses, for example, are reasonably
accurate.

14. Dobyns 1966, 1983.

15. Ubelaker 2006–696-97.

16. The United States 2000 census puts American Indian numbers at 2.5
million, and the Canada census reports 1.4 million (Snipp 2006:710-11)

17. F. Black 1992.

18. Levine and LeBauve 1997; Schroeder 1979.

19. C. Mann 2005.

20. Ruddiman 2005:121, 132-40. Ruddiman makes the point that the
increase in atmospheric CO₂ as a result of deforestation would have been
a long, gradual process tied to the slow Neolithic rhythm of the spread
of agriculture; in contrast, an epidemic of mass mortality, coupled with
the rapidity with which forests re-colonize open ground, would lead—as
it does in the isotope record—to a much faster rate of decrease in
atmospheric CO₂ (2005:140). Also, Nevle and Bird 2008.

21. McNeill (1976) has an insightful discussion of the process by which
pathogens and their hosts co-evolve, and is the basis for what follows.

22. Li et al. 2007.

23. Li et al. 2007.

24. Crosby 1986:208.

25. Le Page du Pratz 1758.

26. Fenn 2001:221.

27. Crosby 1986:286.

28. Stewart 1973:19-20.

29. F. Black 1992. Of course, there are also within American Indian
populations—especially those in South America—novel alleles of the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC), which are generally attributed to
disease-driven selection, likely a response on the part of founding
populations to newly encountered pathogens such as acute malarial
infection, Trypanosoma cruzi, and Leishmania braziliensis (see Belich et
al. 1992; Watkins et al. 1992).

30. Diamond 1999:168-74.

31. McNeill 1976.

32. Boone 1994:18.

33. Crosby 1986:197, 215-16. There has long been debate over the origins
of syphilis. The first recorded epidemic only occurred in 1495, raising
the possibility that the bacterium that causes the disease, Treponema
pallidum pallidum, was not homegrown in the Old World, but was a new and
virulent strain that developed in Europe from a non-venereal type of
yaws brought back by Christopher Columbus's men. Recent molecular
sequencing attempted to trace the genetic history of the
syphilis-causing bacterium, and concluded it was indeed a recent strain,
and its closest relative was non-venereal New World yaws (Harper et al.
2008). However, that study was based on a limited and degraded DNA
sample of New World yaws, and its conclusions remain in need of further
testing (Mulligan, Norris, and Lukehart 2008). Dillehay (1991) explores
the role and effect of disease in the peopling of the Southern
Hemisphere.

34. Crosby 1986:283; Blanton 2003; Stahle et al. 1998.

35. McNutt 1912, Peter Martyr, letter of November 1493.

36. Crosby 1986:151, 155-56.

37. Elliot 2006:103-4

38. Crosby 1986.

39. Swanton 1911:100. Gentleman of Elvas, 1686, Chapter XXIX: “Of the
message sent by the governor to Quigaltam and of the answer given by the
latter, and of what happened during this time.”

40. Brain 1971; Galloway and Jackson 2004; Swanton 1911:107.

41. Swanton 1911:105.

42. Galloway and Jackson 2004:603; also Swanton 1911:185-86.

43. Brain 1971:221-22. The Natchez kin system would not have the
opportunity to run its course. After a long series of skirmishes with
the French, compounded by complex internecine warfare with both allies
and enemies (the sides shifting so fluidly it must have been hard
sometimes to keep track), in 1731 some 400 Natchez surrendered and were
sent to the Caribbean as slaves. Others scattered throughout the
Mississippi Valley, joining with the Chickasaw and Cherokee. Although
the Natchez attempted to maintain their own language, it became extinct
in the 1930s (Campbell 1997; Galloway and Jackson 2004).

44. Dobyns 1991:551.

45. Goddard 2004.

46. Ronda 1984:52.

47. Abler 1999; Eccles 1988; Secoy 1953:30-32; Swagerty 1988:356; Cronon
and White 1988:425.

48. Dunnell 1991:570-71.

49. Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, 25 U.S.C.
3002(a)1-2.

50. Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, 25 U.S.C.
3005(a)4.

51. Thomas 2000:232.

52. Echo-Hawk 1997; also Archambault 2006; Thomas 2000:251-53.

53. B. Babbitt to L. Caldera, September 21, 2000. Available on the
National Park Service Archaeology Program “Kennewick Man” Web site,
www.nps.gov/archeology/kennewick/babb_letter.htm.

54. Jelderks, Opinion and Order, Civil No. 96-1481-JE, August 30, 2002.

55. USC § 3001(9). (Emphasis mine.)

56. Gould, Opinion for the United States Court of Appeal for the Ninth
Circuit, No. 0235996. D.C. No. CV-96-01481-JE, February 4, 2004.
(Emphasis in the original.)

57. In 2005 Senator John McCain offered an amendment (S.536) to change
the definition of American Indian in NAGPRA by adding the words, “or
was” after “is,” (i.e., “of, or relating to, a tribe, people, or culture
that is or was indigenous to the United States”). The amendment failed.

58. One is reminded of the rhetoric from the height of the Great
Paleolithic War, when the proponents of American Paleolithic railed
against government scientists, saying that “of all the arrogant things
in the world official science is perhaps the most arrogant, and of all
the obstructive things official science is perhaps the most obstructive”
(You-mans 1893:841).

59. Schneider and Bonnichsen 2006:301, 307. It's hard to swallow the
conspiracy claim, especially since two of the plaintiffs are government
officials at the Smithsonian Institution (we've met the enemy, and he is
us!), and two of the scientists brought in by the Department of the
Interior (a different government branch) in 1998-99 to study the
Kennewick remains were PhDs trained by two of the plaintiffs.

60. Deloria 1995:41, Deloria quoted in Thomas 2000; Marks 2002:237.

61. Thomas 2000:xxvi.

62. Thomas 2000:275.

63. Deloria 1995:41; Schneider and Bonnichsen stress the importance of
that conversation, but then simultaneously proclaim that those who
believe the “assault on science can be defused through conciliation and
compromise…are mistaken” (2006:307).

64. Gould 1989:283, 289.

65. On Cortés's legal maneuvering, see Elliot 2006.

66. The Spaniards soon enough found out why there was Native resistance:
when they entered the Aztec capital, they were stunned and sickened by
its blood-stained pyramids and scaffolds, covered by some 136,000 human
skulls, gruesome evidence of a thriving industry in human sacrifice and
testimony to how the Empire controlled the other peoples in the region
(Boone 1994).

67. Boone 1994:142.

68. Boone 1994:14.

69. Elliot 2006:5.

70. A similar scenario played out in the collapse of the Inca Empire a
few decades later, and though the circumstances differed in important
respects, the outcome was the same. Less militarily decisive, though
important all the same, disease influenced the outcome of the American
Revolution: British troops under General Cornwallis were hard hit by
malaria. “Revolutionary mosquitoes,” J. R. McNeill calls them (cited in
Mann 2007). See also Fenn 2001.

71. Crosby 1986:200.

REFERENCES

Abbott, C. C. (1889). Evidences of the antiquity of man in eastern North
America. Proceedings American Association for the Advancement of Science
37:293-315.

Abbott, C. C. (1892a). Paleolithic man in America. Science 20:270-71.

Abbott, C. C. (1892b). Paleolithic man: a last word. Science 20:344-45.

Abler, T. (1999). Beavers and muskets: Iroquois military fortunes in the
face of European colonization. In War in the tribal zone, edited by R.
Ferguson and N. Whitehead, pp. 151-74. School of American Research,
Santa Fe, NM.

Achilli, A., U. Perego, C. Bravi, M. Coble, Q-P. Kong, S. Woodward, A.
Salas, A. Torroni, and H-J. Bandelt (2008). The phylogeny of the four
pan-American mtDNA haplogroups: implications for evolutionary and
disease studies. PLoS ONE 3:e1764.

Adovasio, J. and J. Page (2002). The first Americans: in pursuit of
archaeology's greatest mystery. Random House, New York.

Adovasio, J., D. Hyland, and O. Soffer (2001). Perishable technology and
early human populations in the New World. In On being first: cultural
innovation and environmental consequences of first peoplings.
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Chacmool Conference, edited by J.
Gillespie, S. Tupakka, and C. de Mille, pp. 201-21. Archaeological
Association of the University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.

Agassiz, E. (1887). Louis Agassiz: his life and correspondence. Houghton
Mifflin, Boston.

Agenbroad, L. and I. Hesse (2004). Megafauna, Paleoindians, petroglyphs,
and pictographs of the Colorado Plateau. In The settlement of the
American continents: a multidisciplinary approach to human biogeography,
edited by C. M. Barton, G. A. Clark, D. R. Yesner, and G. A. Pearson,
pp. 189-95. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Ahler, S. A. and P. R. Geib (2000). Why flute? Folsom point design and
adaptation. Journal of Archaeological Science 27:799-820.

Aikens, C. M. (2006). Paleo-indian: west. In Handbook of North American
Indians, Vol. 3, environment, origins, and population, edited by D.
Ubelaker, pp. 194-207. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Alley, R. (2000a). The two-mile time machine: ice cores, abrupt climate
change, and our future. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Alley, R. (2000b). Ice-core evidence of abrupt climate changes.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 97:1331-34.

Alley, R. (2007). Wally was right: predictive ability of the North
Atlantic “Conveyor Belt” hypothesis for abrupt climate change. Annual
Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 35:241-72.

Alley, R., P. Clark, P. Huybrechts, and I. Joughin (2005). Ice-sheet and
sea level changes. Science 310:456-60.

Amick, D. (1996). Regional patterns of Folsom mobility and land use in
the American Southwest. World Archaeology 27:411-26.

Amick, D. (1999). Using lithic artifacts to explain past behavior. In
Models for the millennium: current research in Great basin anthropology,
edited by C. Beck, pp. 161-70. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.

Anderson, D. (1995). Paleoindian interaction networks in the eastern
woodlands. In Native American interaction: multiscalar analyses and
interpretations in the eastern woodlands, edited by M. Nassaney and K.
Sassaman, pp. 1-26. University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville.

Anderson, D. (2002). Southeast context. In Earliest Americans theme
study for the eastern United States, compiled and edited by E. M.
Seibert, pp. 44-80. United States Department of Interior, National Park
Service, Washington, D.C.

Anderson, D. and M. Faught (2000). Palaeoindian artifact distribution:
evidence and implications. Antiquity 74:507-13.

Anderson, D. and J. C. Gillam (2000). Paleoindian colonization of the
Americas: implications from an examination of physiography, demography,
and artifact distribution. American Antiquity 65:43-66.

Anderson, D. and K. Sassaman, eds. (1996). The Paleoindian and Early
Archaic Southeast. University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.

Anderson, E. (1984). Who's who in the Pleistocene: a mammalian bestiary.
In Quaternary extinctions: a prehistoric revolution, edited by P. S.
Martin and R. G. Klein, pp. 40-89. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Anderson, P., M. Edwards, and L. Brubaker (2004). Results and
paleoclimatic implications of 35 years of paleoecological research in
Alaska. In The Quaternary period in the United States, edited by A.
Gillespie, S. C. Porter, and B. Atwater, pp. 427-40. Elsevier Science,
New York.

Andre, A., A. Karst, and N. Turner (2006). Arctic and subarctic plants.
In Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 3, environment, origins, and
population, edited by D. Ubelaker, pp. 222-35. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D.C.

Andrews, B., J. LaBelle, and J. Seebach (2008). Spatial variability in
the Folsom archaeological record: a multi-scalar approach. American
Antiquity 73:464-490.

Anthony, D. W. (1990). Migration in archaeology: the baby and the
bathwater. American Anthropologist 92:895-914.

Anyon, R., T. J. Ferguson, L. Jackson, L. Lane, and P. Vicenti (1997).
Native American oral tradition and archaeology: issues of structure,
relevance, and respect. In Native Americans and archaeologists: stepping
stones to common ground, edited by N. Swidler, K. Dongoske, R. Anyon,
and A. Downer, pp. 77-87. AltaMira Press, Walnut Creek, CA.

Aporta, C. and E. Higgs (2005). Global Positioning Systems, Inuit
wayfinding, and the need for a new account of technology. Current
Anthropology 46:729-53.

Archambault, J. (2006). Native views of origins. Handbook of North
American Indians, Vol. 3, environment, origins, and population, edited
by D. Ubelaker, pp. 4-15. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
D.C.

Aschmann, H. (1955). Comment on Quimby's cultural and natural areas
before Kroeber. American Antiquity 20:377-78.

Baker, V. R. and D. Nummedal (1978). The Channeled Scabland. NASA,
Washington, D.C.

Balter, M. (2008). Ancient algae suggest sea route for first Americans.
Science 320:729.

Bamforth, D. (2002). High-tech foragers? Folsom and later Paleoindian
technology on the Great Plains. Journal of World Prehistory 16:55-98.

Bamforth, D. (2007). The Allen site: A Paleoindian camp in southwestern
Nebraska. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Barnosky, A. D., P. L. Koch, R. S. Feranec, S. L. Wing, and A. B. Shabel
(2004). Assessing the causes of late Pleistocene extinctions on the
continents. Science 306:70-75.

Barrazo, R. and C. R. Lazzari (2004). The response of the blood-sucking
bug Triatoma infestans to carbon dioxide and other host odours. Chemical
Senses 29:319-29.

Barton, M., G. A. Clark, D. R. Yesner, and G. A. Pearson, eds. (2004).
The settlement of the American continents: a multidisciplinary approach
to human biogeography. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Barton, M., S. Schmich, and S. James (2004). The ecology of human
colonization in pristine landscapes. In The settlement of the American
continents: a multidisciplinary approach to human biogeography, edited
by C. M. Barton, G. A. Clark, D. R. Yesner, and G. A. Pearson, pp.
138-61. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Bassett, S., G. Milne, J. Mitrovica, and P. Clark (2005). Ice sheet and
solid earth influences on far-field sea-level histories. Science
309:925-28.

Beaton, J. (1991). Colonizing continents: some problems from Australia
and the Americas. In The first Americans: search and research, edited by
T. D. Dillehay and D. J. Meltzer, pp. 209-30. CRC Press, Baton Rouge,
LA.

Beck, C. and G. T. Jones (1997). The terminal Pleistocene/Early Holocene
archaeology of the Great Basin. Journal of World Prehistory 11:161-236.

Belich M. P., J. A. Madrigal, W. Hildebrand, J. Zemmour, R. Williams, R.
Luz, M. L. Petzl-Erler, and P. Parham (1992). Unusual HLA-B alleles in
two tribes of Brazilian Indians. Nature 357:326-29.

Belovsky, G. (1988). An optimal foraging-based model of hunter-gatherer
population dynamics. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 7:329-72.

Benson, L. (2004). Western lakes. In The Quaternary period in the United
States, edited by A. Gillespie, S. C. Porter, and B. Atwater, pp.
185-204. Elsevier Science, New York.

Berger, A. and M. Loutre (1991). Insolation values for the climate of
the last 10 million years. Quaternary Science Reviews 10:297-317.

Berger, J., J. Swenson, and I. Persson (2001). Recolonizing carnivores
and naive prey: conservation lessons from Pleistocene extinctions.
Science 291:1036-39.

Berger, R. (1975). Advances and results in radiocarbon dating: early man
in America. World Archaeology 7:174-84.

Berger, R. and R. Protsch (1989). UCLA radiocarbon dates XI. Radiocarbon
31:55-67.

Berlin, E. and B. Berlin (1996). Medical ethnobiology of the Highland
Maya of Chiapas, Mexico: the gastrointestinal diseases. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Bettinger, R. and D. Young (2004). Hunter-gatherer population expansion
in north Asia and the New World. In Entering America: Northeast Asia and
Beringia before the Last Glacial Maximum, edited by D. Madsen, pp.
239-51. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.

Bever, M. (2001). An overview of Alaskan late Pleistocene archaeology:
historical themes and current perspectives. Journal of World Prehistory
15:125-91.

Bever, M. and M. Kunz, eds. (2001). Between two worlds: late Pleistocene
cultural and technological diversity in Beringia. Arctic Anthropology
38.

Bever, M. and D. J. Meltzer (2007). Investigating variation in Clovis
Paleoindian lifeways: the third revised edition of the Texas Clovis
Fluted Point Survey. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
78:65-99.

Binford, L. R. (1983). Long term land use patterns: some implications
for archaeology. In Lulu linear punctated: essays in honor of George
Irving Quimby, edited by R. C. Dunnell and D. K. Grayson. University of
Michigan Anthropological Papers 72:27-53.

Bird, D. and J. F. O'Connell (2006). Behavioral ecology and archaeology.
Journal of Archaeological Research 14:143-88.

Black, F. L. (1992). Why did they die? Science 258:1739-40.

Black, S. (1978). Polynesian outliers: a study in the survival of small
populations. In Simulation studies in archaeology, edited by I. Hodder,
pp. 63-76. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Blanton, D. (2003). The weather is fine, wish you were here, because I'm
the last one alive: learning the environment in the English New World
colonies. In Colonization of unfamiliar landscapes: the archaeology of
adaptation, edited by M. Rockman and J. Steele, pp. 190-200. Routledge,
London.

Bliss, W. (1940a) A chronological problem presented by Sandia Cave, New
Mexico. American Antiquity 5:200-201.

Bliss, W. (1940b) Sandia Cave. American Antiquity 6:77-78.

Bolnick, D. A., B. A. Shook, L. Campbell, and I. Goddard (2004).
Problematic use of Greenberg's linguistic classification of the Americas
in studies of Native American genetic variation. American Journal of
Human Genetics 75:519-22.

Bolton, H. E. (1949). Coronado, knight of pueblos and plains. Whittlesey
House, New York.

Bonnichsen, R., B. Lepper, D. Stanford, and M. Waters (2006).
Paleoamerican origins: beyond Clovis. Center for the Study of the First
Americans, College Station, TX.

Bonnichsen, R. and K. Turnmire, eds. (1991). Clovis: origins and
adaptations. Center for the Study of the First Americans, Corvallis, OR.

Bonnichsen, R. and K. Turnmire, eds. (1999). Ice-Age people of North
America: environments, origins, and adaptations. Center for the Study of
the First Americans, Corvallis, OR.

Bonnichsen et al. v. United States 1996 Civil No. 96-1481JE, U. S.
District Court, District of Oregon.

Boone, E. (1994). The Aztec world. Smithsonian Books, Washington, D.C.

Booth, D., K. G. Troost, J. J. Clague, and R. Wiatt (2004). The
Cordilleran ice sheet. In The Quaternary period in the United States,
edited by A. Gillespie, S. C. Porter, and B. Atwater, pp. 17-43.
Elsevier Science, New York.

Borgerhoff Mulder, M. (1992). Reproductive decisions. In Evolutionary
ecology and human behavior, edited by E. Smith and B. Winterhalder, pp.
339-74. Aldine de Gruyter, New York.

Borrero, L. (1995). Human and natural agency: some comments on Pedra
Furada. Antiquity 69:602-3.

Bowler, P. (1976). Fossils and progress: paleontology and the idea of
progressive evolution in the nineteenth century. Science History
Publications, New York.

Brace, C. L., A. Nelson, N. Seguchi, H. Oe, L. Sering, P. Qifeng, L.
Yongyi, and D. Tumen (2001). Old World sources of the first New World
human inhabitants: a comparative craniofacial view. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 98:10017-22.

Bradley, B. and D. Stanford (2004). The North Atlantic ice-edge
corridor: a possible Palaeolithic route to the New World. World
Archaeology 36:459-78.

Bradley, R. and J. England (2008). The Younger Dryas and the sea of
ancient ice. Quaternary Research 70:1-10.

Brain, J. P. (1971). The Natchez paradox. Ethnology 10:215-22.

Brand, D. (1940). Regarding Sandia Cave. American Antiquity 5:339.

Breternitz, D., A. Swedlund, and D. Anderson (1971). An early burial
from Gordon Creek, Colorado. American Antiquity 36:170-82.

Brigham-Grette, J., A. Lozhkin, P. M. Anderson, and O. Y. Glushkova
(2004). Paleoenvironmental conditions in western Beringia before and
during the Last Glacial Maximum. In Entering America: Northeast Asia and
Beringia before the Last Glacial Maximum, edited by D. Madsen, pp.
29-61. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.

Broecker, W. S. (1995). Chaotic climate. Scientific American (November):
62-68.

Broecker, W. S. (2003). Does the trigger for abrupt climate change
reside in the ocean or in the atmosphere? Science 300:1519-22.

Broecker, W. S. (2006). Was the Younger Dryas triggered by a flood?
Science 312:1146-48.

Broecker, W. S. and G. Denton (1990). What drives glacial cycles?
Scientific American (January):49-56.

Broecker, W. and R. Kunzig (2008). Fixing climate: what past climate
changes reveal about the current threat—and how to counter it. Hill and
Wang, New York.

Brown, J. H. (1971). Mammals on mountaintops: nonequilibrium insular
biogeography. American Naturalist 105:467-78.

Brown, M., S. Hoseini, A. Torroni, H. Bandeldt, J. Allen, T. Schurr, R.
Scozzari, F. Cruciani, and D. Wallace (1998). mtDNA haplogroup X: an
ancient link between Europe/western Asia and North America? American
Journal of Human Genetics 63:1852-70.

Brown, R. M., H. Andrews, G. Ball, N. Burn, Y. Imahori, and J. Milton
(1983). Accelerator ¹⁴C dating of the Taber Child. Canadian Journal of
Archaeology 7:233-37.

Bryan, A., ed. (1978). Early man in America. Archaeological Researches
International, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

Bryan, A., ed. (1986). New evidence for the Pleistocene peopling of the
Americas. Center for the Study of Early Man, University of Maine, Orono.

Buckland, W. (1823). Reliquix diluvianx; or observations on the organic
remains contained in caves, fissures, and diluvial gravel, and on other
geological phenomena, attesting the action of an universal deluge. J.
Murray, London.

Burkhardt, F., J. Browne, D. Porter, and M. Richmond (1994). The
correspondence of Charles Darwin, Vol. 9, 1861. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

Burkhardt, F. and S. Smith (1985). The correspondence of Charles Darwin,
Vol. 1, 1821-36. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Burkhardt, F. and S. Smith (1986). The correspondence of Charles Darwin,
Vol. 2, 1837-43. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Burkhardt, F. and S. Smith (1991). The correspondence of Charles Darwin,
Vol. 7, 1858-59. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Butzer, K. (1991). An Old World perspective on potential mid-Wisconsinan
settlement of the Americas. In The first Americans: search and research,
edited by T. Dillehay and D. J. Meltzer, pp. 137-56. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL.

Byerly, R. M., J. R. Cooper, D. J. Meltzer, M. E. Hill, and J. M.
LaBelle (2005). On Bonfire shelter (Texas) as a Paleoindian bison jump:
an assessment using GIS and zooarchaeology. American Antiquity
70:595-629.

Campbell, L. (1988). Review of Language in the America. Language
64:591-615.

Campbell, L. (1997). American Indian languages: the historical
linguistics of native America. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Cann, R., M. Stoneking, and A. Wilson (1987). Mitochondrial DNA and
human evolution. Nature 325:31-36.

Cannon, M. D. and D. J. Meltzer (2004). Early Paleoindian foraging:
examining the faunal evidence for large mammal specialization and
regional variability in prey choice. Quaternary Science Reviews 23
(18/19):1955-87.

Cardillo, M., G. M. Mace, K. Jones, J. Bielby, O. R. Bininda-Emonds, W.
Sechrest, C. D. Orme, and A. Purvis (2005). Multiple causes of high
extinction risk in large mammal species. Science 309:1239-41.

Carlson, A., P. U. Clark, B. A. Haley, G. P. Klinkhammer, K. Simmons, E.
Brook and K. Meissner (2007). Geochemical proxies of North American
freshwater routing during the Younger Dryas cold event. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 104:6556-61.

Carlson, R. and L. Bona, eds. (1996). Early human occupation in British
Columbia. University of British Columbia Press, Vancouver.

Cavalli-Sforza, L., P. Menozzi, and A. Piazza (1994). The history and
geography of human genes. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Chamberlin, T. C. (1892). Geology and archaeology mistaught. Dial
13:303-6.

Charnov, R., G. Orians, and K. Hyatt (1976). The ecological implications
of resource depression. American Naturalist 110:247-59. Chatters, J. C.
(2000). The recovery and first analysis of an Early Holocene human
skeleton from Kennewick, Washington. American Antiquity 65:291-316.

Chatters, J. C. (2001). Ancient encounters. Kennewick man and the first
Americans. Simon & Schuster, New York.

Chen, T., R. E. M. Hedges, and Z. Yuan (1989). Accelerator radiocarbon
dating for the Upper Cave of Zhoukoudian. Acta Anthropologica Sinica
8:216-21.

Chilton, E. (2004). Beyond “Big”: gender, age, and subsistence diversity
in Paleoindian studies. In The settlement of the American continents: a
multidisciplinary approach to human biogeography, edited by C. M.
Barton, G. A. Clark, D. R. Yesner, and G. A. Pearson, pp. 162-72.
University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Churchill, S. (2002). Of assegais and bayonets: reconstructing
prehistoric spear use. Evolutionary Anthropology 11:185-86.

Clague, J. (2006). Open letter by INQUA executive committee. Quaternary
International 154/155:158-59.

Clague, J. J., R. W. Mathewes, and T. A. Ager (2004). Environments of
northwestern North America before the Last Glacial Maximum. In Entering
America: Northeast Asia and Beringia before the Last Glacial Maximum,
edited by D. Madsen, pp. 63-94. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake
City.

Clark, D. (2001). Microblade culture systematics in the far interior
Northwest. Arctic Anthropology 38:64-80.

Clark, P. U., R. Alley, and D. Pollard (1999). Northern hemisphere
ice-sheet influences on global climate change. Science 286:1104-11.

Clark, P. U., A. M. McCabe, A. C. Mix, and A. J. Weaver (2004). Rapid
rise of sea level 19,000 years ago and its global implications. Science
304:1141-44.

Clark, P. U., N. Pisias, T. Stocker, and A. Weaver (2002). The role of
thermohaline circulation in abrupt climate change. Nature 415:863-69.

Clausen, C., J. Brooks, and A. Wesolowsky (1975). The early man site at
Warm Mineral Springs, Florida. Journal of Field Archaeology 2:191-213.

Collins, M. B. (1991). Rockshelters and the early archaeological record
in the Americas. In The first Americans: search and research, edited by
T. Dillehay and D. J. Meltzer, pp. 157-82. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.

Collins, M. B. (2002). The Gault site, Texas, and Clovis research.
Athena Review 3:31-41.

Collins, M. B., J. Lohse, and M. Shoberg (2007). The deGraffenreid
collection: a Clovis bifaces cache from the Gault site, central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 78:101-23.

Cook, H. J. (1925). Definite evidence of human artifacts in the American
Pleistocene. Science 62:459-60.

Cook, H. J. (1927). New trails of ancient men. Scientific American
138:114-17.

Crane, H. R. (1955). Antiquity of the Sandia Culture: carbon-14
measurements. Science 122: 689-90.

Cronon, W. and R. White (1988). Ecological change and Indian-White
relations. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 4, history of
Indian-White relations, edited by W. E. Washburn, pp. 417-29.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Crook, W. and R. Harris (1957). Hearths and artifacts of early man near
Lewisville, Texas, and associated faunal material. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 28:7-97.

Crosby, A. (1986). Ecological imperialism: the biological expansion of
Europe, 900-1900. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Curry, R. A. (2007). Late glacial impacts on dispersal and colonization
of Atlantic Canada and main by freshwater fishes. Quaternary Research
67:225-33.

Cybulski, J., D. Howes, J. Haggarty, and M. Eldridge (1981). An early
human skeleton from south central British Columbia: dating and
bioarchaeological inference. Canadian Journal of Archaeology 5:59-60.

Dalton, R. (2007). Archaeology: blast in the past? Nature 447:256-7.

Dansie, A. and W. Jerrems (2006). More bits and pieces: a new look at
Lahontan chronology and human occupation. In Paleoamerican origins:
beyond Clovis, edited by R. Bonnichsen, B. Lepper, D. Stanford, and M.
Waters, pp. 51-79. Center for the Study of the First Americans, College
Station, TX.

Darwin, C. (1839a) Journal of the researches into the natural history
and geology of the countries visited during the voyage of H. M. S.
Beagle round the world, under the command of Capt. Fitz Roy, R. N., from
1832 to 1836. H. Colburn, London.

Darwin, C. (1839b) Observations on the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy, and
of other parts of Lochaber in Scotland, with an attempt to prove they
are of marine origin. In Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
of London, Pt. 1:39-81.

Darwin, C. (1859). On the origin of species. J. Murray, London.

Darwin, C. (1871). The descent of man, and selection in relation to sex.
J. Murray, London.

Davis, L. G. (2006). Geoarchaeological insights from Indian Sands, a
late Pleistocene site on the southern northwest coast, USA.
Geoarchaeology 21:351-61.

Dawkins, W. B. (1863). Wookey Hole hyaena-den. Somersetshire
Archaeological and Natural History Society, Proceedings XI:197-219.

Deloria, V. (1995). Red earth, white lies: Native Americans and the myth
of scientific fact. Scribner, New York.

Dennell, R. and L. Hurcombe (1995). Comment on Pedra Furada. Antiquity
69:604.

Denton, G. H., R. B. Alley, G. Comer, and W. Broecker (2005). The role
of seasonality in abrupt climate change. Quaternary Science Reviews
24:1159-82.

Derenko, M. V., T. Grzybowski, B. A. Malyarchuk, J. Czarny, D.
Mishcicka-Shliwka, and I. A. Zakharov (2001). The presence of
mitochondrial haplogroup X in Altaians from South Siberia. American
Journal of Human Genetics 69:237-41.

Diamond, J. (1999). Guns, germs, and steel: the fates of human
societies. W. W. Norton, New York.

Dieno, A., P. Renne, and C. Swisher (1998). ⁴⁰Ar/³⁹Ar dating in
paleoanthropology and archaeology. Evolutionary Anthropology 6:63-75.

Dillehay, T. D. (1989). Monte Verde: a late Pleistocene settlement in
Chile, Vol. 1, Palaeoenvironment and site context. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Dillehay, T. D. (1991). Disease ecology and initial human migration. In
The first Americans: search and research, edited by T. Dillehay and D.
Meltzer, pp. 231-64. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.

Dillehay, T. D. (1997). Monte Verde: a late Pleistocene settlement in
Chile, Vol. 2, The archaeological context and interpretation.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Dillehay, T. D. (2000). The settlement of the Americas: a new
prehistory. Basic Books, New York.

Dillehay, T. D. and M. Collins (1991). Monte Verde, Chile: a comment on
Lynch. American Antiquity 56:333-41.

Dillehay, T. D. and D. J. Meltzer (1991). Finale: processes and
prospects. In The first Americans: search and research, edited by T.
Dillehay and D. Meltzer, pp. 287-94. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.

Dillehay, T. D., C. Ramirez, M. Pino, M. B. Collins, J. Rossen, and J.
Pino-Navarro (2008). Monte Verde: seaweed, food, medicine, and the
peopling of South America. Science 320:784-86.

Dincauze, D. (1991). Review of “Monte Verde: a late Pleistocene
settlement in Chile, Volume 1: Palaeoenvironment and site context,” by
Tom D. Dillehay. Journal of Field Archaeology 18:116-19

Dincauze, D. (1993). Fluted points in the eastern forests. In From
Kostenki to Clovis: Upper Paleolithic—Paleo-indian adaptations, edited
by O. Soffer and N. Praslov, pp. 279-92. Plenum Press, New York.

Dixon, E. J. (1999). Bones, boats & bison: Archaeology and the first
colonization of western North America. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.

Dobyns, H. (1966). Estimating aboriginal American population: an
appraisal of techniques with a new hemispheric estimate. Current
Anthropology 7:395-416.

Dobyns, H. (1983). Their number become thinned: Native American
population dynamics in eastern North America. University of Tennessee
Press, Knoxville.

Dobyns, H. (1991). New native world: links between demographic and
cultural changes. In Columbian consequences, Vol. 3, the Spanish
borderlands in Pan-American perspective, edited by D. Thomas, pp.
541-59. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Doran, G., ed. (2002). Windover. Multidisciplinary investigations of an
Early Archaic Florida cemetery. University Press of Florida.

Downey, R. (2000). Riddle of the bones: politics, science, race, and the
story of Kennewick man. Copernicus Books.

Duller, G. A. (2006). Comment on “Human footprints in central Mexico
older than 40,000 years,” by S. Gonzalez, D. Huddart, M. R. Bennett, and
A. Gonzalez-Huesca. Quaternary Science Reviews 25:3074-76.

Dumond, D. (1984). Prehistory: summary. In Handbook of North American
Indians, Vol. 5, Arctic, edited by D. Damas, pp. 72-79. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Dumond, D. (2001). The archaeology of eastern Beringia: some contrasts
and connections. Arctic Anthropology 38:196-205.

Dunbar, J. and P. Vojnovski (2007). Early Floridians and late
megamammals: some technological and dietary evidence from four North
Florida Paleoindian sites. In Foragers of the terminal Pleistocene in
North America, R. Walker and B. Driskell, eds., pp. 166-202. University
of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

Dunn, M., A. Terrill, G. Reesink, R. A. Foley, and S. C. Levinson
(2005). Structural phylogenetics and the reconstruction of ancient
language history. Science 309:2072-75.

Dunnell, R. (1991). Methodological impacts of catastrophic depopulation
on American archaeology and ethnology. In Columbian consequences, Vol.
3, the Spanish borderlands in Pan-American perspective, edited by D.
Thomas, pp. 561-80. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Dyke, A. (2004). An outline of North American deglaciation with emphasis
on central and northern Canada. In Quaternary Glaciations-Extent and
Chronology, Part II, edited by J. Ehlers and P. L. Gibbard. Developments
in Quaternary Science, Vol. 2b, 373-424, Elsevier, Amsterdam.

Eccles, W. J. (1988). The fur trade in the colonial Northeast. Handbook
of North American Indians, Vol. 4, history of Indian-White relations,
edited by D. Damas, pp. 324-34. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Echo-Hawk, R. (1997). Forging a new ancient history for Native America.
In Native Americans and archaeologists: stepping stones to common
ground, edited by N. Swidler, K. Dongoske, R. Anyon, and A. Downer, pp.
88-102. AltaMira Press, Walnut Creek, CA.

Egan, T. (1996). Tribe stops study of bones that challenge history. New
York Times, September 30, 1996.

Eiseley, L. (1942). Review of “Evidences of early occupation in Sandia
Cave, New Mexico, and other sites in the Sandia Monzano region,” by
Frank C. Hibben. American Antiquity 7:415-17.

Eiseley, L. C. (1975). All the strange hours: the excavation of a life.
Scribner, New York.

Elliot, J. H. (2006). Empires of the Atlantic world: Britain and Spain
in America 1492-1830. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.

Ellis, C. J. (1997). Factors influencing the use of stone projectile
tips: an ethnographic perspective. In Projectile technology, edited by
H. Knecht, pp. 37-74. Plenum Press, New York.

Ellis, C. J. (2008). The fluted point tradition and the Arctic Small
Tool tradition: what's the connection? Journal of Anthropological
Archaeology 27:298-314.

Ellis, C. J. and D. B. Deller (1990). Paleo-indians. In The archaeology
of southern Ontario to A. D. 1650, edited by C. Ellis and N. Ferris.
Occasional Publications of the London Chapter, Ontario Archaeological
Society No. 5:37-64.

Ellis, C. J. and D. B. Deller (1997). Variability in the archaeological
record of northeastern early Paleoindians: a view from southern Ontario.
Archaeology of Eastern North America 25:1-3°.

Ellison, C., M. Chapman, and I. Hall (2006). Surface and deep ocean
interactions during the cold climate event 8200 years ago. Science
312:1929-32.

Epstein, P. R. (1999). Climate and health. Science 285:347-48.

Eren, M. (2008). Paleoindian stability during the Younger Dryas in the
North American lower Great Lakes. In Transitions in Prehistory: papers
in honor of Ofer Bar-Yosef edited by J. Shea and D. Lieberman. American
School of Prehistoric Research Press, Cambridge, MA.

Eshleman, J. A., R. S. Malhi, and D. G. Smith (2003). Mitochondrial DNA
studies of Native Americans: conceptions and misconceptions of the
population prehistory ofthe Americas. Evolutionary Anthropology 12:7-18.

Evans, J. (1943). Time and chance; the story of Arthur Evans and his
forebears. London, Longmans, Green.

Fagundes, N., R. Kanitz, R. Eckert, A. Valls, M. Bogo, F. Salzano, D.
Smith, W. Silva, M. Zago, A. Ribeiro-dos-Santos, S. Santos, M.
Petzl-Erler, and S. Bonatto (2008). Mitochondrial population genomics
supports a single pre-Clovis origin with a coastal route for the
peopling of the Americas. American Journal of Human Genetics 82:583-92.

Fall, P. L. (1997). Timberline fluctuations and late Quaternary
paleoclimates in the southern Rocky Mountains, Colorado. Geological
Society of America Bulletin 109:1306-10.

FAUNMAP Working Group (1996). Spatial response of mammals to Late
Quaternary environmental fluctuations. Science 272:1601-6.

Feathers, J. (1996). Luminescence dating and modern human origins.
Evolutionary Anthropology 5:25-36.

Fedje, D. and H. Josenhans (2000). Drowned forests and archaeology on
the continental shelf of British Columbia, Canada. Geology 28:99-102.

Fedje, D., Q. Mackie, E. J. Dixon, and T. H. Heaton (2004). Late
Wisconsin environments and archaeological visibility on the northern
Northwest Coast. In Entering America: Northeast Asia and Beringia before
the Last Glacial Maximum, edited by D. Madsen, pp. 97-138. University of
Utah Press, Salt Lake City.

Fedje, D. and R. Matthewes (2005). Haida Gwaii: human history and
environment from the time of loon to the time of iron people. University
of British Columbia Press, Vancouver.

Fedje, D., J. M. White, M. C. Wilson, D. E. Nelson, J. S. Vogel, and J.
R. Southon (1995). Vermilion Lakes site: adaptations and environments in
the Canadian Rockies during the latest Pleistocene and Early Holocene.
American Antiquity 60:81-108.

Fenn, E. (2001). Pox Americana: the great smallpox epidemic of 1775-82.
Hill & Wang, New York.

Ferguson, T. J., J. Watkins, and G. Pullar (1997). Native Americans and
archaeologists: commentary and personal perspectives. In Native
Americans and archaeologists: stepping stones to common ground, edited
by N. Swidler, K. Dongoske, R. Anyon, and A. Downer, pp. 237-52.
AltaMira Press, Walnut Creek, CA.

Ferring, C. R. (2001). The archaeology and paleoecology of the Aubrey
Clovis site (4iDN47g) Denton County, Texas. Center for Environmental
Archaeology, University of North Texas, Denton.

Fiedel, S. and G. Haynes (2004). A premature burial: comments on Grayson
and Meltzer's “Requiem for overkill.” Journal of Archaeological Science
31:121-31.

Firestone, R. B. and W. Topping (2001). Terrestrial evidence of a
nuclear catastrophe in Paleoindian times. Mammoth Trumpet 16.2:9-16.

Firestone, R. B., A. West, J. P. Kennett, L. Becker, T. E. Bunch, Z. S.
Revay, P. H. Schultz, et al. (2007). Evidence for an extraterrestrial
impact 12,900 years ago that contributed to the megafaunal extinctions
and the Younger Dryas cooling. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 104:16016-21.

Firestone, R. B., A. West, and S. Warwick-Smith (2006). The cycle of
cosmic catastrophes: how a Stone-Age comet changed the course of world
culture. Bear, Rochester, VT.

Fisher, T., C. Yansa, T. Lowell, K. Lepper, I. Hajdas, and A. Ashworth
(2008). The chronology, climate, and confusion of the Moorhead Phase of
glacial Lake Agassiz: new results from the Ojata Beach, North Dakota,
USA. Quaternary Science Reviews 27:1124-35.

Fix, A. G. (2002). Colonization models and initial genetic diversity in
the Americas. Human Biology 74:1-10.

Fix, A. G. (2005). Rapid deployment of the five founding Amerind mtDNA
haplogroups via coastal and riverine colonization. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 128:430-36.

Fladmark, K., J. Driver, and D. Alexander (1988). The Paleoindian
component at Charlie Lake Cave (HbRf39), British Columbia. American
Antiquity 53:371-84.

Foley, R. (1988). Hominids, humans and hunter-gatherers: an evolutionary
perspective. In Hunters and gatherers: history, evolution, and social
change, edited by T. Ingold, D. Riches, and J. Woodburn, pp. 207-21.
Berg, Oxford, UK.

Forster, P., R. Harding, A. Torroni, and H. Bandelt (1996). Origin and
evolution of Native American mtDNA variation: a reappraisal. American
Journal of Human Genetics 59:935-45.

Foster, M. (1996). Language and the culture history of America. Handbook
of North American Indians, Vol. 17, Languages, edited by I. Goddard, pp.
64-110. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Friesen, T. and C. Arnold (2008). The timing of the Thule migration: new
dates from the western Canadian Arctic. American Antiquity 73:527-38.

Frison, G. C. (1991). Prehistoric hunters of the high plains, 2nd ed.
Academic Press, New York.

Frison, G. C. (2004). Survival by hunting: prehistoric human predators
and animal prey. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Frison, G. C. and B. Bradley (1999). The Fenn cache: Clovis weapons and
tools. One Horse Land and Cattle Company, Santa Fe.

Galloway, P., and J. Jackson (2004). Natchez and neighboring groups.
Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 14, Southeast, edited by R.
Fogelson, pp. 598-615. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Gamble, C. (1994). Timewalkers: the prehistory of global colonization.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Gardner, W. M. (1974). The Flint Run Paleo-indian complex: a preliminary
report. Occasional Publication No. 1, Archaeology Laboratory, Catholic
University.

Gentleman of Elvas (1686). A relation of the invasion and conquest of
Florida by the Spaniards, under the command of Fernando de Soto, written
in Portuguese by a gentleman of the town of Elvas; now Englished. J.
Lawrence, London.

Gibbons A. (1993). Geneticists trace the DNA trail of the first
Americans. Science 259:312-13.

Gilbert, T., D. Jenkins, A. Gotherstrom, N. Naveran, J. Sanchez, M.
Hofreiter, P. Thomsen, J. Binladen, T. Higham, R. Yohe, R. Parr, L.
Cummings, and E. Willerslev (2008). DNA from pre-Clovis human coprolites
in Oregon, North America. Science 320:786-89.

Gilder, R. (1911). Scientific “inaccuracies” in reports against
probability of geological antiquity of remains of Nebraska loess man
considered by its discoverer. Records of the Past 10:157-69.

Gillespie, A., S. Porter, and B. Atwater, eds. (2004). The Quaternary
period in the United States. Elsevier Science, New York.

Goddard, I., ed. (1996). Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 17,
Languages. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Goddard, I. (2004). Endangered knowledge: what we can learn from Native
American languages. AnthroNotes 25.2:1-8.

Goddard, P. E. (1927). Facts and theories concerning Pleistocene man in
America. American Anthropologist 29:262-66.

Goebel, T. (2004). The search for a Clovis progenitor in sub-Arctic
Siberia. In Entering America: Northeast Asia and Beringia before the
Last Glacial Maximum, edited by D. Madsen, pp. 311-56. University of
Utah Press, Salt Lake City.

Golla, V. (2000). Language families of North America. In America past,
America present: genes and languages in the Americas and beyond, edited
by C. Renfrew, pp. 59-72. McDonald Institute for Archaeological
Research, Cambridge, UK.

Golledge, R. (2003). Human wayfinding and cognitive maps. In
Colonization of unfamiliar landscapes: the archaeology of adaptation,
edited by M. Rockman and J. Steele, pp. 25-43. Routledge, London.

Gonzáles-José, R., A. Gonzales-Martin, M. Hernandez, H. Pucciarelli, M.
Sardi, A. Rosales, and S. van der Molen (2003). Craniometric evidence
for Paleoamerican survival in Baja California. Nature 425:62-65.

Gonzalez, S., D. Huddart, and M. Bennett (2006). Valsequillo Pleistocene
archaeology and dating: ongoing controversy in central Mexico. World
Archaeology 38:611-27.

Gonzalez, S., D. Huddart, M. Bennett, and A. Gonzalez-Huesca (2006).
Human footprints in central Mexico older than 40,000 years. Quaternary
Science Reviews 25:201-22.

Goodyear, A. C. (1982). The chronological position of the Dalton Horizon
in the southeastern United States. American Antiquity 47:382-95.

Goodyear, A. C. (1999). The Early Holocene occupation of the
southeastern United States: a geoarchaeological summary. In Ice-Age
people of North America: environments, origins, and adaptations, edited
by R. Bonnichsen and K. Turnmire, pp. 432-81. Center for the Study of
the First Americans, Corvallis, OR.

Gould, R. (2004). Opinion for the United States Court of Appeal,
February 4, 2004. Bonnichsen et al. v. United States et al., 357 F.3d
962 (9th Cir. 2004).

Gould, S. J. (1989). Wonderful life: the Burgess Shale and the nature of
history. W. W. Norton, New York.

Gramly, R. M. (1982). The Vail site: a Paleo-indian encampment in Maine.
Buffalo Museum of Science, Buffalo, NY.

Gramly, R. M. (1993). The Richey Clovis cache: earliest Americans along
the Columbia River. Persimmon Press, Buffalo, NY.

Gramly, R. M. (2005). Recent archaeological fieldwork at the Vail Clovis
site. Amateur Archaeologist 11:19-38.

Gravlee, C., H. R. Bernard, and W. Leonard (2003). Boas's Changes in
bodily form: the immigrant study, cranial plasticity, and Boas's
physical anthropology. American Anthropologist 105:326-32.

Gray, R. (2005). Pushing the time barrier in the quest for language
roots. Science 309:2007-8.

Grayson, D. K. (1977). Pleistocene avifaunas and the overkill
hypothesis. Science 193:691-93.

Grayson, D. K. (1983). The establishment of human antiquity. Academic
Press, New York.

Grayson, D. K. (1993). The desert's past: a natural history of the Great
Basin. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington DC.

Grayson, D. K. (2001). The archaeological record of human impacts on
animal populations. Journal of World Prehistory 15:1-68.

Grayson, D. K. (2006a). Brief histories of some Great Basin mammals:
extinctions, extirpations, and abundance histories. Quaternary Science
Reviews 25:2964-91.

Grayson, D. K. (2006b). Late Pleistocene faunal extinctions. Handbook of
North American Indians, Vol. 3, environment, origins, and population,
edited by D. Ubelaker, pp. 208-18. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Grayson, D. K. (2007). Deciphering North American Pleistocene
extinctions. Journal of Anthropological Research 63:185-213.

Grayson, D. K. and D. J. Meltzer (2002). Clovis hunting and large mammal
extinction: a critical review of the evidence. Journal of World
Prehistory 16:313-59.

Grayson, D. K. and D. J. Meltzer (2003). Requiem for North American
overkill. Journal of Archaeological Science 30:585-93.

Grayson, D. K. and D. J. Meltzer (2004). North American overkill
continued? Journal of Archaeological Science 31:133-36.

Green, T., B. Cochran, T. Fenton, J. Woods, G. Titmus, L. Tieszen, M.
Davis, and S. Miller. (1998). The Buhl burial: a Paleoindian woman from
southern Idaho. American Antiquity 63:437-56.

Greenberg, J. H. (1987). Language in the Americas. Stanford University
Press, Stanford.

Greenberg, J. H. (1990). The American Indian language controversy.
Review of Archaeology 11:514.

Greenberg, J. H., C. Turner, and S. Zegura (1986). The settlement of the
Americas: a comparison of the linguistic, dental, and genetic evidence.
Current Anthropology 27:477-97.

Griffin, J. B., D. J. Meltzer, B. Smith, and W. C. Sturtevant (1988). A
mammoth fraud in science. American Antiquity 53:578-82.

Grimm, E. and G. Jacobson (2004). Late Quaternary vegetation history of
the eastern United States. In The Quaternary period in the United
States, edited by A. Gillespie, S. C. Porter, and B. Atwater, pp.
381-402. Elsevier Science, New York.

Grover, J. (1994). Faunal remains from Dust Cave. Journal of Alabama
Archaeology 40:116-34.

Grun, R. (1993). Electron spin resonance dating in paleoanthropology.
Evolutionary Anthropology 2:172-81.

Gryba, E. (2001). Evidence of the fluted point tradition in western
Canada. In On being first: cultural innovation and environmental
consequences of first peoplings. Proceedings of the 31st Annual Chacmool
Conference, edited by J. Gillespie, S. Tupakka, and C. de Mille, pp.
251-84. Archaeological Association of the University of Calgary,
Calgary, AL, Canada.

Guidon, N. (2002). Pedra Furada, Brazil: Paleoindians, paintings, and
paradoxes. Athena Review 3:42-52.

Guidon, N. and B. Arnaud (1991). The chronology of the New World: two
faces of one reality. World Archaeology 23:167-78.

Guidon, N. and A-M. Pessis (1996). Falsehood or untruth? Antiquity
70:408-21.

Guthrie, R. (1990). Frozen fauna of the mammoth steppe: the story of
Blue Babe. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Guthrie, R. (2003). Rapid body size decline in Alaskan Pleistocene
horses before extinction. Nature 426:169-71.

Guthrie, R. (2006). New carbon dates link climatic change with human
colonization and Pleistocene extinctions. Nature 441:207-9.

Haber, F. (1959). The age of the world: Moses to Darwin. Johns Hopkins
Press, Baltimore.

Hajdas, I., D. Lowe, and R. Newnham (2006). High-resolution radiocarbon
chronologies and synchronization of records. PAGES News 14:17-18.

Hamilton, T. and T. Goebel (1999). Late Pleistocene peopling of Alaska.
In Ice-Age people of North America: environments, origins, and
adaptations, edited by R. Bonnichsen and K. Turnmire, pp. 156-99. Center
for the Study of the First Americans, Corvallis, OR.

Hammer, M. F. and S. Zegura (1996). The role of the Y chromosome in
human evolutionary studies. Evolutionary Anthropology 5:116-34.

Hanihara, T. and H. Ishida (2005). Metric dental variation of major
human populations. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 128:287-98.

Hardaker, C. (2007). The first American: the suppressed story of the
people who discovered the New World. New Page Books, Franklin Lakes, NJ.

Harmon, A. (2006). DNA gatherers hit snag: tribes don't trust them. New
York Times, December 10, 2006.

Harpending, H. (1999). Comment on “reproductive interests and forager
mobility” by D. MacDonald and B. Hewlett. Current Anthropology 40:517.

Harper, K., P. Ocampo, B. Steiner, R. George, M. Silverman, S. Bolotoni,
A. Pillay, N. Saunders, and G. Armelagos (2008). On the origin of the
Treponematoses: a phylogenetic approach. PLoS Neglected Tropical
Diseases 2(1): e148 doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.0000148.

Harrison, B. and K. Killen (1978). Lake Theo: a stratified, early man
bison butchering and camp site, Briscoe County, Texas. Special
Archaeological Report 1. Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum, Canyon,
Texas.

Hassan, F. (1981). Demographic archaeology. Academic Press, New York.

Haury, E. W., Sayles, E., and Wasley, W. (1959). The Lehner mammoth
site, southeastern Arizona. American Antiquity 25:2-30.

Haven, S. (1856). The archaeology of the United States. Smithsonian
Contributions to Knowledge 8:1-168.

Hawkes, K. and R. Bliege Bird (2002). Showing off, handicap signaling,
and the evolution of men's work. Evolutionary Anthropology 11:58-67.

Hay, O. P. (1918). Doctor Ales Hrdlicka and the Vero man. Science
47:459-62.

Haynes, C. V. (1964). Fluted projectile points: their age and
dispersion. Science 145:1408-13.

Haynes, C. V. (1967). Quaternary geology of the Tule Springs area Clark
County, Nevada. In Pleistocene studies in southern Nevada, edited by H.
M. Wormington and D. Ellis. Anthropological Papers 13:16-104. Nevada
State Museum, Las Vegas.

Haynes, C. V. (1969). The earliest Americans. Science 166:709-715.

Haynes, C. V. (1971). Time, environment and early man. Arctic
Anthropology 8:3-14.

Haynes, C. V. (1991a). Geoarchaeological and paleohydrological evidence
for a Clovis-age drought in North America. Quaternary Research
35:438-50.

Haynes, C. V. (1991b). More on Meadowcroft radiocarbon chronology. The
Review of Archaeology 12:8-14.

Haynes, C. V. (1999). Monte Verde and the pre-Clovis situation in
America. Discovering Archaeology (November-December):17-19.

Haynes, C. V. and B. Huckell (2007). Murray Springs: a Clovis site with
multiple activity areas in the San Pedro Valley, Arizona.
Anthropological Papers of the University of Arizona, Number 71. Tucson,
AZ.

Haynes, C. V., M. McFaul, R. Brunswig, and K. Hopkins (1998).
Lersey-Kuner terrace investigations at the Dent and Bernhardt sites,
Colorado. Geoarchaeology 13:201-18.

Haynes, C. V., S. Stanford, M. Jodry, J. Dickenson, J. Montgomery, P.
Shelley, J. Rovner, and G. Agogino (1999). A Clovis well at the type
site 11,500 B.C.: the oldest prehistoric well in America. Geoarchaeology
14:455-70.

Haynes, G. (2002). The early Settlement of North America: the Clovis
era. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Haynes, G. (2007). A review of some attacks on the overkill hypothesis,
with special attention to misrepresentation and doubletalk. Quaternary
International 169-70:84-94.

Hays, J. D., J. Imbrie, and N. J. Shackleton (1976). Variations in the
earth's orbit: pacemaker of the Ice Ages. Science 194:1121-32.

Helgason, A., G. Pálsson, H. Pedersen, E. Angulalik, E. Gunnarsdóttir,
B. Yngvadottir, and K. Stefansson. (2006). mtDNA variation in Inuit
populations of Greenland and Canada: migration history and population
structure. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 130:123-34.

Hey, J. (2005). On the number of New World founders: a population
genetic portrait of the peopling of the Americas. PLoS Biology
3:0001-11.

Hibben, F. (1941). Sandia Cave. American Antiquity 6:266.

Hill, J. (2004). Evaluating historical linguistic evidence for ancient
human communities in the Americas. In The settlement of the American
continents: a multidisciplinary approach to human biogeography, edited
by C. M. Barton, G. A. Clark, D. R. Yesner, and G. A. Pearson, pp.
39-48. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Hill, M. E. (2007). A moveable feast: variation in faunal resource use
among central and western North American Paleoindian sites. American
Antiquity 72:417-38.

Hill, M. G. (2001). Paleoindian diet and subsistence behavior on the
northwestern Great Plains of North America. PhD dissertation, Department
of Anthropology, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Hillerman, T. (1973). Dance hall of the dead. Harper and Row, New York.

Hiscock, P. (2008). Archaeology of ancient Australia. Routledge, London.

Hitt, J. (2005). Mighty white of you: racial preferences color America's
oldest skulls and bones. Harper's Magazine, July 2005, pp. 39-55.

Ho, S. and G. Larson (2006). Molecular clocks: “when times are
a-changin.” TRENDS in Genetics 22:79-83.

Hoffecker, J. F. (2005). Incredible journey: plains bison hunters in the
Arctic. Review of Archaeology 26:18-23.

Hoffecker, J. F. and S. Elias (2003). Environment and archeology in
Beringia. Evolutionary Anthropology 12:34-49.

Hoffecker, J. F. and S. Elias (2007). Human Ecology of Beringia.
Columbia University Press, New York.

Hoffecker, J. F., W. R. Powers, and T. Goebel (1993). The colonization
of Beringia and the peopling of the New World. Science 259:46-53.

Hofman, J. L., D. Amick, and R. Rose (1990). Shifting sands: a
Folsom-Midland assemblage from a campsite in western Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 35:221-53.

Holden, C. (2008). Verbs across the Bering Strait. Science 319:1595.

Hollenbach, K. D. (2007). Gathering in the Late Paleoindian period:
archaeobotanical remains from Dust Cave, Alabama. In Foragers of the
terminal Pleistocene in North America, edited by R. Walker and B.
Driskell, pp. 132-47. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

Holliday, V. T. (2000). Folsom drought and episodic drying on the
southern high plains from 10,900-10,200 ¹⁴C yr B. P. Quaternary Research
53:1-12.

Holliday, V. T., C. V. Haynes, J. L. Hofman, and D. J. Meltzer (1994).
Geoarchaeology and geochronology of the Miami (Clovis) site, southern
high plains of Texas. Quaternary Research 41:234-44.

Holmes, W. H. (1890). A quarry workshop of the flaked-stone implement
makers in the District of Columbia. American Anthropologist 3:1-26.

Holmes, W. H. (1893a). Are there traces of man in the Trenton gravels?
Journal of Geology 1:15-37.

Holmes, W. H. (1893b). Traces of glacial man in Ohio. Journal of Geology
1:147-63.

Holmes, W. H. (1919). Handbook of aboriginal American antiquities. Part
I. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 60.

Hooton, E. (1930). The Indians of Pecos Pueblo: a study of their
skeletal remains. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.

Hopkins, D., J. Matthews, C. Schweger, and S. Young, eds. (1982).
Paleoecology of Beringia. Academic Press, New York.

Howard, E. B. (1932). Arrowheads found with New Mexican fossils. Science
76:12-13.

Howard, E. B. (1933). Association of artifacts with mammoth and bison in
eastern New Mexico. Science 78:524.

Hrdli[images]ka, A. (1907). Skeletal remains suggesting or attributed to
early man in North America. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 33.

Hrdlicka, A. (1925). The origin and antiquity of the American Indian.
Smithsonian Institution Annual Report for 1923:481-494.

Hrdlicka, A. (1926). The race and antiquity of the American Indian.
Scientific American 135:7-9.

Huckell, B. and W. J. Judge (2006). Paleo-indian: plains and Southwest.
Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 3, environment, origins, and
population, edited by D. Ubelaker, pp. 148-70. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D.C.

Huckell, B. and D. Kilby, eds. (2004). Readings in Late Pleistocene and
Early Holocene Paleoindians: selections from American Antiquity. Society
for American Archaeology, Washington, D.C.

Hughen, K., J. Southon, S. Lehman, and J. Overpeck. (2000). Synchronous
radiocarbon and climate shifts during the last deglaciation. Science
290:1951-54.

Hull, D. (1988). Science as a process: an evolutionary account of the
social and conceptual development of science. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.

Hunley, K. and J. Long (2005). Gene flow across linguistic boundaries in
Native North American populations. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 102:1312-17.

Hutchings, W. K. (1997). The Paleoindian fluted point: dart or spear
armature? PhD dissertation, Department of Archaeology, Simon Fraser
University, Vancouver.

Imbrie, J. and K. Imbrie (1976). Ice Ages: solving the mystery. Enslow,
Berkeley Heights, New Jersey.

Irving, W. N. (1985). Context and chronology of early man in the
Americas. Annual Review of Anthropology 14:529-55.

Irwin, G. (1992). The prehistoric exploration and colonisation of the
Pacific. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Irwin-Williams, C. (1981). Commentary on “Geologic evidence for age of
deposits at Hueyatlaco archaeological site, Valsequillo, Mexico.”
Quaternary Research 16:258.

Ivester, A., D. Godfrey-Smith, M. J. Brooks, and B. E. Taylor (2003).
Concentric sand rims document the evolution of a Carolina Bay in the
middle coastal plain of South Carolina. Paper presented at the
Geological Society of America Annual Meeting, Seattle, WA.

Jablonski, N., ed. (2002). The first Americans: the Pleistocene
colonization of the New World. Memoirs of the California Academy of
Sciences 27, University of California Press, Berkeley.

Jablonski, D., ed. (1962). Letters ofthe Lewis and Clark expedition.
University of Illinois Press, Urbana.

Jackson, S. and C. Weng (1999). Late Quaternary extinction of a tree
species in eastern North America. Proceedings ofthe National Academy of
Sciences 96:13847-52.

Jantz, R. L. and D. Owsley (2001). Variation among early North American
crania. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 114:146-55.

Jantz, R. L. and D. Owsley (2003). Reply to Van Vark et al.: is European
Upper Paleolithic cranial morphology a useful analogy for early
Americans? American Journal of Physical Anthropology 121:185-88.

Jantz, R. L. and D. Owsley (2006). Circumpacific populations and the
peopling of the New World: evidence from cranial morphometrics. In
Paleoamerican origins: beyond Clovis, edited by R. Bonnichsen, B.
Lepper, D. Stanford, and M. Waters, pp. 267-75. Center for the Study of
the First Americans, College Station, TX.

Jefferson, T. (1788). Notes on the state of Virginia. Prichard and Hall,
Philadelphia.

Jelderks, J. (2002). Opinion and Order, August 30, 2002. Bonnichsen et
al. v. United States et al., 217 F. Supp. 2d 1116 (Dist. Or. 2002).

Jelinek, A. J. (1992). Perspectives from the Old World on the habitation
of the New. American Antiquity 57:345-47.

Jenkins, D. (2007). Distribution and dating of cultural and
paleontological remains at the Paisley 5 Mile Point Caves in the
northern Great Basin: an early assessment. In Paleo-indian or
Paleoarchaic? Great basin human ecology at the Pleistocene/Holocene
transition, edited by K. Graf and D. Schmitt, pp. 57-81. University of
Utah Press, Salt Lake City.

Jenks, A. (1937). Minnesota's Browns Valley man and associated burial
artifacts. American Anthropological Association Memoir 49. Menasha,
Wisconsin.

Jodry, M. (1999). Folsom technological and socioeconomic strategies:
views from Stewart's Cattle Guard and the Upper Rio Grande Basin,
Colorado. PhD Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, American
University, Washington, D.C.

Johnson, A. R., J. Wiens, B. Milne, and T. Crist (1992). Animal
movements and population dynamics in heterogeneous landscapes. Landscape
Ecology 7:63-75.

Johnson, C. N. (2002). Determinants of loss of mammal species during the
late Quaternary “megafauna” extinctions: life history and ecology, but
not body size. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B
269:2221-27.

Johnson, E. (1987). Lubbock Lake: late Quaternary studies on the
southern high plains. Texas A&M Press, College Station.

Johnson, J., T. Stafford, H. Aije, and D. Morris (2002). Arlington
Springs revisited. In Proceedings of the Fifth California Islands
Symposium, edited by D. Browne, L. Mitchell, and H. Chaney, pp. 541-45.
Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History, Santa Barbara, CA.

Johnston, W. A. (1933). Quaternary geology of North America in relation
to the migration of man. In The American Aborigines: their origin and
antiquity, edited by D. Jenness, pp. 9-45. University of Toronto Press,
Toronto.

Jones, G. T., C. Beck, E. Jones, and R. Hughes (2003). Lithic source use
and Paleoarchaic foraging territories in the Great Basin. American
Antiquity 68:5-38.

Jones, T. and K. Klar (2007). California prehistory: colonization,
culture, and complexity. AltaMira Press, Lanham, MD.

Jones, T., J. Porcasi, J. Erlandson, H. Dallas, T. Wake, and R. Schwader
(2008). The protracted Holocene extinction of California's flightless
sea duck (Chendytes lawi) and its implications for the Pleistocene
overkill hypothesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
105:4105-08.

Jouzel, J. (1999). Calibrating the isotopic paleothermometer. Science
286:910-11.

Kaplan, H. and K. Hill (1992). The evolutionary ecology of food
acquisition. In Evolutionary ecology and human behavior, edited by E.
Smith and B. Winterhalder, pp. 167-201. Aldine de Gruyter, New York.

Kappleman, J. (1993). The attraction of paleomagnetism. Evolutionary
Anthropology 2:89-99.

Karafet, T., S. Zegura, O. Posukh, L. Ospiva, A. Bergen, J. Long, D.
Goldman, et al. (1999). Ancestral Asian source(s) of New World
Y-chromosome founder haplotypes. American Journal of Human Genetics
64:817-31.

Karafet, T., S. Zegura, J. Vuturo-Brady, O. Posukh, L. Ospiva, V. Wiebe,
F. Romero, et al. (1997). Y chromosome markers and trans-Bering Strait
dispersals. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 102:301-14.

Karner, D. and R. Muller (2000). A causality problem for Milankovitch.
Science 288:2143-44.

Kaufman, T. and V. Golla (2000). Language groupings in the New World:
their reliability and usability in cross-disciplinary studies. In
America past, America present: genes and languages in the Americas and
beyond, edited by C. Renfrew, pp. 47-57. McDonald Institute for
Archaeological Research, Cambridge, UK.

Keegan, W. and J. Diamond (1987). Colonization of islands by humans: a
biogeographic perspective. Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory
10:49-92.

Keigwin, L., J. P. Donnelly, M. S. Cook, N. W. Driscoll, and J.
Brigham-Grette (2006). Rapid sea-level rise and Holocene climate in the
Chukchi Sea. Geology 34:861-64.

Kelly, R. L. (1995). The foraging spectrum: diversity in hunter-gatherer
lifeways. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Kelly, R. L. (1996). Ethnographic analogy and migration to the western
hemisphere. In Prehistoric Mongoloid dispersals, edited by T. Akazawa
and E. Szathmary, pp. 228-40. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Kelly, R. L. (2003). Maybe we do know when people first came to North
America; and what does it mean if we do? Quaternary International
109/110:133-145.

Kelly, R. L. and L. Todd (1988). Coming into the country: early
Paleoindian hunting and mobility. American Antiquity 53:231-244.

Kemp, B., R. Malhi, J. McDonough, D. Bolnick, J. Eshleman, O. Rickards,
C. Martinez-Labraga, et al. (2007). Genetic analysis of Early Holocene
skeletal remains from Alaska and implications for the settlement of the
Americas. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 132:605-21.

Kerr, R. (2006). Atlantic mud shows how melting ice triggered an ancient
chill. Science 312:1860.

Kerr, R. (2007). Mammoth-killer impact gets mixed reception from earth
scientists. Science 316:1264-65.

Kerr, R. (2008). Experts find no evidence for a Mammoth-killer impact.
Science 319:1331-32.

Kidder, A. V. (1936). Speculations on New World prehistory. In Essays in
anthropology, edited by R. Lowie, pp. 143-51. University of California
Press, Berkeley.

King, M. L. and S. Slobodin (1996). A fluted point from the Uptar site,
northeastern Siberia. Science 273:634-36.

Kirch, P. V. (1988). Long-distance exchange and island colonization: the
Lapita case. Norwegian Archaeological Review 21:103-17.

Kirch, P. V. (1997). The Lapita peoples: ancestors of the Oceanic World.
Blackwell, New York.

Kirch, P. V. (2000). On the road of the winds: an archaeological history
of the Pacific Islands. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Kitchen, A., M. Miyamoto, and C. Mulligan (2008). A three-stage
colonization model for the peopling of the Americas. PLoS ONE 3e1596.

Kittler, R., M. Kayser, and M. Stoneking (2003). Molecular evolution of
Pediculus humanus and the origin of clothing. Current Biology
13:1414-17.

Kohfeld, K. E., C. Le Quere, S. P. Harrison, and R. F. Anderson (2005).
Role of marine biology in glacial-interglacial CO₂ cycles. Science
308:74-78.

Krajick, K. (2002). Melting glaciers release ancient relics. Science
296:454-56.

Krieger, A. D. (1953). New World culture history: Anglo-America. In
Anthropology today: an encyclopedic inventory, prepared under the
chairmanship of A. L. Kroeber, pp. 238-64. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

Krieger, A. D. (1964). Early man in the New World. In Prehistoric man in
the New World, edited by J. Jennings and E. Norbeck, pp. 23-81.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Kring, D. (2007). The Chicxulub impact event and its environment
consequences at the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary. Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 255:4-21.

Kroeber, A. L. (1939). Cultural and natural areas of native North
America. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Kroeber, A. L. (1962). The Rancho La Brea skull. American Antiquity
27:416-17.

Kunz, M. L., Bever, M., and C. Adkins (2003). The Mesa Site:
Paleoindians above the Arctic Circle. BLM-Alaska Open File Report 86,
Anchorage, AK.

Kurten, B. and E. Anderson (1980). Pleistocene mammals of North America.
Columbia University Press, New York.

LaBelle, J. M. (2005). Hunter-gatherer foraging variability during the
Early Holocene of the Central Plains of North America. PhD dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Labeyrie, L., J. Cole, K. D. Alverson, and T. Stocker (2003). The
history of climate dynamics in the Late Quaternary. In Paleoclimate,
global change, and the future, edited by K. D. Alverson, R. S. Bradley,
and T. F. Pederson, pp. 33-61. Springer, Berlin.

Lahr, M. (1995). Patterns of modern human diversification: implications
for Amerindian origins. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 38:163-98.

Lambeck, K., Y. Yokoyama, and T. Purcell (2002). Into and out of the
Last Glacial Maximum: sea level change during Oxygen Isotope Stages 3
and 2. Quaternary Science Reviews 21:343-60.

Laub, R. (2002). The Paleoindian presence in the northeast: the view
from the Hiscock site. In Ice Age peoples of Pennsylvania, edited by K.
Carr and J. Adovasio, pp. 105-21. Pennsylvania Historical & Museum
Commission, Harrisburg, PA.

Lavallée, D. (2000). The first South Americans: the peopling of a
continent from the earliest evidence to high culture. University of Utah
Press, Salt Lake City.

Lawlor, T. E. (1998). Biogeography of Great Basin mammals: paradigm
lost? Journal of Mammalogy 79:1111-30.

Lawton, C. (1996). Strategies for indoor wayfinding: the role of
orientation. Journal of Environmental Psychology 16:137-45.

Leakey, L., R. Simpson, and T. Clements (1969). Man in America: the
Calico Mountains excavations. 1970 Britannica yearbook of science and
the future, pp. 65-79.

Leakey, M. (1984). Disclosing the past: an autobiography. Doubleday, New
York.

Lell, J., R. Sukernik, Y. Starikovskaya, B. Su, L. Jin, T. Schurr, P.
Underhill, and D. Wallace (2002). The dual origin and Siberian
affinities of native American Y chromosomes. American Journal of Human
Genetics 70:192-206.

Leonhardy, F. (1966). Domebo: a Paleo-indian mammoth kill in the
prairie-plains. Contributions of the Museum of the Great Plains,
Number 1. Lawton, Oklahoma.

Le Page du Pratz, A. S. (1758). Histoire de la Louisiane: contenant la
decouverte de ce vaste pays; sa description geographique; un voyage dans
les terres; l'histoire naturelle, les moeurs coutumes & religion des
naturels, avec leurs origines; deux voyages dans le nord du nouveau
Mexique, dont un jusqu'a la Mer du Sud; ornee de deux cartes et de 40
planches en taille douce. De Bure, Paris.

Lepper, B. T. (1983). Fluted point distributional patterns in the
eastern United States: a contemporary phenomena. Midcontinental Journal
of Archaeology 8:269-85.

Levine, F. and A. LeBauve (1997). Examining the complexity of historic
population decline: a case study of Pecos Pueblo, New Mexico.
Ethnohistory 44:75-112.

Li, Y., D. Carroll, S. Gardner, M. Walsh, E. Vitalis, and I. Damon
(2007). On the origin of smallpox: correlating variola phylogenics with
historical smallpox records. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 104:15787-92.

Liu, J. P., J. Millman, S. Gao, and P. Cheng (2004). Holocene
development of the Yellow River's subaqueous delta, North Yellow Sea.
Marine Geology 209:45-67.

Lott, D. (2002). American bison: a natural history. University of
California Press, Berkeley.

Lourandos, H. (1997). Continent of hunter-gatherers: new perspectives in
Australian prehistory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Lowell, T., T. Fisher, G. Comer, I. Hajdas, N. Waterson, K. Glover, H.
Loope, J. Schaeffer, V. Rinterknecht, W. Broecker, G. Denton, and J.
Teller (2005). Testing the Lake Agassiz meltwater trigger for the
Younger Dryas. EOS 86:365-73.

Lubbock, J. (1865). Prehistoric times. Williams and Norgate, London.

Lupo, K. (2007). Evolutionary foraging models in zooarchaeological
analysis: recent applications and future challenges. Journal of
Archaeological Research 15:143-89.

Lyell, C. (1860). On the occurrence of works of human art in
postpliocene deposits. British Association for the Advancement of
Science Report 1859:93-95.

Lyell, C. (1863). The geological evidences of the antiquity of man with
remarks on theories of the origin of species by variation. John Murray,
London.

Lyman, R. L. (1984). Broken bones, bone expediency tools, and bone
pseudotools: lessons from the blast zone around Mount St. Helens,
Washington. American Antiquity 49:315-33.

Lyman, R. L., M. O'Brien, and V. Hayes (1998). A mechanical and
functional study of bone rods from the Richey-Roberts Clovis cache,
Washington, U. S. A. Journal of Archaeological Science 25:887-906.

Lynch, T. F. (1990). Glacial age man in South America? a critical
review. American Antiquity 55:12-36.

Lynch, T. F. (1991a). The peopling of the Americas—a discussion. In The
first Americans: search and research, edited by T. Dillehay and D. J.
Meltzer, pp. 267-74. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.

Lynch, T. F. (1991b). Lack of evidence for glacial-age settlement of
South America: reply to Dillehay and Collins and to Gruhn and Bryan.
American Antiquity 56:348-55.

MacArthur, R. and E. O. Wilson (1967). The theory of island
biogeography. Monographs in Population Biology 1. Princeton University
Press, Princeton.

MacDonald, G. M., D. W. Beilman, K. V. Kremenetski, Y. Sheng, L. C.
Smith, and A. A. Velichko (2006). Rapid early development of
circumarctic peatlands and atmospheric CH₄ and CO₂ variations. Science
314:285-88.

Macdougall, D. (2004). Frozen earth: the once and future story of Ice
Ages. University of California Press, Berkeley.

MacNeish, R. S. (1976). Early man in the New World. American Scientist
63:316-27.

MacNutt, F. A. (1912). De orbe novo, the eight decades of Peter Martyr
d’Anghera. Translated from the Latin with notes and introduction. G. P.
Putnam's Sons, New York.

MacPhee, R. D. and H. Sues, eds. (1999). Extinctions in near time:
causes, contexts, and consequences. Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New York.

Madsen, D., ed. (2004). Entering America: Northeast Asia and Beringia
before the Last Glacial Maximum, University of Utah Press, Salt Lake
City.

Malhi, R., J. Eshleman, J. Greenberg, D. Weiss, B. Shook, F. Kaestle, J.
Lorenz, B. Kemp, J. Johnson, and D. Smith (2002). The structure and
diversity within New World mitochondrial DNA haplogroups: implications
for the prehistory of North America. American Journal of Human Genetics
70:905-19.

Malhi, R., B. Kemp, J. Eshleman, J. Cybulski, D. Smith, S. Cousins, and
H. Harry (2007). Mitochondrial haplogroup M discovered in prehistoric
Americans. Journal of Archaeological Science 34:642-48.

Mandryk, C., H. Josenhans, D. Fedje, and R. Mathewes (2001). Late
Quaternary paleoenvironments of northwestern North America: implications
for inland versus coastal migration routes. Quaternary Science Reviews
20:301-14.

Mann, C. (2005). 1491: new revelations of the Americas before Columbus.
Knopf, New York.

Mann, C. (2007). America found and lost. National Geographic May 2007,
pp. 32-53.

Mann, D. and T. Hamilton (1995). Late Pleistocene and Holocene
environments of the North Pacific Coast. Quaternary Science Reviews
14:449-71.

Mann, D. and D. Peteet (1994). Extent and timing ofthe Last Glacial
Maximum in southwestern Alaska. Quaternary Research 42:136-48.

Mann, D., R. Reanier, D. Peteet, M. Kunz, and M. Johnson (2001).
Environmental change and Arctic Paleoindians. Arctic Anthropology
38:119-38.

Marks, J. (2002). What it means to be 98% chimpanzee: apes, people, and
their genes. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Marshall, S., D. Pollard, S. Hostetler, and P. U. Clark (2004). Coupling
ice-sheet and climate models for simulation of former ice sheets. In The
Quaternary period in the United States, edited by A. Gillespie, S. C.
Porter, and B. Atwater, pp. 105-26. Elsevier Science, New York.

Martin, P. S. (1973). The discovery of America. Science 179:969-74

Martin, P. S. (1984). Prehistoric overkill: The global model. In
Quaternary Extinctions: A Prehistoric Revolution, edited by P. S. Martin
and R. Klein, pp. 354-403. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Martin, P. S. (1987). Clovisia the beautiful. Natural History 96:10-13.

Martin, P. S. (2005). Twilight of the mammoths. University of California
Press, Berkeley.

Martin, P. S. and R. G. Klein, eds. (1984). Quaternary extinctions: a
prehistoric revolution. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Martin, P. S. and D. Steadman (1999). Prehistoric extinctions on islands
and continents. In Extinctions in near time: causes, contexts, and
consequences, edited by R. MacPhee, pp. 17-55. Plenum, New York.

Matisoff, J. (1990). On megalocomparison. Language 66:106-20.

Mayor, A. (2005). Fossil legends of the first Americans. Princeton
University Press, Princeton.

McArthur, N., I. Saunders, and R. Tweedie (1976). Small population
isolates: a micro-simulation study. Journal of the Polynesian Society
85:307-26.

McGee, W J (1893). Man and the glacial period. American Anthropologist
6:85-95.

McGhee, R. (1984). Thule prehistory of Canada. Handbook of North
American Indians, Vol. 5, Arctic, edited by D. Damas, pp. 369-76.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

McGhee, R. (2004). Between racism and romanticism, scientism and
spiritualism: the dilemmas of New World archaeology. In Archaeology on
the edge: new perspectives from the northern plains, edited by B.
Kooyman and J. Kelley, pp. 13-22. University of Calgary Press, Calgary.

McGhee, R. (2005). The last imaginary place: a human history ofthe
Arctic world. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

McGovern, T. (1994). Management for extinction in Norse Greenland. In
Historical ecology, edited by C. Crumley, pp. 127-54. SAR Press, Santa
Fe, NM.

McManus J., R. Francois, J.-M. Gherardi, L. D. Keigwin, and S.
Brown-Leger (2004). Collapse and rapid resumption of Atlantic meridional
circulation linked to deglacial climate changes. Nature 428:833-37.

McNeill, W. (1976). Plagues and people. Anchor/Doubleday, Garden City,
NJ.

Medawar, P. (1982). Pluto's republic. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Meltzer, D. J. (1983). The antiquity of man and the development of
American archaeology. Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory
6:1-51.

Meltzer, D. J. (1989). Why don't we know when the first people came to
North America? American Antiquity 54:471-90.

Meltzer, D. J. (1990). In search of a mammoth fraud. New Scientist
127(1725):51-55.

Meltzer, D. J. (1993a). Search for the first Americans. Smithsonian
Books, Washington, D.C.

Meltzer, D. J. (1993b). The Pleistocene peopling of the Americas.
Evolutionary Anthropology 1:157–69.

Meltzer, D. J. (1995). Clocking the first Americans. Annual Review of
Anthropology 24:21-45.

Meltzer, D. J. (1999). Human responses to Middle Holocene (altithermal)
climates on the North American Great Plains. Quaternary Research
52:404-16.

Meltzer, D. J. (2002). What do you do when no one's been there before?
Thoughts on the exploration and colonization of new lands. In The First
Americans: the Pleistocene colonization of the New World, edited by N.
Jablonski. Memoirs of the California Academy of Sciences 27:25-56.

Meltzer, D. J. (2003). Lessons in landscape learning. In Colonization of
unfamiliar landscapes: the archaeology of adaptation, edited by M.
Rockman and J. Steele, pp. 222-41. Routledge, London.

Meltzer, D. J. (2004). Modeling the initial colonization of the
Americas: issues of scale, demography, and landscape learning. In The
settlement of the American continents: a multidisciplinary approach to
human biogeography, edited by C. M. Barton, G. A. Clark, D. R. Yesner,
and G. A. Pearson, pp. 123-37. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Meltzer, D. J. (2005). The seventy-year itch: controversies over human
antiquity and their resolution. Journal of Anthropological Research
61.4:433-68.

Meltzer, D. J. (2006a). Folsom: new archaeological investigations of a
classic Paleoindian bison kill. University of California Press,
Berkeley.

Meltzer, D. J. (2006b). History of research on the Paleo-Indian.
Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 3, environment, origins, and
population, edited by D. Ubelaker, pp. 110-28. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D.C.

Meltzer, D. J., J. M. Adovasio, and T. D. Dillehay (1994). On a
Pleistocene human occupation at Pedra Furada, Brazil. Antiquity
68:695-14.

Meltzer, D. J. and M. Bever (1995). Paleoindians of Texas: an update on
the Texas Clovis fluted point survey. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:17-51.

Meltzer, D. J., D. K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A. Barker, D. Dincauze, C. V.
Haynes, F. Mena, L. Nunez, and D. J. Stanford (1997). On the Pleistocene
antiquity of Monte Verde, southern Chile. American Antiquity 62:659-63.

Meltzer, D. J. and J. I. Mead (1985). Dating late Pleistocene
extinctions: theoretical issues, analytical bias and substantive
results. In Environments and extinctions: man in late glacial North
America, edited by J. I. Mead and D. J. Meltzer, pp. 145-74. Center for
the Study of Early Man, University of Maine, Orono.

Meltzer, D. J. and W. C. Sturtevant (1983). The Holly Oak shell game: an
historic archaeological fraud. In Lulu Linear Punctated: essays in honor
of G. Irving Quimby, edited by R. C. Dunnell and D. K. Grayson.
Anthropological Papers No. 72:325-52. Museum of Anthropology, University
of Michigan.

Merriwether, D. A. (2002). A mitochondrial perspective on the peopling
of the New World. In The first Americans: the Pleistocene colonization
of the New World, edited by N. Jablonski. Memoirs of the California
Academy of Sciences 27:295-310.

Merriwether, D. A., W. Hall, A. Vahlne, and R. Ferrell (1996). mtDNA
variation indicates Mongolia may have been the source for the founding
population for the New World. American Journal of Human Genetics
59:204-12.

Merriwether, D. A., F. Rothhammer, and R. Ferrell (1995). Distribution
of the four founding lineage haplotypes in Native Americans suggests a
single wave of migration to the New World. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 98:411-30.

Mithen, S. (2003). After the ice: a global human history 20,000-5000 BC.
Weidenfield & Nicholson, London.

Moore, J. (2001). Evaluating five models of human colonization. American
Anthropologist 103:395-408.

Morlan, R. E. (1988). Pre-Clovis people: early discoveries of America?
Ethnological Monographs 12:31-43.

Morrell, V. (1995). Ancestral passions. Simon and Schuster, New York.

Morse, D. (1997). Sloan: a Paleoindian Dalton cemetery in Arkansas.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Moulton, G. (2003). The Lewis and Clark journals: an American epic of
discovery. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

Mulligan, C. (2006). Anthropological applications of ancient DNA:
problems and prospects. American Antiquity 71:365-80.

Mulligan, C., K. Hunley, S. Cole, and J. Long (2004). Population
genetics, history, and health patterns in Native Americans. Annual
Review Genomics Human Genetics 5:295-315.

Mulligan, C., S. Norris, and S. Lukehart (2008). Molecular studies in
Treponema pallidum evolution: toward clarity? PLoS Neglected Tropical
Diseases 2(1): e184. doi:10.1371/journal. pntd.0000184.

Muscheler, R., B. Kromer, S. Bjork, A. Svensson, M. Friedrich, K. F.
Kaiser, and J. Southon (2008). Tree rings and ice cores revea¹⁴C
calibration uncertainties during the Younger Dryas. Nature Geoscience
1:263-67.

Myers, T., M. Voorhies, and R. Corner (1980). Spiral fractures and bone
pseudotools at pale-ontological sites. American Antiquity 45:483-90.

Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, Public Law
101-601; 25 U. S. C. 3001 et seq. (November 16, 1990).

Nelson, A. R. (2006). Patterns of craniometric variation and
geographical distribution in North America: a historical comparison. In
Paleoamerican origins: beyond Clovis, edited by R. Bonnichsen, B.
Lepper, D. Stanford, and M. Waters, pp. 277-88. Center for the Study of
the First Americans, College Station, TX.

Nelson, R. (1969). Hunters of the northern ice. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago. Nelson, R. (1986). Hunters of the northern forest.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago. Nettle, D. (1998). Explaining
global patterns of language diversity. Journal of Anthropological
Archaeology 17:354-74.

Nettle, D. (1999). Linguistic diversity of the Americas can be
reconciled with a recent colonization. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 96:3325-29.

Neves, W. and M. Hubbe (2005). Cranial morphology of early Americans
from Lagoa Santa, Brazil: implications for the settlement of the New
World. Proceedings ofthe National Academy of Sciences 102:18309-14.

Nevle, R. and D. Bird (2008). Effects of syn-pandemic fire reduction and
reforestation in the tropical Americas on atmospheric CO₂ during
European conquest. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology
264:25-38.

Newby, P., J. Bradley, A. Spiess, B. Shuman, and P. Leduc (2005). A
Paleoindian response to Younger Dryas climate change. Quaternary Science
Reviews 24:141-54.

Nichols, J. (1990). Linguistic diversity and the first settlement of the
New World. Language 66:475-521.

Nichols, J. (2002). The first American languages. In The first
Americans: the Pleistocene colonization of the New World, edited by N.
Jablonski. Memoirs of the California Academy of Sciences 27:273-93.

Noonan, J. P., G. Coop, S. Kudaravalli, D. Smith, J. Krause, J. Alessi,
F. Chen, et al. (2006). Sequencing and analysis of Neanderthal genomic
DNA. Science 314:1113-18.

O'Connell, J. F. and J. Allen (2004). Dating the colonization of Sahul
(Pleistocene Australia-New Guinea): a review of recent research. Journal
of Archaeological Science 31:835-53.

Odess, D., S. Loring, and W. Fitzhugh (2000). Skraeling: first peoples
of Helluland, Markland, and Vinland. In Vikings: the North Atlantic
Saga, edited by W. Fitzhugh and E. Ward, pp. 193-205. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Oldfield, F. and K. D. Alverson (2003).The societal relevance of
paleoenvironmental research. In Paleoclimate, global change, and the
future, edited by K. D. Alverson, R. S. Bradley, and T. F. Pederson, pp.
1-11. Springer, Berlin.

Orians, G. and J. Heerwagen (1992). Evolved responses to landscapes. In
The adapted mind: evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture,
edited by J. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, pp. 555-79. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.

Orr, P. C. (1962). The Arlington Springs site, Santa Rosa Island.
American Antiquity 27:417-19.

Osborn, H. F. (1922). Hesperopithecus, the first anthropoid primate
found in America.American Museum Novitates 37.

Overpeck, J., C. Whitlock, and B. Huntley (2003). Terrestrial biosphere
dynamics in the climate system: past and future. In Paleoclimate, global
change, and the future, edited by K. D. Alverson, R. S. Bradley, and T.
F. Pederson, pp. 81-111. Springer, Berlin.

Owsley, D. and D. Hunt (2001). Clovis and Early Archaic period crania
from the Anzick site (24 PA 506), Park County, Montana. Plains
Anthropologist 46:115-24.

Owsley, D. and R. Jantz (2006). Nearsightedness in Paleoamerican
research: historical perspectives and contemporary analysis. In
Paleoamerican origins: beyond Clovis, edited by R. Bonnichsen, B.
Lepper, D. Stanford, and M. Waters, pp. 289-94. Center for the Study of
the First Americans, College Station, TX.

Pääbo, S. (2003). The mosaic that is our genome. Nature 421:409-12.

Parenti, F., M. Fontugue, and C. Guerin (1996). Pedra Furada in Brazil
and its “presumed” evidence: limitations and potential of the available
data. Antiquity 70:422-27.

Park, R. (1993). The Dorset-Thule succession in Arctic North America:
assessing claims for cultural contact. American Antiquity 58:203-34.

Peltier, W. R. (2002). On eustatic sea level history: Last Glacial
Maximum to Holocene. Quaternary Science Reviews 21:377-96.

Peltier, W. R. (2005). On the hemispheric origins of meltwater pulse 1a.
Quaternary Science Reviews 24:1655-71.

Pennisi, E. (2004). Speaking in tongues. Science 303:1321-23.

Petit, C. (1998). Rediscovering America: the New World may be 20,000
years older than experts thought. US News & World Report 125:56-64.

Pettitt, P. (2000). The Paviland radiocarbon dating programme. In
Paviland Cave and the “Red Lady”: a definitive report, edited by S.
Aldhouse-Green, pp. 63-71. Western Academic and Specialist Press,
Bristol, UK.

Pintar, N. and S. Ishman (2008). Impacts, mega-tsunami, and other
extraordinary claims. GSA Today 18:37-38.

Pitulko, V., P. Nikolsky, E. Girya, E. Basilyan, V. Tumskoy, S.
Koulakov, S. Astakhov, E. Pavlova, and M. Anisimov (2004). The Yana RHS
site: humans in the Arctic before the Last Glacial Maximum. Science
303:52-56.

Poinar, H. N., C. Schwarz, J. Qi, B. Shapiro, R. D. E. MacPhee, B.
Buigues, A. Tikhonov, et al. (2006). Metagenomics to paleogenomics:
large-scale sequencing of mammoth DNA. Science 311:392-94.

Powell, J. F. (2005). The first Americans: race, evolution, and the
origin of Native Americans. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Powell, J. F. and W. Neves (1999). Craniofacial morphology ofthe first
Americans: pattern and process in the peopling of the New World.
Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 42:153-88.

Powell, J. F. and J. Rose (1999). Report on the osteological assessment
of the “Kennewick man” skeleton (CENWW.97.Kennewick). Available at
http://www.nps.gov/archeology/kennewick/powell_rose.htm.

Powell, J. W. (1891). Indian linguistic families of America north of
Mexico. Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology 7:3-142.

Preston, D. (1995). The mystery of Sandia Cave. New Yorker, June 12,
1995, pp. 66-83.

Pringle, H. (2007). Did a comet wipe out prehistoric Americans? New
Scientist, 2591:28-33.

Punke, M. L. and L. G. Davis (2006). Problems and prospects in the
preservation of Late Pleistocene cultural sites in southern Oregon
coastal river valleys: implications for evaluating coastal migration
routes. Geoarchaeology 21:333-50.

Quimby, G. (1954). Cultural and natural areas before Kroeber. American
Antiquity 19:317-31.

Quimby, G. (1955). Reply to Aschmann's comment. American Antiquity
20:378-79.

Raynaud, D., T. Blunier, Y. Ono, and R. Delmas (2003). The Late
Quaternary history of atmospheric trace gases and aerosols: interactions
between climate and biogeochemical cycles. In Paleoclimate, global
change, and the future, edited by K. D. Alverson, R. S. Bradley, and T.
F. Pederson, pp. 13-31. Springer, Berlin.

Reanier, R. E. (1995). The antiquity of Paleoindian materials in
northern Alaska. Arctic Anthropology 32:31-50.

Reasoner, M. and M. Jodry (2000). Rapid response of alpine timberline
vegetation to the Younger Dryas climate oscillation in the Colorado
Rocky Mountains, USA. Geology 28:51-54.

Redder, A. and J. Fox (1998). Excavation and positioning ofthe Horn
Shelter burial and grave goods. Central Texas Archaeologist 11:1-12.

Reeves, B. O. (1990). Communal bison hunters of the northern plains. In
Hunters ofthe recent past, edited by L. Davis and B. O. Reeves, pp.
168-94. Unwin Hyman, London.

Renfrew, C., ed. (2000). America past, America present: genes and
languages in the Americas and beyond. MacDonald Institute for
Archaeological Research, Cambridge, UK.

Renne, P., J. Feinberg, M. Waters, J. Arroyo-Cabrales, P.
Ochoa-Castillo, M. Perez-Campa, and K. Knight (2005). Age of Mexican ash
with alleged “footprints.” Nature 438, E7-E8.

Rick, T., J. Erlandson, and R. Vellanoweth (2001). Paleocoastal fishing
along the Pacific Coast of the Americas: evidence from Daisy Cave, San
Miguel Island, California. American Antiquity 66:595-614.

Rind, D. (2002). The sun's role in climate variations. Science
296:673-77.

Ringe, D. (2000). Some relevant facts about historical linguistics. In
America past, America present: genes and languages in the Americas and
beyond, edited by C. Renfrew, pp. 139-62. McDonald Institute for
Archaeological Research, Cambridge, UK.

Roberts, F. H. H. (1940). Developments in the problem of the North
American Paleo-Indian. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections 100:51-116.

Robinson, L. F., J. F. Adkins, L. D. Keigwin, J. Southon, D. P.
Fernandez, S-L. Wang, and D. S. Scheirer (2005). Radiocarbon variability
in the western North Atlantic during the last deglaciation. Science
310:1469-73.

Rockman, M. and J. Steele, eds. (2003). Colonization of unfamiliar
landscapes: the archaeology of adaptation. Routledge, London.

Rogers, R., L. Rogers, and L. Martin (1992). How the door opened: the
peopling of the New World. Human Biology 64:281-302.

Ronda, J. (1984). Lewis and Clark among the Indians. University of
Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

Roosevelt, T. (1910). African game trails: an account of the African
wanderings of an American hunter-naturalist. Charles Scribner and Sons,
New York.

Roseman, C. and T. Weaver (2004). Multivariate apportionment of global
human craniometric diversity. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
125:257-63.

Ruddiman, W. (2005). Plows, plagues, and petroleum: how humans took
control of climate. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Rudwick, M. (1985). The great Devonian controversy: the shaping of
scientific knowledge among gentlemanly specialists. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

Rudwick, M., ed. (1997). Georges Cuvier, fossil bones, and geological
catastrophes: new translations & interpretations of the primary texts.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Ruhlen, M. (1994). The origin of language: tracing the evolution ofthe
mother tongue. John Wiley and Sons, New York.

Saillard, J., P. Forster, N. Lynnerup, H. Bandelt, and S. Norby (2000).
mtDNA variation among Greenland Eskimos: the edge of the Beringian
expansion. American Journal of Human Genetics 67:718-26.

Santos, G., M. Bird, F. Parenti, L. Fifield, N. Guidon, and P. Hausladen
(2003). A revised chronology of the lowest occupation layer of Pedra
Furada rock shelter, Piaui, Brazil: the Pleistocene peopling of the
Americas. Quaternary Science Reviews 22:2303-10.

Sapir, E. (1916). Time perspective in aboriginal American culture: a
study in method. Geological Survey Canada, Anthropological Series 13.
Ottawa, Canada.

Sapir, E. (1921). A bird's-eye view of American languages north of
Mexico. Science 54:408.

Saunders, N. (1998). Review of “Monte Verde: a late Pleistocene
settlement in Chile, Volume 2: archaeological context and
interpretation,” by Tom D. Dillehay. Nature 392:145-46.

Scarre, C., ed. (2005). The human past: world prehistory and the
development of human society. Thames & Hudson, London.

Schaefer, J., G. Denton, D. Barrel, S. Ivy-Ochs, P. Kubik, B. Anderon,
F. Phillis, T. Lowell, and C. Schluter (2006). Near-synchronous
interhemispheric termination of the Last Glacial Maximum in
mid-latitudes. Science 312:1510-13.

Schenninger, J., S. Gonzalez, D. Huddart, M. Bennett, and A.
Gonzales-Huesca (2006). The OSL dating of the Xalnene ash: a reply to
comments by Duller on “Human footprints in central Mexico older than
40,000 years.” Quaternary Science Reviews 25:3077-80.

Schledermann, P. (2000). A. D. 1000: East meets West. In Vikings: the
North Atlantic saga, edited by W. Fitzhugh and E. Ward, pp. 189-192.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Schneider, A. and R. Bonnichsen (2006). Where are we going? Public
policy and science. In Paleoamerican origins: beyond Clovis, edited by
R. Bonnichsen, B. Lepper, D. Stanford, and M. Waters, pp. 297-312.
Center for the Study of the First Americans, College Station, TX.

Schrag, D. (2000). Of ice and elephants. Nature 404:23-24.

Schroeder, A. (1979). Pecos Pueblo. Handbook of North American Indians,
Vol. 9, Southwest, edited by A. Ortiz, pp. 430-37. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Schroeder, K., T. Schurr, J. Long, N. Rosenberg, M. Crawford, L.
Tarskaia, L. Osipova, S. Zhadanov, and D. Smith (2007). A private allele
ubiquitous in the Americas. Biology Letters 3:218-23.

Schuiling, W. (1972). Pleistocene man at Calico: a report on the
international conference on the Calico Mountains excavations, San
Bernardino County, California. San Bernardino County Museum Association,
San Bernardino, CA.

Schurr, T. G. (2004a). Molecular genetic diversity in Siberians and
Native Americans suggests an early colonization of the New World. In
Entering America: Northeast Asia and Beringia before the Last Glacial
Maximum, edited by D. Madsen, pp. 187-38. University of Utah Press, Salt
Lake City.

Schurr, T. G. (2004b). The peopling of the New World: perspectives from
molecular anthropology. Annual Review of Anthropology 33:551-83.

Schwarz, H. (1992). Uranium series dating in paleoanthropology.
Evolutionary Anthropology 1:56-62.

Schwenninger, J-L., S. Gonzalez, D. Huddart, M. R. Bennett, and A.
Gonzalez-Huesca (2007). The OSL dating of the Xalnene ash: a reply to
comments by G. Duller on “Human footprints in central Mexico older than
40,000 years.” Quaternary Science Reviews 25:3077-80.

Secoy, F. (1953). Changing military patterns of the Great Plains
Indians. Monographs of the American Ethnological Society 21. Seattle,
Washington.

Seebach, J. (2006). Drought or development? patterns of paleoindian site
discovery on the Great Plains of North America. Plains Anthropologist
51:71-88.

Seeman, M. (1994). Intercluster lithic patterning at Nobles Pond: a case
for “disembedded” procurement among early Paleoindian societies.
American Antiquity 59:273-88.

Seielstad, M., E. Minch, and L. Cavalli-Sforza (1998). Genetic evidence
for a higher female migration rate in humans. Nature Genetics 20:278-80.

Seielstad, M., N. Yuldasheva, N. Singh, P. Underhill, P. Oefner, P.
Shen, and R. Wells (2003). A novel Y-chromosome variant puts an upper
limit on the timing of first entry into the Americas. American Journal
of Human Genetics 73:700-705.

Sellet, F. (2004). Beyond the point: projectile manufacture and
behavioral inference. Journal of Archaeological Science 31:1553-66.

Severinghaus, J. and E. Brook (1999). Abrupt climate change at the end
of the last glacial period inferred from trapped air in polar ice.
Science 286:930-34.

Shapiro, B., A. J. Drummond, A. Rambaut, M. C. Wilson, P. E. Matheus, A.
V. Sher, O. G. Pybus, et al. (2004). Rise and fall of the Beringian
Steppe Bison. Science 306:1561-65.

Sherwood, S. C., B. Driskell, A. Randall, and S. Meeks (2004).
Chronology and stratigraphy at Dust Cave, Alabama. American Antiquity
69.3:533-54.

Shetrone, H. (1936). The Folsom phenomena as seen from Ohio. Ohio State
Archaeological and Historical Quarterly 45:240-56.

Shields, E. and G. Jones (1998). Dorset and Thule divergence from east
central Asian roots. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
106:207-18.

Shipley, W. (1978). Native languages of California. Handbook of North
American Indians, Vol. 8, California, edited by R. Heizer, pp. 80-90.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Shott, M. J. (2002). Sample bias in the distribution and abundance of
Midwestern fluted bifaces. Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology
27:89-123.

Shuman, B., P. Bartlein, and T. Webb (2005). The magnitudes of
millennial- and orbital-scale climatic change in eastern North America
during the Late Quaternary. Quaternary Science Reviews 24:2194-2206.

Shuman, B., T. Webb, P. Bartlein, and J. W. Williams (2002). The anatomy
of a climatic oscillation: vegetation change in eastern North America
during the Younger Dryas chronozone. Quaternary Science Reviews
21:1777-91.

Siegenthaler, U., T. Stocker, E. Monnin, D. Luthi, J. Schwander, B.
Stauffer, D. Raynaud, et al. (2005). Stable carbon cycle-climate
relationship during the late Pleistocene. Science 310:1313-17.

Silberbauer, G. (1981). Hunter & habitat in the central Kalahari Desert.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Silverman, I. and M. Eals (1992). Sex differences in spatial abilities:
evolutionary theory and data. In The adapted mind: evolutionary
psychology and the generation of culture, edited by J. Barkow, L.
Cosmides, and J. Tooby, pp. 533-49. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Simms, S. R. (1996). North America: the North American West. In The
Oxford Companion to Archaeology, edited by B. Fagan, pp. 523-25. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.

Skinner, M., S. Skinner, and R. Gooris (1977). Stratigraphy and
biostratigraphy of late Cenozoic deposits in central Sioux County,
western Nebraska. American Museum of Natural History Bulletin
158:271-367.

Slobodin, S. (2001). Western Beringia at the end of the Ice Age. Arctic
Anthropology 38:31-47.

Smith, D., R. Malhi, J. Eshleman, F. Kaestle, and B. Kemp (2006).
Mitochondrial DNA haplogroups of Paleoamericans in North America. In
Paleoamerican origins: beyond Clovis, edited by R. Bonnichsen, B.
Lepper, D. Stanford, and M. Waters, pp. 243-54. Center for the Study of
the First Americans, College Station, TX.

Smith, D., R. Malhi, J. Eshleman, J. Lorenz, and F. Kaestle (1999).
Distribution of mtDNA haplogroup X among native North Americans.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 110:271-84.

Snipp, C. M. (2006). Population size, nadir to 2000. Handbook of North
American Indians, Vol. 3, environment, origins, and population, edited
by D. Ubelaker, pp. 702-11. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
D.C.

Snyder, L. M. and J. Leonard (2006). Dog. Handbook of North American
Indians, Vol. 3, environment, origins, and population, edited by D.
Ubelaker, pp. 452-62. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Southon, J. and R. E. Taylor (2002). Brief comments on “Terrestrial
evidence of a nuclear catastrophe in Paleoindian times” by Richard B.
Firestone and William Topping. Mammoth Trumpet 17.2:14-17.

Sparks, C. and R. Jantz (2002). A reassessment of human cranial
plasticity: Boas revisited. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 99:14636-39.

Speth, J. and K. Spielmann (1983). Energy source, protein metabolism,
and hunter-gatherer subsistence strategies. Journal of Anthropological
Archaeology 2:1-31.

Stafford, M. D., G. C. Frison, D. Stanford, and G. Zeimans (2003).
Digging for the color of life: Paleoindian red ochre mining at the
Powars II site, Platte County, Wyoming, U. S. A. Geoarchaeology
18:71-90.

Stahle, D., M. Cleaveland, D. Blanton, M. Therrell, and D. Gray (1998).
The Lost Colony and Jamestown droughts. Science 280:564-67.

Stalker, A. M. (1977). Indications of Wisconsin and earlier man from the
southwest Canadian prairies. In Amerinds and their paleoenvironments in
northeastern North America, edited by W. Newman and B. Salwen. New York
Academy of Sciences Annals 288:119-36.

Stanford, D. (1978). The Jones-Miller site: an example of Hell Gap bison
procurement strategy. Plains Anthropologist Memoir 14:90-97.

Stanford, D. (1999). Paleoindian archaeology and late Pleistocene
environments in the plains and southwestern United States. In Ice-Age
people of North America: environments, origins, and adaptations, edited
by R. Bonnichsen and K. Turnmire, pp. 281-339. Center for the Study of
the First Americans, Corvallis, OR.

Stanford, D., R. Bonnichsen, and R. Morlan (1981). The Ginsberg
experiment: modern and prehistoric evidence of a bone-flaking
technology. Science 212:438-40.

Stanford, D. and B. Bradley (2002). Ocean trails and prairie paths?
thoughts about Clovis origins. In The first Americans: the Pleistocene
colonization of the New World, edited by N. Jablonski. Memoirs of the
California Academy of Sciences 27:255-71.

Steele, D. G. (1998). Human biological remains. In Wilson-Leonard: an
11,000-year archaeological record of hunter-gatherers in central Texas,
Vol. 5, edited by M. B. Collins, pp. 1441-62. Studies in Archaeology 31,
Texas Archaeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas, Austin.

Steele, G. and J. Powell (2002). Facing the past: a view of the North
American human fossil record. In The first Americans: the Pleistocene
colonization of the New World, edited by N. Jablonski. Memoirs of the
California Academy of Sciences 27:93-122.

Steens-McIntyre, V., R. Fryxell, and H. Malde (1981). Geologic evidence
for age of deposits at Hueyatlaco archaeological site, Valsequillo,
Mexico. Quaternary Research 16:1-17.

Stephens, D. and J. Krebs (1986). Foraging theory. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ.

Stewart, T. D. (1973). The people of America. Scribner, New York.

Stiger, M. (2006). A Folsom structure in the Colorado mountains.
American Antiquity 71:321-52.

Storck, P. (1991). Imperialists without a state: the cultural dynamics
of early Paleoindian colonization as seen from the Great Lakes region.
In Clovis origins and adaptations, edited by R. Bonnichsen and K.
Turnmire, pp. 153-62. Center for the Study of the First Americans,
Corvallis, OR.

Strauss, L. G., D. J. Meltzer, and T. Goebel (2005). Ice Age Atlantis?
exploring the Solutrean-Clovis “connection.” World Archaeology
37:506-31.

Surovell, T. (2003). Simulating coastal migration in New World
colonization. Current Anthropology 44:580-91.

Sutherland, P. (2000). The Norse and Native North Americas. In Vikings:
the North Atlantic saga, edited by W. Fitzhugh and E. Ward, pp. 238-47.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Swagerty, W. R. (1988). Indian trade in the trans-Mississippi west to
1870. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 4, history of
Indian-White relations, edited by W. E. Washburn, pp. 351-74.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Swanton, J. (1911). Indian tribes of the lower Mississippi Valley.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 43.

Swedlund, A. and D. Anderson (1999). Gordon Creek woman meets Kennewick
man: new interpretations and protocols regarding the peopling of the
Americas. American Antiquity 64:569-76.

Szathmary, E. J. (1984). Human biology ofthe Arctic. Handbook of North
American Indians, Vol. 5, Arctic, edited by D. Damas, pp. 64-71.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Szathmary, E. J. (1993). Genetics of aboriginal North Americans.
Evolutionary Anthropology 1:202-20.

Szathmary, E. J. (1996). Ancient migrations from Asia to North America.
In Prehistoric Mongoloid dispersals, edited by T. Akazawa and E.
Szathmary, pp. 149-64. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

Tamm, E., T. Kivisild, M. Reidla, M. Metspalu, D. Smith, C. Mulligan, C.
Bravi, et al. (2007). Beringian standstill and spread of Native American
founders. PLoS One 9***829.

Tarasov, L. and W. Peltier (2006). A calibrated deglacial drainage
chronology for the North American continent: evidence of an Arctic
trigger for the Younger Dryas. Quaternary Science Reviews 25:659-88.

Taylor, R. E. (1995). Radiocarbon dating: the continuing revolution.
Evolutionary Anthropology 4:169-81.

Taylor, R. E., C. V. Haynes, D. Kirner, and J. Southon (1999).
Radiocarbon analyses of modern organics at Monte Verde, Chile: no
evidence for a local reservoir effect. American Antiquity 64:455-60.

Teller, J. T. (2004). Controls, history, outbursts, and impact of large
Late-Quaternary pro-glacial lakes in North America. In The Quaternary
period in the United States, edited by A. Gillespie, S. C. Porter and B.
Atwater, pp. 45-61. Elsevier Science, New York.

Teller, J. T., M. Boyd, Z. Yang, P. S. G. Kor, and A. M. Fard (2005).
Alternative routing of Lake Agassiz overflow during the Younger Dryas:
new dates, paleotopography, and a re-evaluation. Quaternary Science
Reviews 24:1890-1905.

Thomas, D. H., ed. (1989). Columbian consequences, Vol. 1:
archaeological and historical perspectives on the Spanish borderlands
west. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Thomas, D. H., ed. (1990). Columbian consequences, Vol. 2:
archaeological and historical perspectives on the Spanish borderlands
east. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Thomas, D. H., ed. (1991). Columbian consequences, Vol. 3: the Spanish
borderlands in Pan-American perspective. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Thomas, D. H. (2000). Skull wars: Kennewick man, archeology, and the
battle for Native American identity. New York, Basic Books.

Thomas, D. H. (2006). Finders keepers and deep American prehistory. In
Imperialism, art and restitution, edited by J. Merryman, pp. 218-53.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Thomas, N. (2003). Cook: the extraordinary voyages of Captain James
Cook. Walker, New York.

Thompson, L. and M. Kinkade (1990). Languages. Handbook of North
American Indians, Vol. 7, Northwest Coast, edited by W. Suttles, pp.
30-51. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Torroni, A. (2000). Mitochondrial DNA and the origin of Native
Americans. In America past, America present: genes and languages in the
Americas and beyond, edited by C. Renfrew, pp. 77-87. McDonald Institute
for Archaeological Research, Cambridge, UK.

Torroni, A., T. Schurr, M. Cabell, M. Brown, J. Neel, M. Larson, D.
Smith, C. Vullo, and D. Wallace (1993). Asian affinities and continental
radiation of the four founding Native American mtDNA. American Journal
of Human Genetics 53:563-90.

Toth, N. (1991). The material record. In The first Americans: search and
research, edited by T. Dillehay and D. J. Meltzer, pp. 53-76. CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL.

Touhy, D. and A. Dansie (1997). Spirit Cave, Wizards Beach and Grimes
burial shelter. Nevada Historical Society Quarterly 40:24-53.

Turner, C. G. (1985). The dental search for Native American origins. In
Out of Asia: peopling of the Americas and the Pacific, edited by R. Kirk
and E. Szathmary, pp. 31-78. Journal of Pacific History, Canberra.

Turner, C. G. (1986). Dentochronological separation estimates for
Pacific Rim populations. Science 232:1140-42.

Turner, C. G. (2002). Teeth, needles, dogs, and Siberia:
bioarchaeological evidence for the colonization of the New World. In The
first Americans: the Pleistocene colonization of the New World, edited
by N. Jablonski. Memoirs of the California Academy of Sciences
27:123-58.

Turner, C. G. (2005). A synoptic history of physical anthropological
studies on the peopling of Alaska and the Americas. Alaska Journal of
Anthropology 3:157-79.

Turner, C. G., Y. Manabe, and D. E. Hawkey (2000). The Zhoukoudian Upper
Cave dentition. Acta Anthropologica Sinica 19, 253-68.

Ubelaker, D. ed. (2006a). Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 3,
environment, origins, and population. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Ubelaker, D. (2006b). Population size, Contact to nadir. In Handbook of
North American Indians, Vol. 3, environment, origins, and population,
edited by D. Ubelaker, pp. 694-701. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Valladas, H., N. Mercier, M. Michab, J. Joron, J. Reyss, and N. Guidon
(2003). TL age-estimates of burnt quartz pebbles from the Toca do
Boquierao da Pedra Furada (Piaui, northeastern Brazil). Quaternary
Science Reviews 22:1257-63.

Van Dyne, G. M., N. Brockington, Z. Szocs, J. Duek, and C. Ribic (1980).
Large herbivore system. In Grasslands, systems analysis, and man, edited
by A. I. Breymeyer and G. M. Van Dyne, pp. 269-537. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

Van Riper, A. B. (1993). Men among the mammoths: Victorian science and
the discovery of human prehistory. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Van Vark, G. N., D. Kuizenga, and F. Williams (2003). Kennewick and
Luzia: lessons from the European Upper Paleolithic. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 121:181-84.

Wagner, G. (1996). Fission-track dating in paleoanthropology.
Evolutionary Anthropology 5:165-71.

Waitt, R. B. (1985). Case for periodic, colossal jokulhlaups from
Pleistocene glacial Lake Missoula. Geological Society of America
Bulletin 96:1271-1286.

Walker, R. B. (2007). Hunting in the Late Paleoindian period: faunal
remains from Dust Cave, Alabama. In Foragers ofthe terminal Pleistocene
in North America, edited by R. Walker and B. Driskell, pp. 99-115.
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

Wallace, B. (2000). The Viking settlement at L'Anse aux Meadows. In
Vikings: the North Atlantic Saga, edited by W. Fitzhugh and E. Ward, pp.
208-16. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Wallace, D., K. Garrison, and W. C. Knowler (1985). Dramatic founder
effects in Amerindian mitochondrial DNAs. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 68:149-55.

Walthall, J. (1998). Rockshelters and hunter-gatherer adaptation to the
Pleistocene/Holocene transition. American Antiquity 63:223-38.

Walthall, J. and B. Koldehoff (1998). Hunter-gatherer interaction and
alliance formation: Dalton and the cult of the long blade. Plains
Anthropologist 43:257-73.

Wang, S., C. Lewis, M. Jakobsson, S. Ramachandran, N. Ray, G. Bedoya, W.
Rojas, et al. (2007). Genetic variation and population structure in
Native Americans. PLoS Genetics 3:2049-67.

Waters, M. R. (1986). Sulphur Springs woman: an early human skeleton
from southeastern Arizona. American Antiquity 51:361-365.

Waters, M. R., and T. W. Stafford, Jr. (2007). Redefining the age of
Clovis: Implications for the peopling of the New World. Science
315:1122-26.

Watkins D. I., N. McAdam, X. Liu, C. Strang, E. Milford, C. Levine, T.
Garber, et al. (1992). New recombinant HLA-B alleles in a tribe of South
American Amerindians indicate rapid evolution of MHC class I loci.
Nature 357:329-30.

Webb, S. D., R. W. Graham, A. D. Barnosky, C. J. Bell, R. Franz, E.
Hadly, E. Lundelius, et al. (2004). Vertebrate paleontology. In The
Quaternary period in the United States, edited by A. Gillespie, S. C.
Porter, and B. Atwater, pp. 519-38. Elsevier Science, New York.

Webb, T., B. Shuman, and J. W. Williams (2004). Climatically forced
vegetation dynamics in eastern North America during the late Quaternary
Period. In The Quaternary period in the United States, edited by A.
Gillespie, S. C. Porter, and B. Atwater, pp. 459-78. Elsevier Science,
New York.

Weber, D. (1992). The Spanish frontier in North America. Yale University
Press, New Haven, CT.

West, F. (1983). The antiquity of man in America. In Late Quaternary
environments of the United States, Vol. 1, the Late Pleistocene, edited
by S. Porter, pp. 364-82. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.

West, F., ed. (1996). American beginnings: the prehistory and
palaeoecology of Beringia. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Whallon, R. (1989). Elements of culture change in the Later
Palaeolithic. In The human revolution: behavioral and biological
perspectives on the origins of modern humans, edited by P. Mellars and
C. Stringer, pp. 433-54. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Wheat, J. B. (1972). The Olsen-Chubbuck site: a Paleo-indian bison kill.
American Antiquity Memoir 26. Washington, D.C.

Wilder, J., S. Kingan, Z. Mobasher, M. Pilkington, and M. Hammer (2004).
Global patterns of human mitochondrial DNA and Y-chromosome structure
are not influenced by higher migration rates of females versus males.
Nature Genetics 36:1122-25.

Wilford, J. (1997). Human presence in Americas is pushed back a
millennium. New York Times, February 11, 1997.

Wilke, P., J. Flenniken, and T. Ozbun (1991). Clovis technology at the
Anzick site. Journal of California and Great Basin Anthropology
13:242-72.

Williams, F. and G. Armelagos (2007). Reply to “On the misclassification
of human crania,” by M. Hubbe and W. Neves. Current Anthropology
48:285-288.

Williams, J. W., B. Shuman, and T. Webb (2001). Dissimilarity analyses
of Late-Quaternary vegetation and climate in eastern North America.
Ecology 82:3346-62.

Wilmsen, E. and F. H. H. Roberts (1978). Lindenmeier, 1934-1974:
concluding report on investigations. Smithsonian Contributions to
Anthropology, Number 24, Washington, D.C.

Wilson, M. C., D. W. Harvey, and R. G. Forbis (1983). Geoarchaeological
investigations of the age and context of the Stalker (Taber Child) site,
D1Pa 4, Alberta. Canadian Journal of Archaeology 7:179-207.

Winterhalder, B., W. Baillargeon, F. Cappalleto, R. Daniel, and C.
Prescott (1988). The population dynamics of hunter-gatherers and their
prey. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 7:289-328.

Woodbury, A. (1984). Eskimo and Aleut languages. Handbook of North
American Indians, Vol. 5, Arctic, edited by D. Damas, pp. 49-63.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Wright, G. F. (1890). Report. In Discovery of a Paleolithic implement at
New Comerstown, Ohio, edited by W. C. Mills and G. F. Wright, pp. 5-14.
Western Reserve Historical Society, Tract 75.

Wright, G. F. (1892). Man and the glacial period. D. Appleton, New York.
Wright, G. F. (1912). Origin and antiquity of man. Bibliotheca Sacra,
Oberlin. Wu, X. and L. Wang (1985). Chronology in Chinese
palaeoanthropology. In Paleoanthropology and Palaeolithic archaeology in
the People's Republic of China, edited by R. Wu and J. W. Olsen, pp.
29-51. New York: Academic Press. Wyckoff, D. (1993). Gravel sources of
knappable Alibates silicified dolomite. Geoarchaeology 8:35-58.

Yesner, D. (2001). Human dispersal into interior Alaska: antecedent
conditions, mode of colonization, and adaptations. Quaternary Science
Reviews 20:315-27.

Youmans, W. J. (1893). The insolence of office. Popular Science Monthly
42:841-42.

Young, D. (1998). An osteological analysis of the Paleoindian double
burial from Horn Shelter, Number 2. Central Texas Archaeologist
11:13-105.

Yu, Z. and H. E. Wright, Jr. (2001). Response of interior North America
to abrupt climate oscillations in the North Atlantic region during the
last deglaciation. Earth Science Reviews 52:333-69.

Zegura, S., T. Karafet, L. Zhivotovsky, and M. Hammer (2004).
High-resolution SNPs and microsatellite haplotypes point to a single,
recent entry of Native American Y Chromosomes into the Americas.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 21:164-75.

Zimmerman, L. (1997). Remythologizing the relationship between Indians
and archaeologists. In Native Americans and archaeologists: stepping
stones to common ground, edited by N. Swidler, K. Dongoske, R. Anyon,
and A. Downer, pp. 44-56. AltaMira Press, Walnut Creek, CA.

INDEX

The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not
match the pages in your eBook. Please use the search function on your
eReading device to search for terms of interest. For your reference, the
terms that appear in the print index are listed below.

 

Abbeville site (France)

Abbott, Charles Conrad

absolute age

absolute dating technique

Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) dating

acculturation

Acosta, Jose de

adaptation

adaptive challenges, New World

adaptive convergence

“adaptive insurance,” as possible motivation for

migration

Adkins site (Maine)

aDNA. See ancient DNA

Adovasio, James

Africa, migration out of

“African Fallacy,” linguistics

Aftonian interglacial

Agassiz, Louis

Agate Basin site (Wyoming)

projectile points

winter camp, remnants of

Agenbroad, Larry

Agogino, George

agriculture

Ahler, Stanley

air temperature, average annual

albedo

Alibates agatized dolomite outcrop (Texas)

alleles

Allen, Jim

Allen site (Nebraska)

Alley, Richard

Altai region

Alvarado, Pedro de

Amazon River

American Indians. See Native Americans

American Indians

American Indian languages

abundance and distribution, causes of

classifying

American Paleolithic, rise and fall of

Amerind language family

Amick, Daniel

amino acid racemization

amoebic dysentery

Anatolian language

ancient DNA (aDNA)

lineage loss, evidence of

potential of to link ancient and modern

Native Americans

Anderson, David

Anderson, Patricia

animals. See also prey breeding

domesticated

instant flight reflex

Late Wisconsin period

Pleistocene Beringia

resource ranking

stalking

stampedes

unfamiliar, learning about

Antarctic ice sheet

Antevs, Ernst

anthropogenic CO₂

anticyclone

Antoine pandemic (smallpox)

Anzick site (Montana)

aphelion

4°Ar/39Ar dating

archaeological ages, as minimum estimates of

antiquity

archaeological patterns

archaeological time vs. human time

archaeology. See also field techniques for finding

early sites

conspiracy literature

Dust Bowl, influence on finds

methods

archaeomagnetic dating

Arctic adaptations

Arctodus simus (giant short-faced bear)

Arikara tribe

Arlington Springs site (California)

Arnold cave (Missouri)

art, Paleoindian

artifacts. See also tools

bone

bone and ivory, scarcity of

defined

discrete concentrations of

materials

perishable

pre-Clovis

related to burial practices

stone

artificial resupply depots. See also caches

Aschmann, Homer

Asian Pacific Rim languages

assimilation

Associations for the Advancement of Science

American and British

asteroid impact, Pleistocene, supposed

Athabascan languages. See Na-Dene family

atlatl

atmospheric CO₂

Aubrey site (Texas)

Australia

autosomal (nuclear) DNA

avian influenza

Aztec empire

Aztlanolagus (Atzlan rabbit)

 

Babbage, Charles

Babbitt, Bruce

back-migration

backwash of diseases from New World to Old

Bamforth, Douglas

banks, failure of in Great Depression

Barker, Alex

Barnes projectile points

bear, grizzly

Beaton, John

Beck, Charlotte

Becker, Luann

behavioral depression. See resource depression Berelekh site (Siberia)

Beringia

Beringian standstill, inferred by geneticists

Bering Land Bridge. See Beringia Bering Sea

Bering Strait

Bever, Michael

bias, in pre-Clovis debate

Bible

as human chronology prior to 1860

plagues

bifaces

Big Eddy site (Missouri)

big-game animals. See megafauna Big Horn Basin

Binford, Lewis

biotic communities, rearrangement in Pleistocene

Bird, Douglas

Bird, Rebecca Bliege

bison

competitive release

extinction

favored food of

herds, size of

hide

hunting of

kills

lack of domestication of

migration

natural predators of

planned hunts, evidence of

population decline, factors influencing

robes

trapping

Bison antiquus

exploitation of

life-size reconstruction of

Bison bison (American bison)

Black, Francis

Black Death

Black Mat

Bliss, Wesley

blue-grama grass

Boas, Franz

boats

body lice. See clothing

B[images]lling-Aller[images]d warm period

bone artifacts

breakage

independent evidence, need for

scarcity of

Bonfire Rockshelter site (Texas)

Bonneville salt flats

Bonnichsen, Robson Bonnichsen et al. lawsuit. See also

Native American Graves Protection and

Repatriation Act (NAGPRA)

botanical learning, process of

Boucher de Perthes, Jacques

bowhead whales

Boyes, H. D.

B.P. (before present)

Brace, Loring

Brachyprotoma obtusata (short-faced skunk)

Bradley, Bruce

Brain, Jeffrey

Brixham Cave (England)

Broecker, Wallace

Broken Mammoth site (Alaska)

Brose, David

Brown, Barnum

bubonic plague

Buckland, William

buffalo grass

“buffalo guns”

Buhl skeleton

Bull Brook site (Massachusetts)

Bureau of American Ethnology (BAE)

Burnet Cave (New Mexico)

butchering

Byerly, Ryan

 

C₄ grasses

caatinga (thorn forest)

caches

food

landscape learning, possible role in

stone

Cactus Hill site (Virginia)

Caldwell, Joseph

calendar years, and radiocarbon years compared

calibration, radiocarbon dates

CALIB program

Calico alluvial fan

Calico Hills site (California)

camels

Campbell, Lyle Canis dirus (dire wolf)

Cannon, Michael

Carabelli's trait

carbon dioxide (CO₂)

anthropogenic

atmospheric

and climate change

formation of

role of in glaciation

water temperature and

carbon fixation

caribou

Carrion's disease

Casper site (Wyoming)

Castoroides ohioensis (giant beaver)

cation-ratio dating

cattle, introduced to America

Cattle Guard site (Colorado)

“Caucasoids”

cave art

caves, use in Paleoindian times

cemeteries, Paleoindian

census counts of Native Americans, reliability of

early Spaniard

Center for the Study ofthe First Americans

cephalic index

ceremonial exchange

ceremonies. See rituals and ceremonies

Cerro Sota cave (Chile)

Chagas’ disease

chalcedony, use in stone tool production

Chamberlin, Rollin

Chamberlin, Thomas

channel flakes. See fluting

Channeled Scablands (Pacific Northwest)

charcoal, reliability of age determinations on

Charlie Lake Cave (British Columbia)

Chatters, James Chedytes lawi (sea duck)

Cheek Bend Cave (Tennessee)

chert, use in stone tool production

Chesapeake Bay

Chesrow complex (Wisconsin)

chicken pox

China Lake Site (British Columbia)

Chinchihuapi Creek. See also Monte Verde

site (Chile)

Chindadn projectile points

cholera

chromosome, founder effect on

City of Gold (Quivira)

Clark, Peter

Clark, William

Claymont site (Delaware)

Clewlow, William

climate. See also precipitation

temperature

continental

contrasted with weather

coping with

defined

drivers of over geological time

equable

global changes in (see climate change(s))

Ice Age

ice sheets and

jet stream, influence of

latitude and altitude shifts

Milankovitch's mathematical model of

Pleistocene

seasonal/annual changes in

variation, over time

climate change(s)

animal extinction and

carbon dioxide and

and culture change

drought

effects of on habitats

Ice Age, end of

landscape learning and

population loss and

rapid, and glacial movement

reproduction, effects on

thermohaline circulation and

vegetation responses to

climatic stress, as possible motivation for

migration

clothing

body lice, as indicators of

as disease carrier

insulated

manufacture and repair of

Clovis and Beyond conference (1999)

Clovis period

antiquity of

art

diet

diffusion, of technology

dispersal of

geological knowledge

habitation sites

megafaunal hunting by

migration

mobility, plant collecting and

movement, predictability of

population densities

role in megafaunal extinction, supposed

sites across the continent

toolkit

Clovis projectile points

caches

fluting

and Folsom projectile points compared

impact damage, scarcity of

multiple uses of

small-caliber

tallying by state

used against bison

variations in

Clovis site (New Mexico)

human occupation, chronology of

initial discovery and fieldwork

mammoth remains

sale of to Eastern New Mexico University

well-digging, proposed evidence of

coalescent method, haplogroup age estimation

using

coastal colonization

Cody knife

cognates, language

Colbert projectile points

Colby site (Wyoming)

Collins, Michael

colonization

big-game hunting, hypothesized role of

bold vs. cautious colonizing strategies

challenges of

coastal

competing demands of

defined

different ecosystems, failure to appreciate

Norse, attempted

process of

reproduction, effects on

colonizing group

Columbus, Christopher

coming of age celebrations

commodities exchanges, late prehistoric period

common ancestry

tracing

communal hunts and kills

competitive release

Concannon, Joseph and Michael

conflict and warfare, effects of European contact

on

Conrad, Timothy Abbott

conspiracy against early sites in America

accusations of

context, importance in identifying artifacts

continental climate

continental shelf

convergence, adaptive

Cook, Captain James

Cook, Harold

Cordilleran ice sheet

retreat of

cores, stone

Coronado, Francisco

Cortés, Hernán

cost-benefit equation, in prey choice models

costly signaling

CO₂. See carbon dioxide

coulees

cowpox

crania (human), discoveries of

cranial morphology

Hooton's types

craniometry

challenged by Boas

contemporary usage

creation

Biblical account of

Cuvier's theory of

discovery of deep time, consequences for

crescent stone tools

Cresson, Hilborne

critical resources, locating

Croll, James

Crosby, Alfred

Crowfield projectile pointsM

Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North America (Kroeber)

cultural drift

cultural groups, point types and

Cumberland projectile points

curiosity, as possible motivation for migration

currency, point styles as

Cuvier, Georges

The Cycle of Cosmic Catastrophes: How a Stone-Age Comet Changed the
Course of World Culture (Firestone, West, and Warwick-Smith)

 

D₉S1120 autosomal marker

Dalton adze

Dalton period sites

Dalton projectile points

Danger Cave (Utah)

Darwin, Charles

Dasypus bellus (beautiful armadillo)

dating techniques. See also radiocarbon dating

absolute

Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) dating

amino acid racemization

archaeomagnetic

argon/argon (⁴⁰Ar/₃₉Ar) dating

B.P. (before present)

calibrating radiocarbon measurements

cation-ratio

charcoal, use and reliability of

conditions required for

contamination, danger of

conventional decay-counting method

converting radiocarbon years to calibrated

years

electron spin resonance (ESR)

fission-track

geochemical methods

luminescence

optically stimulated luminescence (OSL)

radioactive decay of elemental isotopes

radiocarbon

stratigraphy as

tephrahydration

thermoluminescence (TL)

tree-ring

uranium-series dating

debitage

decay principle, radiocarbon

de Charpentier, Jean

deep time, discovery of

deep water formation

deer

deforestation, consequences for atmospheric

CO₂

deglaciation

coastal

meltwater release

timing of

deGraffenreid cache

de la Salle, René-Robert

Deller, Brian

Deloria, Vine

deltas

dendrochronology (tree-ring dating)

dental evidence of first peoples. See also teeth

dentochronology (dating by dental patterns)

Dent site (Colorado)

depopulation following European contact

effects of on people and nature

from epidemic disease

ratio

deserts

de Soto, Hernando

dhole

dialects (language)

diversity

emergence and evolution of

Eskimo

Diamond, Jared

diet

archaeological evidence of

breadth

Clovis

cranial plasticity and

Dalton

deficiencies

ecological changes, influence of

Great Basin

patterns and trends in

processing time and

regional variations in

search time and

diet breadth model

diffusion vs. migration, Clovis groups

Dillehay, Tom

diluvium

Dincauze, Dena

diphtheria

Discovering Archaeology, role in Monte Verde

controversy

disease. See also infectious epidemic disease etiology, understanding of

immunity from

native infections, New World

native responses to

spread of

divergence

biological

cultural

divergence method, haplogroup age estimation using

diversity of projectile point styles, as age indicator

Dobyns, Henry

dogs

Domebo site (Oklahoma)

domesticated animals. See animals

domesticated

domesticated plants

drought

Dryas octopetala (mountain avens)

Dry Creek site (Alaska), microblades from

Dunnell, Robert

du Pratz, Antoine Le Page

dust

Dust Bowl (1930s)

Dust Cave (Alabama)

Dyke, Arthur

Dyuktai Cave (Siberia)

 

Early Wisconsin period

Easter Island. See Rapa Nui (Easter Island)

Ebola virus

eccentricity, orbital

ecological conditions

Ice Age

Younger Dryas

economic opportunities, as possible motivation

for migration

edible plants, identifying

effective population, defined

BP cold event

Eiseley, Loren

elders, knowledge passed down by

electron spin resonance (ESR)

elephants

Elias, Scott

elk

Ellis, Christopher

El Niño

encephalitis

energy metabolism

engraved stones, Paleoindian

environment

possible role in Pleistocene mammalian

extinction

stability of Ice Age

environmental cues, as used by colonizers

environmental stress, as possible motivation for

migration

epidemic disease. See infectious epidemic

disease

epidemics

aftermath of, in Americas

repeated, in Americas

requirements for

smallpox, in Americas

equifinality, in identifying artifacts

Eremotherium rusconii (Ruscon's ground sloth)

Erik the Red

Eriksson, Leif

Eriksson, Thorvald

erosion

erratic boulders

Escapule site (Arizona)

Eshleman, Jason

Eskimo

dialects

mtDNA haplogroups

Eskimo-Aleut language family

ethnic odontology

ethnographic weaponry

European Paleolithic

Europeans

arrival of in New World

contact with Native Americans

Euskara language isolate

Evans, John

evolution

Darwin's theory of

role of in island endemism and extinctions

exchange. See trade and exchange

exile, as possible motivation for migration

exotic stone, presence of

expansion, apparent speed of Clovis

experience, role in landscape learning

experimentation, role in landscape learning

exploitation depression. See resource depression

extinction(s)

asteroid impact theory

birds

bison

causes of

climate change and

Cuvier's demonstration of

environment, role of

exploitation of rich plant resources

human hand in

island life, susceptibility to

mammalian genera and species of North

America

megafaunal

minimum group size for humans to avoid

multiple causes of

overkill and

Pleistocene

risk of to humans, minimizing

timing and chronology of mammalian

 

Faraday, Michael

Fedje, Daryl

Fenn, Elizabeth

Ferring, Reid

Fiedel, Stuart

field techniques for finding early sites

Figgins, Jesse

fingerprints

fire

Firestone, Richard

firn

first Americans. See also migrations

Paleoindian(s); peopling of the Americas

antiquity of

descendants of (see also Native Americans/American Indians)
disagreements concerning

entry of, routes and timing

homeland of, determining

knowledge of

migratory routes

recoverable sites, likelihood of finding

search for

stereotypes of

tracing

fission-track dating

Fix, Alan

fjords, creation of

flintknapping

Florentine Codex

flotation (field technique)

fluting

channel flakes created by

disappearance of

drills

Folsom

Great Basin projectile points

on hafted points

origins sought

spread of

Thunderbird site

variations

folklore, role in landscape learning

Folsom-age house structures, floor plan

Folsom period

bison hunting

projectile points

rendezvous site

structures

Folsom site (New Mexico)

antiquity of

excavation of

lessons learned from

stone acquisition

visit to

food cache

food shortages, response to

foraging

foraminifera

Fort Ancient period sites

founder effect

genetic

in projectile point styles

founding genetic lineages

founding population

Frederick site (Oklahoma)

French language, English words derived from

Frison, George

Fulton, Robert

 

Gabrielli, Paolo

Gainey projectile points

Gainey site (Michigan)

Galapagos Islands

Gardner, William

gathering spots. See also

rendezvous

Gault site (Texas)

gazelle, extinction of

Geib, Phillip

gender, role in landscape learning

gene flow. See genetic, exchange

generic knowledge

genes, isolated populations and

genetic(s). See also haplogroups; mitochondrial

DNA; mutation(s); non-recombining portion of the Y chromosome

admixture of Native Americans and Europeans

as basis for reconstructing population histories

continuity over time

diversity

drift

exchange

homogeneity

role in studying peopling of Americasi

source population(s)

Genographic Project

Geochelone (North American tortoise)

geochemical dating methods

geofacts

geographic features, role in landscape learning

Geographic Information Systems

geographic isolation

geology, role in landscape learning

Geomys bursarius (Plains pocket gopher)

German language, English words derived from

germ filter, Beringia as

gifts, exchange of

Gilder, Robert

Gilder Mound (Nebraska)

Gillam, Christopher

glacial eustasy

glaciation

carbon dioxide, role of

earth's orbit/tilt, changes in

four-stage model of

as possible hindrance to migration

insolation as key to understanding

interglacials

major glacial-interglacial episodes

in peopling of the Americas

in shaping the landscape

glaciers. See also ice sheets

advance and retreat of

early knowledge of

eustasy

extent of

history of on land

isolated alpine

movement, critical thickness and

zone of accumulation

global warming. See also climate

change(s)

Globigerina bulloides

glottochronology

glyptodont

Goddard, Ives

Goddard, Pliny Earle

Goebel, Ted

Goldberg, Paul

“Goldilocks standard”

Golledge, Reginald

Gonzalez, Sylvia

Goodnight, Charles

Gould, Stephen Jay

gourmet butchering

GPS technology

Graham, Russell

Graham Cave (Missouri)

Gramly, Michael

Grant, Ulysses S.

grasslands

changing ecology of

composition, changes in

overgrazing

Younger Dryas

grass seed as resource

grave goods

Grayson, Donald

Great Basin

climatic and environmental changes in

Clovis-like materials in

fluted projectile points

glaciers in

pluvial lakes

stemmed projectile points

vegetation

Great Depression

Great Lakes

Great Paleolithic War

Great Sand Dunes National Monument

Greenberg, Joseph

Greenbrier projectile points

greenhouse gases

Greenland ice core

Greenland ice sheet

Griffin, James B.

grinding stones

ground sloth

growing season, end of Pleistocene changes in

growth and development, effects on skeleton

Guidon, Niéde

Gulf Stream

Gunnison Basin

Guthrie, Dale

Guthrie, Woody

 

habitation debris

habitats, effects of climate change on

hafting (projectile points)

Haida language

half-life, radiocarbon

Halley, Edmund

Hammer, Michael

Hanson site (Wyoming)

haplogroup(s)

A

B

C

D

E

Eskimo groups

F

founding

frequencies

G

I

J

M

NRY

Q

R

representativeness of modern

sequence diversity

X

haplotype(s)

Hardaway projectile points

Harrington's mountain goat

Harris, Jack

Harris lines

Haskett projectile points

Hassan, Fekri

Haury, Emil

Hawkes, Kristen

Hay, Oliver

Haynes, C. Vance

Haynes, Gary

Head-Smashed-In site (Alberta)

Healy Lake site (Alaska)

hearths

Hell Gap projectile points

Henshaw, Henry

hepatitis

“heriditarians”

Hesperopithecus haroldcookii

Hey, Jody

Hibben, Frank

Hidatsa tribe

hide working

Hill, Jane

Hill, Matthew E.

Hill, Matthew G.

Hiscock site (New York)

HIV/AIDS

H.M.S. Beagle

Hoffecker, John

Holcombe projectile points

Holliday, Vance

Holly Oak whelk (Busycon) shell pendant

Holmes, William Henry

Holocene interglacial period

migration during

start of

hominids, earliest

Homo erectus

Homo genus

Homo neanderthalensis

Homo sapiens

Hooton, Earnest

Hopkins, David

Horner site (Wyoming)

horses

American, Pleistocene

introduced to America

Howard, Edgar B.

Howarth, Fred

Hrdli[images]ka, Ale[images]

Hubbard Glacier

Hueyatlaco site (Mexico)

Hull, David

human antiquity

America, controversy surroundingi

Australia

establishment of

human artifacts, mimicked by nature. See geofacts

human butchering, signs of

human footprints, discovery of

human genetic diversity and history, mapping of

human genome

human history, uncoupling of from earth

history

human leukocyte antigens (HLAs)

human predation

human presence

documenting, worst-case setting for

evidence of

human remains

ancient DNA recovered from

Buhl skeleton

child, Anzick site

crania

discovery of

Taber child

human replication error. See genetic mutations

human sacrifice, Aztec

human waste, chemical signs of

Hunley, Keith

hunting

bison

by Clovis

communal

continent-wide

megafauna, strategies for

with nets

planned hunts

specialized

weaponry

hunting overlook

Hutchings, Karl

Huxley, Thomas Henry

hydrology, role in landscape learning

hyperaminoacidemia

hyperammonemia

 

ice. See glaciers; ice sheets

Ice Age(s)

Agassiz's

in America, first recognized

causes of

climatic and ecological consequences of

overlap with Pleistocene geological period

end of

ice dams

ice-free corridor

ice sheets. See also glaciers

advance, Late Wisconsin period

Antarctic

climate, effects on

continental-scale

Cordilleran

Greenland

Innuitian

Laurentide

melting of

migration and

size of in Last Glacial Maximum (LGM)

times

topography, effects on

ice-wedge casts

Illinoian glacial stage

immunity, disease

inbreeding, necessity of avoiding

Inca Empire, collapse of

incest, necessity of avoiding

indigenous languages. See languages

Indo-European languages

Industrial Revolution

infectious epidemic disease

archaeological first appearance of

backwash of from New World to Old, absence of

and collapse of New World empires

depopulation from

domesticated animals, role in evolution of

effects on society

genetic lineage loss and

language loss and

susceptibility of New World populations to

vectors for

influenza

information

exchange between dispersed groups

storage, human capacity for

Ingstad, Helge

inheritance

mitochondrial, Y chromosome and autosomal

DNA, illustration of

process described

Innuitian ice sheet

insolation

instant flight reflex

intelligence testing, as replacement for

craniometry

interglacials

International Commission on Stratigraphy

definition of Pleistocene

International Union for Quaternary Research

iridium

Irving, William

Ishman, Scott

isolate, languages

isolates, projectile points

isolation

language change, effect on

genetic change, effect on

of New World and Old World populations

isotatic rebound

isotope analysis

isotope, defined

ivory artifacts, scarcity of

 

“Jackie Robinson Rule”

Jamestown colony (Virginia)

Jantz, Richard

jasper, use in stone tool production

Jefferson, Thomas

Jelderks, Judge John

Jenner, Edward

jet stream

Jinmium site (Australia)

Jodry, Margaret

Johnston, W. A.

Jones, George

Jones-Miller site (Colorado)

Judge, James

jump kills

“junk DNA”

Justinian pandemic (plague)

 

Kansan glacial stage

Karafet, Tatiana

katabatic winds

Kelly, Robert

Kemp, Brian

Kennett, James

Kennewick remains (Washington)

“Caucasoids”

legal battle overi

and Native American Grave Protection and

Repatriation Act (NAGPRA)

Kidder, A. V.

kills, animal. See also bison, mammoth

mastodon

with adjoining camps

jump

large, communal

seasonal trends

of small game

small-scale

targeting cow-calf herds

kill sites

Clovis

later Paleoindian

toolkit

Kimmswick site (Missouri)

King, Maureen

kinship networks

Kirch, Patrick

Kitchen, Andrew

knowledge

colonizer

prior, downside of

transmission of

Koeberl, Christian

Koldehoff, Brad

Köppen, Wladimir

Kraft, John

Krieger, Alex

Kring, David

Kroeber, Alfred

Kunz, Michael

 

LaBelle, Jason

Labrador Current

La Brea tar pits (California)

Laetoli site (Tanzania)

Lake Agassiz

Lake Bonneville

lake-effect snows

Lake Lahontan

Lake Missoula

Lake Mojave projectile points

Lake Ojibway

Lake Theo site (Texas)

La Madeleine mammoth

lanceolate projectile points

landmarks, role in landscape learning

landscape

artificial markers

deep knowledge of, moderns’

legibility

mapping of, by colonizers

landscape learning

absence of caches as evidence of

broad-scale vs. local knowledge

climate changes and

components of

gender and

Paleoindian achievements in

survival and

land-use patterns, effects on site discovery

Lange, Dorothea

Lange-Ferguson site (South Dakota)

language(s)

borrowing

classifying (see also language families)

cognates

common origins of

counts of in the Americas

dialects

as evidence of migration routes

evolution of

Greenberg's method of classifying

isolates

Native American, disappearance of

new, emergence of

sound correspondences

language diversity

language families

antiquity of

correspondence with genetic haplogroups

counts of in the Americas

identification of, by Greenberg's mass

comparison

identification of, by traditional historical

linguistic method

native North American

Powell's grouping of

relationship to dental groups

Sapir's grouping of

Language in the Americas (Greenberg)

language loss

infectious epidemic diseases and

Native American

L'Anse aux Meadows site (Newfoundland)

Lansing site (Kansas)

La Reira Cave (Spain)

Lartet, Eduoard

Last Glacial Maximum (LGM)

climatic conditions, severity of

defined

glacial ice, extent of

Late Paleoindian

projectile point types

sites, location of

Late Wisconsin period. See also Last Glacial Maximum

Latin language, English words derived from

Laub, Richard

Laugerie Haute site (France)

Laurentide ice sheet

retreat of

Lawson, John

Leakey, Louis

Lehner site (Arizona)

Leishmania braziliensis

leptospirosis

Lewis and Clark expedition

Lewis, Meriwether

Lewisville site (Texas)

LGM. See Last Glacial Maximum

Libby, Willard

Lincoln, Abraham

Lindenmeier site (Colorado)

“lineal descendants,” identification of according

to NAGPRA

linguistic assimilation

linguistic diversity

lithic(s). See stone

Little Ice Age

llamas

Loch Roy (Scotland)

loess

Lone Wolf Creek site (Texas)

Long, Jeffrey

long-distance exchange and alliance networks

long-faced European. See cranial morphology

Hooton's types

Lost Tribes of Israel

Lott, Dale

Lubbock, John

Lubbock Lake site (Texas)

luminescence dating

Lyell, Charles

lymphocytes

Lynch, Thomas

 

MacNeish, Scotty

major histocompatibility complex (MHC)

Malakoff heads (Texas)

malaria

Malhi, Ripan

mammals, genera of extinct North American

mammoth(s)

bones

and disappearance of grasslands

Holly Oak fraud

kill sites

La Madeleine (France) depiction

remains, Clovis sites

unsuccessful kills

Mammoth Steppe

Mammut americanum (American mastodon)

Mammuthus primigenius (woolly mammoth)

Man and the Glacial Period (Wright)

Mandan tribe

Mann, Daniel

manufacturing debris

Mapuche people (Chile)

Marine Isotope Stage (MIS)

marine subsidence theory, Darwin's

Marks, Jonathan

Martin, Paul

Martyr, Peter

Mason, Ronald “Mason-Quimby” line

mass comparison. See also Green-berg; language(s); language families

mastodon

Mastodon State Historic Site (Missouri). Seealso Kimmswick

Mather, Cotton

Matisoff, James

“Matthew Effect”

McCain, Senator John

McGee, WJ

McGhee, Robert

McJunkin, George

McNeill, William

Mead, Jim

Meadowcroft Rockshelter (Pennsylvania)

antiquity

controversy surrounding

excavations and soil sampling

human presence at

lanceolate projectile point at, mf

radiocarbon dating

mean measure of divergence (MMD)

measles

meat

caches

preservation of

transport and storage of

Medawar, Sir Peter

medicine post

Medieval Warm Period

megafauna. See also mammoth(s)

mastodon

exploitation of

extinction of

glyptodont

ground sloth

hunting of

kill sites, scarcity

mass extinction of by asteroid, supposed

role of in Clovis migration, proposed

“megalocomparison”

Megalonyx jeffersonii (Jefferson's ground sloth)

megapatches

meltwater lakes, glacial

meltwater release, glacier

memory, role in landscape learning

Mercer, Henry

meridional overturning circulation. See also thermohaline circulation

Merriwether, Andrew

Mesa site and complex (Alaska)

Metamorphosis (Kafka)

metapopulation, genetics

methane (CH₄)

MHC antigens

Miami site (Texas)

Michaud projectile points

microblade/microcore assemblages

microhabitat depression. See resource depression

Microtus xanthognathus (yellow-cheeked vole)

Middle English language

Middle Wisconsin period

migration(s)

back

big-game hunting and

bison, post-Pleistocene

caribou, seasonal

climate, coping with

Clovis

coastal

craniofacial evidence for

critical resources, locating during

following epidemics

glaciation and

Holocene

ice-free corridor, opening of

ice sheets as barrier to

male and female patterns, possible differences in

multiple

number of

Paleo-eskimo

and the peopling of the Americas

reasons for, possible

routes (see migration routes)

from Siberia to Alaska

simulated

single

speed of

Thule

timing of

topography and terrain, influence of

into unknown territory

unsuccessful

migration routesi

Beringia

coastal route

ease of different routes, simulating

first Americans

interior route

language proposed as evidence of

migratory backwash

migratory game trail

migratory pulse(s)

Milankovitch, Milutin

mired animals

Mississippi River

Dalton occupation, valley

flow, speed of

ice sheets, influence on

ice sheets, outlet for

mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)

age estimates based on

American Indian

Eskimo

founding lineages

haplogroups

lineage loss

mutations

population bottleneck, signs of

MITOMAP (human mitochondrial genome database)

moa, extinction of

mobility

food shortages as reason for

long-distance contacts and

maximizing

Paleoindian

Modoc Rockshelter (Illinois)

Moermann, Daniel

molecular clock(s)

Mono Lake (Great Basin)

monogenesis

Monte Verde site (Chile)

age

Clovis, and

discovery of

excavation and analysis of

implications for peopling of Americas

lanceolate projectile points

1997 visit to

organic preservation at

as pre-Clovis age presence

Siberian precursor, absence of

Montezuma II

Moorehead, Warren

Moore, John

Moose Creek site (Alaska)

moraine(s)

Morlan, Richard

Morse, Dan

mortality rates

among colonizers

from introduced epidemic diseases

Mountaineer site (Colorado)

mtDNA. See mitochondrial DNA

Mulligan, Connie

Murchison, Roderick

Murray Springs site (Arizona)

musk ox(en)

mutation(s). See also genetic(s)

among isolated populations

haplogroup C

mtDNA

NRY

Short Tandem Repeats (STRs)

Single Nucelotide Polymorphisms (SNPs)

 

Naco site (Arizona)

Na-Dene language family

NAGPRA. See Native American Graves

Protection and Repatriation Act

Nall site (Oklahoma)

naming rites

nanodiamonds

Narváez, Pánfilo de

Natchez tribe

National Register of Historic Places

National Science Foundation

Native American Graves Protection and

Repatriation Act (NAGPRA)

Native Americans/American Indians

ancestry ofi

Asia as ancestral source of

defined, by NAGPRA

dental morphology

diversity of

European contact, consequences of

founding lineages

haplogroups

identity and ancestry, debates concerning

infectious diseases, vulnerability to

language diversity among

language families language loss

lineage loss

mtDNA

and Norse, contacts with

NRY

population, pre-European contact

2000 census of

native infections

native speakers, decline of

natural selection

Neanderthals

absence of in Asia and Siberia

in Europe

Nebraskan glacial stage

Nelson, Nels

Nelson, Richard

Nenana Complex (Alaska)

neotaphonomy

Nepa I site (Siberia)

net hunting

Nettle, Daniel

Neves, Walter

Newby, Paige

Newcomerstown paleolith (Ohio)

New Deal recovery programs, role of

archaeology in

Newton, Isaac

New World

contact with Old World, beginnings of

defined

Nicholas projectile points

Nichols, Johanna

Noah's flood, as early explanation for glacial

features

Nobles Pond site (Ohio)

non-culture-specific words

non-recombining portion of the Y chromosome (NRY)

age estimates based on

American Indian

founding lineages

haplogroups

lineage loss

mutations

population bottleneck, signs of

Norse

contact with Native Americans

first Europeans in America, evidence of

sagas

Vinland settlement

North Pacific avian flyway Notes on the State of Virginia (Jefferson)

NRY. See non-recombining portion of the Y

chromosome Nuckolls projectile points

Nunamuit people

nut collecting

 

obliquity (orbital)

observation, role in landscape learning

obsidian, use in stone tool production

Occam's razor

ocean

circulation, changes in

deep water formation

freezing of

oxygen isotope ratios

salinity

thermohaline circulation

ocher

O'Connell, James

offerings, burial

Old Crow site (Canada)

Oldman River (Alberta). See Taber site Old World

diseases imported to New World

domesticated plants and animals

human antiquity in

languages linked to New World languages

New World contacts, beginnings of

Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania)

Olsen-Chubbuck site (Colorado)

onomatopoeia

On Your Knees Cave (Alaska)

opportunistic scavenging

optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) dating

orbital-forcing functions

Origin of Species (Darwin)

outcrops, stone

out-migration

outré passé (overshot) flaking

“overchill”

overgrazing

overkill

absence of evidence for

defense of

unlikeliness of, reasons for

overpopulation, as possible motivation for

migration

overwintering

Owsley, Douglas

oxygen, isotopes of

 

Paisley Cave (Oregon)

Paleoamerican

Paleoarchaic

Paleoarctic Complex

migration

time-transgressive expansion of

Paleo-Eskimo (Tuniit)

Paleoindian(s)

adaptations

American Indian descendants of

boneless sites, rarity of

cranial morphology

diet

dental patterns

gatherings of

lifeways, stereotypes about

migration by

mobility

projectile point styles, late

ritual

sites

paleomagnetic dating

Palli Aike cave (Chile)

paralithic industry

Parallel Roads of Glen Roy (Scotland)

Paramylodon harlanii (Harlan's ground sloth)

Parenti, Fabio

Parman projectile points

pastoralism, rise of

patch choice model

pathogens

brought from Old World to New

deaths from, imported

first appearances of

main lines of defense against

source, role of in epidemics

Patterson, Nick

peccaries

Peccary Cave (Arkansas)

Pecos Pueblo (New Mexico)

Pedra Furada site (Brazil). See Toca do

Boquerir o da Pedra Furada

Pelegrin, Jacques

pemmican

Pendejo Cave (New Mexico)

peopling of the Americas

common ancestry and

disagreements regarding

disease, role and effects of

glaciation, role of

interdisciplinary approach toii

motivations, possible

new conceptions regarding

place of origin

timeline for

perihelion

permafrost

Permian-Triassic boundary, ET impact at

phytoplankton mass, increase of

pigs, introduced to America

transmission of disease by

Pikimachay site (Peru) “Piltdown Man”

Piney Branch site (Washington, D.C.)

Pintar, Nicholas

Pitulko, V. V.

Pizarro, Gonzalo

plague

Plains Indian. See cranial morphology, Hooton's types

plant and animal communities, Pleistocene

plant(s)

collecting

in diet

domesticated

edible

identifying, novel

importing of from Old World

Late Wisconsin period

medicinal

Pleistocene Beringia

poisonous

as raw material for tools

Pleasant Lake (Michigan)

Pleistocene

climate

deposits, initial recognition of

end date

extinction

International Commission on Stratigraphy

definition of

number of glacial episodes within

radiocarbon plateaus

sea level change

pluvial lakes

point(s). See projectile points. See also individual

names; e.g., Clovis projectile points

Folsom projectile points, etc. polar air masses

polygamy

polygyny

Polynesians

population bottleneck

population density

language diversity and

topography and

population growth

population history, tracing

population loss, possible effects of on climate

change

population splits

versus genetic lineage splits

post-Clovis sites, human populations, supposed

decline of

postmolds

Powars II site (Wyoming)

Powell, John Wesley

Powell, Joseph

precession (orbital)

precipitation

decreases in

Pleistocene pattern of

pre-Clovisi

criteria for demonstrating

presence of in New World

pre-Clovis archaeology, Martin's views on

pre-Clovis controversy

dating techniques

human footprints, discovery of

reasons for

rock art and

stratigraphy, role of

“pre-Clovis credibility decay curve”

pre-Clovis sitesi. See also Meadowcroft Rockshelter (Pennsylvania);
Monte Verde (Chile); Toca do Boquerir o da Pedra Furada (Brazil)

Calico Hills

debates regarding

lists of

location of

predator-prey relationship

predators

prehistoric chaw

prehistoric rock art

prehistory

America and Australia compared

roots of

“pre-projectile point stage”

pre-sapiens fossils, search for

Prestwich, Joseph

prey

humans as possible

human hunters’

population rebound

ranking

reduced availability of

primary forest efficiency

Prince of Wales Island (Canada), early human

occupation of

principal components analysis

prior knowledge, role in colonization

Productivity Paradox

Prohibition, repeal of

projectile points

beveled edges

compared to bullets

ceremonial exchange of

distribution, Clovis

fluting

hafting

impact fractures

knives, occasional use as

lanceolate shape

Late Paleoindian types

resharpening and recycling of

styles

style zones

stylistic changes in

pronghorn

proto-language

Pseudo-Astraloid. See cranial morphology

Hooton's types

Pseudo-Negroid. See cranial morphology

Hooton's types

Pueblo Revolt of

pulses

migratoryi

sea level rise

Putnam, Frederic Ward

Pyramid Lake (Nevada)

 

Queen Charlotte Island (Canada), early human

occupation of

Quetzalcoatl

Quimby, George

Quivira (City of Gold)

 

rabbit starvation

race

radioactive decay of elemental isotopes

radioactivity

radiocarbon (¹⁴C)

radiocarbon dating

accelerator

bones, reliability of

charcoal, reliability of

converting radiocarbon years to calibrated

years

decay principle

invention of

Kennewick artifacts

limitations of

of Pleistocene extinct animals

teeth

thermohaline circulation, effects of changes in

radiocarbon years, and calendar years compared

radiometric dating methods

rainfall. See precipitation

Rapa Nui (Easter Island)

Rau, Charles

Red Earth, White Lies (Deloria)

“Red Lady” of Paviland

red ocher. See ocher Red Queen Hypothesis

Redstone projectile points

refugee movements

relict pingos

rendezvous

Renne, Paul

repatriation, defined

reproduction

colonization and

effects of climate change on

gestation period

rates

strategies

residence time, maximizing

resource decline, as possible motivation for

migration

resource densities

resource depression

resource returns

return rate

Richey-Roberts site (Washington)

Ringe, Donald

risk, adaptive

rituals and ceremonies

Roanoke Island colony (North Carolina)

Roberts, Frank

rockshelters

Rodgers Shelter (Missouri)

Romance languages

Rooke, Sarah

Roosevelt, Franklin

Roosevelt, Theodore

Rose, Jerome

Roseman, Charles

Rothstein, Arthur

Ruddiman, William

Rudwick, Martin

Ruhlen, Merritt

 

Sahul land mass

salinity (ocean)

salt

Saltville site (Virginia)

Sampson, Garth

Sandia Cave (New Mexico)

Sandia culture

Sandweiss, Daniel

Sangamon interglacial

San Patrice projectile points

Sapir, Edward

scarlet fever

Schneider, Alan

Schroeder, Kari

Schurr, Theodore

Schwachheim, Carl”

sea levels. See Pleistocene, sea level change

Sedgwick, Adam

Sellet, Frederic

Senga site (Zaire)

sense of direction

settled village life, advent of

Shaler, Nathaniel

Shapiro, Beth

Shawnee-Minisink site (Pennsylvania)

sheep, introduced to America

Sherwood, Sarah

Shimek, Bohumil

Short Tandem Repeats (STRs). See mutations showing off. See also costly

signaling

shrines

Siberia

mammals

peopling of

sickle sheen

Signor-Lipps effect

Silberbauer, George

Simms, Steven

Simpson, Ruth “Dee”

Simpson projectile points

simulation of colonization process

Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP). See

mutations

Sinodonts

Sino-Tibetan language family

skeletal remains.

See also Kennewick

Buhl skeleton

Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene from

North America

ownership of (see Native American

Graves Protection and Repatriation Act

(NAGPRA))

“Red Lady” of Paviland

Taber child

skinning knives

“Skraelings”

slavery

Sloan projectile points

Sloan site (Missouri)

Slobodin, Sergei

smallpox (Variola major)

Antoine pandemic

Aztec victims of

earliest records of

Native Americans, epidemics

vaccine

Smilodon/atalis (saber-toothed cat)

Smith, Bruce

Smith, Captain John

snow lines

social disruption. See infectious disease, effects on society

social isolation, role in language differentiation

social networks, role in adaptation

social rank

solar radiation. See insolation Solutrean culture

supposed colonization of America

Somme Valley sites (France)

sound correspondences. See language(s) source populations. See
genetic(s) specialized hunting

Spirit Cave (Nevada)

springs

Stafford, Michael

Stafford, Thomas

staging areas, migration

Stalker, Archie

stalking

stampede, as hunting technique

Stanfield-Worley rockshelter (Alabama)

Stanford, Dennis

Steadman, David

Steele, Gentry

Steensen, Niels. See Steno, Nicolaus Steinbeck, John

Steno, Nicholaus

Steno's law of stratigraphic superposition. See also stratigraphy
Stewart, T. Dale

Stiger, Mark

stock market

collapse of

stone

acquisition of

caches

conveyance zones

engravings on/ heat-treated stone

outcrops

tool technology

type of, as indicator of mobility

storytelling

role in landscape learning

as showing off

stratigraphy

complications of

as a dating technique

mixing and intrusion, guarding against

Steno's law

Straus, Lawrence

Sturtevant, W. C.

style zones. See projectile points

style zones

sun and stars, navigation by

Sundadonts

surge (glacier)

Surovell, Todd

Suwannee projectile points

syphilis, origins of

Szathmary, Emoke

 

Taber site (Alberta)

Taima-Taima site (Venezuela)

Tamm, Erika

tapeworm

taphonomy

tapir

T-cells

tectonic activity, effects on Pleistocene coastaline

teeth

Carabelli's trait

dental morphology, Native Americans

dentochronology

ethnic ondontology

incisor shoveling

language families, supposed correlations

with

Sinodonty

Sundadonty

three-rooted molars

temperature

ocean

Pleistocene pattern of

seasonal swings, role in glacial growth

vegetation, effects on

Younger Dryas

Tenochtitlan (Mexico City)

tephrahydration dating

thermohaline circulation

thermoluminescence (TL) dating

Thomas, David Hurst

Thomas, Ronald

Thule Eskimo

expansion

and Vikings, encounters with

Thunderbird site (Virginia)

till (glacial)

tilt (orbital)

time, motion, and relative position, human ability for integration of

tobacco

Toca do Boquerir o da Pedra Furada site (Brazil)

Pedra Furado occupation phase

Serra Talhada occupation phase

Todd, Lawrence

Toluquilla site (Mexico)

Tonkawa language

tool(s). See also artifacts; stone, tool technology

Clovis

later Paleoindian

by site type

topographic markers, role in landscape learning

Topper site (South Carolina)

Topping, William

Torroni, Antonio

Toth, Nicholas

Totonac people

trachoma

tracking

trade and exchange

treeless zone, Pleistocene

tree-ring dating. See dendrochronology

tree sloth (South American)

Trenton site (New Jersey)

Treponema pallidum

The Trial (Kafka)

Triatoma infestans (Vinchuca bug)

trichinosis Trypanosoma cruzi

tuberculosis

tule reed

Tule Springs site (Nevada)

tundra

Tunica language

Tuniit. See Paleo-eskimo

Turner, Christy

Tuross, Noreen

turtles, in diet

Twilight o/the Mammoths (Martin)

typhoid fever

 

Ubelaker, Douglas

Udora site (Ontario)

unfamiliar animals, learning about

uniformitarian principle

United States Geological Survey (USGS)

Upham, Warren

Upper Cave, Zhoukoudian site (China)

Uptar site (Siberia)

uranium-series dating

Ushki site (Kamchatka)

 

Vail site (Maine)

Vajda, Edward

Valsequillo region (Mexico)

van Vark, Gerrit

variolation. See smallpox vaccine Vaughn, Nelson/ veering, human
tendency toward

Velazquez, Diego

Veracruz (Mexico)

Vermillion Lakes site (Alberta)

Vero site (Florida)

Vicksburg (Mississippi), siege of

Vikings. See Norse

“virtual colonization.” See simulation of colonization process

 

Walker Road site (Alaska)

Wallace, Douglas

Walthall, John

wanderlust, as possible motivation for migration

warfare

following European contact

as possible motivation for migration

watercraft. See boats

Waters, Michael

water screening. See flotation

wayfinding

possible gender differences in

role of stone caching in

traditional skills, loss of

veering, tendency toward

weapons

ethnographic study of

failure

for hunting

lances vs. javelins

weather. See also climate; climate change(s)

defined and contrasted with climate

human adaptation to

Weaver, Timothy

Wedgwood, Julia

well-digging, evidence of

West Athens Hill site (New York)

whales

Wheat, Joe Ben

Wheatstone, Charles

Whipple site (New Hampshire)

whooping cough

Wild Horse Arroyo. See also Folsom site

(New Mexico)

Wilke, Philip

Wilmsen, Edwin

Wilson, Michael

Winchell, Newton

wind direction, navigation by

Windover site (Florida), aDNA recovered from

winters, Pleistocene

Winthrop, John

Wisconsin glacial stages

Woodward, Sir Arthur Smith

Wright, Reverend George Frederick

 

Xalnene ash

 

Yana RHS site (Siberia)

Yarmouth interglacial

yaws

Y chromosome DNA. See non-recombining

portion of the Y chromosome (NRY)

yellow fever

Yeniseian language family

Yesner, David

Younger Dryas (YD)

asteroid impact, proposed as explanation for

atmospheric debris during

cause of

climate and environment during

onset of

Paleoindians, proposed effects on

radiocarbon dating, effects on

temperatures during

thermohaline circulation shutdown during

 

Zegura, Stephen

zone of ablation, glacial ice

zone of accumulation, glacial ice

Zuni language
