3

FROM PALEOLITHS TO
PALEOINDIANS

In the fall of 1781, the governor of Virginia received a letter from the
secretary of the French Legation, inquiring about the political
institutions, natural history, and native peoples of his state. Times
being what they were (hostile British forces were advancing on the
governor's home) his answer was postponed until the following summer,
after Cornwallis had surrendered at Yorktown and the governor had
retired from office. “Great question has arisen,” Thomas Jefferson then
replied in his now-classic Notes on the State of Virginia, “from whence
came those aboriginal inhabitants of America.” For that matter, who were
they, and when had they arrived?¹

These questions were deeply unsettling to a nation that viewed the past
through a biblical lens, and which well realized American Indians were
not mentioned in the chronicles of Moses. Still, on the presumption of
monogenesis, the idea that “all the varieties of the human race were
descended from a single pair, and that after the flood the earth was
indebted solely to the ark of Noah for the replenishment of man and
beast,”² American Indian origins were sought among historically known or
imagined groups, among them wandering Egyptians, Phoenicians, Mongols,
Welsh, Hindus (those other Indians), survivors of the Lost Continents of
Mu or Atlantis, and the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel. The possibility that
American Indians were Israelites had two great virtues: it explained who
the Indians were, and where the Israelites had been lost all those
years.

Yet few capable thinkers, and Jefferson was an extraordinarily capable
thinker, paid these any mind. Diverse as the Native Americans were,
Jefferson realized they shared a common ancestry. Judging by their
appearance, he supposed their ancestral homeland must have been eastern
Asia. That being the case, how had they reached the New World? The
answer, anticipated in the late sixteenth century by the Jesuit Jose de
Acosta, was that they came by land, possibly via northern Asia and
northwestern North America. But it was not until 200 years later that
Jefferson was able to report that “the late discoveries of Captain Cook,
coasting from Kamchatka to California, have proved that, if the two
continents of Asia and America be separated at all, it is only by a
narrow streight [sic].”³

Having found an easy migration route from the Old World to the New still
left unsettled the question of when that migration had taken place.
Jefferson had his suspicions. Native Americans spoke a Babel of
languages (few of which were mutually intelligible or bore any
resemblance to an ancestral Asian language), they did not all look
alike—the usual stereotypes notwithstanding—and they had diverse
cultural practices, all of which implied a long period of divergence
from what was assumed to be a common ancestor. Could this variability
have arisen in the biblically allotted 6,000 years? Jefferson was
doubtful: such linguistic, physical, and cultural divergence from a
common source seemingly required “an immense course of time; perhaps not
less than many people give to the age of the earth.”⁴

As old as the earth? Jefferson's political enemies howled, accused him
of heresy, and branded him an atheist. The earth itself could turn out
to be very old, perhaps tens of thousands of years old as astronomers
and geologists were already insisting, but Jefferson's critics demanded
human history go no earlier than the 6,000 years allotted in the
scriptures. And it didn't.

At least not for another seventy-two years.

THE DISCOVERY OF DEEP TIME

Before 1859, the Bible was history, chronology, and ethnography all
rolled into one: it was a detailed and sacred account of human genealogy
and lifeways from Adam and Eve on down. Compiled by people who had
either been present or had access to a supernatural informant, it linked
modern life back to the very creation of heaven and earth. Well, almost
to the Creation.⁵

By the late seventeenth century, scientists such as Isaac Newton began
lobbying for more time, at least for earth history. They knew from
physical evidence the earth had to be more than 6,000 years old, but not
daring to reject Genesis entirely, they placated themselves by treating
the first days of Creation as allegorical only, supposing that Moses was
simply “accommodating his words to the gross conceptions of the vulgar,”
as Newton put it, and that the Biblical chronology “relates only to the
human race.” This was an argument easy to make. After all, as Edmund
Halley (of comet fame) observed, if the sun was created only on the
fourth day, how could the time before then be measured in “days” in the
literal twenty-four-hour sense?⁶

So geologists got busy. From the strange fossils brought to light by
exploring expeditions and the rapacious mining that fueled the
Industrial Revolution, Georges Cuvier and others revivified the
wonderfully exotic plant and animal life of earlier periods of earth
history. The most recent of those earlier periods was inhabited by
fossil elephants, including North America's mastodon and mammoth. Cuvier
had it on the good authority of American Indians—“nomadic peoples who
move ceaselessly around the continent in all directions” and thus were
in a good position to know—that these “creatures no longer existed.”⁷

The “unconsolidated…layers of the earth” in which the fossils of these
animals were found lay close to the surface, in what appeared to be sand
and gravel laid down by water—Buckland's diluvium. It would be several
decades before those deposits were recognized as the residue of
once-vast continental ice sheets (Chapter 2) and, in turn, linked with
Lyell's Pleistocene. Nonetheless, even by the early 1800s, Cuvier
realized these were not truly ancient deposits, for there were still
more primitive fossil elephants and other animals in deeper layers of
the earth. He concluded that earth's history was one of multiple periods
of creation of different kinds of animals, each of which came to a
cataclysmic end. The animals of the diluvium represented merely “the
last or one of the last catastrophes of the globe.” But if these animals
were not old in geological time, they were assuredly from the pre-modern
world. The Bible made no mention of mammoths.⁸

Accordingly, no one was looking for human remains alongside mammoth
fossils in Pleistocene deposits, nor expected to find any. This was a
period unknown to human history, beyond range of the Mosaic chronicles,
and thus a baseline against which human antiquity could be measured. The
uncoupling of earth history from human history was a splendid compromise
in a world fast becoming inconceivably old: humanity's best hope for
divine origins and its own uniqueness in the animal kingdom lay in the
affirmation of the Bible. Here, fortunately, Genesis and geology seemed
to agree: humans were the most recent creation, or so it seemed on good
authority.⁹

Still, through the first half of the nineteenth century, human remains
were found alongside Cuvier's extinct animals at an increasing number of
sites. But why accept those finds at face value?¹⁰ Most came from
continental Europe and especially France, and for this reason
immediately lost credibility with the more theologically conservative
British who, since the French Revolution, had suspected the French of
atheism and harbored a lingering distrust of their latter-day
Enlightenment notions. Much of the evidence came from excavations by
provincial amateurs who were looked upon, in John Lubbock's charitable
Victorian parlance, as mere “enthusiasts.”¹¹ They were hardly a
trustworthy source of evidence on such a momentous question. No
scientist was going to reject long-held beliefs on their say-so.

Compounding resistance, the bulk of finds were made in caves, settings
regularly churned by burrowing animals that mix deposits of different
ages. Caves are ill suited to demonstrating whether artifacts found
alongside animal bones were the same age, or just accidentally
associated. When the “Red Lady” of Paviland, an ocher-covered human
skeleton, was found in a cave with the remains of a mammoth, it was all
too easy for the Reverend Buckland to explain (with a knowing wink) that
a nearby Roman camp site threw “much light on the character and
[antiquity] of the woman under consideration.” Ocher apparently wasn't
the only reason Buckland supposed the Lady of Paviland was red (as it
happens, she was no lady either, but an Upper Paleolithic male, now
radiocarbon dated to slightly over 26,000 BP).¹²

Finally, none of the evidence fit prevailing expectations of human
history based on the Bible or geology, and thus there was no compelling
reason to accept it. This isn't dogmatic; it's good science: one doesn't
reject a long-established worldview without compelling reason. As Lyell
later confessed, “I can only plead that a discovery which seems to
contradict the general tenor of previous investigations is naturally
received with much hesitation.”¹³ Only when the counterevidence becomes
too weighty to ignore does the model of the world get reassessed and, if
needed, rejected.

That reassessment began in the summer of 1858 at Brixham Cave in
southwestern England where, beneath a nearly impenetrable layer, a crack
team of excavators under the supervision of Britain's finest geologists
(Charles Lyell among them) had uncovered stone tools in direct
association with Pleistocene fossils. Either the team had failed to
observe that stone tools had been mixed in from higher, younger deposits
and had botched the excavation (a conclusion no one was keen to admit),
or the theologically disconcerting was true: humans had occupied Brixham
Cave during the Pleistocene, alongside now-extinct animals, and thus had
an ancestry that predated biblically recorded history.

Brixham Cave's revelations prompted another look at the long-standing
claims of Jacques Boucher de Perthes, who for decades had been
collecting stone tools and Pleistocene fossils in the Somme Valley of
northwest France. Until that moment, he'd been mostly ignored because
many of the “artifacts” he illustrated were clearly not artifacts at
all, and what genuine evidence he did have was embedded in arcane
theories that had long since been rejected. Charles Darwin was hardly
alone in reading Boucher de Perthes’ work and concluding “the whole was
rubbish.”¹⁴

Yet, some of the stone tools Boucher de Perthes illustrated looked a
great deal like those from Brixham Cave and, better, had come from
floodplain deposits, which are less prone to the mixing of deposits that
occurs in caves. A procession of geologists and antiquarians made the
pilgrimage to see Boucher de Perthes and his sites and collections,
including Joseph Prestwich and John Evans, who in April 1859 witnessed
and photographed a handaxe in situ at a locality in Amiens.

At a meeting of London's Royal Society a few weeks after their return,
Prestwich read a paper on the glacial age and stratigraphy of the Somme
Valley gravels, and Evans spoke extemporaneously on the stone artifacts
found in them. Listening to them, Evans recalled, “were a good many
geological nobs…Sir C. Lyell, Murchison, Huxley…Faraday, Wheatstone,
Babbage, etc. so [we] had a distinguished audience.” That's an
understatement. The audience included not only the geological elite
(Lyell, Thomas Henry Huxley, Roderick Murchison), but also one of the
greatest experimental scientists of all time (Michael Faraday); the
inventor of the stereoscope and a pioneer researcher in acoustics,
electricity, and telegraphy (Charles Wheatstone); and one of the trio
who revolutionized English mathematics in the nineteenth century and a
dabbler in crypt-analysis, probability theory, geophysics, astronomy,
and computing machines (Charles Babbage). It might not have been
possible to gather in one place a more influential group of scientists
in all of England. The question of a deep human antiquity was out of the
closet and on center stage, and the favorable reception their audience
accorded Prestwich and Evans (“Our assertions as to the findings of the
weapons seemed to be believed”¹⁵) immeasurably helped the cause.

In the summer of 1859, Charles Lyell himself, foremost among those who
had long challenged all claims of great human antiquity, made the
pilgrimage to Abbeville. He too returned from France a convert,
announcing, “I am fully prepared to corroborate the conclusions which
have been recently laid before the Royal Society…. I believe the
antiquity of the Abbeville and Amiens flint instruments to be great
indeed if compared to the times of history and tradition.”¹⁶ Humans had
seen Agassiz's glaciers and preyed on Cuvier's fauna.

Only months before, the idea of a deep human antiquity had been the
dubious claim of provincial amateurs. Now, it was almost universally
accepted fact. As one contemporary joked, people were no longer
insisting “it was not true” or that “it was contrary to religion,” but
that “it was all known before.”¹⁷

The Paleolithic, or Stone Age, occupants of Brixham Cave and the Somme
Valley predated history, and lived at a distant time “when man shared
the possession of Europe with the Mammoth, the Cave bear, the
Woolly-haired rhinoceros, and other extinct animals,” using “rude yet
venerable weapons” of stone, as John Lubbock put it.¹⁸ This was a human
past about which the Bible said absolutely nothing, and which suddenly
rendered it obsolete as the story of humanity's past. The Paleolithic
would be knowable only through its silent artifacts and skeletal
remains. To investigate that past required a new discipline of
prehistory, with its own body of theory and methods, kin to geology and
not sacred history.

As dozens more Paleolithic sites were found across Europe, humanity's
roots were pushed back ever deeper in time: hundreds of thousands of
years, some suggested, perhaps millions of years, others supposed. What
had transpired over that span was poorly known, testament to the vast
“chasm which separates the flint folks from ourselves.” Julia Wedgwood,
Darwin's niece, saw “something dreary in the indefinite lengthening of a
savage and blood-stained past,”¹⁹ but however dreary or theologically
unnerving, those rude artifacts were nonetheless vivid testimony of the
savage depths from which humanity had climbed. They became for many
Victorians a triumphant demonstration of social progress.

The demonstration of a deep human antiquity came at virtually the same
moment as Darwin published his Origin of Species, which laid out the
theory of evolution by natural selection. Although the two had
independent origins, they soon and ever after were linked. The Origin
had no more to say about the evolution of the human species from our
animal forebears than the understated one-liner, “Light will be thrown
on the origin of man and his history.” But everyone knew what that
meant: ancient human ancestors and ultimately a pedigree shared with
other primates. One could scarcely accept the implications of Darwin's
views of human evolution without the deep past that prehistory provided.
Darwin well recognized that, and a decade later when he finally tackled
the topic of human evolution, he knew precisely where to start: “The
high antiquity of man has recently been demonstrated by the labors of a
host of eminent men, beginning with M. Boucher de Perthes; and this is
the indispensable basis for understanding his origin. I shall,
therefore, take this conclusion for granted.”²⁰ It was rubbish no more.

And that's when the search began on the other side of the Atlantic.

THE RISE AND FALL OF THE AMERICAN PALEOLITHIC

The discovery of the European Paleolithic fired American scientific
imaginations: why couldn't American prehistory be just as old? After
all, the geology of the two continents seemed so very similar. But
archaeologists quickly realized that here in America there were no
deeply stratified river valleys or caves with human artifacts
indiscriminately mixed with Pleistocene fauna.²¹

No matter, they soon had another inspiration: if artifacts were ancient,
they ought to look the part, so ones similar to the tools of Paleolithic
Europe must be the same age. The catalyst for these studies was Charles
Conrad Abbott, a New Jersey physician (and coincidentally, nephew of
Timothy Abbott Conrad, who first found traces of the Ice Age in
America). By all accounts—including his own—Abbott had a dreadful
bedside manner and was unable to earn a living as a physician. But a
living had to be made, for although he came from a prominent,
land-holding family, his was not a wealthy branch of the family tree.
Abbott made a half-hearted stab at farming and the occasional odd job to
help support himself and his family, but his livelihood came to revolve
around authoring popular books on the natural history and archaeology of
the Trenton area. Abbott soon realized the artifacts he was finding near
his Trenton home appeared to be as “rude” as those of the European
Paleolithic (Figure 10). Better still, some came from geological
deposits that hinted of considerable antiquity, and perhaps they were
even Pleistocene in age.

We now know, based on archaeological work done at the Abbott farm since,
the artifacts he was finding were not very old at all, and certainly not
glacial in age. But Abbott didn't know that, nor did most of his peers.
In February 1877, Harvard University geologist Nathaniel Shaler studied
the Trenton ground with Abbott and pronounced the artifact-bearing
gravels to have been deposited during the Ice Age. In his diary that
night, Abbott recorded his triumph: “I have discovered glacial man in
America”²² (emphasis in the original).

[images]

FIGURE 10.
Charles Abbott searching for paleoliths in the Trenton gravels, New
Jersey, ca. 1880s. (Photograph courtesy of the Peabody Museum, Harvard
University. © Harvard University, Peabody Museum 2004.24.31046.)

Heady stuff, this, and it inspired Abbott's compatriots. Harvard
archaeologist Frederic Ward Putnam hired a local man to walk the freshly
dug railroad right-of-ways and sewer trenches of Trenton watching for
more “Paleolithic” artifacts. As Abbott's work in the Delaware Valley
gained prominence, so, too, did the American Paleolithic. Throughout the
1880s, reports came in of other paleoliths from the eastern seaboard
into the Upper Midwest. Some were found under geological circumstances
that suggested a Pleistocene antiquity, but even in the absence of
secure geological evidence, these artifacts so readily mimicked European
paleoliths of undeniable antiquity, they must be as old. As Reverend
George Frederick Wright, an Oberlin College theologian and geologist,
put it, in Paleolithic times, as today, American fashions followed the
Paris line.²³

By the end of the 1880s, Abbott and his colleagues possessed the proof
they needed that the first Americans had arrived thousands of years ago,
when northern latitudes lay shrouded in glacial ice. The American
Paleolithic spawned a formidable literature of symposia, feature
articles, and books. Abbott was lionized here and abroad as “America's
Boucher de Perthes.” Everyone believed the first Americans had arrived
in the Pleistocene; the only question remaining was how much further
back in time that prehistory extended. It had to be deep, Abbott
insisted, for were it only 10,000 years old, he would be “compelled to
crowd several momentous facts in American archaeology into a
comparatively brief space of time.”²⁴

But the consensus surrounding the American Paleolithic proved
short-lived. Scarcely a year later, it was under withering fire from
USGS geologists and archaeologists at the Smithsonian Institution's
Bureau of Ethnology (later, the Bureau of American Ethnology, or BAE).
By late 1889, the archaeological community was humming with rumors that
BAE archaeologist William Henry Holmes's excavations at a prehistoric
stone quarry along Piney Branch Creek in Washington, D.C. (Figure 11),
were set to demolish the conceptual foundations of the American
Paleolithic.

[images]

FIGURE 11.
William Henry Holmes sitting in “an ocean of paleoliths” at the Piney
Branch quarry, in Washington, D.C., ca. 1890. Holmes was only kidding
about those being paleoliths. He used the cobbles and workshop debris
from Piney Branch to show that the “primitive-looking” and supposedly
ancient artifacts of the American Paleolithic were mere quarry refuse.
(Photograph courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution Libraries,
Washington, D.C.)

At the Piney Branch site (which, astonishingly, remains intact just a
few miles north of the White House), prehistoric groups found quartzite
cobbles suitable for making their artifacts. Scattered across the site
surface were the debris of tool manufacture, ranging from cobbles with
just a few flakes struck from them, to nearly finished items that had
broken or otherwise been rejected in the final stages of preparation.
Many of the rejects bore an uncanny resemblance to Paleolithic
artifacts. Holmes had an aha! moment: the manufacturing sequence at
Piney Branch mimicked the long evolution of stone toolmaking from
primitive to refined. Thus, just as the most ancient stone tools were
little more than barely sharpened cobbles, so, too, were stone tools in
the early stages of manufacture. That being the case, he reasoned, an
artifact jettisoned prematurely during manufacture would naturally
resemble a primitive stone tool, even if it was scarcely a few hundred
years old.

In late January 1890, Holmes hurled his opening salvo in the American
Anthropologist: artifact form had no inherent chronological
significance.²⁵ Proponents of an American Paleolithic were mistaking
primitiveness for antiquity, failing to realize their artifacts were
merely manufacturing failures. An artifact's age, he insisted, must be
determined by its geological context—and not because it happened to look
like one illustrated by Boucher de Perthes or John Evans. That included
Abbott's Trenton paleoliths, which to Holmes's eye looked very much like
manufacturing failures. Still, at that moment, he was feeling
charitable, and he wasn't suggesting the Trenton specimens were recent
in age. Not yet, anyway.

Word soon reached Abbott of Holmes's paper, and he dashed off a letter
to Henry Henshaw, editor of the American Anthropologist, requesting a
copy. He got one, along with an invitation. Would Abbott like to come to
Piney Branch, preferably immediately? “It seems to me,” Henshaw wrote,
“that you would be particularly interested in the matter since you have
done so much work at Trenton, and a visit here just now could not fail
to prove instructive. Mr. Holmes would be very glad to see you, and we
will all do what we can to make your visit pleasant and instructive.”²⁶

“Instructive,” Henshaw said. Twice. But Abbott wasn't looking for
instruction. He was looking for confirmation. But he went to Washington
anyway, and toured Piney Branch with Holmes in early 1890. A smug Holmes
later recalled that

on parting Abbott said, “I have learned more arch[aeology] in three
hours than ever before in three months.” This I was content to think of
as a pleasant compliment but from my subsequent studies and increased
wisdom I concluded that he probably meant what he said.²⁷

If Abbott indeed said that, he hardly meant it, for he left Washington
unswayed. As he later wrote, Holmes may well have been correct in his
archaeological interpretation of Piney Branch, but Abbott failed to see
that the story at Piney Branch had any relevance to either Trenton or
the larger question of human antiquity in America. After all, Holmes's
“so-called failures” were “not identical with the true American
Paleolithic implements of the Delaware River Valley,” which were found
in what Abbott deemed undisturbed Pleistocene glacial deposits. Even if
geologists did quibble over their precise age, Abbott was sure “no
verbal jugglery” could make the Trenton gravels that much younger.²⁸ If
Holmes aimed to reject Trenton as a Paleolithic site, he would have to
go to Trenton.

The lines were drawn in the sand (and gravel). The Great Paleolithic War
began.

Holmes spent the next several years examining the alleged Paleolithic
sites in eastern North America, including Trenton.²⁹ In each case,
Holmes solemnly proclaimed that mistakes had been made. All alleged
paleoliths were manufacturing failures having no appreciable antiquity,
and were merely the debris of historically known Native Americans. None,
in his view, were Pleistocene in age, and those allegedly found in
glacial deposits must have fallen down rodent burrows or cracks in the
earth, and fortuitously settled in those older deposits (Figure 12). And
if the specimens were actually in situ in “Pleistocene” gravels, Holmes
could say, on the supreme authority of the USGS's Thomas Chamberlin and
WJ McGee, that those gravels were not Pleistocene age at all.

[images]

FIGURE 12.
Two perspectives on the Newcomerstown, Ohio, “paleolith.” Left, G. F.
Wright's (1890) composite of the Newcomerstown paleolith alongside a
European paleolithic biface (reduced to one-half size) from Amiens,
France. Right, Holmes's (1893b) depiction of the Newcomerstown specimen
alongside “four ordinary rejects.” Holmes left it to the reader to
decide which of the five specimens was from Newcomerstown, and which
were quarry rejects.

Abbott was furious. If the critics were correct, why were only
primitive-looking specimens found in gravel deposits, and not the more
refined artifacts of the American Indians? If these were quarry rejects,
where was the flake debris resulting from their fashioning? And who were
these self-styled “expert geologists” to lecture him about the Trenton
gravels? None had spent a fraction of the time he had walking the banks
of the Delaware, and assuredly could not have greater knowledge of its
geology than he possessed. “I lay a claim to a smattering of
gravel-ology,” Abbott declared in Science, and if “up pops some
‘authority’ and declaims the possibility that the ground was washed from
beneath the big stone and the implement slipped in. Well, we can go on
supposing till the crack o'doom, but as to proof, that is another
matter.”³⁰

Perhaps. But as Holmes snorted in reply two weeks later, demonstrating
that artifacts were truly found in glacial gravels required the skills
of “competent and reputable observers of geological phenomena.” That
Holmes believed no glacial-aged artifacts had yet been found made it
quite clear he did not consider Abbott's claims to “gravel-ology” equal
to competence. A testy Abbott immediately fired back with doggerel
virtually guaranteed to offend the humorless Holmes:³¹

The stone are inspected,

And Holmes cries “rejected,

They're nothing but Indian chips”

He glanced at the ground,

Truth, fancied he found,

And homeward to Washington skips.

They got there by

chance He saw at a glance

And turned up his nose at the series;

“They've no other history,

I've solved the whole mystery,

And to argue the point only wearies.”

But the gravel is old,

At least so I'm told;

“Halt, halt!” cries out WJ [McGee],

“It may be very recent,

And it isn't quite decent,

For me not to have my own way.”

So dear WJ

There is no more to say,

Because you will never agree

That anything's truth

But what issues, forsooth,

From Holmes or the brain of McGee.

Holmes was not amused (though the editor must have been, since it was
highly unusual for Science to publish verse). The American Paleolithic,
he snarled, was little more than the blunders and misconceptions of
“amateurs” with little scientific understanding of stone toolmaking, let
alone of geological age and context. If Abbott still didn't get the
message, Holmes spelled it out in a lengthy, sharply pointed critique,
which asked the decidedly nonrhetorical question, “Are there traces of
man in the Trenton gravels?” Holmes's answer was “No.”³² And then the
controversy turned ugly.

In the fall of 1892, USGS and BAE scientists attacked George Frederick
Wright's just-published Man and the Glacial Period. Wright's wrongs were
obvious enough: he had spoken in favor of the American Paleolithic; he
had challenged one of Chamberlin's (and by extension the entire USGS
Glacial Division's) intellectual monuments—the demonstration there had
been multiple glacial events; and, worst of all, he had put those
heresies in a book written for a general audience. Wright's critics,
orchestrated by Chamberlin, set out to destroy his credibility as a
glacial geologist, as an archaeologist, and especially as a public
spokesman for science. They launched a barrage of vicious reviews of Man
and the Glacial Period, which were unprecedented in number and savagery.
“No one,” Chamberlin thundered, “is entitled to speak on behalf of
science who does not really command it.” WJ McGee, a one-time staunch
supporter of the American Paleolithic but by now a zealous convert, was
especially bloodthirsty, labeling Wright's work absurdly fallacious,
unscientific, and an “offense to the nostrils,” then dismissing him as
“a betinseled charlatan whose potions are poison. Would that science
might be well rid of such harpies.”³³

The maliciousness of the attacks appalled Wright's colleagues, as well
as many who hardly knew him or his work. To Wright's allies, the
near-simultaneous appearance of the reviews and their “sameness of tone”
smelled of a conspiracy. They were right. It was. Yet, the assault on
Wright was more than just personal. It was a thinly veiled proprietary
dispute in which BAE and USGS scientists sought to impose their vision
of archaeology and geology on those fields, and contrast their brand of
science against those, such as Wright and Abbott, they deemed rank
amateurs.

Because the BAE and USGS scientists were richly funded and backed by the
power of the federal government, at a time when the government dominated
American science (the balance of scientific research and power would
shift to universities only in the twentieth century), the atmosphere was
charged with accusations that arrogant, heavy-handed federal scientists
were conspiring to crush state and local practitioners. Those
accusations reached Capitol Hill in 1893, when Congress was deciding the
annual budgetary fate of the USGS and BAE. Neither agency could afford
such bad press, since their appropriations were already threatened by
the economic fallout from the Panic of 1893. Paleolithic proponents got
a measure of revenge: the BAE and USGS budgets were slashed.

After savaging each other in meetings and in print, the warring parties
suspended hostilities in late 1893, though more from battle fatigue than
by truce, for both sides had hardened beyond compromise or retreat. They
met again in the summer of 1897 in Toronto at a joint meeting of the
American and British Associations for the Advancement of Science. There,
Paleolithic proponents suffered a devastating blow: Putnam handed Sir
John Evans a set of Trenton artifacts. With barely a glance, the dean of
Stone Age archaeology dismissed the lot as not Paleolithic at all.
Putnam desperately tried to change Evans's mind and undo the damage, but
failed. Critics gloated. Proponents were badly shaken. Only the faithful
remained undaunted. A bitter Abbott blamed Putnam for the “unfortunate
Toronto business.”³⁵

A MAMMOTH FRAUD IN SCIENCE

The boldface headlines of the September 8, 1894, Philadelphia Inquirer
nearly screamed aloud: “DR. HILBORNE CRESSON TAKES HIS OWN LIFE.” As the
paper indelicately put it, Cresson “blew his brains out in a park in New
York City.” He had gone insane, the Inquirer reported, his mind
disordered as a “result of scientific study” and the “too close
application of esoteric principles.”

Cresson was an archaeologist.

He began his career an expatriate student of art and archaeology at the
ficole des Beaux Arts and ficole d’Anthropologie in Paris in the 1870s.
Apparently, he had a talent for recreating prehistoric art. He returned
to the United States in 1880 and began collecting artifacts and
excavating around Philadelphia. By 1887 he'd attracted the attention of
Frederic Ward Putnam, who hired Cresson as an archaeological field
assistant.

In December 1889, Cresson appeared in Putnam's office bearing a whelk
(Busycon) shell pendant, on which was engraved the figure ofa mammoth
(Figure 13). Cresson reported he'd dug up the specimen as a schoolboy
years earlier near Holly Oak, Delaware. Putnam, a staunch champion of
the American Paleolithic, would have instantly understood the pendant's
significance: if the mammoth had been engraved from life, it would be a
tidy solution to the question of human antiquity in the New World, and
would show that Paleolithic Americans had created works of art to rival
in age and beauty those of Paleolithic Europe. How timely that Cresson
should appear with a specimen that could tip the balance of the Great
Paleolithic War, which Putnam knew was looming on the horizon.

[images]

FIGURE 13.
The Holly Oak pendant (Delaware), and as drawn by W. C. Sturtevant. Note
that there is ample room on the shell for feet; that they are not shown
was one of the hints that the mammoth image was made from a book, and
not from real life. (Adapted from Griffin et al. 1988.)

Even so, one searches Putnam's papers in vain for the happy announcement
his cherished beliefs had been vindicated by this remarkable evidence.
At Cresson's request, Putnam showed the Holly Oak pendant at the
February 1890 meeting of the Boston Society of Natural History, yet was
ever after silent about it. But Putnam left behind a telling clue of his
opinion: a photograph of the Holly Oak pendant alongside a drawing of
the La Madeleine mammoth, which had been engraved on a segment of
mammoth tusk that was discovered by Eduoard Lartet in 1865 in the
Dordogne region of France.

Any good archaeologist, and Putnam was a good archaeologist, would have
instantly seen the similarities between the Holly Oak and La Madeleine
engravings. To be sure, in Putnam's day there were few mammoth
depictions known from Europe, and none from America. Possibly, he may
have concluded the similarity between the two merely reflected the fact
both depicted mammoths, as opposed to both depicting the same mammoth
(nowadays we know of thousands of European Paleolithic depictions of
mammoth—still none from America—and those depictions vary greatly, as
one might expect).

Putnam's suspicions might have been further aroused when Cresson
reported his discovery had been made in 1864, conveniently predating La
Madeleine's by a year, and claimed that his French tutor, allegedly
involved in the Holly Oak discovery, had been a student of Lartet's.
Cresson never satisfactorily explained why it took him twenty-five years
to reveal the pendant's presence.

Cresson suggested to Putnam that he look at Charles Rau's book, Early
Man in Europe, to see how well the Holly Oak mammoth resembled the
mammoth skeleton it illustrated. In doing so, Putnam would have seen
that the book also provided an illustration of the La Madeleine
engraving, one that differs from better reproductions of the original in
ways strikingly similar to Holly Oak: the contours of the back and tusks
and trunk can be overlaid; they have the same orientation and overall
posture, especially the leg positions; they treat the feet in a similar
way. Most mammoths are shown with bulbous feet, but the La Madeleine
feet are cut off by a break in the original specimen, and the Holly Oak
feet terminate in precisely the same way, despite the fact that there is
ample room on the shell where feet could have been engraved. Putnam,
almost certainly suspecting the Holly Oak pendant was a fraud, quietly
ignored it.

For that matter, there was hardly any mention of the pendant in the
thousands of pages published during the Great Paleolithic War. That
silence was more damning than even the rare voice condemning the
pendant, that of archaeologist Henry Mercer who, busy peddling his own
mastodon-engraved forgery, sneered that Holly Oak was a fraud and
Cresson a liar. Since the archaeological community in those days was so
very small, its members must have known of the pendant. One can safely
surmise they doubted its authenticity, and were just too polite to say
anything about it. And why bother? Everyone knew the story.

Unfortunately, that story died with its participants, though the pendant
itself survived in obscurity in a drawer at the Smithsonian Institution,
only to emerge in 1976 on the cover of Science.³⁴ An accompanying
article by John Kraft and Ronald Thomas reported that geological work in
and around what is now Claymont, Delaware, revealed deposits that were
at least 10,000-40,000 years old. They asserted, in the absence of any
evidence that the pendant actually came from those deposits, it must be
just as old, thereby making it “definite evidence of association of
early American man with the woolly mammoth” and the only known example
of North American Paleoindian art.

The Science cover caught the eye of Bill Sturtevant, a curator at the
Smithsonian, who was instantly reminded of the La Madeleine mammoth.
When he read the pendant came from Delaware, not the Dordogne, he
straightaway suspected fraud. Knowing of my interests in Paleoindians
and the history of American archaeology, he asked me to help
investigate.

We quickly established there were concerns about unrelated but equally
suspicious archaeological discoveries of Cresson's that, like Holly Oak,
could never be field checked. We learned, too, Cresson was not trusted
by his peers, and for good reason. In late 1891, Cresson was working in
Ohio on Putnam's archaeological field crew when his supervisor, Warren
Moorehead, caught him stealing artifacts from the excavations and
shipping them to his home to Philadelphia. Cresson was fired on the
spot.

Reading the details of Cresson's pilfering in Moorehead's diary, I was
reminded of a comment made to me a few months earlier by James B.
Griffin, one of the deans of American archaeology. Griffin thought it
odd that the Holly Oak pendant, ignoring its engraved mammoth, bore such
a striking resemblance to shell pendants found in Fort Ancient period
sites, which generally postdate AD 1000. In virtually the same moment, I
remembered that prior to revealing the existence of the pendant in 1889,
Cresson had worked for Putnam on Fort Ancient-age sites and museum
collections. What better way to pass off a forgery than to carve a
mammoth on a genuine archaeological specimen stolen from a collection
that at least looked old, but in the late nineteenth century could not
be independently dated?

Of course, in the late twentieth century it could be, and when
accelerator radiocarbon dating came on line, we submitted a tiny
fragment of the pendant's shell. While we waited for the dating results,
Smithsonian archaeologist Bruce Smith organized a pool to guess the
pendant's age. The resulting radiocarbon age, when calibrated, came to
approximately AD 875 (with a one standard deviation range of AD
760-990). Our prediction of its age was off by just a couple of
centuries, probably attributable to the margin of error in dating marine
shell; more precise calibration would require knowing where the shell
came from in order to account for the local carbon reservoir, but on
this point the trail is cold.

No matter. The Holly Oak pendant was engraved from looking at an image
in a book, and not at a live mammoth. Bruce Smith won the pool.

Archaeology, not being a hard science but a difficult one all the same,
rarely yields the kind of unequivocal results obtained in the Holly Oak
case. When it does, it is gratifying—regardless of whether one happens
to be right or wrong. But let's be honest: most of us want to be right.
Science is like that. After we published the radiocarbon date on the
shell, many colleagues claimed they had known all along the Holly Oak
pendant was a fake. Science is like that, too.

Cresson had been desperate to place his name on the rolls of American
science, and evidently believed that if he made a discovery so wonderful
that it resolved the most bitter dispute then facing American
archaeology, the archaeological world would beat a path to his door. The
flaw in that strategy is that spectacular finds cannot be made on
command, unless one is blindly ambitious and utterly dishonest. So it
was that a stolen Fort Ancient shell pendant in the hands of a skilled
artist schooled in French prehistory and with an illustration of the La
Madeleine engraving in a book in front of him, became for a moment the
first American Paleolithic art object. But only for a moment.

Whether it was the disgrace of being summarily fired, or the dismissal
of his pendant (more by stony silence than public censure), or some
other event that started Cresson on his downward spiral into insanity,
we will never know. But perhaps Cresson knew. Among the items in his
pockets at the time of his suicide was a note in his handwriting that he
feared he was “suspected of counterfeiting and that Secret Service
detectives were continually on his track.”

Nevertheless, the active search for the deep past continued, though
following that pivotal summer, no more claims were made on behalf of
American paleoliths. However, the new century brought a new kind of
evidence to center stage.

NEANDERTHALS IN AMERICA?

In December 1899, Putnam's hired hand in Trenton found a human femur
(upper leg bone) deep in what appeared to be Pleistocene-age gravels at
Trenton. Hope for a Pleistocene human antiquity was renewed, but Putnam
was worried. “We must not make any blunder about it,” he warned, and for
good reason. Government critics quickly scorned the fast-traveling news
of the find. Putnam turned the femur over to Ales Hrdlicka, a young
physician turned physical anthropologist, whom he hoped would show that
the bone had some antiquity. But Hrdlicka was none too impressed by the
specimen, which looked no different from femurs of recent American
Indians. Perhaps, he supposed, the geology of the site might shed light
on its age. Wright had examined the geology, and thought the specimen's
Pleistocene age was so clear that there was scarcely anything to
discuss. Wright, however, was hopelessly optimistic. By then, the
Trenton gravels had such geological notoriety that any agreement on
their age was impossible.³⁶

The Trenton femur proved to be the first of many human skeletal parts
found over the next twenty-five years in apparent Pleistocene-age
deposits. Over that period, Hrdlicka would emerge—after 1903 in the
employ of Holmes at the Smithsonian—to challenge each and every claim,
“like Horatio at the land bridge between Asia and North America, mowing
down with deadly precision all would-be geologically ancient invaders of
the New World,” as one of his contemporaries put it.³⁷

Hrdlicka's position was this: if the earliest Americans had arrived in
the Pleistocene, they should look like a Pleistocene-age fossil
human—like Neanderthals, say, and not like the American Indians who
inhabited the region. In structure this was no more than Abbott's
argument (if it's old, it should look primitive) applied to skeletons.
But there was one significant difference: the argument worked for
Hrdlicka. He was fast becoming the premier physical anthropologist of
his day, and few could challenge his considerable knowledge of human
variability and evolution. To claim a human skeleton was Pleistocene in
age, one had to play by Hrdlicka's rules. So were there Neanderthals in
America?

On a farm along the Missouri River just outside Lansing, Kansas, in
February 1902, brothers Michael and Joseph Concannon were digging a
tunnel to store fruit and vegetables on their father's farm. Seventy
feet into the hillside and twenty feet beneath the surface, they
shoveled into two human skeletons. The bones were pushed aside—there was
a tunnel to be dug—but after a few months, word of their discovery
reached the City Public Museum in nearby Kansas City.

The museum's curator visited the Concannon farm, and seeing that the
bones came from under a layer of apparent glacial loess, he alerted
geologists Warren Upham and Newton Winchell of the Minnesota Historical
Society, who rushed to Lansing. The two men were stunned by what they
saw: Pleistocene loess atop the bones. Within days, Upham prepared a
paper announcing that Lansing proved a human presence in the New World
prior to the last episode of ice advance in North America: in round
numbers, perhaps 30,000 years before the present.

To his friend Wright, Upham happily chirped that Lansing vindicated the
claims made in Man and the Glacial Period, then sent his hastily written
paper to Chamberlin and Holmes, inviting “verification or correction of
our view.”³⁸ Verification, naturally, was what Upham preferred and
briefly thought he had. Chamberlin and Holmes (and later Hrdlicka)
visited Lansing, and soon afterward Upham heard rumors they had endorsed
the site's great antiquity—rumors Upham vigorously fanned.

But the rumors were false. Unbeknownst to Upham, even before Chamberlin
left for Lansing, he was already grousing about Upham's “fundamental
untrustworthiness.” Chamberlin's mood hardly improved at the site, where
he concluded Upham—his former USGS employee—had badly misread the
stratigraphy and geology. Back in Chicago, Chamberlin blistered Upham in
a string of letters, lecturing him on the attributes of loess,
scientific ethics (like Wright, Upham had “gone public” with his claims
about Lansing), and even ominously accused him of “direct
falsification.”³⁹

Battle lines were drawn once more: Upham, Winchell, and Wright fighting
for a Pleistocene age for the loess overlying the skeleton, with
Chamberlin and Bohumil Shimek, the Midwest's leading loess expert,
dismissing the Lansing deposit as neither true loess nor Pleistocene in
age. Holmes and Hrdlicka joined Chamberlin, chiming in that the Lansing
skulls were no different than crania of American Indians of the region,
and surely no more than a few hundred or a few thousand years old. To
Abbott watching from the sidelines, it all recalled “the merry old days
of earnest work…[and] the controversial days that embittered me.”⁴⁰ Just
like in the old days, neither proponents nor critics backed down.

Scarcely four years later and 195 kilometers up the Missouri River, the
exercise was repeated. At the Gilder Mound, just outside Omaha,
Nebraska, human crania—Neanderthal-looking to some—were plucked from
apparent Pleistocene loess. Eight years later, attention shifted to the
tar pits of Rancho La Brea, where a human skull was extracted from the
asphalt ooze along with bones of an extinct (Pleistocene) condor. Two
years after that (1916), it was Vero, Florida, where human remains
rolled out of sand deposits yielding the bones of extinct mammoth and
sloth. Nearly a decade later, it was a similar story at Melbourne,
Florida.

In each case, a swarm of archaeologists and geologists descended on the
site to inspect the skeletal remains and their geological context,
Hrdlicka usually leading the charge (Figure 14). Testifying to the
duration of the dispute, there was now a second generation of
participants. Literally, a second generation: geologist Rollin
Chamberlin visited Vero in the place of his father, Thomas.

[images]

FIGURE 14.
Aleš Hrdli[images]ka examining the stratigraphy in the Gilder Mound,
Nebraska, January 1907. (Photograph by E. Barbour, courtesy of the
Nebraska State Museum.)

There were the usual disagreements over whether the human skeletal
remains at each site were in primary context, or contemporary with the
apparently ancient loess or extinct mammal-bearing deposits in which
they were found. Hrdlicka took a cue from Holmes: since human beings
bury their dead and because bone is so easily broken and moved in the
earth, the odds were that any bone in ancient deposits came from later
times. “Perhaps,” paleontologist Oliver Hay tartly replied, “we get a
clue here to the reason why civilized people nail up their dead in good
strong boxes.”⁴¹

Besides, Hrdlicka continued, even granting human remains had not moved
in the ground, what assurance was that of their great age? Geologists’
opinions were utterly divided. The Lansing and Gilder Mound specimens
were either in true loess or not in true loess, and thus either
Pleistocene or post-Pleistocene in age, while the Vero and Melbourne
fauna was either Pleistocene or post-Pleistocene in age—it all depended
on which geologist one heeded.

Hrdli[images]ka naturally followed the Chamberlins, but his true
allegiance was to the bones. What did they have to say? Only if they
spoke of an anatomically distinct pre-modern human could they be
Pleistocene in age, never mind the geology. But they said no such thing.

Chamberlin (senior) was disappointed in Hrdli[images]ka's low opinion of
geological testimony, but no more so than in many of his geologist
colleagues. In fact, the irreconcilability of interpretations soured
relations all around. Anthropologists and archaeologists bickered among
themselves over what a Pleistocene-aged human should look like, then
argued with paleontologists about the timing of mammal extinctions.
Paleontologists wrangled with geologists about where to draw the line
between Pleistocene and post-Pleistocene formations. Geologists fought
each other over the number, timing, and evidences of glacial history.
Even linguists got in the act, clucking with disapproval at everyone's
failure to provide them sufficient time to evolve the great diversity of
native North American languages (Chapter 5).

Once again, the situation reached an angry impasse. Holmes darkly
pronounced the evidence from Vero “dangerous to the cause of science.”
Journalist Robert Gilder, who had found the Nebraska “Neanderthals,”
called Hrdli[images]ka a “liar.”⁴²

So it went. Over the decades, scores of purportedly Pleistocene-age
sites were championed, some with stone tools, others with human skeletal
remains, but all were suspect, and all faced withering criticism from
Holmes, Hrdli[images]ka, and others. In this wide-open field, there were
few rules of engagement, and the dispute exposed deep rifts over what
constituted legitimate proof of human antiquity. At its worst, Frank
Roberts darkly admitted, “the question of early man in America [became]
virtually taboo, and no anthropologist, or for that matter geologist or
paleontologist, desirous of a successful career would tempt the fate of
ostracism by intimating that he had discovered indications of a
respectable antiquity for the Indian.” Archaeologist Nels Nelson advised
his colleagues to “lie low for the present.” Shrewd advice and many,
such as Alfred Kidder, followed it: we “comforted ourselves,” he later
confessed, “by working in the satisfactorily clear atmosphere of the
late periods.”⁴³ Ironically, the key to resolving the dispute had, since
1908, quietly lain exposed in an arroyo in New Mexico.

IN THE BELLY OF THE BEAST

On August 27, 1908, torrential rains fell on Johnson Mesa in a remote
corner of northeastern New Mexico. The thunderstorm broke in early
evening, yielding a beautiful sunset, but then, unusually, fired up
again. After dark, from a ranch just below the mesa, a frantic phone
call went out to Sarah Rooke, the local telephone operator: the Dry
Cimarron River was rising fast. Everyone downstream in the town of
Folsom needed to head to higher ground. From her switchboard, Rooke
began calling the townspeople. Many heeded the warning. Others could not
be saved, including Sarah Rooke, who stayed at her post sounding the
alarm until the floodwaters tore her small operator's shed from its
foundations and washed it away. Her body was found in a field the next
spring, buried in mud.⁴⁴ The flood forever changed the town of Folsom.
So, too, American archaeology.

Sometime after the flood, George McJunkin, the foreman on the Crowfoot
Ranch below Johnson Mesa, went out to check his cattle and fences, and
came across a new and deeply incised portion of Wild Horse Arroyo, a
tributary of the Dry Cimarron. Looking down, he noticed bones jutting
out near the base of the arroyo. Most cowboys would have passed them by:
bones are hardly an uncommon sight in ranch country. But by all
accounts, McJunkin was no ordinary cowboy. Born a slave in pre-Civil War
Texas, he was befriended at an early age by his plantation owner (Jack
McJunkin), who taught him to read and supplied him with books. In his
teens, George moved to Midland, taking a ranching job using the McJunkin
name. By the time he was in his twenties, he was working on the Crowfoot
Ranch.

Precisely what McJunkin, a self-taught naturalist, thought of the bones
in the bottom of Wild Horse Arroyo is not known. But they obviously
piqued his curiosity, for he told others about them. One was Carl
Schwachheim, the blacksmith in nearby Raton, who had built a fountain in
front of his home using the antler racks of two bull elk that had become
entangled in a mortal contest. McJunkin had passed by the fountain, saw
that its builder was a kindred spirit, and on trips to Raton would stop
in to talk to Schwachheim—at some point, he must have described the
bones in Wild Horse Arroyo.

Schwachheim did not visit the Folsom site until December 1922 (after
McJunkin died). He and Raton banker Fred Howarth collected a few of the
bones, which they took to the then Colorado Museum of Natural History in
Denver. Jesse Figgins, the director, turned the bones over to the
museum's paleontologist, Harold Cook, who identified them as being from
an extinct species of bison. Figgins and Cook visited the site in March
1926 and decided to excavate, with the aim of acquiring a bison skeleton
for museum display. They were not looking for, nor did they expect to
find, any archaeological remains.

Still, they were well aware of the human antiquity controversy. Cook was
the discoverer and namesake of Hesperopithecus haroldcookii, a fossil he
had found in the early 1920s near his family ranch in western Nebraska,
which was identified as a pre-Pleistocene form said to resemble what was
then the oldest-known human ancestor, Homo erectus (Java Man, as it was
then known).⁴⁵ Sadly for Cook's hopes of taxonomic immortality (Cook
Man?), Hesperopithecus proved on closer inspection to be a fossil pig
that had become extinct millions of years before our ancestors appeared
on the plains of Africa. But Cook paid that little mind—the tooth might
well be from a fossil pig, but he was convinced some of the bones found
with it had been broken by humans. Ever the optimist, Cook was sure
humans had been in America a very long time.

He saw further evidence of that at the site of Lone Wolf Creek, in
Colorado City, Texas. Figgins had hired workers there in 1924 to extract
the bones of an extinct bison for display (Figure 15). Unfortunately,
they made a mess of the task, lopping off the ends of bones to make them
fit packing crates, rather than just getting larger crates. Worse,
Figgins learned only afterward that three artifacts had been found with
the bison. The artifacts were neither left in place nor photographed;
one was missing. The following spring, Figgins dispatched Cook to the
site to assess the geology, and even though the evidence was long out of
the ground (and badly mangled), Cook still confidently concluded that
Lone Wolf Creek provided “good, dependable definite evidence of human
artifacts in the Pleistocene in America,” perhaps as much as 350,000
years old.⁴⁶

That was a daring claim at a time when most were unwilling to push human
antiquity in America back to 10,000 years ago. But because of the
sloppiness of the discovery, there was little reason for confidence in
Lone Wolf Creek, no matter how vigorously Cook tried to promote it. And
he tried very hard indeed. But that hardly convinced skeptics like
Holmes, who immediately asked about Cook's scientific reliability. The
answer from Cook's old mentor was none too flattering: “Harold has a
somewhat optimistic temperament, and I find it necessary to discount his
geological conclusions more or less.” Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka did as
well.⁴⁷

[images]

FIGURE 15.
H. D. Boyes and Nelson Vaughn at their excavations at the Lone Wolf
Creek site, Texas, 1924. Note the bison remains in place. (Photograph
courtesy of the Heart of West Texas Museum.)

Cook persisted. In a broadside attack on Hrdli[images]ka published the
next year, Cook invoked Lone Wolf Creek and Hesperopithecus to bolster
his claim of a Pleistocene or even earlier human presence in the New
World. In Hrdli[images]ka's angry eyes, Cook's latest paper was just
“another head of the hydra,”⁴⁸ and he moved swiftly to decapitate it.
But like a hydra, new heads kept popping up.

In early 1927, Cook was called to a gravel quarry in Frederick,
Oklahoma, following a report of mammoth and other extinct mammal bones
found alongside grinding stones in apparent Pleistocene gravels.
“Strangely enough,” Cook remarked, “these implements show a degree of
culture closely comparable with that of the nomadic modern Plains
Indians.”⁴⁹ He assessed the geology and concluded the site was about
365,000 years old. But as at Lone Wolf Creek, crucial details of what
was found, and where, rested on the unreliable testimony of an
inexperienced collector. Worse, an independent assessment of the site's
geology concluded the deposits were “not necessarily more than 10,000
years old, and might be somewhat younger.”⁵⁰ That was followed by a
searing critique of the archaeology that ridiculed the absurdity of
Pleistocene-age grinding stones (even today, such are rare).

Yet, Cook and Figgins paid the skeptics little mind, writing that
Hesperopithecus, Lone Wolf Creek, and now Frederick pushed human
antiquity back “by hundreds of thousands of years.”⁵¹ By then, however,
few were taking them or their sites very seriously. It was in this
harshly skeptical climate that their Folsom work emerged.

Schwachheim was hired by Figgins to excavate at Folsom, and began in May
1926. By early July, he was down to the level of the bison bones, and in
mid-July, an artifact was found. This was no “rude” paleolith, but a
delicately made spear point with a distinctive central groove or flute.
Unfortunately, the point was out of the ground before he spotted it, so
whether it was associated with the bison bones was uncertain. Notified
in Denver, Figgins instructed Schwachheim to watch “for human remains
and then in no circumstances, remove them, but let me know at once.”⁵²
He wanted to inspect the remains in place. The remainder of the summer,
Figgins waited anxiously for word. None came.

Nonetheless, he and Cook were convinced this was another Pleistocene
archaeological site. That fall they wrote matching papers for Natural
History magazine that, as Figgins boasted to Oliver Hay at the
Smithsonian, were “a deliberate attempt to arouse Dr. Hrdli[images]ka
and stir up all the venom there is in him.” As Figgins explained,
“Everyone seems to think Hrdli[images]ka will attack [and if he] tears a
chunk of hide off my back…there is nothing to prevent my removing three
upper and two lower incisors, black one eye and gouge the other, after I
have laid his hide across a barbed wire fence. I am daring the whole
miserable caboodle of them.”⁵³

Brave words, and they inspired Hay to march down the hall to
Hrdli[images]ka's office to arrange “a showdown” with Figgins in
Washington. When Hay reported what he'd done, Figgins backpedaled fast,
declaring it would be much better if Cook went to Washington to “be the
[sacrificial] goat.” In the end, Figgins checked his faltering bravado
and boarded a train for Washington. By the time he arrived at
Hrdli[images]ka's office, he was in a fearful lather. Yet, much to his
astonishment and relief, Hrdli[images]ka was courteous, “extremely
pleased” to see the Folsom point Figgins carried with him, and even
offered some advice: if additional points appeared during the coming
excavation season, they should be left in place and telegrams should be
sent around the country inviting “outside scientists” to come and
examine them in the ground.⁵⁴

Good advice, Figgins thought, and he left with newfound respect for
Hrdli[images]ka. What he didn't appreciate, however, were
Hrdli[images]ka's motives for offering that advice. Hrdli[images]ka
didn't trust Figgins or Cook for a moment, and would not be convinced by
anything they said about Folsom's age, or any possible association of
artifacts with extinct animals. He wanted others called in to judge the
evidence.

Schwachheim resumed excavating at Folsom in the spring of 1927. In late
August, he uncovered a Folsom point, this time firmly in place between a
pair of bison ribs. Figgins was alerted, and immediately broadcast
telegrams around the country announcing, “Another arrowhead found in
position with bison remains at Folsom, New Mexico. Can you personally
examine find.” Schwachheim was commanded to guard the point night and
day until the visiting dignitaries arrived. He dutifully awaited the
parade of “Scientists, Anthropologists, Archaeologists, Zoologists, or
other bugs.”⁵⁵

It began a few days later with the arrival of Figgins, paleontologist
Barnum Brown of the American Museum of Natural History, and
archaeologists Alfred Kidder of the Carnegie Institution of Washington
and Frank Roberts, a young colleague of Hrdli[images]ka's at the
Smithsonian (Hrdli[images]ka was invited, but was in Alaska at the time;
Holmes by then had retired) (Figure 16). All agreed this was no
accidental association of artifact and bone: human hunters had killed
this now-extinct Pleistocene bison. Here, finally, was proof in those
pre-radiocarbon days of an Ice Age human presence.⁵⁶

That certainty, however, gave way to uncertainty about the site's
absolute age, since the taxonomy and timing of bison extinction were
still not altogether clear. Even so, within weeks Kidder announced
publicly what he'd always hoped for privately: the first Americans had
arrived some 15,000-20,000 years ago (now he could rebut those who
claimed the Americas hadn't been occupied long enough for its
civilizations to have developed on their own). The announcement,
subsequently elaborated by Brown and Roberts, electrified the scientific
community.

Brown, in fact, was so taken by what he saw that he returned to Folsom
in 1928 to expand the excavation. That July, when fluted points were
again found alongside bison remains, telegrams were once more broadcast
across the country, and in response, the find was seen by several of
“the best men in the country,”⁵⁷ including some of a new breed of USGS
geologists who mapped the region, and who independently affirmed
Folsom's late Pleistocene antiquity (based on my own investigations at
Folsom seventy years later, which involved extensive radiocarbon dating,
I can report their age estimates were off by only a couple thousand
years: that's quite an achievement, given they had no techniques for
absolute age dating⁵⁸).

[images]

FIGURE 16.
Carl Schwachheim (left) and Barnum Brown posing with the first in situ
Folsom point, September 4, 1927. The point is the one shown in close-up
in Plate 1 of this book. (Photograph courtesy of American Museum of
Natural History.)

The decades spent searching for paleoliths or pre-sapiens fossils were
over. In retrospect, that effort seemed strangely misguided. Folsom was
late Pleistocene in age, but it looked nothing like what anyone expected
a Pleistocene human occupation to look like.

HISTORICAL HOMILIES

Proponents of a great human antiquity in the Americas, recalling with
fondness Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka apparently getting their comeuppance
at Folsom, see in this history a vindication of their belief that
critics hinder the recognition of bona fide early sites and retard the
progress of science. That's a serious charge, but it needn't be taken
too seriously. Historian of science David Hull observes that “the least
productive scientists tend to behave the most admirably, while those who
make the greatest contributions just as frequently behave the most
deplorably.”⁵⁹ Without question, Chamberlin, Holmes, and Hrdli[images]ka
often behaved deplorably: they were merciless in attack and engaged in
no small amount of behind-the-scenes skullduggery.

Nevertheless, far from hamstringing inquiry, these critics actually sped
it along toward resolution. Their tough questions and criticisms
crystallized debate on stone tool technology (the means of making
tools), the relationship between tool form and age, human evolution,
glacial geology, and dating techniques—critical issues all. Much was
learned in the half century of dispute, not least what a solution to the
human antiquity controversy had to look like. The swift acceptance of
Folsom attests to that.

Besides, look at the sites the critics rejected. Today, Trenton,
Newcomerstown, Lansing, Gilder Mound, Vero, and all the other allegedly
Pleistocene sites are significant because of the battles fought there,
not because of the great age of their archaeological remains. None of
them were what they were claimed to be. Skepticism about a Pleistocene
human presence was not arbitrary, but rather forged in the face of
repeated cases that failed to withstand critical scrutiny (circumstances
that will arise again).

The antiquity of the Folsom site, like that of Brixham Cave before it,
was based on artifacts in close association with the remains of an
extinct Pleistocene animal, the only secure means then available for
telling time. That made Folsom unlike virtually every previous
contender, where it had been impossible to demonstrate that the
artifacts (or human skeletal remains) had been deposited at the same
time as the Pleistocene-aged deposits or fauna with which they were
found.

Equally important, Folsom was a kill site that would ultimately yield
the remains of nearly three dozen bison and almost as many points.
Consequently, its excavation provided several opportunities for
scientific visitors to witness newly discovered points in place. Site
visits to evaluate claims of great antiquity had been common since the
1890s. Yet, they were not always successful nor, for that matter,
welcome. After a joint visit to Trenton in the late summer of 1897,
Abbott griped, “I cannot say, looking back over the past four days, that
I have enjoyed it. There is too much assumption of extra-carefulness, as
they call it, which is simply a lot of childish twaddle. They cannot
grasp the subject in its entirety and see the facts…. They may all be
very eminent men, but it took me a good deal less time to learn that we
had here evidences of man's antiquity.”⁶⁰

Those earlier site visits were often exercises in incompatibility, never
achieving consensus and serving largely to highlight differences in
interpretation. This was hardly surprising: archaeological methods and
techniques in those years were uneven, many discoveries were made under
dubious conditions, training was spottier, more amateurs were in the
mix, there was considerable disagreement about how to recognize
Pleistocene-age deposits, the criteria for evaluating evidence were less
explicit, and a site's age had to be assessed in the field after careful
examination of the stratigraphy and geology, artifact context, and the
nature of the associated remains. At Trenton, Lansing, Gilder, and Vero,
proponents and critics visited the sites, looked at the very same
evidence, but came away with radically different views of what it meant.
The 1927 visit to Folsom, where everyone agreed on what they were
seeing, was the exception far more than the rule. But then by 1927,
archaeology, geology, and vertebrate paleontology had become more
professional sciences.

It was not inevitable that resolution of the human antiquity controversy
would occur at Folsom, only that a site such as Folsom was needed, where
the association of points and extinct animals was indisputable and could
be repeatedly witnessed. That's critical, for the evidence at Folsom was
seen—on Hrdli[images]ka's good advice—by members of the scientific
elite.

Historian of science Martin Rudwick has shown that controversy in
science, or at least nontrivial controversy, is not resolved by
consensus across the community.⁶¹ Rather, resolution is brought about by
a core elite within the field who are recognized as experts, even if
they are not particularly involved in the research within that area.
These elite scientists regard themselves, and are regarded by others, as
competent arbiters of the fundamental questions of a discipline: for
example, the antiquity of people in America.

That Kidder examined Folsom, then publicly announced his acceptance of
the evidence, carried enormous weight, for in the 1920s, he was at the
height of his considerable power and influence (like Lyell in the
1860s). He was not being immodest when he explained to Figgins that “as
an archaeologist, I am of course not competent to pass either upon the
paleontological or the geological evidences of antiquity, but I have
paid great attention for many years to questions of deposition and
association. On these points I am able to judge, and I was entirely
convinced of the contemporaneous association of the artifact which you
so wisely had left ‘in situ’ and the bones of the bison.”⁶²

Wise, indeed. Figgins, of course, had done so in order to convince two
more members of the elite: Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka. We know their
opinions mattered, and not just because they thought so. Cook and
Figgins thought so, too. In every paper they wrote, they wrote for—or
rather, against—the Smithsonian duo. They recognized, however much they
disliked the idea, that it was only “right and proper [that Holmes and
Hrdli[images]ka] should not take without question such basic evidence as
may seem necessary to establish a given fact beyond reasonable
question.”⁶³

Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka did accept the evidence from Folsom, though
on their own terms. When asked directly, the eight-one-year-old Holmes
understandably replied he was finally content to leave judgment to
others (the old lion passed away a half-dozen years later).
Hrdli[images]ka quietly probed for weaknesses in the Folsom case, but
did so more out of habit than hope, for he respected Kidder's authority
in such matters. It was not true, as one paleontologist teased, that
Hrdli[images]ka would not accept that the Folsom bison were speared by
humans unless he had “fired the arrow himself.”⁶⁴ But Hrdli[images]ka
did want to know who was there when the “arrow” was unearthed. When
later confronted on the larger question of human antiquity in America
some years later, Hrdli[images]ka stuck close to his original script:
there was still no evidence of a pre-sapiens skeleton in America. In
that, he was correct.

Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka for decades had been the scourge of claims
for a deep human antiquity. That they said nothing about Folsom spoke
volumes. No mea culpa was offered, but then no one expected them to
admit to being wrong for so long.

But if Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka lost the war over a Pleistocene human
antiquity in America, it was not because Cook and Figgins won the battle
at Folsom. Much like the situation at Brixham Cave, there was a sharp
divide between those who made the discoveries (Boucher de Perthes; Cook
and Figgins), and those who were called upon to judge their significance
(Evans, Lyell, and Prestwich; Brown, Kidder, and Roberts). In both
instances, the opinions of the discoverers were largely ignored because
of their propensity to make absurd claims about what they'd found.
Figgins understood their place, privately admitting “our opinions are
valueless.”⁶⁵ He was not being humble; he was being honest. At a time
when virtually all archaeologists were skeptical of a Pleistocene
presence in the Americas, he and Cook were campaigning for several
spectacularly weak cases. Nelson lectured Figgins that if everything he
and Cook said were true, “we shall have to revise our entire world view
regarding the origin, the development, and the spread of human
culture.”⁶⁶ Nelson was not ready to do that. Few were.

Even worse, it wasn't obvious to Cook and Figgins, as it was to everyone
else, that Folsom was the pick of the litter. In fact, Cook judged
Folsom the “weakest and least conclusive of our localities,” and
Frederick the strongest.⁶⁷ That they couldn't properly evaluate their
own evidence destroyed any remaining shreds of their credibility.

Cook and Figgins fell victim to what's been called the Matthew Effect:
“for whosoever hath, to him shall be given…but whosoever hath not, from
him shall be taken away even that he hath.” Hrdli[images]ka's reputation
may have been roughed up by Folsom, but only slightly, and he continued
to be a sought-after authority regarding human antiquity in the
Americas. Not all scientists are created equal; some are more equal than
others. And inequality is most visible during episodes of controversy,
when the stakes are highest. In the end, and despite their crucial role
in the discovery at Folsom, neither Cook nor Figgins was asked to
interpret the meaning of what he had found, nor given the opportunity to
participate in any of the half-dozen major symposia devoted to human
antiquity that followed in the next decade, let alone receive the
acclaim for his contributions. Unfair, perhaps, but at least there were
these kind, albeit private words to Figgins from the ever-gracious
Alfred Kidder: “Anthropology owes you a very great deal for having
handled this material so carefully and so intelligently, and I think the
researches of yourself and Dr. Cook will go far towards opening a new
era in the study of the question of Pleistocene man in the New World.”⁶⁸
They did.

A MAMMOTH BARRIER

The Folsom find did not result in an antiquity comparable to the remote
ages of Paleolithic Europe. But by 1927, it was obvious American
prehistory did not extend that far back. Nonetheless, Folsom did show
that the first Americans arrived at least by the end of the Pleistocene.
They were not Paleolithic peoples, but assuming them to be ancestors of
modern American Indians, they came to be called Paleoindians.

The Folsom find also taught archaeologists how to look for Paleoindian
sites. The strategy was simple: look in arroyo channels or ancient lake
beds, or track down reports of large and easily spotted bones of extinct
Pleistocene mammals (Figure 17), then carefully comb those localities
for any associated human artifacts. So it was that Clovis came to light.
A road crew, mining gravel from an old pond near Clovis, New Mexico, had
struck immense fossils bones. Word of their discovery reached Edgar B.
Howard of Philadelphia's Academy of Natural Sciences, who began
excavations there in the summer of 1933, and soon uncovered mammoth
bones alongside fluted points that were longer, broader, and less finely
made than Folsom points (Chapter 8). These “generalized Folsoms” soon
became known as Clovis points.

Naturally, how archaeologists looked for Paleoindian sites predisposed
what they found: almost all of the nearly two dozen found in the decade
after the Folsom discovery were kill sites with bones of extinct animals
and artifacts. “Boneless” Paleoindian sites were rare.⁶⁹ Not fully
realizing how much this pattern was biased by their search strategies,
archaeologists saw in the many sites littered with bones of bison and
mammoth the testimony that Paleoindians were top predators, who
specialized in the killing of big game. An inspiring vision of gutsy
hunters, holding a trumpeting and mortally wounded animal at bay, came
to embody North American Paleoindians, and often established
expectations of Paleoindian sites in areas environmentally and
climatically different from the Great Plains, where virtually all the
iconic kill sites had been found. Steven Simms, who works in the Great
Basin, gives voice to many when he complains of “stereotypes of
[Paleoindian] lifeways applied uncritically from the Plains.”⁷⁰ Big-game
hunting makes for good copy, but the appearance masks a different
reality (Chapter 8).

[images]

FIGURE 17.
A bison tibia (the larger of the two lower leg bones) exposed on the
wind-swept floor of a now dry Pleistocene lakebed in far west Texas.
Spotting bones eroding out in this manner led to the discovery of many
Paleoindian kill sites, particularly during the 1930s Dust Bowl.
(Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

Sites with Folsom points soon proved to be limited in their distribution
to the western plains, but Clovis points were more widespread—across the
continent, in fact. They were also found in deposits below Folsom
points, evidence the Clovis archaeological complex was older than
Folsom. How much older would only be learned a couple of decades later,
following the advent of radiocarbon dating (it would also become clear
that by Folsom times, there were many other archaeological complexes in
other parts of the continent, as detailed in Chapter 9).

But were Clovis groups the first Americans, or had people arrived
earlier still? In the aftermath of the Clovis discovery, archaeologists
sought traces of more ancient Americans, and soon found themselves again
at loggerheads over the question of antiquity. As early as 1953, Alex
Krieger warned his colleagues that having overthrown the
Holmes-Hrdli[images]ka “dogma,” they were now in danger of replacing it
with another. The first Americans would be permitted a late Pleistocene
entry, but he feared that 10,000 years was fast becoming the new
“allowed antiquity.”⁷¹

Yet, in 1953 he tallied a half-dozen sites that “may and probably do”
break that barrier. In 1964 he upped the total to fifty sites in North
and South America that he thought pointed to a human presence predating
Clovis. Not all sites were likely genuine, as Krieger well appreciated.
But what impressed him most was how many sites looked old. As he saw it,
where there's smoke there's fire. The sites on his list included some
with radiocarbon ages ranging from 21,000 to more than 38,000 BP. Others
had bones of extinct animals that appeared split, burned, or broken by
human hands. And then there were the Malakoff heads—giant sandstone
boulders from deep in a Texas gravel quarry that had crude “faces”
carved into them, looking like enormous versions of Mr. Potato Head
toys. Krieger even tossed in several American Paleolithic sites, Trenton
included, for they “cannot all be set aside as insignificant.”⁷²

In fact, many of the sites on Krieger's list recalled the American
Paleolithic, for they contained crude stone or bone artifacts. Krieger
insisted he was not making Abbott's mistake of equating artifact form
with age, merely raising the possibility of a “pre-projectile
(pre-Clovis) point stage.” Perhaps. But few were eager to follow Krieger
out on his speculative limb. Others were busy sawing it off behind him.

The same year Krieger published his pre-Clovis compendium (1964), C.
Vance Haynes reported the first secure radiocarbon ages for a half-dozen
Clovis sites (including the type site). Their ages fell in a very narrow
slice of time, between 11,500 and 11,000 BP.⁷³ None were more than
12,000 years old, and none yielded evidence of a precursor or pre-Clovis
population, despite having underlying sediments of the right age, and
with ecological conditions that should have been favorable to
occupation—had people been present in the area.

But if there was no pre-Clovis, how might one explain the “apparently
sudden appearance” of Clovis over much of North America 11,500 years
ago? Geology provided a clue. By the late 1950s, there were a raft of
radiocarbon ages available on the timing of deglaciation, and in them
Haynes spotted a striking concordance between the geological and
archaeological records. It appeared that 12,000 years ago the ice-free
corridor had opened, linking Alaska with the rest of the continental
United States for the first time in 15,000 years. Was it mere
coincidence Clovis appeared south of the ice sheet at this moment?

It all made perfect sense: the land bridge connecting Siberia and Alaska
only emerged during glacial cycles, but once migrants reached Alaska,
ice sheets had blocked their path south. Either the first Americans came
before the Late Wisconsin ice advance, in which case they had to contend
with crossing the open Bering Sea, or they came later and walked across
the land bridge, then cooled their heels in Alaska waiting for the
Cordilleran and Laurentide ice to retreat. The splendid chronological
correlation between the disappearance of the ice and the appearance of
Clovis surely favored the latter hypothesis.

The way Haynes saw it, Clovis progenitors probably were in Alaska some
12,500 years ago, moved out across the Arctic slope soon thereafter, and
then down the ice-free corridor fast on the heels of its opening. The
migration from Siberia into northwestern North America might have taken
1,500 years altogether, but once south of the glaciers, Clovis groups
could have spread rapidly east and west, colonizing the entire continent
in fewer than 1,000 years.

For Haynes the pieces were falling neatly into place. For Krieger, his
worst fears were coming to pass (Figure 18). The notion that Clovis was
one of the older occupations of North America was steadily losing ground
to the idea that it was the oldest occupation in North America.

Still, in 1964 Haynes saw “good indications” there were people in
America before 12,000 years ago. He just didn't think they were related
to Clovis, or perhaps there were just very few of them. But by 1969, he
was losing enthusiasm for the idea of pre-Clovis.⁷⁴ His newly found
skepticism was understandable. In the intervening years, he had learned
the hard way that sites too good to be true often weren't.

Tule Springs, located near Las Vegas, Nevada, had everything going for
it: genuine artifacts, bones of Pleistocene megafauna seemingly broken
by human hands, and a radiocarbon date of 28,000 BP. Anxious to learn
more of this occupation, a team of archaeologists, paleoecologists, and
geologists embarked on an ambitious excavation program, overseen by a
blue-ribbon panel of scientists. Almost immediately Haynes, the site
geologist, noticed that the “hearths” at Tule Springs were nothing more
than organically blackened deposits. That was welcome news, solving as
it did a longstanding puzzle: if these were hearths, why were they full
of unburned snail shells? Then the curious fracturing of the megafaunal
bones turned out to be restricted to remains found in the spring vents,
and likely had been broken by the frantic trampling of animals trapped
in those quicksand-like sediments, and not by human hands. Their
“burning” was merely groundwater staining. The only indisputable
artifacts at Tule Springs were from deposits much younger than 12,000
years old.⁷⁵ Tule Springs was not pre-Clovis. Still, neither Haynes nor
anyone else categorically rejected the possibility of an older human
presence in the Americas. Just so, the seeds of skepticism were sown.

[images]

FIGURE 18.
C. Vance Haynes and Alex Krieger examining specimens at the 1970 Calico
Conference. (Photograph courtesy of David J. Wilson.)

At the outset of the Great Paleolithic War, Charles Abbott had expressed
the fervent hope that “the ‘doubting Thomases’ [would] be fewer by the
year 2000.”⁷⁶ As it turns out, Abbott finally got something right. But
it was no easy road getting there.

4

THE PRE-CLOVIS
CONTROVERSY AND ITS
RESOLUTION

In the late 1980s, about the time the pre-Clovis dispute in America was
nearing a boil, archaeologist Jack Harris visited my university,
bringing with him the just-excavated artifacts from the Senga site in
Zaire (now Democratic Republic of Congo). Judging by the animal bones
found with them, he inferred the specimens were more than 2.3 million
years old—making them nearly 100,000 years older than any previously
known artifacts from Africa, and thus the earliest human tools ever
found. At the end of a brief talk about his excavations at Senga, Harris
laid the specimens on the table.

It is surprisingly humbling to see a human culture starter set, even if
it is several hundred shattered quartz flakes, most no more than 2
centimeters long and all utterly nondescript, even by forgiving Lower
Paleolithic standards. But what I really noticed was the silence. No one
in that audience of mostly Old World archaeologists asked Jack how sure
he was of the artifacts’ age, whether their geological context was
secure, or why he was certain they were even artifacts—questions I was
asking myself. After all, I'd been in rooms where artifacts on display
from the pre-Clovis age sites of Monte Verde, Chile, and Meadowcroft
Rockshelter, Pennsylvania, dated to 12,500 and 14,250 BP, respectively,
triggered noisy debate.

So why does Senga, plunging the birth of cultural behavior 100,000 years
deeper into the past—almost to the doorstep of the Pliocene—scarcely
elicit a murmur of skepticism, while sites just 1,000 years older than
Clovis come under withering fire? Senga helps redefine what makes us
human. Monte Verde and Meadowcroft only tell us American prehistory
began slightly earlier than we thought.

I asked my colleague, South African archaeologist Garth Sampson, why
Senga was so readily accepted. He tried not to be condescending: “My
dear fellow,” he said, “because it's obvious Senga is just what Jack
says it is.”

Yes. Well. That was helpful. But explain that to Tom Dillehay or James
Adovasio, both highly competent archaeologists, each of whom had assured
us that the pre-Clovis-age occupations at Monte Verde and Meadowcroft
were just what they said they were. Why wouldn't we take their word for
it?¹

Why did controversy over antiquity persist in the face of mounting
evidence from fields as diverse as linguistics, genetics, and physical
anthropology—as well as archaeology? Why did it remain unresolved in the
face of a regular crop of purportedly ancient assemblages and
archaeological sites, and an almost annual harvest of books and papers
on the topic? Why, indeed, all the fuss?

Some blamed this state of affairs on critics either secretly envious or
so hopelessly biased they attack even legitimate pre-Clovis claims—Niede
Guidon believes that “when you are the first to discover something,
people want to kill you because you disturbed the placid waters of the
lake”. The result, Guidon claims, is a “Kafkaesque” situation in which
there are good archaeologists (with Clovis sites), and bad ones (those,
like herself, with pre-Clovis sites).²

Yet, were I selecting Kafka metaphors, it would not be his dark classic
The Trial, but his lesser-known Metamorphosis, in which a perfectly
promising human being turns into a cockroach. Virtually every field
season over the last several decades brought a new contender for the
pre-Clovis crown. Each was initially heralded with great fanfare, but
soon started rolling down the slippery slope of the pre-Clovis
credibility decay curve.

The problems varied, but the outcome was inevitably the same. Most
pre-Clovis claims had a shelf-life of about a decade: better than fish
and house guests, but ultimately they, too, began to stink.

Recall that in 1964 Alex Krieger had identified fifty pre-Clovis sites
in the New World. By 1976 Scotty MacNeish had tallied just thirty-five;
in 1988 Richard Morlan had found only five.³ The sites on their lists
are almost completely different. Supporters of pre-Clovis put a positive
spin on these wholesale losses: by 1976, they say, MacNeish had at his
disposal a wealth of new and improved sites unavailable to Krieger.
Naturally, he would use these weapons in the battle over the antiquity
of the first Americans. Maybe so. But then thirty-one of MacNeish's
sites failed to make Morlan's list. Critics read a different message: if
90% of what was considered the best pre-Clovis claims in 1964 failed to
survive until 1976, and if nearly the identical percentage from 1976
failed to make the 1988 list, why put much faith in any sites on any
list?

There is one very good reason: whether the first Americans came here
before Clovis times and whether we have detected their traces are
independent issues. The fact many sites have been proposed but none
accepted only tells us none of those sites is acceptable. It does not
prove humans were absent from the Americas in pre-Clovis times. And no
matter how many sites fail, that does not reduce the odds of finding one
that might pass. Still, and not surprisingly, that decades-long failure
meant few archaeologists were willing to accept a pre-Clovis claim at
face value. We grew skeptical, cynical, even insulting: Paul Martin (not
an archaeologist, but with his own Clovis-first agenda to push⁴) likened
the pre-Clovis search to the quest for Bigfoot, as though there were
sound reasons why pre-Clovis could not exist. There aren't. But then
there's no reason it has to either. Whether it does or not is strictly a
question of evidence.

PASSING THE TEST

Although there has been considerable and largely fruitless speculation
over what a pre-Clovis site ought to look like, just as there was a
century earlier over how an American Paleolithic might appear, one
conclusion seems inescapable: we are not looking for—and from what we
know of human evolution do not expect to find—Senga-like artifacts here
in the Americas. To be sure, in some places “primitive-looking”
artifacts were made even in the recent past (it is often a sign of a
dearth of suitable toolmaking stone), but overall we should see the
relatively complex tools and features that characterize those of other
sites produced by anatomically modern humans (Homo sapiens), who spanned
the globe over the last 100,000 years. Beyond that, however, we cannot
be much more specific predicting the look of a pre-Clovis toolkit.

What we can expect—demand, even—of a pre-Clovis site are (1) undeniable
traces of humans, either their artifacts or skeletal remains, in (2)
undisturbed geological deposits in proper stratigraphic position, which
are (3) accompanied by indisputable radiometric ages (speared bison no
longer suffice). These are no more than evolved versions of criteria
Ales Hrdlicka first proposed in 1907, and no less than what was finally
met at Folsom in 1927.⁵ On their face, they are not difficult criteria
to meet, nor any different than the ones used in Africa to identify the
earliest (and often the most ambiguous) traces of human culture.

Still, as the changes between Krieger, MacNeish, and Morlan's lists
plainly show, these criteria have proven extraordinarily difficult to
meet, so much so that pre-Clovis proponents have cried foul.⁶ The
criteria, they charge, are unfairly applied and unduly rigid. They
insist that if broadly applied, we would be left wondering whether
anyone occupied North America in Clovis time. Are the criteria so
perversely narrow they blind archaeologists from seeing legitimate
evidence? A closer look is in order.

The first criterion (and often the most troublesome), requires the
presence of artifacts or human skeletal remains. The latter have not
figured prominently in the pre-Clovis dispute, simply because few
Pleistocene-age human remains have been found in North or South America,
and none is significantly older than 11,500 BP (as we'll see in Chapter
5, skeletal remains are central to the most controversial questions
about who the first Americans were). Artifacts are another story.

Artifacts come in a myriad of materials, but most commonly only those
made of stone, and to a lesser degree bone, survive the rough passage of
time. Almost certainly the earliest Americans fashioned artifacts of
wood, antler, shell, and the like (but not ceramics—those came later),
but those materials are quick to decompose, and are seldom preserved or
recovered archaeologically.

An artifact is an object made, modified, or otherwise used by humans.
Oftentimes, fashioning an object for use renders it easy to spot as the
product of human hands: turning a chert cobble into a finely crafted
spear point, or carving a piece of mammoth rib into a socket wrench. No
recognition problems here.

But at other times, objects are hardly modified, and even after use show
little sign of having been made by human hands—like a round river cobble
employed briefly to smash open bone for marrow, but which left few
traces of that action. And to complicate matters, nature can modify
stone and bone in ways that mimic the action of human hands. Grinding
glacial ice and roaring rivers, for example, can break stone or bone
into forms that resemble rough-hewn artifacts, such as choppers or
scrapers. Here it becomes much harder to tell whether an object was made
or used by people.

Such ambiguous cases require close scrutiny of context: where was the
object found and with what? An otherwise nondescript, round river cobble
found in a site high above a river, alongside charred and broken animal
bones, a charcoal-laden hearth, and a dozen broken spear points all in
fine-grained loess, is likely an artifact. Find that cobble in the river
bed, amid millions like it, and even if it were an artifact, one would
be hard-pressed to prove it. Worse, in that river bed there would be
naturally broken cobbles that looked more like artifacts than that round
cobble. Where artifact look-alikes grade imperceptibly into broken
cobbles bearing no resemblance to artifacts, and then into unbroken
cobbles, the context bespeaks a natural origin for all. Seems simple
enough.

TROUBLE IN THE HILLS

The Calico Hills site is located in the hills high above Pleistocene
pluvial Lake Manix, in what is now the Mojave Desert near Yermo,
California. In the 1960s, Ruth “Dee” Simpson found stone artifacts
scattered about its surface; some were obviously recent, others looked
“Paleolithic” (shades of Charles Abbott).

Louis Leakey, fresh from his triumphant discovery of 2-million-year-old
hominids at Olduvai Gorge, in Tanzania, was invited to Calico in May
1963. When he saw the site, and what appeared to be artifacts in place
deep in a bulldozer pit, he was instantly convinced this was a spot to
find ancient Americans. “Dee, dig here,” is what he said.⁷ “Here” turned
out to be smack in the middle of a pre-Wisconsin-age alluvial fan, a
dense mass of gravel and sand (Figure 19) originally deposited by moving
water. Its age was initially estimated at more than 100,000 years old;
it's now thought to be twice that old. Excavations plunged into the fan,
and soon recovered “uniquely different” artifacts. Leakey returned in
the spring of 1965, and in front of the anxious excavation crews,
examined stones they had cherry-picked from the rubble. He judged at
least twenty-five of the specimens to be humanly made. “Leakey's luck,”
it seemed, had struck again.⁸

[images]

FIGURE 19.
Excavations in Master Pit 2 at the Calico site, ca. 1968. The untold
number of naturally broken rocks jutting from the sidewalls convey why
it has proven impossible to demonstrate that humans were present at this
site in early Pleistocene times. (Photograph courtesy of David J.
Wilson.)

That was enough to entice the National Geographic Society to fund
fieldwork at Calico to the tune of $100,000 (no small change in those
days), but with strings attached: they funded Vance Haynes and others to
visit and evaluate the site's artifacts and geology. When the visitors
saw that “artifacts” were being plucked from amid hundreds of thousands
of broken stones occurring naturally in the fan, they urged all
specimens be saved, whether thought to be artifacts or not. They were.

Excavations continued at Calico, and as the pile of rocks tossed aside
as non-artifacts grew to cover several acres, so did the number of
Calico “artifacts” (at last count over 11,400 pieces). No surprise
there: where nature breaks millions of rocks (as it can in a
fast-flowing river), a small percentage will resemble crude artifacts.
Were these found in an otherwise indisputable archaeological context,
they might be accepted as artifacts. But found as these were in the
Calico alluvial fan—a giant, natural gravel crusher—Haynes suspected
none were humanly made, but instead were naturally produced geofacts,
formed as the rocks tumbled downstream from sources in the Calico
mountains.

Haynes's criticisms sparked a lively discussion over the minutiae of
flaked stone: did the Calico specimens possess attributes unequivocally
made by human hands? Caliper-wielding critics compared known artifacts
with naturally broken stones, identified the essential criteria that
differentiate the two, and then applied those to the Calico specimens.
The specimens proved to be more like naturally fractured stones than
humanly fashioned ones.

Proponents insisted that other attributes of the stones bespoke their
human origin. Only, they reached that conclusion after discarding all
the rocks that did not look like artifacts. Naturally, the ones they
kept looked humanly made and had attributes of artifacts. But that only
means they were consistent in their sorting criteria, and not that those
specimens were flaked by people.

Calico, in the words of Nicholas Toth—who studies Africa's earliest
stone tools—represents a worst-case setting for documenting a human
presence. Against a backdrop of all those naturally broken cobbles, is
there reason to suppose any were artificially fractured?⁹ And if they
were, how could they possibly be reliably identified?

Leakey organized an international conference and site visit at Calico in
1970, hoping it would be the American equivalent of the British
geologists’ visits to examine Boucher de Perthes’ collections and sites
in 1859 (naturally, the Cambridge-trained Leakey would think of the
landmark European site visit rather than Folsom). Leakey had “no doubt,
whatsoever!” about Calico's antiquity, but he failed to carry the day.
His wife Mary—an accomplished archaeologist in her own right—later
bluntly wrote that no one at the conference “really cared to get up and
make a strong outright condemnation of the evidence, because it would
have been equivalent to saying that Louis had lost his capacity to think
scientifically—which, I fear, was perfectly true.”¹⁰ Indeed, there's
reason to wonder whether Calico would have been taken seriously by
anyone, were it not for his ringing endorsement.

In the end, Calico's best hope for pre-Clovis legitimacy vanished when a
semicircular “hearth,” found deep in the excavations, proved not to be
one: the stones comprising the feature hadn't been subjected to heat in
as much as 400,000 years, if ever. It was instead a natural rock scatter
that, friend and foe admit, only looked hearthlike after surrounding
gravel was removed. A small core of loyalists remain convinced of
Calico's antiquity, but otherwise no one considers it an ancient
archaeological site.

“Leakey's luck” finally ran out in the California desert, a couple of
hours down the road from Las Vegas, where dreams are daily made, and
lost, on luck.

STENO'S LEGACY

No matter how sophisticated archaeological techniques have become, we
still rely on one developed centuries earlier: stratigraphy. In 1669
Niels Steensen (better known by his Latin pen name, Nicolaus Steno)
formulated the first principle of stratigraphy: namely, that in an
undisturbed deposit of strata or layers in the earth, the order of
deposition is from bottom to top, and therefore the layers below (and
any fossils or artifacts within them) are older than those above.
Stratigraphy can be relatively uncomplicated, even where layers were cut
through or are cross-bedded, but problems can arise.

In an ideal stratigraphic circumstance artifacts found in, say, Late
Wisconsin-age loess, would presumably be Late Wisconsin in age. Yet, in
the real world, both natural processes (such as burrowing animals,
shrinking and swelling of soils, erosion, and redeposition) and human
action (our tendency to bury the dead) mix the deposits in which
archaeological remains are found. Younger artifacts can easily intrude
into older strata, falsely implying they are just as old. Sometimes the
reverse occurs (Figure 20). Because of our very-human tendency to pick
up curious fossils and even artifacts, older materials can be added to
younger sites (fluted points and Paleozoic crinoids have been found in
prehistoric Pueblos, but those sites are neither Pleistocene nor
Paleozoic in age).

[images]

FIGURE 20.
An example of the complications of stratigraphy, Dry Cimarron Valley,
New Mexico. Deposit 1 was laid down gradually by river overflow. At
times deposition slowed, vegetation grew on the land, and created soil
horizons (for example, the horizontal black band under the Deposit 1
label), which were subsequently buried by more overbank deposition. In
turn, the top of Deposit 1 was eroded—how much was lost, we cannot
say—which was then followed by the accumulation of Deposit 2 sediments.
Deposits 1 and 2 were then both eroded and subsequently buried by
Deposit 3. If stone artifacts were found on the uppermost surface of
Deposit 1, it could mean they were contained in sediments originally
part of Deposit 1, which had since eroded; or that they were deposited
after erosion cut into Deposit 1 but before Deposit 2 was laid down; or
if they were found where Deposit 3 sits atop Deposit 1, they could have
been in or atop Deposit 1, or in or atop Deposit 2, or were dropped
there just before Deposit 3 began to accumulate. Given what is known of
the radiocarbon ages from this site (which range from 7800 to 2200 BP),
incorrectly reading the stratigraphy could mean “misplacing” the
artifacts in time by as much as 5,000 years. And that assumes the
artifacts were dropped at this spot, but because this is a river valley,
they could have been washed in from some distance away, and were older
(or younger) than their position at this spot would indicate.
(Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

Back in the pre-Folsom days, Holmes and Hrdlicka guarded against the
possibility of stratigraphic mixing by automatically assuming that any
artifact or human skeleton found in Pleistocene-aged deposits had
arrived there at a later time. A site was strati-graphically guilty
until proven innocent. Theirs was an extreme position, but in the
sometimes complex stratigraphy of ancient valleys, terraces, and
especially caves (recall the worries over Brixham Cave), where claims of
great antiquity hang in the balance, stratigraphic caution is
appropriate.

A YOUNG CHILD ON OLDMAN RIVER

In the early 1960s, in a modern gully draining into the Oldman River of
southwestern Alberta (near Taber), Archie Stalker of Canada's Geological
Survey came across the fragmentary skeleton of an infant. Little could
be told of the child's heartrending story, but perhaps the tiny presence
was a story in itself. The remains were in a block of calcium
carbonate-cemented sands, apparently broken away from a layer of ancient
stream alluvium exposed on the gully floor.¹¹

The alluvium layer was deep below the surface, itself no great sign of
age. More significant, it was sandwiched above one glacial till and
beneath another. By Steno's law, the child predated the Late Wisconsin
till; given how far beneath the till the skeleton was found, Stalker
thought it might reach into the Middle Wisconsin.

A geologist by training, Stalker was well aware of the necessity of
guarding against possible stratigraphic mixing and intrusion, but he was
certain that had not happened at Taber. There was no evidence for
erosion older than the modern gully but younger than the alluvium, which
might have carried the infant remains down from the surface. The bones
were in place, he insisted, their age bracketed by the ages of the
enclosing alluvium that had been radiocarbon dated at nearby sites. In
round numbers, the remains were likely more than 18,000 years old, and
perhaps as much as 60,000 years old. Unfortunately, there was not enough
bone to be directly dated using radiocarbon techniques then available,
and despite Stalker's almost annual visits to the site, no more bone was
found.

Stalker's confidence notwithstanding, few were completely satisfied with
the antiquity of the Taber child. In the late 1970s, Michael Wilson and
others returned to the site (Figure 21) to look for more remains and
clarify its stratigraphic sequence. They had no better luck than Stalker
finding skeletal remains, but did spot patches of bone-bearing,
redeposited Holocene sands on the nearby slopes.

[images]

FIGURE 21.
Excavations at the Taber Child site, Alberta. The folding and dipping of
the deposits (which complicated the stratigraphic interpretation) show
up nicely in the pit floor. (Photograph courtesy of Michael Wilson.)

Those recent sands possessed many features thought to be unique to the
Middle Wisconsin alluvium, but careful inspection revealed the two sands
were quite different in texture, color, and chemistry. Fortunately, the
sand adhering to the remains of the Taber child had been saved, and when
it was analyzed, it proved to be like the Holocene sands, and not Middle
Wisconsin sands. At some time in the recent past, the unfortunate
child's bones had been redeposited alongside, but not in, a layer of
genuine antiquity.

In the 1980s, after AMS radiocarbon dating was developed, a tiny piece
of the Taber skeleton was submitted: it dated to 3,550 ± 500 BP. Stalker
rejected that result because of possible contamination of the bone.
Perhaps. But if the date is off, the revised stratigraphy shows it is
not off by much.

THE DATING GAME

Stratigraphy is a relative dating technique: the age of a layer (or
items in it) is only known to be older or younger than some other layer.
Knowing the actual age of an artifact or event requires using an
absolute dating technique that yields ages in years (usually measured
“before present”). There are many such techniques available nowadays,
some of which can be used for specimens less than a thousand years old,
others on materials more than a million years old.

Many use the clock nature provides in the radioactive decay of elemental
isotopes, such as radiocarbon (¹⁴C), Argon/Argon (⁴°Ar/³⁹Ar), and
uranium series dating (²³°Th/²³⁴U). Others rely on incremental time
markers such as dendrochronology (which uses the annual growth rings in
trees), and luminescence dating (which measures the accumulation of
electrons in crystal lattices within quartz grains). Still others rely
on changes in the position of the earth's magnetic pole
(archaeomagnetism and paleomagnetism). In order for a dating technique
to be useful, certain conditions must obtain; among them are these:
there must be a time-dependent signal (a natural clock) that is
relatively constant over time; a means of calibrating the signal in
years; a rate of chemical or physical change that matches the time span
of interest (some short-lived isotopes disappear in a matter of
minutes—those are not useful for dating events thousands of years old);
and a means of linking the sample being dated, be it charcoal, quartz
grains, or magnetized clay, with the event of interest—say, the
occupation of an archaeological site.¹²

Over the decades since its development by Willard Libby, radiocarbon
dating has been the preferred method for dating the sites of the
earliest Americans: its range reaches back to around 50,000 BP (Chapter
1), which nicely covers the time period of interest. Its reliability is
well attested, since we now know that the amount of radiocarbon in the
atmosphere has changed over time but can account for the confounding
effects of that through calibration (though as noted, the calibration of
ages from the Younger Dryas period is still challenging). And, finally,
the technique can be applied to any material that incorporates
radiocarbon, such as charcoal and wood from plants, bone, teeth, ivory,
keratin, hooves, horns, shell from animals, and even soils, by virtue of
the organic acids that seep into them.

Yet, not all these materials, including charcoal and bone from which
radiocarbon ages are most often obtained, give results that are equally
reliable (if we run the sample multiple times will we get the same
result?) or valid (is the result correct?). Case in point: prior to our
reopening excavations at the original Folsom site in the 1990s (Chapter
9), the bison kill was thought to have dated to 10,890 ± 50 BP, based on
radiocarbon ages of charcoal found with the bison bones. Yet, our
subsequent radiocarbon dating of the bison bones themselves yielded an
average age 400 years younger: 10,490 ± 20 BP. Why the discrepancy?

Charcoal has the virtue of being relatively impervious to contamination
and thus normally yields a reliable age. But the age may not be valid
since the charcoal may not be the same age as the bison kill. If the
charcoal came from, say, a lightning-strike forest fire, it will have no
bearing on the age of the kill. Even if the charcoal was from wood that
stoked the fires over which bison meat was cooked, it could still
overestimate the age of the kill if the wood came from a long-lived
tree, the inner rings of which could be decades or even centuries older
than its outer rings. This is why, as we'll see, there is often a call
in contentious cases for the radiocarbon dating of shortlived seeds.

Conversely, radiocarbon dating of animal bones can more precisely pin
down the age of a site, since animals live shorter lives than trees, but
only if those bones occurred there as a result of human activity (which
is certainly the case of the Folsom bison). But dating bone itself can
be challenging, since it is made of multiple constituents, some of which
are highly susceptible to contamination. The inorganic (apatite)
portion, for example, readily absorbs ancient carbon via groundwater or
other contaminants. Before that was realized, multiple radiocarbon ages
on the same skeleton often gave wildly divergent results—in one case,
for example, the oldest and youngest radiocarbon ages on the same
mammoth were nearly 3,000 years apart. It was only in the 1980s, after
laboratory advances enabled the extraction of protein and even
individual amino acids from organic bone collagen, substances less
susceptible to contamination, that it became possible to derive ages
from bone that were more reliable. Hence, our conclusion the bone amino
acid we obtained dates from Folsom better estimated when that kill
occurred.

But the handicap of radiocarbon dating, which will be felt if the first
Americans prove to be far older than supposed, is that it does not
provide reliable ages for any samples that might prove to be
significantly more than 50,000 years old. For that, waiting in the wings
are a number of dating methods that can go beyond radiocarbon's limits
(or can be used where we lack material suitable for radiocarbon dating).
Among those tried on pre-Clovis sites are amino acid racemization,
cation-ratio dating, fission-track dating, electron spin resonance
(ESR), uranium-series dating, and thermoluminescence (TL) and optically
stimulated luminescence (OSL) dating (the difference between the TL and
OSL techniques is in how the accumulated electrons in the lattice traps
are released and measured). Sometimes the results of these applications
have been good, sometimes not, and sometimes one can't tell, which is
worse than getting bad results or no results at all. Thus far, no dating
method has proven to be as tried and true as radiocarbon dating.

FOOTPRINTS IN THE ASHES OF TIME

Every year London's Royal Society puts on a summer exhibition to
showcase some of the UK's latest scientific research. One of the
exhibits in 2005 was an archaeological show-stopper: a report of more
than 150 apparently human footprints in a volcanic ash (the Xalnene ash)
at the Toluquilla site in central Mexico, which were possibly more than
40,000 years old. Finding human footprints is unusual, though not
unprecedented: 3.6-million-year-old tracks of early hominids were found
at the site of Laetoli in northern Tanzania. But the Toluquilla site was
rare enough and old enough by New World standards to be noticed,
especially for the faint bell it rang in archaeological memory.

Toluquilla, it turned out, was on the edges of the Valsequillo
reservoir, which was constructed in the 1940s in the basin of a one-time
Pleistocene lake. A 30-meter-thick gravel formation outcropping along
the edges of the reservoir had yielded a zoo of Pleistocene fossils, and
a slew of archaeological sites including a very controversial one:
Hueyatlaco, the lower layer of which had flake tools and possible
projectile points associated with the remains of a mastodon. Geologists
had dated that lower layer at 250,000-600,000 years old, based on the
then-experimental techniques of uranium-series, fission-track, and
tephrahydration dating. However, the archaeologist excavating the site
put that layer at just 9,000-22,000 years old, based on results from
radiocarbon dating of mollusk shells contained within it.¹³

Unfortunately, it proved impossible to close the huge gap separating the
two sets of age estimates, and from the 1960s through the 1980s,
Hueyatlaco was a poster child for problems that occur when different
dating techniques, especially still-unproven ones, cannot be reconciled.
Further efforts in the 1990s using the ages of the vertebrate fauna and
of the diatoms from Hueyatlaco were equally at odds: the vertebrates
pointed to an age less than 30,000 years ago, while diatoms in the
deposits appeared to be more than 80,000 years old. “Conflicting and
confusing” was the verdict handed down on the site's age.¹⁴

Worse, many of the original Hueyatlaco artifacts, including mammoth bone
ostensibly engraved with serpents and saber-toothed cats, had
disappeared under puzzling circumstances. Ugly accusations surfaced that
the artifacts at Hueyatlaco had been planted by unscrupulous laborers.
The allegations were false. But the odor permeating the site's integrity
and age was enough to knock it from the list of pre-Clovis contenders,
though its claim to great antiquity lived on in the archaeology
conspiracy literature (yes, there is one¹⁵) as one more site
professional archaeologists suppressed ostensibly because it threatened
our authority to dictate archaeological knowledge. Alas, the truth is
far less sinister: we just didn't know what to make of this site.

In the summer of 2003, a team led by archaeologist Sylvia Gonzalez
returned to the Valsequillo region and spotted the footprints. They
undertook an ambitious campaign to date the Xalnene ash in which the
tracks were imprinted. OSL dating yielded an age of about 40,000 BP,
older (as it should be) than radiocarbon and ESR ages from overlying
deposits. Better still, since that ash occurs throughout the
Valesequillo area, and at Hueyatlaco 2 kilometers away it lies beneath
the gravels in which the site is situated, that meant (here's Steno
again) the 250,000 years and older ages from this controversial locality
must be wrong. After forty years, the age of Hueyatlaco was finally
known to be younger than 40,000 years old. At least now we had a
ballpark age.¹⁶ Or so it seemed.

Within months of the Royal Society's summer exhibition, geochronologist
Paul Renne and colleagues announced that ⁴°Ar/³⁹Ar and paleomagnetic
dating of the Xalnene ash—for those keeping count, we're up to ten
separate dating methods brought to bear on this chronologically stubborn
region—had yielded startlingly different results: the ash was laid down
1.3 million years ago. If those were indeed footprints, they must have
been made by an ancestral hominid that was no Homo sapiens. Hardly
plausible, they argued: more likely, those weren't human footprints at
all, or if they were, they were not made when the ash was fresh. An
expert on OSL chimed in as well: the Xalnene ash contained negligible
amounts of quartz, making it “far from ideal” for luminescence dating,
especially since over half the quartz grains analyzed had their electron
traps completely emptied, others partially so, making age estimates
unreliable. He would not be convinced that ash was 40,000 years old
until additional OSL dates replicated the result.

Gonzalez's group had already tried ⁴⁰Ar/³⁹Ar dating, but had no success
because they spotted in the ash older mineral fragments that could skew
age estimates, so they, in turn, were suspicious of the ages from
Renne's group. Besides, if it were 1.3 million years old, why was there
no stratigraphic hint of the vast time separating it from the late
Pleistocene deposits directly atop it? Clearly, replication of the
dating of the ash was in order, not just of the OSL results but of the
⁴⁰Ar/³⁹Ar and paleomagnetic ages as well. Turnabout: it's fair play in
science.¹⁷

So the long-running debate over the age of the Valsequillo gravels is
not over. Gonzalez's group has embarked on additional efforts to date
the ash, and are optimistic they will eventually be able to nail down
its age, and with it the age of the apparent footprints (their human
origin is in question), and of the Valsequillo gravels that bury
Hueyatlaco. They're optimistic, too, their results will make the
Valsequillo Basin one of the oldest and most important regions for the
study of the first Americans. On that, they may be correct. And they
suggest that even if the Xalnene ash is 1.3 million years old, those
could still be human footprints. But that's not a rabbit hole most
archaeologists will be willing to follow them down, though conspiracy
buffs might.

SO MANY SITES, SO MANY PROBLEMS

Ambiguous artifacts, scrambled stratigraphy, dubious dates. The problems
at Calico, Taber, and Valsequillo are matched in a roll call of sites
from Old Crow in Canada's Yukon Territory, to Lewisville in Texas, to
Pikimachay in Peru. Could the search for pre-Clovis be doomed to failure
simply because there is no pre-Clovis? Some skeptics suspect as much and
point to Australia, where American archaeologists have long looked with
interest and more than a touch of envy. We are interested because of
similarities in the prehistory of the two continents. Both were
colonized about the same time from Asia by highly mobile people
possessing Stone Age technology, who found a new landscape teeming with
a naive native fauna, and who—it seems—spread quickly through each
continent.

And we covet our neighbor's archaeological record because of our
apparently very different archaeological histories. The search for the
earliest sites in America has been suffused with ambiguity and
controversy. But look at Australia, many a pre-Clovis critic has said:
once serious archaeological work began there in the 1960s, its deep
antiquity was “established quickly, definitively, and largely without
rancor,” despite that continent having far fewer archaeologists.
Perhaps, Paul Martin suggested, we just need to hire some “Aussies [who]
seem to be capable of finding and agreeing on the existence of [ancient]
sites…unclouded by controversy.” Were that only true.¹⁸

As archaeologists James O'Connell and Jim Allen have recently recounted,
in the early 1960s Australian prehistory was thought to extend back a
mere 10,000 years. But within two decades, widespread excavations and
radiocarbon dating had pushed the arrival of the earliest Australians to
just over 40,000 years ago. That antiquity held for a brief time, but
then a series of TL and OSL ages suddenly plunged its prehistory back to
65,000 years ago, and then, astoundingly, to almost 176,000 years ago
(at the site of Jinmium). That sparked a lively—and to American ears
familiar—debate over the antiquity of the first Australians. Is the
controversy over Down Under? Hardly. O'Connell and Allen make a
compelling case for an antiquity no greater than 45,000 years old, but
there are those who continue to push Australia's antiquity earlier
still.¹⁹

Pre-Clovis critics also point to the impoverishment of early American
archaeological records compared to those of Europe, Africa, and Asia.
Look around before 11,000 BP, Martin suggests, and everywhere but in
America artifact quantities are “awesome.” If America were occupied at
the same time, “why didn't they leave us some similar trophies?”²⁰ The
answer, quite simply, is antiquity and demographics. The Old World was
occupied much earlier than the New, no matter how old the New, and by
late Pleistocene times, it had relatively large and archaeologically
visible populations. Of course there are many more Old World
Pleistocene-age sites.

In contrast, as Fekri Hassan and others have shown, a small number of
hunter-gatherers could have entered the New World 25,000-20,000 years
ago, yet hovered below archaeological radar for a long time
thereafter.²¹ We'll probe this matter further; for now, bear in mind
that the search for pre-Clovis in the Americas may be a search for a
very elusive quarry indeed.

That being the case, should the criteria be relaxed? Is it true, as
pre-Clovis proponents insist, that by the criteria, Clovis would not
pass muster? Hardly. Clovis long ago met these criteria, and the process
need not be repeated with each discovery of a new Clovis site, since a
site's recognition—assuming it has diagnostic Clovis points—is
straightforward (however, what is appropriate to ask are whether claims
about, say, Clovis adaptations, can be supported by evidence from those
sites, and such questions are being asked—as we'll see). That same
privilege cannot be granted pre-Clovis until after a site is found that
meets these criteria, and when we have learned how to recognize sites
and distinctive artifacts of that age.

That the criteria worked at Folsom, at a time when archaeological
methods were less refined than they are today, is also testimony that
the criteria are not too rigid. The fact so many pre-Clovis sites since
have not measured up speaks more of problems with the sites than with
the criteria.

Those problems notwithstanding, there have been payoffs along the way.
In the course of evaluating new kinds of evidence, applying new methods
and techniques, or trying on new ideas, the field as a whole advances. A
prime example: archaeologists working in the Old Crow Basin of the Yukon
Territory found mammoth bones that appeared to have been flaked,
fractured, and polished in ways that seemed “unnatural.” Could they be
artifacts? The specimens were sent off for radiocarbon dating, and the
results were surprising: some dated to 60,000 years ago. A paralithic
industry, William Irving called these ostensible artifacts, and he and
others showed experimentally they could have been made by humans. Fair
enough. But then Irving threw down the gauntlet, insisting only humans
could make those fractures. It was “difficult to imagine,” he said,
nature breaking bones the same way.²² Upping the ante, he announced some
of those broken bones were in 350,000 year old deposits, thereby
plunging North American prehistory deeper into the Pleistocene, and even
before the appearance of anatomically modern humans.

That did it. The gauntlet was picked up by a gaggle of researchers who
soon proved nature could fracture bone in ways identical to the Old Crow
specimens with embarrassing ease, whether by carnivores gnawing, large
animals trampling, rivers freezing and thawing, or even volcanoes
exploding.²³ In the end, it raised the red flag of equifinality: if
humans and nature can break bones the same way, then one must find
independent evidence to prove the bones were artifacts (say, finding
them in an undeniable archaeological site context). That hasn't
happened. Instead, the paralithic specimens have come from stream
deposits that are chock full of naturally broken bones (a sort of “bony”
Calico).

Nowadays few believe the Old Crow mammoth bones were humanly modified or
attest to an ancient human presence. But credit Old Crow with igniting
an explosion of studies that have helped us understand how geological
processes, animals, and humans may have altered the bones that we find
in archaeological sites. Because of it, we know a great deal more about
the mechanics of bone breakage, and along the way, we forever lost our
innocent notion that just because something could have been broken by
people is somehow proof it was. Like other knowledge forged in this
dispute, lessons learned here have rippled outward to benefit the
archaeology of other places and times.

In the end, it comes down to this: no matter how vigorously claims for a
pre-Clovis site are promoted, they will never prove compelling unless
the site's artifacts, stratigraphy, and ages are unimpeachable. And
preaching to the choir will not do: they are already believers. Instead,
the site has to convince the skeptics. And it has to be utterly
unimpeachable in all respects: one that can withstand withering
criticism and meet the criteria with room to spare. Call it the Jackie
Robinson Rule, after the first African American to break the color
barrier in major league baseball (in 1949 with the then Brooklyn
Dodgers), who not only had to be a superb ballplayer, which he was, but
also an exemplary human being (he was that, too) who could rise above
the inevitable attacks he would bear for the color of his skin. In the
last decade or so, archaeology has had a few sites come close, and one
that made it over the bar.

STORMY SHELTER

Meadowcroft Rockshelter is 50 kilometers west of Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, on a steep slope 15 meters above Cross Creek, a tributary
of the Ohio River. James Adovasio and an interdisciplinary team of
geologists, paleontologists, palynologists, and others began work in
this large (15 m wide, 6 m deep, and 13 m high), sandstone overhang in
1973. Intensive excavations continued at Meadowcroft for the next five
years, and by all accounts—including those of the site's harshest
critics—the work was superb. Adovasio has a well-earned reputation for
employing cutting-edge field techniques, and for being a meticulous,
demanding, highly skilled excavator, even in the stratigraphically
challenging setting of a rockshelter.²⁴

As a result, the excavations—sometimes done by razor blade to follow the
thinnest deposits—went slowly, but ultimately the team dug through 4.6
meters of sediment, divisible into eleven natural strata (Figure 22), in
which were artifacts, charcoal, and various features of human
occupation, mostly from later (Woodland) occupations (marked by pottery
sherds and early cultivated plants such as squash and corn). In the
deeper levels of Stratum II was a rich record of Archaic
hunter-gatherers, and beneath that, remains from Paleoindian times. The
stratigraphic sequence was anchored by fifty-two radiocarbon dates,
analyzed by several different laboratories, which ranged in age from
31,400 BP to the Historic period; the Declaration of Independence was
signed on the opposite side of Pennsylvania about the time the last
hearth at Meadowcroft was snuffed out. All but four dates are in proper
stratigraphic order, and the ones out of order are minor flip-flops in
upper, Holocene-age levels. Steno would have been proud.

[images]

FIGURE 22.
Excavations and soil sampling in the deep pit at the Meadowcroft
Rockshelter, Pennsylvania, ca. 1976. The white tags on the wall mark
individual stratigraphic layers. (Photograph courtesy of James
Adovasio.)

The pre-Clovis action is down in middle Stratum IIa, bracketed between
11,300 and 12,800 BP and which has produced an unfluted lanceolate
projectile point, and lower Stratum IIa, which has six radiocarbon dates
from 12,800 to 16,175 BP, along with associated artifacts (Figure 23).
These are genuine artifacts, too (about 700 altogether), and include a
broken bone punch, flake debris from stone tool making, small blades
(long and narrow pieces of stone), unifacial (flaked on one side only)
and bifacial knives, and gravers (pointed tools possibly used for bone
or wood working). The stone for these artifacts came from distant (or
exotic) sources in New York, Ohio, West Virginia, and Pennsylvania.

The average of the lower Stratum IIa dates associated with these
artifacts indicates a human presence at Meadowcroft around 14,250 years
BP. This is Adovasio's “conservative interpretation.” It may, of course,
be earlier still. But, skeptics say, consider the implications: 14,250
years ago the Laurentide ice sheet was within 150 kilometers of
Meadowcroft. At that close range, they say, Meadowcroft ought to have
experienced near-glacial climatic and ecological conditions: permafrost
and tundra, perhaps, or shy of that, a boreal setting with cold-loving
flora and fauna. Yet, there is no evidence for either. Present instead
in the Pleistocene levels at Meadowcroft are bits of wood and charcoal
from deciduous trees (oak, hickory, and walnut), along with the bones of
white-tailed deer, southern flying squirrel, and passenger pigeon. These
speak of a temperate environment, seemingly anomalous for this time and
place. Where are the bones of extinct Pleistocene fauna like mastodon or
sloth, or the remains of displaced arctic or boreal plant and animal
taxa?

[images]

FIGURE 23.
Miller lanceolate projectile point in situ in Stratum IIa at Meadowcroft
Rockshelter, Pennsylvania (Photograph courtesy of James Adovasio)

Certainly not in the lowest levels at Meadowcroft, but then hardly any
organic remains come from there. Nearly 1 million animal bones were
recovered from the entire shelter excavations, but only 278 bones came
from the lower reaches of Stratum IIa, and of those, just 11 could be
identified. Same story with the plants: roughly 1.4 million fragments of
wood, charcoal, seeds, and fruits were recovered. The grand total from
the glacial-age levels was a pitiful 11.9 grams.

That's a hopelessly inadequate basis to judge whether the anomaly is
real, or a freak of sampling that netted only deciduous elements from
local, complex boreal-deciduous forests (Chapter 2). Adovasio's team
sees no anomaly, attributing the absence of boreal species to
Meadowcroft's low-lying (260 m above sea level) and south-facing aspect.
Still, without an adequate sample the Meadowcroft paleoenvironmental
record cannot well support any interpretation.

Or perhaps, critics add, the radiocarbon dates are simply wrong, and
Stratum IIa is actually post-glacial in age? Meadowcroft is, after all,
in western Pennsylvania coal country, and skeptics—Vance Haynes foremost
among them—wondered whether ancient coal infiltrating the deposits as
dust or via groundwater contaminated the Meadowcroft radiocarbon samples
and inflated their actual ages.

Adovasio and colleagues counter that the closest coal to the rockshelter
is 800 meters away, and neither coal particles nor coal-associated
spores were found in microscope scans of the radiocarbon samples.
Besides, if there had been contamination, it surely would have been
noticed by one of the several radiocarbon laboratories that analyzed the
Meadowcroft samples—unless, Adovasio snarled sarcastically, one assumes
“a witless incompetence of astronomical…dimensions” on their part, which
he does not.²⁵ Moreover, if the samples were contaminated, the fifty-two
dates would not have been in near-perfect stratigraphic order.

Maybe, Haynes responded, only the charcoal from lower Stratum IIa sat in
contaminated groundwater and got proportionately older as a result.
Adovasio calls such a scenario “contorted, even fanciful,” since the
geologists on his team showed that groundwater never got closer than 10
meters below the deepest occupation surface at Meadowcroft. More
important, geoarchaeologist Paul Goldberg conducted an independent
microscopic inspection of Stratum IIa sediments searching for traces of
groundwater saturation or coal particles, but found no evidence of
either.

Haynes, dismissing the Goldberg study (though without explaining why),
said the chronological dispute could neatly be resolved if only some
short-lived seeds or nuts from lower Stratum IIa were dated, believing
they would be less susceptible to contamination. Only, he complains, his
“repeated pleas for radiocarbon dating of nuts and seeds…have gone
unheeded.”²⁶

Not exactly unheeded, more like emphatically rejected: “I knew,”
Adovasio writes, “that by Haynes's tortured reasoning, if I took a seed
from Stratum IIa at Meadowcroft and the date came back just as old as
the 16,000-year-old date from charcoal from a hearth, Haynes would say
it had to have been tainted by some soluble contaminant—yet to be
identified, of course. And if it came out younger than my older [16,000
BP] dates, Haynes would deem [those older] dates discredited, although
it is well known that seeds can migrate between horizons quite
easily.”²⁷ Adovasio figures he cannot win for losing. He might be right.

Round and round it goes. So far, Meadowcroft has cheated pre-Clovis
actuarial tables, with more written about it than any other potential
early site, save Trenton itself, an analogy Adovasio himself has drawn.
They are both, arguably, the most controversial sites of their times.
And like Abbott, Adovasio has aggressively carried the flag for
Meadowcroft, branding his critics “gnats,”²⁸ and producing to date more
than 100 published articles and papers pushing the pre-Clovis antiquity
of the site.

But there's one thing Adovasio hasn't done: issue a comprehensive, final
report on Meadowcroft. One is needed, as even he admits, in order to lay
out all the data in one place, including detailed descriptions of
individual artifacts, precise information on their position relative to
radiocarbon samples, and the context of those samples relative to the
stratigraphy. Then the archaeological community will have the chance to
evaluate it in detail. Until that moment, Meadowcroft may remain in
archaeological limbo, the exception that proves the rule that if a site
is not convincingly older than 11,500 BP before a pre-Clovis presence is
generally accepted, then it will not be any more convincing afterward.

EARLY AMERICAN ART?

The prehistoric rock art of the remote, arid caatinga (“thorn forest”)
of northeastern Brazil is rich, colorful, expressive, and in spots,
downright racy (some Brazilian customs, it appears, have prehistoric
precursors). It was rock art that drew Niede Guidon to Toca do Boqueirao
da Pedra Furada (“hole in the wall,” after an erosional cavity in a
nearby cliff), a rockshelter that covers a roughly semicircular area 70
meters wide and nearly 18 meters deep. Seeking to determine the age of
the art, Guidon began excavations in 1978 that continued until bedrock
was reached in the late 1980s. Her team dug through nearly 5 meters—and
as many strata—of sediment filling the shelter, now dated by more than
fifty radiocarbon ages, the earliest of which is greater than 50,000
years old. Two periods of prehistoric occupation were recognized: the
Pedra Furada phase, all materials predating 14,300 BP, and the younger
Serra Talhada phase, which began around 10,400 BP and lasted through
much of the Holocene.

The Serra Talhada phase is marked by distinctive, well-made bifacial and
unifacial stone tools fashioned, in many cases, of exotic chert. It has
extensive and complicated rock art, abundant ocher (a natural paint),
well-defined hearths, and easily detected living surfaces that preserved
animal bones and plant remains. Serra Talhada is unequivocally
archaeological.

[images]

FIGURE 24.
A quartzite cobble “chopper” from one of the deepest levels at the Pedra
Furada site, Brazil. (Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

Less so the older Pedra Furada phase, which lacks bone, wood, or other
organic remains, save for charcoal. Nor does it have the rock art,
unmistakable hearths, or the obvious living floors of the younger phase.
Instead, proof of its human presence rests largely on about 600 crudely
fashioned quartz and quartzite cobble choppers (Figure 24), scrapers,
and flake cutting tools, along with clusters of rock identified as
hearths.

Such wholesale differences between the two phases naturally make
skeptics wonder whether the older material is truly archaeological, and
not just rocks flaked and arranged by nature. Guidon dismissed such
carping, however, and for seemingly good reason: a 1993 doctoral thesis
by Fabio Parenti showed that the Pleistocene-age specimens possessed
flaking patterns diagnostic of human manufacture (these included the
removal of more than three flakes, edge angles less than 90°, and a
“logic” to the flake removal pattern). No small triumph that, and even
Nature, a journal that rarely notices doctoral theses, noticed this one.

Of course, we know the pre-Clovis dispute is littered with sites that
testify to nature's uncanny ability to mimic primitive human artifacts,
and trap even the expert (think Louis Leakey). Pedra Furada might be
such a setting. It is nestled beneath a sandstone cliff more than 100
meters high (see Plate 5). Atop the cliff is a 20-meter-thick rock layer
of densely packed quartz and quartzite pebbles and cobbles: a
high-energy gravel bar, frozen in time. At both the east and west ends
of the shelter are water-stained chutes down which rocks, dislodged from
the cobble layer by weathering and erosion, plummeted to the shelter
floor, occasionally swept along by “violent torrents of water” (Guidon's
words²⁹). At the base of the eastern chute there is a large debris cone
of shattered quartz and quartzite pieces, flaked by the impact of their
100-meter free-fall; beneath the western chute are potholes scoured from
the bedrock, one upwards of 3 meters in diameter, testimony to the
erosive pounding of cascading water and debris. Filling the shelter are
coarse sediments, pebbles, and hand-to head-sized cobbles, coming from
directly overhead. Not surprisingly, the pebbles and cobbles are flaked
to varying degrees. Clearly, nature's been dropping rocks into Pedra
Furada over tens of thousands of years. But were people?

As Nature said of Pedra Furada, seeing may be believing. And believing
“meetings of specialists on site, and formal debates, should take place
regularly if we are to establish an agreed basis for evaluating
evidence,”³⁰ Guidon generously extended invitations to proponents and
critics to visit Pedra Furada in December 1993. We accepted. The meeting
was held in Sao Raimundo Nonato, a dot on the map in the northeastern
Brazilian state of Piaui and the gateway to a beautiful ecological and
archaeological preserve, of which Pedra Furada is the centerpiece. It
was a landmark meeting: stimulating, intense, enlightening, and
sometimes downright uncomfortable, simultaneously and in several
languages.

James Adovasio, Tom Dillehay, and I were among the conferees (Figure
25), and we raised questions (later published), about the site
stratigraphy, its supposed hearths, and the 600 Pedra Furada-phase
artifacts.³¹ We were especially concerned about the artifacts. They had
been identified as such during excavations, presumably because they
looked the part, and then afterward were sent to Parenti for analysis to
see if they could be artifacts. Yet, these were specimens already
suspected to be of human manufacture. What was not at all apparent was
how much these specimens, plucked from a dense deposit of naturally
broken rocks, differed from those left behind.

No matter. The supposed artifacts certainly looked the part, though were
decidedly retro: more akin to stone tools hundreds of thousands of years
old than to what was being used around the globe 50,000 years ago. Looks
aren't everything, of course, and their crudeness might easily be
explained by the indifference of those who did the flaking, or the mean
quality of the raw material. Some of prehistory's most spectacularly
ugly stone work was executed in quartz and quartzite.

[images]

FIGURE 25.
James Adovasio (left) and Tom Dillehay (to Adovasio's right) examining
the witness block left unexcavated at the Pedra Furada site, Brazil,
during the international site visit in December 1993. Naturally broken
cobbles are visible throughout the witness block. (Photograph by David
J. Meltzer.)

Even so, many bore a worrisome resemblance to the naturally flaked
cobbles that today litter the surface beneath the chutes at the site.
Just how guilty nature might be comes clear on a visit to Pedra Furada,
as you crane the neck upward to catch a glimpse of the conglomerate
layer high overhead. How long would it take for a dislodged cobble to
make the Pedra Furada plunge, and how fast would it be traveling when it
smashed onto the rock-strewn surface below? The questions aren't
entirely academic: one instinctively steps back from the impact zone
while calculating the physics of free-falling rocks. From that height,
it would take a cobble just 4.51 seconds to hit bottom, impacting at a
velocity of roughly 160 kilometers per hour (100 miles per hour). Give
that rock a mass of 1-2 kilograms, and there's considerable force
involved, far more than a person fashioning a stone tool normally
musters. Cobbles would be flaked when they first hit, when they bounced
into other rocks after impact, and again when they were struck by
later-falling stones. Could such natural impacts produce the patterns
seen on the Pedra Furada specimens?

The conference hall in Sao Raimundo Nonato grew warm on this issue, even
before an electrical failure knocked out the ceiling fans. A deep
division emerged on the question of a Pleistocene human presence at
Pedra Furada. The divide was partly, though not entirely, along national
lines, but for reasons that have little to do with politics, and much to
do with paradigms: the question of antiquity looks very different
depending on the intellectual tradition from which one emerges. North
Americans tend to be more skeptical than most, but then we brought
Calico into the debate and have much for which to atone.

For us, it's the usual rub: it is not enough to show a specimen could be
cultural, one must also demonstrate it could not be natural. The Pedra
Furada team was ready for that. Parenti had gathered 2,000 cobbles from
the modern debris cones. All were obviously flaked by nature, fell in
the last couple of decades, and were well above the archaeological
levels at the site. He was pleased to report none exhibited the flake
scars or patterns observed in the 600 specimens from the Pleistocene
levels. Case closed?

Not yet. The issue is one of probability. As stone tool expert Jacques
Pelegrin admitted, nature can flake stones in ways that mimic the Pedra
Furada specimens, though he thought the odds slim, less than 1 in 100,
he supposed. For the sake of discussion, make them even more remote: 1
in 1,000, or 1 in 10,000. Yet, no matter how rare the chances, given
sufficient time and raw material (Pedra Furada had plenty of both),
nature can magnify even the slimmest odds to the point where such
geofacts occur in detectable frequencies. The shelter first opened more
than 50,000 years ago, and has been bombarded by cobbles ever since: by
conservative estimate, upwards of 10 million cobbles have taken the
100-meter plunge. That's a potential yield, even with odds as slim as 1
in 10,000, of roughly 1,000 geofacts. Nature, it appears, had ample
opportunity to produce the 600 “artifacts” that occurred at the site—far
better odds, in fact, than waiting for a monkey to type Shakespeare (the
analogy Pedra Furada's defenders invoke).

Guidon fired back, fiercely so, denouncing our assessment as
“worthless,” pointing out several errors of fact in our statements about
the site and their excavation methods (errors for which we were guilty),
but otherwise largely ignoring the critical question of whether those
were truly artifacts, except to say that “only one lithic flaked by man
is enough to demonstrate his presence.”³² Alas, were it only so easy in
a geological context such as this.

Work has continued intermittently at Pedra Furada, and recently included
one analytical surprise: thermoluminescence was used to date forty
burned quartz pebbles thought to come from Pleistocene hearths. These
results failed to confirm that the burning resulted from human activity.
Moreover, the TL ages ranged so widely (to nearly 162,000 years ago)
they raised the possibility the deposits had been disturbed and that the
stratigraphy was “much more complex than suspected.”³³ One can only
admire Guidon and colleagues’ candor. Clearly, more needs to be known of
Pedra Furada, its artifacts/geofacts, features, and stratigraphy. On
these, its pre-Clovis status will ultimately stand or fall.

BANKING ON CHINCHIHUAPI CREEK

Monte Verde is on the banks of Chinchihuapi Creek in southern Chile, 50
kilometers up the Rio Maullin from the Pacific Ocean. It was found when
local woodsmen, cutting back the creek bank to widen an oxcart trail,
dislodged some buried wood, mastodon bone, and a stone artifact, all of
which found their way to American archaeologist Tom Dillehay, then
teaching at the Universidad Austral de Chile (Valdivia). From 1977 to
1985, Dillehay and an international, interdisciplinary team of nearly
eighty collaborators excavated and analyzed the material from the site.

Monte Verde first leapt into archaeological consciousness one afternoon
in the spring of 1989 when a couple hundred archaeologists assembled at
the University of Maine for several days of wrangling over the origin
and antiquity of the first Americans. It was a tough crowd. The evening
before, it had sat quietly and largely unimpressed by a presentation on
Pedra Furada. But ten minutes into Dillehay's talk on Monte Verde, the
fellow sitting next to me (then, a hard-nosed skeptic—now, ironically,
the purveyor of his own pre-Clovis site) whistled softly in astonishment
and then said, to no one in particular, “What planet is this stuff
from?” I was wondering that myself.

The images Dillehay was showing of the well-preserved remains at Monte
Verde—wooden artifacts and house planks, fruits, berries, seeds, leaves,
and stems, as well as marine algae, crayfish, chunks of animal hide, and
what appeared to be several human coprolites found in three small
pits—were unlike anything most of us, who long ago had learned to be
used to stone tools and grateful for occasional bits of bone, had ever
seen. The site's unusual preservation resulted from a geological fluke.
Very soon after the people who camped on the sandy banks of Chinchihuapi
Creek departed, the creek was dammed, water backed up over the site, and
a water-saturated, culturally sterile, grass-matted peat deposit formed
atop the 600 m² area they once occupied—what Dillehay calls the MVII
surface (there's a much older MVI surface, but let's put that aside for
now). In that oxygen-starved setting, the normal decay processes
stalled, preserving that astonishing array of organic materials.

Excavating such remains is extremely challenging. They are saturated
with water, extremely soft, and easily harmed; worse, once exposed to
the air they rapidly dry, crack, and crumble to dust. In order to
minimize the damage—especially of fragile wood and animal
hide—Dillehay's team had to excavate slowly and without the usual metal
tools of the trade, using instead fine-haired brushes, small air pumps,
even their fingers. They had to minimize the exposure of these remains,
then move quickly to keep them saturated for safe transport to the
laboratory where, after 6-8 months in carefully controlled water and
chemical baths, the items could be permanently stabilized.

Those painstaking efforts were well worth it, for they revealed a site
rich in plant remains: parts of some seventy-five species littered the
MVII surface, many more than occur in a comparably sized natural
deposit, which Dillehay knew because he had dug where the site was, and
where it wasn't: he ventured 2 kilometers up and down Chinchihuapi Creek
to examine naturally deposited, non-artifact bearing sediments. That
preemptive shoveling helped muffle criticism that the site had formed
naturally by highlighting differences between natural deposits and the
archaeological ones.³⁴

About a third of the plants at Monte Verde were charred from cooking; a
quarter were exotic, imported to the site from the Pacific coast some 30
kilometers distant (including seaweed, the residue of which adhered to
many tools), from high Andean settings, or from arid grasslands up to
600 kilometers away. Coincidence or not, more than half the plants are
still used by the native Mapuche as food, drink, medicine, or
construction materials. The archaeological list includes charred and
uncharred skins of wild potato, along with burned and unburned juncus
and scirpus seeds that were found mashed into the cracks of wooden
basins. Among the most unusual of the MVII plant remains were a
half-dozen plugs of chewed boldo leaves mixed with seaweed, forming a
medicinal tea still used by the Mapuche to relieve stomach ills, colds,
and congestion.

Prehistoric chaw, we'd call that, and the plugs were found lying just
outside a wishbone-shaped foundation (roughly 3.9 m by 3 m) of sand and
gravel that appeared to be glued together by animal fat, and lined with
vertical wood stubs and scraps of animal skin, the remnants of a
hide-draped frame hut that once stood there. Inside the structure were
three small hearths containing a variety of exotic plants and stone
artifacts including quartz crystals. Fronting the structure were
hearths; a small cache of salt brought from the coast; a litter of
leaves and seeds; scraps of mastodon meat and bones; artifacts of stone,
wood, and ivory; and a large (30 x 40 cm) cut and scraped block of red
ocher. Monte Verdeans worked, ate, and took cures here.

They lived about 35 meters away in a cluster of roughly rectangular
huts, the wooden foundation timbers of which survived (Figure 26). The
structure was about 20 meters long, arranged like a row house, and
framed by log planks anchored by wooden stakes, which supported walls of
wooden poles that had bits of animal skin still clinging to them,
possibly the remains of mastodon or paleo-llama hide that once draped
the structure. String fashioned of juncus reed was knotted around many
of the wooden stakes, likely tent pegs for securing the hide cover.

The hut floors were high in nitrogen and phosphate, a sure chemical sign
of human waste, and littered with ash, grit, and flecks of animal skin.
The huts surrounded two large communal hearths, and two dozen smaller
ones, which were clay lined, contained ash and charcoal, and often had
been heavily scorched. In the muddy sand and clay floor alongside one of
the hearths was a child's footprint (one of three found) (Figure 27). In
this area, too, were traces of meals: more plant parts, as well as the
bones, tusks, teeth, and fractured ribs of mastodon; paleo-llama bones;
and the remains of fish, shellfish, birds, and even seaweed, coastal
algae, and egg shells.

Most of the MVII artifacts are wooden (digging sticks, mortars, lances),
while others are bone and ivory, and still others stone (some 715
specimens), including bola stones, cores, a polished basalt perforator,
grinding slabs, knives, unifacial scrapers, and spear points (Figure
28). Not all the stone pieces, even the majority, are indisputably
artifacts. Many are unmodified stones from the stream bed or distant
coastal beaches. But because they were found amid sandy sediments (this
was no Pedra Furada) and showed, as Michael Collins demonstrated, an
unnatural sphericity, they are accorded human authorship. Most of the
stone for the artifacts was locally derived, but over forty were made of
material from distant sources. And from the coast came bitumen, a
natural tar used to bind several of the stone tools to wooden and bone
handles.

[images]

FIGURE 26.
Timbers that served as the base of the hut remains in Area D of the
Monte Verde site, Chile. (Photograph courtesy of Tom D. Dillehay.)

[images]

FIGURE 27.
One of the three human footprints left in the muddy sand and clay in
Area D of the Monte Verde site. By its size (13 cm long), the print was
apparently left by a young person. (Photograph courtesy of Tom D.
Dillehay.)

[images]

FIGURE 28.
Two of the Monte Verde lanceolate projectile points. (Photograph by
David J. Meltzer.)

The assemblage from Monte Verde is extraordinary, all the more so
because of its age. The preservation of organic material made it
possible to obtain radiocarbon dates on wood, charcoal, tusk, and bone.
The radiocarbon analyses were conducted by several different
laboratories, a handy cross-check of the reliability of the results, and
produced ages on the MVII surface and its artifacts that ranged from
11,790 ± 200 to 13,565 ± 250 BP. The average was put at 12,500 BP.

That's certainly old enough to establish Monte Verde's pre-Clovis
credentials, but making matters more intriguing, Dillehay's excavations
in a different area of the site encountered a couple dozen more stone
specimens, along with three small, shallow, circular hearth-like basins,
each containing charcoal specks that dated to more than 33,000 BP. These
MVI deposits lack the spectacular organic preservation typical of the
MVII occupation, and though some of the MVI artifacts are unequivocal,
no one, least of all Dillehay, was quite sure what to make of this much
older occupation, since it has not been fully excavated. Understandably,
he concentrated his efforts and attention on MVII—as I shall here.

FROM RESISTANCE TO RESOLUTION

Monte Verde, like all pre-Clovis contenders, got no free ride: early on,
it even failed to make Morlan's 1988 list of the five “best pre-Clovis
sites,” wary as he was that the wooden timbers were naturally fallen
trees and the stakes merely branches. It took Dillehay more than a
decade of postexcavation analysis to fully compile the evidence, during
which time he published a series of papers and—in 1989—the first of two
books on the site. The volume presented the results of the
paleoenvironmental and geological studies, and descriptions of the
plant, animal, and other organic remains. Yet, it said very little about
the site's artifacts and architecture. This was deliberate. Dillehay
wanted to prove Monte Verde was an archaeological site by showing nature
could not have deposited plant and animal remains in that variety and
amount. It was a novel gambit, and one Dillehay admitted imposed “a
burden on the reader to understand and accept results not yet
presented.”³⁵ He was right, though the effort almost paid off. Almost.

But the burden of proof, as always, had to wait on the archaeological
testimony. Skeptics were willing to grant Monte Verde's
non-archaeological remains were unusual, but was their “pervasive
strangeness” (as skeptic Dena Dincauze put it) necessarily
archaeological?³⁶ That was something only the artifacts—slated for
description in the second volume—could resolve. Some were unwilling to
wait. Thomas Lynch, who for many years had carefully patrolled the
pre-Clovis border in South America, was not giving Monte Verde a pass
based on its plant and animal remains, or its promise of artifacts.
Indeed, what little he had seen of MVII's artifacts and features failed
to convince him that MVII was an archaeological surface. The few
artifacts that he deemed genuine might, he suspected, come from later
(Archaic) occupations in the area, and even the biface associated with
mastodon bones still dated to “essentially Clovis time.” Lynch dismissed
the older MVI evidence outright: he doubted its specimens were
artifacts, and thought it highly unlikely humans would camp twice in
this “wet and boggy” creek bottom 20,000 years apart (in point of fact,
MVI sits on the high terrace over a lagoon, not on the floor of the
creek).³⁷

Dillehay and Collins were quick to defend the site: Lynch was biased,
ignorant of the Monte Verde artifacts, and misunderstood the site's
geological and archaeological context. This was, they argued, an ideal
place to camp, and the closest Archaic site was at least half a
kilometer away, precluding any mixing of younger artifacts. Lynch didn't
back down. The accusation of bias was “baseless,” and more to the point,
he dismissed their rebuttal as disingenuous. After all, how could he
(Lynch) be accused of ignorance or misunderstanding if the evidence
itself remained “unpublished or inadequately illustrated”? (To which
Dillehay asks, that being so, how could Lynch be so stringent in his
judgment?³⁸). And to Dillehay's lament that only two archaeologists had
responded to his invitation to visit Monte Verde during the excavations
and see for themselves, Lynch growled: “If so many of us stayed away, it
was in good part because we did not feel free to go and make our own
observations.”³⁹

Clearly, much was riding on the publication of the second Monte Verde
volume, and what it would say of the site's artifacts, archaeological
features, and architecture. When it finally appeared in early 1997,
written by Dillehay and a team of thirty-two co-authors and weighing in
at a whopping 1,000 pages, reviewers were awestruck. Nature hailed it as
“one of the most persuasive and impressive interdisciplinary volumes of
any kind of archaeology for a generation.”⁴⁰ That wasn't hyperbole: the
volume bristled with meticulous details on everything from mastodon
bones and wooden lances to eggshell fragments and finely made strings;
it examined and analyzed evidence that could be seen with the naked eye,
and that which could not, such as the sediment chemistry; residues
adhering to stone, bone, and wooden artifacts; and the microscopic bits
of animal tissue. The effort was analytical overkill. Yet, overkill was
necessary, given the great skepticism facing this (or any) potentially
early site and the doubts expressed about Monte Verde's antiquity by
Lynch and others since the site's discovery. Jackie Robinson could not
be baseball player of merely average skill.

But would the second volume be enough to bring about consensus and—if
judged positively—establish a pre-Clovis presence in the Americas? A few
years before, following the appearance of the first Monte Verde volume,
I had put that question to Vance Haynes, the dean of the skeptics: “No,”
he said.

“But why not?”

“Have you ever visited a site,” he replied, “that looked just the way
you thought it would, based on what you'd read of it beforehand?”

I had to admit I hadn't. But was a site visit really necessary? Much has
changed since the 1920s visit to Folsom. Nowadays, professional
competence can usually be assumed, and archaeological fieldwork follows
well-defined protocols. More significant, much of the crucial evidence
emerges only in postexcavation laboratory analyses of radiocarbon
samples, sediment chemistry, artifacts, the isotopic composition of
organic remains, and the detailed spatial analyses of the artifact
distribution maps. Fortunately, those results can be evaluated without
having to look over the shoulders of those doing the analyses, and thank
goodness for that: who has time for a six-month watch in a radiocarbon
laboratory to insure dating samples are properly analyzed? A site visit
might lead one to reject a claim of great antiquity, but cannot
demonstrate one. Folsom was the first, and almost assuredly the last
site in which a visit fully and without ambiguity resolved a claim of
great antiquity. In the 1990s, a site visit could reasonably be viewed
as an anachronism, even irrelevant.

So why bother? One good reason: as Haynes said, what one reads of a site
and what one sees are often very different. Unlike researchers in the
experimental sciences, archaeologists cannot replicate a critical study
in our own labs, nor fully recreate in words and pictures a site's
setting and surroundings, the complexity of the sediments and
stratigraphy, the artifacts in the ground (if you arrive in time), a
measure of how difficult the sediment was to excavate, how easy it might
have been to miss potentially mixed deposits, or what the back dirt
piles look like (one sometimes learns an embarrassing amount about an
excavation by looking through the backdirt at what was missed).

“The next book's important,” Haynes said, “but one day on the site of
Monte Verde would be worth all the words they could write.”
Overstatement, perhaps, but no matter.

Dillehay's response? “Fine. Let's go look at it.”

And so Dillehay, Haynes, and I began organizing a visit to Monte Verde,
which took place in January 1997. A group of pre-Clovis proponents and
skeptics—including Dincauze and Haynes—armed with the proof pages to the
forthcoming second Monte Verde volume, traveled to the site via the
University of Kentucky (where Dillehay was then teaching) and the
Universidad Austral de Chile (Valdivia), both of which housed the
artifact collections from Monte Verde. Over a week-long, nearly
continuous conversation and debate reaching from North to far South
America, the Monte Verde evidence—detailed in the pages of Dillehay's
book; visible in the specimens laid out on tables in Lexington and
Valdivia; and seen in the geology, setting, and stratigraphy of the site
itself—was thoroughly vetted.⁴¹

The trip to Monte Verde was extremely interesting, educational, and
mostly enjoyable, though it also had its share of tense and downright
unpleasant moments. No one ever promised breaking the Clovis barrier was
going to be easy. Awkward as it occasionally was, that was a sure sign
the visit was doing what it was supposed to do: allow a careful
inspection of the evidence and a frank exchange of views. The one thing
the Monte Verde trip was not was a counterpart to the 1927 Folsom site
visit, but then it wasn't intended to be. The excavations were
long-since completed, and much of the site was gone. There were no
artifacts to be witnessed in place.

On the final evening of the trip at a quiet bar in the seaside town of
Puerto Montt, Chile, we had a long and sometimes rancorous discussion
that finally culminated in a consensus: all agreed Monte Verde was
archaeological and 12,500 years old (Figure 29). Everyone around the
table knew exactly what that meant.

[images]

FIGURE 29.
The calm before the storm: at Monte Verde late in the afternoon, January
1997, as the site visit was wrapping up (the author is on the far left).
(Photograph courtesy of Alex Barker.)

A couple months after our return, and after we'd had a chance to mull
what had been seen and said, Donald Grayson and I drafted a summary
report of our visit and assessment that was circulated for comment and
signature by the participants—if they accepted its conclusions. Everyone
had a chance to examine and reassess the Monte Verde case in the cold
light of day and well after any bruised egos or perceived twisted arms
had fully healed. To be sure, some of us had lingering questions about
the character of the Monte Verde artifact assemblages and their
interpretation (for example, does the MVII occupation represent, as
Dillehay suspects, a nearly year-round encampment?), but that did not
change our central conclusion about the site's age and archaeological
status. Everyone signed.⁴⁷

The statement was published in American Antiquity, the premier
professional journal of American archaeology.⁴⁸ In it, we urged others
to judge Monte Verde for themselves based on their own evaluation of the
evidence in Dillehay's two volumes on the site. Many did just that, and
the fact that a few (but only a few) reached different conclusions than
we did is testimony our say-so did not carry the weight that Lyell's or
Kidder's had 140 and 70 years earlier.

So, too, is the fact that Haynes has since had second thoughts, claiming
the site has only six unequivocal artifacts; those six, naturally, are
the ones that most resemble the North American Paleoindian projectile
points with which he (and I, for that matter) is most familiar.⁴⁹
Frankly, I think that's a red herring, ignoring as it does the wooden
artifacts, modified bones, ivory pieces, chunks of mastodon meat, the
strings tied in overhand knots around the wooden stakes, the exotic
plant remains, and so on. We can agree to disagree about those other
remains, but it doesn't matter: even with just six artifacts, we are
still left with an archaeological site that is 12,500 years old.
Haynes's second thoughts have not reversed the archaeological tide of
opinion on Monte Verde.

A VISIT TO MONTE VERDE

We came, we saw, we were convinced. And a few weeks after our return
from Monte Verde in January 1997, the Dallas Museum of Natural History
and the National Geographic Society (which co-sponsored our trip)
organized a press conference to announce our conclusion that Tom
Dillehay's work at Monte Verde had finally broken the Clovis barrier. It
was a moment the New York Times ranked with “aviation's breaking of the
sound barrier.”⁴² Heady stuff this—but The Right Stuff? I wasn't
convinced. We'd long been open to the possibility of pre-Clovis; most
thought the sound barrier unbreakable. However, part of the comparison
rang true: as Chuck Yeager had discovered fifty years before, when
approaching the sound barrier, a plane is badly buffeted. Now that I'd
experienced.

The visit to Monte Verde began in calm skies, when from across the
United States and distant points in South America participants assembled
at the University of Kentucky. That first evening Dillehay briefed us on
South America late Pleistocene archaeology. To those of us who work in
North America, it was an eye-opener: an archaeology with a scant
bifacial technology, few formal tools, little in the way of “big-game”
kills, and yet a gaggle of sites as old as Clovis—and a few possibly
even older.

The next morning we assembled in Dillehay's lab where many of Monte
Verde's stone, bone, ivory, wood, and soft tissue specimens were neatly
laid out. Dillehay and his colleagues explained their analyses and
results, but the talks were no match for seeing Pleistocene string tied
in overhand knots, a wooden lance with mastodon flesh adhering to it, or
a log mortar with wild potato skins pounded into it (dinner was meat and
potatoes?). There was give and take: in a room full of pros, there was
no avoiding it—or so I thought. Deep into what I judged a riveting,
statistics-studded debate over whether some rounded stones were
artifacts, I glanced over at the National Geographic writer traveling
with us. He was dozing. Maybe it wasn't so riveting.

After several long plane rides, we repeated the process in Valdivia,
Chile, with the Monte Verde collections housed there: more stunning
specimens, more exchanges. Finally, to the site itself. It was a
spectacular austral summer day. We examined the stratigraphy in the
walls of Chinchihuapi Creek, studied the different MVII occupation
areas, and visited off-site spots where Dillehay had tested the natural
deposits. We peered into a trench in the MVI area, and wondered if
people had also been on this spot 33,000 years ago. But no one wanted to
go there just yet: we stayed focused on MVII. Vance Haynes, as is his
custom, collected charcoal samples; Jim Adovasio, as is his custom, wove
string from juncus reed.

Since it was the last day of the trip and participants would scatter the
next morning, we headed back to Puerto Montt looking for a restaurant
where we could chew over dinner and all we'd seen. None were open that
early, so we headed instead for a local bar: La Caverna. I had a sinking
feeling. There'd been tense moments already. Dillehay was dealing as
best he could with a nonstop barrage of questions from a dozen of his
peers about a project to which he'd devoted twenty years of his
professional life. None of us had ever experienced that kind of intense
grilling. I thought it best if everyone was feeling satisfied from a
meal before turning to what I suspected would be a hard conversation. It
wasn't to be. Drinks were ordered, and the talk began.

And it was tough talk, lasting over two hours. We probed Monte Verde for
flaws, and hashed and rehashed alternative explanations. Maybe the dates
were contaminated by local volcanic eruptions,⁴³ perhaps those wooden
“lances” were natural, where exactly were the artifacts relative to the
dated remains, were the deposits at all mixed, and on, and on. Dillehay,
who'd spent years thinking about such matters and was unquestionably
more familiar with the evidence than we ever could be, grew increasingly
short-tempered, even insulting (which is not his personality). Tempers
flared, and at a moment when the words grew especially heated, Alex
Barker, the Dallas Museum's representative on the trip, gave an
ear-piercing whistle. Stunned silence. The museum, he announced, had
sponsored the trip with the proviso we'd seek some degree of closure
over Monte Verde. He didn't want to have to report that we only learned
“archaeologists don't play well together.” The tension broke, the
discussion continued. Finally, Barker called for a vote on whether we
believed Monte Verde was a pre-Clovis site. It was a theatrical ploy,
but I was not entirely surprised by how it turned out—though I was
intensely curious. Nor was I the only one. As I was furtively looking
around the table to see whose hands were up, so was everyone else. But
all hands were raised: everyone agreed MVII was archaeological and
12,500 years old.

Barker called for a toast, and then a dreadful slip of the tongue:
Dennis Stanford, perhaps looking at Jim Adovasio sitting across the
table, raised his glass and inadvertently toasted Meadowcroft, not Monte
Verde (I knew we should have had food first). Stanford recovered as best
as he could, saying we should all do this next year at Meadowcroft. Too
late. Haynes innocently chimed in, suggesting that if Adovasio would
date just one more seed from the deepest levels at Meadowcroft, he might
believe in the antiquity of the site.

By his own admission, Adovasio lost it: “I burst out in derisive
laughter,” and he then spat that “never would I accede to any request
[Haynes] made for further testing of the Meadowcroft site because if I
did he would simply ask for something else in a never-ending spiral of
problems…. Meadowcroft's antiquity was settled as far as most other
professionals and I were concerned, and that if any remaining skeptics
did not believe it, I could not care less. I then stormed out of the
bar.”⁴⁴

It was painful. Haynes looked like he'd been slapped. A pall settled
over the room. We'd been so close to getting through without an
explosion. The National Geographic writer sat intently witnessing it
all. I wondered if he was trying to memorize everyone's lines. I headed
for the restroom to wash my hands (it seemed the right thing to do). The
restaurant was now open, so we drifted out of La Caverna, much more
subdued than we'd been just five minutes earlier. The moment of triumph
had passed.

Ironically, Adovasio and Haynes were sharing a hotel room, and I hoped
they would have the chance to smooth over matters (I can't help it: both
are good friends of mine). But Adovasio got in late that night, and
Haynes left early the next morning. He was not flying back to the States
with us, but was headed to a conference in Cairo. He was gone before any
of us saw him.

In the weeks after we returned, Donald Grayson and I circulated to our
colleagues drafts of the statement for American Antiquity; a press
conference was held; we began to ponder the full implications of Monte
Verde. There was much to ponder, but the one thing I thought was beyond
pondering was the site's antiquity and archaeological status. I was
wrong.

After our American Antiquity statement appeared, archaeologist Stuart
Fiedel took our advice and examined Dillehay's Monte Verde volume. He
found errors, which mostly boiled down to discrepancies in artifact
location, numbers, and mapping. I was not surprised: errors are
inevitable in complex, multiyear, multidisciplinary research programs
and the massive books they yield. All of us who do such projects live
with that unfortunate reality, however much we attempt to prevent errors
from happening. But were the errors in the Monte Verde volume trivial or
profound? It was hard to say, and Fiedel's critique hard to swallow
since he gave all his criticisms equal weight, and blanketed them in a
patina of conspiratorial mistrust and accusations, layered with snide
remarks. He did his critique no favors.

Worse, instead of sending it to Dillehay prior to publication—it's
professional courtesy, and would allow Dillehay to correct errors of
fact—then submitting the piece to a rigorously peer-reviewed academic
journal (the usual procedure), Fiedel instead sent it to Discovering
Archaeology, a “popular” archaeology magazine (but not too popular: it's
now defunct). Dillehay learned ofFiedel's attack only after returning
from a long season of fieldwork. Discovering Archaeology's editor told
him Fiedel's piece would be published, and if Dillehay wanted to
respond, he had two weeks: the magazine was being hurried for
distribution at the Clovis and Beyond conference that fall of 1999. As
David Hurst Thomas observes, it looked like an ambush.⁴⁵ To those of us
also asked to comment under this looming deadline, it certainly felt
like an ambush. Fiedel claims this was not his doing: the editor assured
him the piece would not be published if Dillehay chose not to respond.
Right. The editor—knowing full well controversy sells magazines—failed
to mention that option to Dillehay, who responded as best he could in
the time allowed, then later produced a much lengthier reply for posting
on the Web.⁴⁶

So was this much ado about nothing? Fiedel's critique focused on the
“unambiguous” artifacts (projectile points, mostly): Where were they
found? How were they associated with dated samples? Why were there no
photographs of them in place, as at Folsom? Dillehay and colleagues
clarified their provenience and provided photographs. I could only shake
my head. Could a picture of a point in place make that much difference?
Adovasio had published pictures of a projectile point in pre-Clovis age
levels at Meadowcroft (see Figure 23 in this book), but where was the
groundswell of support for that site's claims to great antiquity?

The Clovis and Beyond conference buzzed with talk of the Monte Verde
critique, but it was clear what the 1,200 people in the hall listening
to Dillehay's response to Fiedel thought of the whole matter: when he
finished speaking, Dillehay was given a long, standing ovation. I was in
the back of the hall with one of the conference organizers when he was
approached by a furious Fiedel asking for “ten minutes on stage to
respond to this crap.” “No, Stuart,” came the reply, “you can write a
letter to the editor of Discovering Archaeology.”

And, indeed, the tide keeps rolling in for this site: in early 2008
Dillehay and colleagues reported further analysis of hearth sediment
from Monte Verde yielded half a dozen previously unrecorded species of
algae and seaweed (the latter still adhering to a stone tool), and
radiocarbon dates neatly affirming the site's great age. These new
results, as long-time skeptic Daniel Sandweiss graciously admitted,
“remove any lingering doubts about the antiquity of human presence at
that site.”⁵⁰ And as Dillehay observed, here was further testimony to
the importance of coastal resources in the diet and health of early
Americans.

Although Monte Verde is just a thousand years older than Clovis, what a
difference a millennium makes: to have reached southern South America by
12,500 years ago, the first Americans must have left northeast Asia and
crossed Beringia—16,000 kilometers distant—much earlier. But when, from
where, and how? And why is the oldest acceptable site in the Americas
about as far from Beringia as one can reach, with no sites in North
America demonstrably as old or older? Monte Verde has forced a sea
change in our thinking of the possible entry route(s) into the Americas,
the timing and mode of that entry, how and where we look for ancient
archaeological sites, and just who the first Americans were and from
whence they came.

COASTING TO AMERICA

Current geological evidence has the Laurentide and Cordilleran
obstructing the interior route into North America from before about
28,000 until sometime after 12,000 years ago (Chapter 2). That being the
case, no matter how fast one supposes the first Americans traveled south
from Alaska, they could not have gone fast enough to arrive at Monte
Verde 500 years before the ice-free corridor opened. This leaves a
couple of interesting possibilities: either they departed Alaska before
the interior corridor opened—that is, in pre-LGM times—or they traveled
south ice via a coastal route.

So far, no pre-Clovis sites have been found in the interior corridor
region. A very few are Clovis age, but most are younger than 10,500 BP.
And no sites here or, arguably, anywhere else in the New World, precede
the LGM. That would seem to preclude entry through an interior route—for
the moment (we have learned the hard way to be circumspect about such
pronouncements, since new discoveries often surprise and contradict our
received wisdom).

In the meantime, and in the wake of Monte Verde, archaeological
attention has turned to the Pacific Northwest coast to explore the
timing and viability of a coastal entry route. Opinion is divided over
whether in-migrating groups coming down the coast would have traveled on
foot or by boat. Since we've not found any late Pleistocene watercraft,
much of this debate rests on speculation and circumstantial
evidence—both for and against the possibility.

Pleistocene Australia, for example, even though joined during times of
lowest sea level to New Guinea and Tasmania in a land mass known as
Sahul, was throughout the Pleistocene separated from mainland Southeast
Asia by at least 90 kilometers of open ocean. That the first Australians
crossed open water over 40,000 years ago is taken as indirect testimony
that the first Americans could also have paddled the coastal waters of
Beringia and northwest North America. But the North and South Pacific
are very different oceans, especially during glacial episodes. No early
Australian on a raft had to contend with a northern ocean's dark skies
and frozen seas of winter, the treacherous ice floes and squalls of
summer, and year-round frigid water, where death by hypothermia would
come quickly when capsizing or falling into those inhospitable waters
(in any case, regular, planned, and repeated voyaging around the South
Pacific began only 3,500 years ago).

The first evidence watercraft were used in the North Pacific—the
occupation of islands off the Pacific Northwest coast and the hunting of
marine mammals—mostly postdates 10,000 BP, too late for initial
colonizers skirting south around the ice sheets (Chapter 6). Early
Americans made it onto a couple of California's Channel Islands, at the
Arlington Springs site on Santa Rosa Island and Daisy Cave on San Miguel
Island, as early as 10,960 BP.⁵¹ Even at the LGM, these islands were
separated from the mainland by at least 10 kilometers and had to be
reached by watercraft (see Plate 6). That said, they are too far south
to be relevant to the question of whether the first Americans got from
Alaska to unglaciated North America by boat.⁵² Nonetheless, based on
such evidence, scenarios are conjured of early American seafarers who
hunted and fished saltwater, and gathered shellfish and other intertidal
resources, and thus could have made it down the coast in short order.
That they may have, but whether they had boats to travel in remains
unresolved.

Walking (rather than rafting) down the Pleistocene coast became a viable
option once the outer coast was free of glacial ice (Chapter 2).
Although the terrain of the present-day Pacific coast is highly
dissected and inhibits movement, the now-drowned Pleistocene coastline
would not have presented such a challenge. For the moment, Occam's razor
points to groups walking down the coast—if they came via that route.

Forestalling the resolution of the by-foot vs. by-boat debate, and
indeed the larger question of whether colonization proceeded via the
coast, is the fact that much of that route is presently under water,
drowned by rising post-glacial seas. Yet, as noted in Chapter 2, not all
the Pleistocene coast was drowned: rapid isostatic rebound and tectonic
activity has uplifted segments of the Pleistocene coastline in Alaska
and British Columbia. Unfortunately for archaeology, dense temperate
rainforest hinders surface visibility along much of that stretch. These
challenges notwithstanding, in the last decade, Daryl Fedje and
colleagues (among others) have sought early coastal sites on land and
under sea, an effort enhanced by sophisticated geological and
bathymetric mapping and seafloor coring, along with efforts to predict
the most likely places to locate sites.⁵³ To date, none older than
10,300 BP have been found, but it's still early in the search.

IT'S ABOUT TIME

Monte Verde implies an arrival in the New World much earlier than 12,500
years ago, given how long it must have taken to travel from Beringia to
southern Chile. The initial round of speculation, and it was little more
than that, put the arrival at perhaps 20,000 years ago. It could have
been later, of course, or even far earlier, if one had to reach Monte
Verde in time to make the MVI occupation. But estimates of the timing
depend on how long it would take for colonizers to traverse the
continent. Chapter 7 looks into what we know or might infer about how
fast the first Americans dispersed, in light of obstacles or challenges
they may have met along the way, how readily they adapted to the diverse
and increasingly exotic New World in which they found themselves, how
easily they may have coped with novel pathogens and diseases, and how
they might have maintained their population size and reproductive
viability while living in relatively small numbers spread thinly over a
vast and otherwise unpopulated continent.

For now, consider this: hunter-gatherers can travel quickly within
familiar environments (especially ones that are relatively homogenous)
in which they know the plants that are edible and when they are
available, how animal prey behave, where rock outcrops to replenish
their stone supplies are located, where (or how) to find water, and so
on. Such knowledge is usually hard won over lifetimes and generations.
Yet, to the first Americans, this was a new, exotic, and utterly unknown
landscape, which became ever more alien to their Beringian experience as
they entered different habitats on their journey south. With every
ecological boundary and geographic barrier they crossed, and there were
many across late Pleistocene North and South America, the process of
finding water, food, and critical materials began anew. This was not the
Oklahoma Land Rush, with a known destination, wagons bulging with
homesteading provisions, and a strict timetable to meet. The process
took time: just how much, we don't know (more on this in Chapter 7).

SEARCHING FOR THE VERY FIRST AMERICANS

What we do know is that if people were in southern South America 12,500
years ago, sites of equal or greater age should be found between there
and the Beringian gateway. Some argue they already have been. In
Venezuela, projectile points similar to those at Monte Verde were found
with the skeleton of a young mastodon. Skeptics suspect the points sank
through overlying wet sediment, and came to rest next to the bones. If
so, nature is wonderfully perverse: one of the points rests snugly in
the cavity of the mastodon's right innominate (pelvic) bone. The
radiocarbon ages on the bone do not much help the case, ranging as they
do from 12,980 to 14,200 BP, with some suggestion the site may be much
younger. Taima-Taima's antiquity and association must stand on its own
merit, but having artifacts similar to those from Monte Verde raises the
possibility it is an expression of the same early archaeological
presence. However, until the age of Taima-Taima is pinned down, it will
remain in archaeological limbo.⁵⁴

As for pre-Clovis age sites in North America, there's Meadowcroft, of
course, though we still await its final report. In the wake of Monte
Verde, a flurry of additional pre-Clovis contenders have appeared—almost
twenty, by Adovasio's count—including the sites of Big Eddy (Missouri),
Cactus Hill and Saltville (both in Virginia), the localities of the
Chesrow complex (Wisconsin), Paisley Cave (Oregon), Pendejo Cave (New
Mexico), and Topper (South Carolina). Most of these have only recently
been discovered and/or reported, some are still undergoing excavation
and analysis, but a few—like Paisley Cave, which has yielded ancient DNA
from human coprolites that date to more than 12,000 BP—are nonetheless
extremely promising: the ages of the coprolites were determined by two
different radiocarbon laboratories, the DNA analysis was likewise
cross-checked by independent laboratories, the investigators carefully
guarded against the possibility of contamination (in the field and the
laboratory), and the mitochondrial DNA haplogroups matched those seen in
American Indians.⁵⁵

So far, however, none of these sites has been fully accepted by the
archaeological community in North America that, I think rightly, still
maintains a healthy skepticism toward pre-Clovis claims. It is a point
worth emphasizing: seventy years earlier when Folsom broke the
Holmes-Hrdlickian log jam, Abbott's paleoliths got no older as a result.
Merely because a barrier is breached does not mean it should be removed.
Put another way, reason to expect a pre-Clovis site should never be
mistaken for evidence a site is pre-Clovis. Each must stand on its own
merits.

All of which begs a question: do we need to find more than one site to
prove a pre-Clovis presence? A few critics insist on it. But that
insistence logically confounds the process of establishing
antiquity—finding a site that meets the necessary criteria—with the
process of discerning the broader cultural patterns of that period
(which does require multiple sites). The initial establishment of a
Pleistocene human presence in America required only one site (Folsom),
and there is no reason why that should be any different today. Indeed,
in 2004 V. V. Pitulko and colleagues announced the discovery of the Yana
RHS site in northeastern Siberia, which at 71°N and dated to 27,000 BP
was nearly twice as old as any previously recorded far northern site,
and had artifacts startlingly like those found in Clovis assemblages
(Chapter 6).⁵⁶ No one batted an eye, or insisted that Yana would be
unacceptable until replicated.

So why hasn't a pre-Clovis presence been better established in the
decade since Monte Verde? Within a decade of the discoveries at Brixham
Cave and Folsom, dozens of Paleolithic and Paleoindian sites
(respectively) were found. But the circumstances then and now are very
different. Both Brixham Cave and Folsom lent themselves to ready
generalizations about how or where more sites like them would be found
(Chapter 3). Equally important, the occupation at Brixham Cave was
preceded by many hundreds of thousands of years of Paleolithic
prehistory. Folsom, at the very least, came on the heels of a millennium
or more of a well-established human presence in the Americas. Neither
Brixham nor Folsom were the very oldest sites ever found in England or
America, and that's no surprise: the very oldest archaeological sites
are extraordinarily hard to find, and almost never the first ones
discovered.

Here's why: the number of sites produced in a given period or region is
the sum of many things, not least the size of the contemporary
population. Lots of people produce lots of debris and ample evidence of
their presence; if there are fewer people on the landscape, and they are
highly mobile and widely scattered, their traces are much rarer. And
certainly in the earliest centuries and millennia of colonization, large
areas of the American continent were thinly occupied, or simply
unoccupied. This is why we know so much less about the first peoples of
a continent than about a continent's first farmers: the latter were
numerous, more firmly rooted in place, and produced heavier artifact
“rains.”

We do not know how large the first group(s) of colonizers in the
Americas was, but it was almost certainly not large. We assume, in the
absence of any evidence but in keeping with studies of modern
hunter-gatherers, that minimally viable numbers for an initial
population might have ranged between several score and several hundred.
So one part of the answer to the question of why there were so few early
sites is that there were few early people.

The other part of the answer is that the odds of site preservation and
discovery can be slim. The number of sites recovered archaeologically
from a given period is determined by, among other factors, erosional and
depositional processes that help erase or bury ancient sites and make
them less visible; the antiquity of the period, older sites being rarer
because time has had longer to erase them; the search techniques used to
find sites, because if sites are deeply buried or, say, underwater on
the now-drowned continental shelf, they will be more difficult to locate
(of which, more below); and, finally, the number of sites relative to
the size of the area being searched by archaeologists.

The last point perhaps requires a bit of explanation, easily done by
comparing the colonization of North America with the colonization of,
say, any one of the scores of islands that dot the Pacific Ocean and
were settled in just the last few thousand years. In those instances,
the number of colonizers might well have been no larger than the group
that came to the Americas. Yet, when these seafaring peoples arrived on
an island, they had an immediate and devastating ecological impact: the
native, flightless birds were driven to extinction, trees were felled
for fuel and construction materials, and exotic plants and animals (such
as yams and stowaway rats) were introduced. Ecosystems changed radically
on the heels of human arrival, and given the small size of these
islands, those changes were sweeping and are usually highly visible
archaeologically (sediment cores, for example, show a sharp drop in the
pollen of native trees and a sudden rise in the amount of charcoal,
while the fossil record is marked by a precipitous decline and
disappearance in the number of bird species). Moreover, the size of the
area to be searched on islands is smaller than a continent by many
orders of magnitude, and thus the likelihood of finding the
archaeological “footprints” of the first colonists correspondingly
greater.

Not so in the Americas, where the area to be searched is a haystack of
many millions of square kilometers, and the needle a tiny number of
sites, left by people that could not have had a visible impact on the
hemisphere's ecosystems (though as we'll see in Chapter 8, some have
claimed as much⁵⁷).

Archaeological geologist Karl Butzer has observed, further, that because
of the converging circumstances of low population and destructive
geological processes, “recoverable” sites dating to, say, 30,000 years
ago, will be about ten to fifteen times less common than those dating to
11,000 years ago.⁵⁸ All of which implies that

 

•  people were likely present in the Americas long before their traces
appear on our archaeological radar screen;

•  the oldest archaeological site in the Americas that we currently know
of—Monte Verde—represents an early presence in the New World, but
assuredly not the earliest; and

•  earlier or the earliest sites of the first peoples will be rare, hard
to find, and may never be found.

 

If Monte Verde is pushing the limits of antiquity in this hemisphere,
then the likelihood of finding dozens or scores more as old or older
diminishes.

For that matter, and again unlike the circumstances of Brixham Cave and
Folsom, the unusual geology and archaeology of Monte Verde do not
readily lend themselves to easy generalizations about how or where more
sites like it will be found. The absence of confirmed North American
pre-Clovis sites raises the possibility that archaeologists haven't
looked in the right places or in the right way for sites of this age
(Albert Goodyear even admits he never used to excavate below the Clovis
layer; once he started doing that, he discovered the Topper site). It
is, for example, a curious but well-known fact of the archaeology of
North America that Paleoindian traces are rarely found in rockshelters
or caves, Meadowcroft being (once again) the obvious exception. Yet
around the world, from Arago (France) to Zhuoukoudian (China), caves
were used throughout prehistory.

Various scenarios are conjured to explain why Paleoindians failed to
inhabit North American caves, notably that they were moving through the
Americas at such a fast clip they hadn't had time to find them (though,
as we'll see later, they managed to find small and isolated stone
sources). Archaeologist Michael Collins has another idea: North American
archaeologists only excavate the younger (generally Holocene) deposits
in caves, and routinely fail to peer beneath massive roof spalls—as
Adovasio did at Meadowcroft—to see what traces may be found in older,
Pleistocene sediments (more on this in Chapter 9).

Indeed, there are many regions and settings yet to be searched
systematically for evidence of the first Americans: deeply buried late
Pleistocene surfaces, especially at the intersection of major rivers
(which were likely corridors of travel); bogs and wetlands; now-drowned
or uplifted coastlines; resource-rich forests; and especially the
60-kilometer-wide Panama bottleneck connecting North and South America,
through which the earliest South Americans must have passed. Searching
those settings will require more than the usual archaeological field
techniques: geological and geophysical remote sensing techniques will
become increasingly in demand.⁵⁹

WHO WERE THE FIRST AMERICANS?

Whatever may ultimately prove to be the antiquity of the first
Americans, Monte Verde has renewed discussion of who they were, and
where they originated. The archaeological “footprints” of those who
occupied Monte Verde cannot be followed back to North America, let alone
across Beringia or into northeast Asia (Chapter 6). The absence of an
obvious Siberian precursor has prompted some breathtaking speculations,
among them that the first Americans came across the Pleistocene Atlantic
from Europe, or sailed across the Pacific, possibly first setting foot
in South America. Those scenarios are highly doubtful (of which, more
later).

Monte Verde's decidedly non-Clovis look raises further questions of the
historical relationship between the people who occupied this site and
later (and northern) Clovis groups. Were they related, and if so, how?
Do they represent the same or different colonizing pulses? More broadly,
how many early migrations were there to the Americas; was it a single
event from which all subsequent groups were descended, or (as Hrdlicka
supposed) did it involve a series of separate migratory pulses? And what
might we say from this of the population history of contemporary Native
American populations: are they descendants of the first Americans?

These are not strictly archaeological questions, but ones to which
geneticists, linguists, and physical anthropologists have offered
answers. Indeed, few archaeological questions lend themselves more
readily to an interdisciplinary solution than that of the peopling of
the Americas.

