PREFACE

An Albuquerque Journal reporter was on the phone. “Have you heard of the
recent discoveries at Pendejo Cave here in New Mexico?” he asked and
then added, laughing, “Do you know what ’Pendejo’ means in Spanish? Our
readers sure do!” I had heard. I did know. And what I said
next—foolishly, in retrospect—nearly got me pummeled one night in a
hotel bar in Brazil by Scotty MacNeish: excavator of Pendejo Cave, grand
old man of archaeology…and former Golden Gloves boxing champion.

The fight was about a discovery as profound—or trivial—as fingerprints.
Not just any fingerprints: MacNeish came out of Pendejo Cave and
announced he'd found human fingerprints that were upwards of 37,000
years old, instantly tripling the then oldest accepted antiquity for the
arrival of humans in the New World (the Clovis archaeological presence,
dated to nearly 11,500 years ago). When the reporter asked what I
thought of MacNeish's claim, I replied, “You're not going to convince me
until you've fingerprinted the crew.”

Granted, it was a flip response. But I thought the point reasonable. To
persuade an extremely skeptical archaeological community to accept this
unparalleled discovery, MacNeish would have to demonstrate those
fingerprints were just as old as advertised, and not odd clay globs his
excavators had inadvertently imprinted and later mistook for
archaeological specimens. Extraordinary claims require extraordinary
proof. I thought I was being helpful. MacNeish thought otherwise. It
surely didn't help that my response led to his Pendejo Cave claim being
named one of that year's Albuquerque Journal Cowchip Award winners (I
don't think I need to explain why the Cowchip is not a coveted award).

When we bumped into each other in that bar a year later—ironically, we'd
both been invited to Brazil to examine another purportedly ancient
site—MacNeish swore furiously at me for accusing his crew of faking
evidence. Faking evidence!? Only after fifteen minutes of very fast
talking, spent just beyond the distance I guessed he could still throw a
punch at age seventy-five, was I able to convince him that wasn't my
point at all. I am not sure he ever believed me. I know he never forgave
me. But he did send me a reprint of the article he published on the
Pendejo Cave fingerprints, and even autographed it: “Finally got it
published,” he scrawled across the top, “in spite of you.”

Fair enough.

I framed the reprint, and it's prominently displayed in my
office—perfect witness to the heat that's generated in the search for
America's first peoples.

Not that this is anything new. Questions about the origins, antiquity,
and adaptations of the first Americans, although easily asked, have
proven extraordinarily difficult to answer, and have been contentious
since first posed in modern form in the 1860s. Those questions are still
the focus of research today, albeit using vastly different theoretical,
analytical, and archaeological tools; involving a far wider range of
contributing disciplines; and producing a stream of publications that in
the last several decades has become a raging academic torrent. The
intervening century and a half has witnessed multiple site discoveries,
conceptual breakthroughs, pivotal moments that have propelled and guided
research, and cycles of bitter controversy and grudging, short-lived
periods of peace. We've learned a great deal.

Still, in just the last dozen years much of what we knew—or thought we
knew—about the peopling of the Americas has been turned on its head by
new discoveries, new analyses, and new controversies, all of which cut
across multiple disciplinary lines. The biggest difference? Before, we
spoke of the possibility of a pre-Clovis presence in the New World in
hypothetical terms; now it is a reality, and it's a whole new
archaeological world as a result. In the scramble to right ourselves,
many ideas—some controversial, others outlandish—are being tried on for
size. It's the natural course of affairs in scientific change, and no
cause for alarm. Yet.

So much has changed that my previous book on the topic, Search for the
First Americans, published in 1993, is now woefully out of date (more
embarrassing: used copies are now selling for one dollar on the Web, and
the press that published it has folded; these two facts, I choose to
believe, are unrelated). At the time I wrote Search for the First
Americans, geneticists were only just beginning to peer into corners of
the human genome to use DNA to trace our collective ancestry; the
excavation and analysis of the Monte Verde site in Chile—then one of
several candidates for great antiquity in the New World, and not the
first among all—was just being wrapped up; Pleistocene geologists had
only glimpsed the complexity of the causes as well as the climatic and
ecological consequences of the Ice Age (Pleistocene), especially the
frenetic changes at its end, which were occurring just as the first
Americans were radiating out across the continent; and the now infamous
Kennewick skeleton still lay buried in the banks of the Columbia River,
yet to make its 60 Minutes debut with Leslie Stahl or become the
centerpiece of a costly lawsuit that exposed deep rifts within the
archaeological community, and especially between those who study the
past and those—Native Americans—who are its living descendants. These
and a gaggle of other developments have wrought a sea change in our
approach to and understanding of the first Americans. It's time for a
fresh look.

This book was originally intended as a second edition of Search for the
First Americans, but my attempt to gently insert new material, delete
stale parts, and patch up original but still-serviceable bits proved
impossible, and I soon gave up the effort. I had underestimated just how
much had changed—including my own thinking on many of these matters. So
I instead tore down each of the original chapters to their foundation
timbers, discarded unwanted parts (and even one unwanted chapter), added
several new chapters, and then rebuilt the whole from the ground up to
reflect all the changes in evidence, emphasis, and thinking. The basic
framework remains, and some of the load-bearing elements of a chapter,
if judged sufficiently robust, were allowed to stay, along with stories
that were just too good not to retell. Much of the new material is based
on articles I've published in recent years in a variety of scholarly
journals and books, and road tested in my classes, so it has been
through the wringer of peer review from colleagues and—perhaps a more
stringent test—has had to pass muster with my students, undergraduate
and graduate alike. The result is the book before you: more than twice
as long, far wider in range, more detailed in coverage than Search for
the First Americans, and because it supersedes and replaces the earlier
volume, deserving of a new title: First Peoples in a New World:
Colonizing Ice Age America.

WHAT THIS VOLUME IS…

First Peoples in a New World is my effort to explain the twists and
turns of the search for the first Americans, the controversy that has
long enveloped it, and what we've learned of who they were, when and
from where they came, and how they colonized what was then, truly, a New
World. Although I am an archaeologist, I am by nature eclectic in my
approach to scientific problems, and have spent a fair amount of time on
search and seizure missions behind interdisciplinary lines looking for
help from geneticists, geologists, linguists, and physical
anthropologists in answering stubborn archaeological questions. And
there are few questions more stubborn or that lend themselves so readily
to an interdisciplinary solution as the peopling of the Americas. First
Peoples in a New World is thus not just a synthesis of the intellectual
history and current state of the archaeological understanding of the
peopling of the Americas, it's also a close look at the evidence being
brought to bear by non-archaeologists to this problem—and an effort to
see whether we can all get along.

In fact, this book centers around two interlocking themes. The first is
what we know of the first Americans—about who they were, where they came
from, when we think they arrived, how many early migratory pulses there
may have been, and by which route(s) they came to the Americas. It's
also about the climatic and ecological conditions of the Ice Age terrain
they traveled and the diverse landscapes they encountered, their
adaptive responses to the challenges of colonizing an uninhabited and
unfamiliar world, the speed with which these pedestrian hunter-gatherers
moved across their new world, their effect on the native animals of the
Americas—and whether they had a hand in the extinction of some
thirty-five genera of Pleistocene mammals. Finally, it is about the
evolutionary processes and pathways they blazed, and the long-term
consequences of their prehistory.

The other theme is about how we know what we know about the first
Americans. It is about the methods archaeologists, geologists,
linguists, physical anthropologists, and geneticists are bringing to
bear on the problem of origins, antiquity, and adaptations (my
non-archaeological colleagues will, I hope, forgive my trespassing).
Because these approaches yield very different kinds of evidence, they
are not easily reconciled, nor do the practitioners in each field sing
in harmony. Hence, it is important to understand how they (we) arrive at
our conclusions, and just how reliable those conclusions might be.

Admittedly, talking about how we know what we know is not nearly as
satisfying as talking about what we know, but it's vital all the same,
especially in light of how this topic is often portrayed in the popular
media. Our contentiousness encourages journalists, science writers, and
filmmakers to pitch a story of the peopling of the Americas around
colorful characters, raging controversy, and outrageous theories—we
don't lack for any of these—especially if it involves that hackneyed
theme of an iconoclastic scholarly David fighting the establishment
Goliath to prove the revolutionary idea that (fill in the blank) proves
everything science has ever thought was wrong. The headlines fairly leap
from page and screen: “American Indians were not the first ones here!”
“Siberian hunter claims extinct Ice Age bears still alive!” And, for
conspiracy buffs, “The suppressed story of the people who discovered the
New World.” One doesn't have to make these up: the last is the subtitle
of a just-released book.

Those of us in the business are not without sin. We feed the beast,
holding press conferences to announce the discovery of the (latest)
oldest site in the Americas, make claims on camera that would never pass
muster in the professional journals, or give flip comments to reporters
about our colleagues’ discoveries (like, say, “Fingerprint the crew”)
that stoke the fires of controversy. Indeed, as I was writing this book,
a group of geologists and archaeologists launched a press campaign
proclaiming that a comet blasted the earth in the late Pleistocene, an
unwelcome ET that wreaked havoc on global climates, destroyed North
America's megafauna, and devastated Paleoindian populations. They might
be right, but it's customary in science to build the case and publish
the evidence before issuing the press release about the conclusions.

However entertaining the often-gossipy popular accounts of this
controversy—especially when it's not your ox being gored—they rarely
provide accurate or complete details of the science behind it all, or
its results. Having long been a participant in the pre-Clovis
controversy, and particularly its tipping point at Monte Verde, I can
easily see that commentary on it by individuals who view it from the
outside bears only a passing resemblance to what I saw actually
happening. In fact, not only do these err on what happened publicly, but
they also naturally miss much of what went on behind the scenes, and
those who put dialogue in our mouths to recreate events are usually
completely wrong.

Moreover, there is the inescapable fact that beneath all the tabloid
talk, there are legitimate scientific and substantive reasons why we
disagree about issues, why the same archaeological (or linguistic, or
genetic, or skeletal) evidence can and often is viewed very differently
by different investigators, and why there is ambiguity and disputed
interpretation. Challenging though it may be at times, to truly
understand the peopling of the Americas requires probing deeply into how
this knowledge is created, shaped, and put to use. Only with that
understanding is it possible to appreciate, despite evidence converging
from so many diverse fields, why questions about the first Americans are
among the most contentious in anthropology, and may remain so.

Finally, and though it may go without saying, I confess I am not without
sin. My voice has long contributed to the din over the origins and
antiquity and adaptations of the first Americans, and I have been
directly involved in disputes over key pre-Clovis sites, in contesting
the claim the Americas were colonized from Ice Age Europe, in debating
the role of Paleoindians in the extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna,
and in seeking to understand how hunter-gatherers met the challenges of
moving across and adapting to the vast, unknown, diverse, and changing
landscapes of Pleistocene North America

I have had my own ox gored.

I will nonetheless do my best to present the different sides of a
disputed issue, but the reader is forewarned. Caveat lector.

…AND WHAT THIS VOLUME IS NOT

This book is not about the Ice Age peopling or Paleoindian archaeology
of the entire New World: it's mostly about North America. This is so for
several reasons, not least that Pleistocene glaciation, climates, and
environments play out in very different ways in the Northern and
Southern hemispheres, and so, too, the archaeological records are
dissimilar. Even using the term pre-Clovis in South America is a
misnomer since Clovis fluted points, strictly speaking, only reach as
far south as Panama. Covering the entire hemisphere would double the
size of an already large book, and is unnecessary in any case since
there are several volumes that ably cover the South American ground,
leaving me free to concentrate on North America, which is the region of
my own archaeological field research and expertise.

That said, the South American record is not ignored. I examine
hemisphere-wide evidence from language, teeth, genes, and crania
relevant to questions of the peopling of North America, as well as the
South American sites that figure prominently in the pre-Clovis debate.
The latter are archaeologically relevant since the ancestors of the
first South Americans must have come via North America; we haven't a
shred of evidence to indicate South America was peopled directly by
ocean crossing. If the oldest accepted sites in the New World are in the
Southern Hemisphere—as is the case at the moment—then there must be ones
older still in the Northern Hemisphere. Only, we've not found them
yet—or at least not agreed we've found them.

I wrote this book for the general reader and not my archaeological
colleagues, who've perhaps heard quite enough from me on this subject
already. The difference is largely a matter of style rather than
substance, but also of coverage. The constraints of space and the
demands of the narrative forbade me from mentioning every important
site, researcher, argument, or claim (sometimes, I confess, I was glad
of it). Accordingly, rather than provide encyclopedic, site-by-site
lists of what was found where—the sort of thing only an archaeologist
could love—I instead highlight finds that help illustrate broad
archaeological patterns and adaptive processes. I provide details as
needed, but there's too good a story to be told here to become bogged
down in archaeological minutiae. To further ease the narrative for my
intended readers, I have gone against all my scholarly instincts and
omitted citations from the text. But I cannot fully shed my obligation
to give credit (or blame) for ideas and discoveries. Thus, I have
embedded endnotes throughout the book that provide citations to source
material, along with occasional follow-up comments.¹

Many voices will be heard here, save for an obvious one: those of the
descendants of the first peoples, American Indians. I do not omit
discussion of their traditional origin narratives out of either
disinterest or disdain, or because I think American Indians are
unrelated to the first peoples in America. I don't. Rather, it is
because my expertise lies elsewhere. Even so, I am acutely aware that
questions of the Pleistocene peopling of the Americas bear on
contemporary issues of Native American identity and ancestry, and of
“ownership” of the past and present. It's not a rhetorical question to
ask, as Vine Deloria has, if American Indians had “barely unpacked
before Columbus came knocking on the door,” will people doubt their
claims to the land and its resources? And I am sympathetic to the anger
provoked among Native groups by speculations by some archaeologists and
physical anthropologists that the Americas were originally peopled from
Europe, or not by ancestral Native Americans. Such claims cannot be made
lightly nor without unimpeachable evidence, though as will be seen, they
have been.

I also recognize that Native American views of their origins are not
always consonant with those of archaeology. In some cases—as, for
example, Deloria's piercing Red Earth, White Lies—they furiously condemn
it. There are archaeologists who agree: we need to downplay “solid
archaeological dogma such as the Bering Land Bridge migration route to
the Americas,” they say.² Here's my view: the past is large enough to
accommodate many different uses (as Robert McGhee put it), and I am
content to co-exist.

But more important, I won't be shy about casting a critical scientific
eye on what archaeologists and anthropologists know and don't know about
the peopling of the Americas. After all, it's only dogma if it's left
unexamined. That won't happen here.

Finally, a comment on my use of the terms colonization and New World. I
well understand the baggage that comes with both: colonization conjures
painful images of the displacement and destruction of indigenous peoples
and culture in America after 1492. The word itself is rooted even
deeper, in the settlements established in territories conquered by the
legions of the Roman Empire (from the Latin coloniae³). However, in the
2,000 years since the Romans, and in the centuries since European global
expansion, “colonize” has acquired a much broader and more neutral
meaning in the sciences to refer to the dispersal of a population or
species, and its settlement in a different place. It is in this
unencumbered ecological sense that the word is used here, and often
interchangeably with peopling or migration.

The term New World was, of course, one applied by Europeans to the
Americas.⁴ At the tail end of the fifteenth century, the American
continent was new. To them. It was hardly new to the Native Americans
who were here to greet them, for they were the descendants of peoples
who had been living here for millennia. Yet, to speak of the Ice Age
colonization of the New World is unquestionably appropriate in this
context, for when the first people reached America more than 12,500
years ago, this truly was a New World. In fact, as we shall see, Ice Age
America was new in more ways than just a world uninhabited.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Blake Edgar, acquisitions editor for the University of California Press,
has my thanks for asking—just as my previous volume with the University
of California Press (Folsom, 2006) was rolling off the presses—whether I
had another book in the offing. Here ’tis.

Blake, as well as Wendy Ashmore, Tom Dillehay, Donald Grayson, Torrey
Rick, and David Hurst Thomas read the entire manuscript, and provided
detailed and helpful comments. Daniel Mann and Stephen Zegura, geologist
and geneticist, respectively, provided constructive, detailed critiques
of chapters 2 (Mann), and 5 and 6 (Zegura), thereby saving me possible
embarrassment in venturing into disciplines not my own. I am extremely
grateful for the help of all, and hereby absolve them of blame for any
lingering errors.

As with all my work, I've been able to rely on friends and colleagues
who've kindly answered questions (or asked pointed ones), given advice,
supplied references or unpublished manuscripts, or otherwise rendered
aid along the way. For that I'd like to thank Michael Adler, Tony Baker,
Douglas Bamforth, Lewis Binford, Deborah Bolnick, Michael Cannon, Tom
Dillehay, Arthur Dyke, Sunday Eiselt, Michael Gramly, Donald Grayson,
Michael Hammer, Vance Holliday, Karl Hutchings, Brian Kemp, Jeffrey
Long, Dan Mann, Daniel Moermann, Connie Mulligan, James O'Connell, Nick
Patterson, Torrey Rick, Theodore Schurr, Vin Steponaitis, Noreen Tuross,
Richard Waitt, Cathy Whitlock, and Don Yeager.

For providing photographs or help with other illustrations, I am
grateful to Jim Adovasio, Tony Baker, Alex Barker, Charlotte Beck,
Michael Collins, Deborah Confer, Judith Cooper, Joseph Dent, Tom
Dillehay, Boyce Driskell, Steve Emslie, Michael Gramly, Eugene Hattori,
Louis Jacobs, George Jones, David Kilby, Jason LaBelle, Anne Meltzer,
Ethan Meltzer, Jeff Rasic, Richard Reanier, Torrey Rick, Richard Rose,
Mark Stiger, Lawrence Straus, Renee Walker, Fred Wendorf, David Willers,
David Wilson, Michael Wilson, Tom Wolff, and David Yesner. I am
particularly indebted to Katherine Monigal, who put her considerable
artistic and computer talents to work on many of the figures in the
book, and thereby saved me from having to get over my loathing of Adobe
Photoshop (Adobe Illustrator and I still remain on quite good terms).

Several years ago I was fortunate to participate in a series of
fascinating National Science Foundation-sponsored conferences organized
by John Moore and Bill Durham that brought together archaeologists,
geneticists, linguists, and social anthropologists to explore issues
related to the colonization of new landscapes—and not just the Americas,
but also Australia and the islands of Oceania. These sessions and my
fellow participants contributed immeasurably to my thinking about these
matters.

This book was written in the spring of 2007 while I was on a Research
Fellowship Leave from Southern Methodist University, for which I am most
grateful. My archaeological fieldwork and historical research touched on
here have been supported by grants from the National Science Foundation,
the Potts and Sibley Foundation, and especially (over the last decade)
by the Quest Archaeological Research Fund, generously established at SMU
by Joseph and Ruth Cramer.

In the fall of 1992, when I was writing Search for the First Americans,
my children were four and six years old. And so I wrote at my university
office to avoid the wonderful and welcome distractions of home. The
children have since flown the nest for their own universities far away.
And so I wrote First Peoples in my son's room—now converted to an
office. But I miss those wonderful distractions that used to be home.
Shadow the dog tried his best to fill the void, but it was just not the
same.

David J. Meltzer
Dallas, Texas, January 2008

1

OVERTURE

It was the final act in the prehistoric settlement of the earth. As we
envision it, sometime before 12,500 years ago, a band of hardy Stone Age
hunter-gatherers headed east across the vast steppe of northern Asia and
Siberia, into the region of what is now the Bering Sea but was then
grassy plain. Without realizing they were leaving one hemisphere for
another, they slipped across the unmarked border separating the Old
World from the New. From there they moved south, skirting past vast
glaciers, and one day found themselves in a warmer, greener, and
infinitely trackless land no human had ever seen before. It was a world
rich in plants and animals that became ever more exotic as they moved
south. It was a world where great beasts lumbered past on their way to
extinction, where climates were frigidly cold and extraordinarily mild.
In this New World, massive ice sheets extended to the far horizons, the
Bering Sea was dry land, the Great Lakes had not yet been born, and the
ancestral Great Salt Lake was about to die.

They made prehistory, those latter-day Asians who, by jumping
continents, became the first Americans. Theirs was a colonization the
likes and scale of which was virtually unique in the lifetime of our
species, and one that would never be repeated. But they were surely
unaware of what they had achieved, at least initially: Alaska looked
little different from their Siberian homeland, and there were hardly any
barriers separating the two. Even so, that relatively unassuming event,
the move eastward from Siberia into Alaska and the turn south that
followed, was one of the colonizing triumphs of modern humans, and
became one of the great questions and enduring controversies of American
archaeology. Those first Americans could little imagine our intense
interest in their accomplishment thousands of years later, and would
almost certainly be puzzled—if not bemused—at how seemingly
inconsequential details of their coming sparked a wide-ranging, bitter,
and long-playing controversy, ranking among the greatest in anthropology
and entangling many other sciences.

[images]

FIGURE 1.
Map of the Western Hemisphere, showing the extent of glacial ice at the
Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) 18,000 years ago, the approximate position of
the coastline at the time, and some of the key early sites,
archaeological and otherwise, hemisphere-wide.

Here are the bare and (mostly) noncontroversial facts of the case. The
first Americans came during the Pleistocene or Ice Age, a time when the
earth appeared vastly different than it does today. Tilts and wobbles in
the earth's spin, axis, and orbit had altered the amount of incoming
solar radiation, cooling Northern Hemisphere climates and triggering
cycles of worldwide glacial growth. Two immense ice sheets up to three
kilometers high, the Laurentide and Cordilleran, expanded to blanket
Canada and reach into the northern United States (while smaller glaciers
capped the high mountains of western North America).

As the vast ice sheets rose, global sea levels fell approximately 120
meters, since much of the rain and snow that came down over the land
froze into glacial ice and failed to return to the oceans. Rivers cut
deep to meet seas that were then hundreds of kilometers beyond modern
shorelines (Figure 1). Lower ocean levels exposed shallow continental
shelf, including that beneath the Bering Sea, thereby forming a land
bridge—Beringia—that connected Asia and America (which are today
separated by at least ninety kilometers of cold and rough Arctic
waters). When Beringia existed, it was possible to walk from Siberia to
Alaska. Of course, once people made it to Alaska, those same glaciers
presented a formidable barrier to movement further south—depending, that
is, on precisely when they arrived in this far corner of the continent.

These ice sheets changed North America's topography, climate, and
environment in still more profound ways. It was colder, of course,
during the Ice Age, but paradoxically winters across much of the land
were warmer. And the jet stream, displaced southward by the continental
ice sheets, brought rainfall and freshwater lakes to what is now western
desert and plains, while today's Great Lakes were then mere soft spots
in bedrock beneath millions of tons of glacial ice grinding slowly
overhead.

A whole zoo of giant mammals (megafauna, we call them) soon to become
extinct roamed this land. There were multi-ton American
elephants—several species of mammoth and the mastodon—ground sloths
taller than giraffes and weighing nearly three tons, camels, horses, and
two dozen more herbivores including the glyptodont, a slow-moving mammal
encased in a turtle-like shell and bearing an uncanny resemblance to a
1966 Volkswagen Beetle—or at least a submersible one with an armored
tail. Feeding on these herbivores was a gang of formidable predators:
huge lions, saber-toothed cats, and giant bears. All of these mammals
were part of richly mixed animal communities of Arctic species that
browsed and grazed alongside animals of the forests and plains.

But this was no fixed stage. From 18,000 years ago, at the frigid depths
of the most recent glacial episode—the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) it's
called—until 10,000 years ago when the Pleistocene came to an end (and
the earth entered the Holocene or Recent geological period), the
climate, environment, landscapes, and surrounding seascapes of North
America were changing. Many changes happened so slowly as to be
imperceptible on a human scale; others possibly were not. Certainly,
however, the world of the first Americans was unlike anything
experienced by any human being on this continent since.

Once they got to America, these colonists and their descendants lived in
utter isolation from their distant kin scattered across the planet. Over
the next dozen or so millennia, in both the Old World and the New,
agriculture was invented, human populations grew to the millions, cities
and empires rose and fell, and yet no humans on either side of the
Atlantic or Pacific oceans was aware of the others’ existence, let alone
knew of their doings.

It would not be until Europeans started venturing west across the
Atlantic that humanity's global encircling was finally complete. Peoples
of the Old World and the New first encountered one another in a remote
corner of northeast Canada around AD 1000.¹ But that initial contact
between Norse and American Indians was brief, often violent, and mostly
served to thwart the Vikings’ colonizing dreams and drive them back to
Greenland and Iceland. It had none of the profound, long-term
consequences that followed Columbus's splashing ashore on a Caribbean
island that October day of 1492.

Europeans, of course, were profoundly puzzled by what they soon realized
was far more than a series of islands, but instead a continent and
peoples about whom the Bible—then the primary historical source for
earth and human history—said absolutely nothing. We can presume Native
Americans were just as perplexed by these strange-looking men, but their
initial reactions went largely unrecorded by them or contemporary
Europeans. Over the next several centuries, Europeans sought to answer
questions about who the American Indians were, where they had come from,
when they had arrived in the Americas, and by what route. The idea that
they must be related to some historically known group—say, the Lost
Tribes of Israel—held sway until the mid-nineteenth century, when it
became clear that wherever their origins, they had arrived well before
any historically recorded moment. The answer would have to be found in
the ground in the artifacts, bones, and sites left behind from a far
more ancient time.

But how ancient would prove a matter of much dispute. In 1927, and after
centuries of speculation and more than fifty years of intense
archaeological debate, a discovery at the Folsom site in New Mexico
finally demonstrated the first Americans had arrived at least by Ice Age
times. The smoking gun?—a distinctive, fluted spear point found embedded
between the ribs of an extinct Pleistocene bison. A hunter had killed
that Ice Age beast (see Plate 1).

A half-dozen years later, outside the town of Clovis (also in New
Mexico), larger, less finely made, and apparently still older fluted
spear points than those at Folsom were found—this time alongside the
skeletal remains of mammoth. As best matters could then be determined,
these were the traces of the most distant ancestors of Native Americans.
Paleoindians, they were named, to recognize their great antiquity and
their ancestry to American Indians.

But were these the very first Americans, and if so, just when had they
arrived? A more precise measure of their antiquity would have to wait on
chemist Willard Libby's Nobel Prize-winning development of radiocarbon
dating in the 1950s. By the early 1960s, that technique showed that the
Folsom occupation was at least 10,800 years old, while Clovis dated to
almost 11,500 radiocarbon years before the present (BP).² This was
relatively new by Old World standards—humans had lived there for
millions of years—but it was certainly old by New World standards.

Better still, the Clovis radiocarbon ages apparently affirmed the
suspicion this archaeological culture represented the first Americans,
for the dates coincided beautifully with the retreat of North America's
vast continental glaciers that, it was widely believed, had long
obstructed travel to the south and forced any would-be first Americans
to cool their heels in Alaska.

As those glaciers retreated, an “ice-free” corridor opened between them
(around 12,000 years ago) along the eastern flanks of the Rocky
Mountains, forming a passageway for travel into unglaciated,
lower-latitude North America. Emerging from the southern end of the
corridor onto the northern plains fast on the heels of its opening, the
first Americans radiated across the length and breadth of North

America with apparently breathtaking speed, spreading Clovis and
Clovis-like arti-facts across North America within a matter of
centuries. Nor did they stop at the border: their descendants evidently
continued racing south, arriving in Tierra del Fuego within 1,000 years
of leaving Alaska (having developed en route artifacts that were no
longer recognizably Clovis). It's an astonishing act of colonization,
especially given it took our species more than 100,000 years just to
reach the western edge of Beringia.

Indeed, the possibility that Clovis groups traversed North America in
what may have been barely 500 years is all the more striking given that
North America was then in the midst of geologically rapid climatic and
environmental change. Yet, Clovis groups seemingly handled the challenge
of adapting to this unfamiliar, ecologically diverse, and changing
landscape with ease. Their toolkit, including its signature fluted
points, is remarkably uniform across the continent. That lack of
variability is taken as testimony to the rapidity of their dispersal
(that is, it happened so quickly there was hardly time for new point
styles to emerge).

That some of those points were found embedded in the skeletons of
mammoth and bison suggested an answer to the question of how
Paleoindians had moved so quickly and effortlessly: they were apparently
big-game hunters, whose pursuit of now-extinct animals pulled them
across the continent. Some took the argument a step further: it was
their relentless slaughter that drove the Pleistocene megafauna to
extinction.

ON DATES AND DATING

Throughout this book, time is denoted in years before present,
abbreviated simply as BP. In regard to deep geological time, as with the
onset of glaciation 2.5 million years ago, little need be said by way of
qualification. Such ages are, at best, well-rounded estimates derived by
a variety of geochemical dating methods, and are certainly accurate at
the scale of hundreds of thousands of years, which is sufficient for our
purposes. However, when attention turns to the last 50,000 years, the
period of particular interest here, we seek more precise chronological
control.

For that span, radiocarbon dating is the method of choice. It works off
a straightforward decay principle (illustrated in Figure 2): when cosmic
ray neutrons bombard the earth's upper atmosphere, they react with
nitrogen (¹⁴N) to drive off a proton to form radioactive carbon or
radiocarbon (¹⁴C), one of several isotopes (isotope = same element,
different mass) of carbon. Radiocarbon has the same chemical structure
as elemental carbon (¹²C), but a heavier mass (maintaining nitrogen's
atomic mass of 14). And like ¹²C, radiocarbon combines with oxygen to
form carbon dioxide (CO₂), which is then absorbed by plants via
photosynthesis, and which moves up the food chain into the animals that
feed on those plants.

[images]

FIGURE 2.
The radiocarbon process in schematic form (see text for a fuller
explanation).

When a plant or animal dies, its supply of ¹⁴C is no longer being
replenished, and the resident ¹⁴C slowly begins to revert back to ¹⁴N,
and in this decay process releases a radioactive emission (beta
particle). Immediately after death, ¹⁴C decay produces roughly 15 beta
emissions/gram/minute. After 5,730 years, half of the ¹⁴C is gone, and
the decay process yields roughly 7.5 beta emissions/gram/minute. That
lapsed period is called a half-life. After another 5,730 years have
passed (that is, 11,460 years after the organism died), another half of
the original ¹⁴C is now gone (we are down to 25% remaining), and the
decay process yields roughly 3.75 beta emissions/gm/minute. And so on.

Thus, by measuring the amount of radiocarbon still present in a sample,
one can determine the approximate date that the organism died. By
consensus, all radiocarbon ages are expressed as years before present,
present being arbitrarily set at 1950, the year the first successful
dates were reported by Willard Libby, the chemist who invented the
technique (for which he received a Nobel Prize). We set all our
radiocarbon clocks to years before 1950 to avoid the confusion that
would follow when comparing the ages of different samples whose
radioactivity was measured at different times (e.g., 1950 vs. 2000).

Radioactivity is a statistically random process. When it's measured, the
result is an estimate of the average amount of ¹⁴C in the sample, with
an accompanying standard deviation to show the estimated error (the true
value should fall within one standard deviation 68% of the time). A date
of 10,130 ± 60 BP means that the estimated age of the sample based on
the mean of the emissions was 10,130 years, and the chances are two out
of three that the true age lies between 10,070 and 10,190 BP.

Theoretically, radiocarbon decay takes place until all the ¹⁴C is gone
from a sample—and that takes about ten half-lives. In principle we
should be able to date material that old, but problems of preservation,
the difficulty of detecting the tiniest amounts of ¹⁴C, and the
potential for contamination of ancient samples, put the present reliable
upper limit of radiocarbon dating at about 50,000 years.

In terms of detection, measuring the amount of ¹⁴C in a sample can be
done in one of two ways: the conventional decay-counting method is to
prepare a sample as a liquid or a gas, put it in a radioactive counter,
and wait for beta emissions to happen. Older samples with less ¹⁴C
obviously have fewer and more widely spaced beta emissions, and
obtaining a statistically reliable count of them can take days, weeks,
and sometimes months.

The alternative technique, Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) dating,
uses particle accelerators to count ¹⁴C atoms directly by sending a
sample at high speeds around a circular or oval particle accelerator.
The lighter ¹²C atoms can take the tight turns; the heavier ¹⁴C atoms
can't and fly off the molecular racetrack and crash into a strategically
placed mass spectrometer, which counts the number of atoms. AMS dating
takes only minutes or hours, not days or weeks, and standard errors are
often less than fifty years. Best of all, because atoms are counted
directly, large samples are no longer necessary. Prior to the advent of
AMS dating, approximately 5 grams of carbon were required; now, it is on
the order of 1 milligram. That's the difference between needing the
entire limb bone of a bison, as opposed to the single tooth of a rodent.

Since AMS dating became available in the 1980s, it has greatly expanded
our ability to date sites. But radiocarbon dating is not without
complications, especially because the amount of radiocarbon in the
atmosphere and ocean has varied over time. In effect, we cannot assume
that all plants and animals over time started with the same amount. That
variation is driven by how much radiocarbon is produced in the upper
atmosphere, which is largely a function of changing amounts of neutrons
bombarding the atmosphere at a given time (blame the sun for that), and
changes in the relative amount of CO₂ stored in the atmosphere versus
the ocean. Speed up or slow down how much CO₂ is squirreled away in the
deep ocean, and one's radiocarbon-dated sample might have higher (or
lower) amounts of ¹⁴C—not because the sample is younger (or older), but
because when it formed, the atmosphere had more (or less) ¹⁴C to absorb.

To control for this variation, radiocarbon measurements are calibrated
against objects whose ages are precisely known, such as the growth rings
of a tree. Simplifying a bit: a tree adds one ring every year, and since
most years differ from one to the next in rainfall and temperature, the
rings are often different widths (wide and light colored if it's a good
growth year, dark and narrow if not). The ring pattern becomes a
fingerprint for a particular period in time. And like fingerprints, no
two periods are exactly alike. By pushing the tree ring pattern back in
time—thanks to some well-preserved and long-lived trees from the
American Southwest, Ireland, and Germany (along with well-preserved wood
specimens from archaeological sites)—a tree ring sequence has been
compiled for the last 12,410 years.

By radiocarbon dating a specific tree ring of known age, one can measure
how far the radiocarbon age diverges from the true age, making it
possible to calibrate the radiocarbon result to bring it into line with
a calendar age. When one sees an age listed as “cal BP,” one is in the
presence of a calibrated age.³

Unfortunately, the period of greatest interest to the study of the first
Americans—the late Pleistocene—was also a window of geological time
during which there were unusually rapid changes in ocean circulation
(for reasons explained in Chapter 2), causing atmospheric ¹⁴C to yo-yo.
As a result, the radiocarbon clock at times ran too fast or too slow,
and so a single radiocarbon age from this time period often corresponds
to more than one calibrated age.⁴

[images]

Because calibrating radiocarbon ages for this time period is neither
straightforward nor certain,⁵ calibrated ages are not used here;
instead, all ages are given in radiocarbon years BP. Although this can
mean a slight loss of chronological precision, that won't particularly
matter since I am, for the most part, speaking of ages in general. At
some point in the future, calibration of radiocarbon ages in this window
of time will be more precise, and then we can make the switch. Until
then, using radiocarbon years BP has the ancillary benefit of making
them comparable to the vast bulk of the literature on the Pleistocene
and on the first Americans, and so will cause less confusion for those
who wish to look into that literature.

One can, of course, convert the radiocarbon years given here to
calibrated years. Readers can try this at home, either using web-based
programs such as CALIB (http://calib.qub.ac.uk/calib/), or by
downloading calibration share-ware such as OxCal
(http://c14.arch.ox.ac.uk/oxcal.php). I provide in the accompanying
table a set of radiocarbon-to-calendar age calibrations at 500-year
intervals (with one exception) covering the period from 18,000-7400 BP.
These were calculated using OxCal 3.10.⁶ These are just rough cuts and
imply a more straightforward relationship between radiocarbon and
calendar years than actually exists. Real calibration is a complicated
and messy business, especially for the late Pleistocene.

EARLIER THAN WE THOUGHT?

The idea the first Americans were highly mobile, wide-ranging, big-game
hunters, whose arrival was tied to the final rhythms of Pleistocene
glaciation, made perfect sense. For a time. But there were always
nagging doubts, not least the persistent claims of a pre-Clovis presence
in the Americas. As more archaeologists took to the field in the 1960s
and 1970s, perhaps driven (more than they might care to admit) by the
chance of finding America's oldest site, every field season promised a
pre-Clovis contender. Some were heralded with great fanfare: the
legendary Louis Leakey, fresh from his triumph at Olduvai Gorge, flew to
California to proclaim the Calico site to be middle Pleistocene in age
(several hundred thousand years old). Unfortunately, its supposed
artifacts—pulled from massive gravel mudflow deposits—proved
indistinguishable from the millions of naturally broken stones the
site's excavators burrowed through and tossed aside in great piles,
still visible on final approach to Los Angeles International airport.

Other pre-Clovis claims were made by lesser mortals, but in all cases
the result was the same: a purportedly ancient site burst on the scene
with great promise, only to quickly tumble down what I came to call the
pre-Clovis credibility decay curve, wherein the more that was learned
about a site—for example, that its supposed artifacts were likely
naturally flaked stone, or that the dating technique was experimental
and unreliable, or that its deposits were so hopelessly mixed that the
allegedly ancient artifacts were found alongside discarded beer cans—the
fewer the archaeologists there were willing to believe it.

Dozens, even scores of sites failed to withstand critical scrutiny.
There were so many false alarms archaeologists grew skeptical, even
cynical, about the possibility of pre-Clovis. And we have long
memories—it's part of our business, after all. The response may not have
been commendable, but it was certainly understandable, particularly in
light of the fact that once artifacts are out of the ground, they can
never again be seen in their original context. In effect, we “destroy”
aspects of our data in the process of recovering it, and because our
sites cannot be grown in a petri dish in a lab, replication and
confirmation of a controversial claim is no easy task and independent
experiments to check results are nigh on impossible (archaeology may not
be a ‘hard’ science, though it can be a difficult one all the same).

Pre-Clovis proponents cried foul, claiming the demands made of their
sites and evidence were unfair, their work chronically underfunded, and
their task overdemanding. Critics replied with a sneer that those same
demands were met easily enough at Africa's and Australia's earliest
sites, and perhaps the proponents’ eagerness to find pre-Clovis sites
marked a basic flaw in the motivational structure of American academia.
Bystanders wisely kept their heads down and declared neutrality. Opinion
quickly outran and outweighed the meager facts, and in science
disagreement moves in quickly to fill the void between fact and opinion.
So controversy grew.

All of this was testimony, cynics smirked, that academic battles are so
ferocious because the stakes are so low.

The cynics are partly right. Knowing that the first Americans may have
arrived 14,250 years ago, as suggested by artifacts deep within
Meadowcroft Rockshelter, Pennsylvania, only tells us American prehistory
is a couple of thousand years older than we used to think. In the grand
scheme of the last 6 million years of human evolutionary history, that
hardly matters. People could have arrived in the Americas tens of
thousands of years earlier still, and it would not radically alter our
understanding of human evolution (though if they came here hundreds of
thousands of years ago, the ante is upped considerably—but the odds that
happened are vanishingly small).

Nonetheless, there is more here than an academic turf war. Hanging in
the balance is an understanding of when, how, how fast, and under what
conditions hunter-gatherers can colonize a rich and empty continent;
insight into the population and biological history of New World peoples;
a gauge of the speed with which the descendants of the first Americans
domesticated a cornucopia of plants (some as early as 10,000 years ago)
and became the builders of the complex civilizations here when Europeans
arrived; a better and more precise calibration of the rates of genetic,
linguistic, and skeletal change in populations over that time; and most
unexpectedly, a deeper understanding of the often-tragic historical
events that unfolded in the wake of the Europeans’ arrival on the shores
of what they mistakenly, if self-righteously, proclaimed a New World.

As the peopling controversy deepened, support for pre-Clovis got a boost
from an unexpected quarter. Starting in the late 1980s, molecular
biologists and human geneticists began to piece together histories of
modern American Indians from their mitochondrial DNA (which is inherited
mother to child) and from DNA in the non-recombining portion of the Y
chromosome (inherited father to son). By determining the genetic
distance between modern Asians and Native Americans, and assuming that
distance marks the time elapsed since they were once part of the same
gene pool, geneticists have a molecular clock by which they can reckon
the moment the ancestors of these groups split from one another. By some
estimates, it was upwards of 40,000 years ago.

The linguists spoke up as well. There were an estimated 1,000 American
Indian languages spoken in historic times. If all those evolved from a
single ancestral tongue, they argued, then the time elapsed since those
first speakers arrived in the New World might be as much as 50,000
years. The Clovis chronology, one linguist proclaimed, was simply in
“the wrong ballpark.” Although geneticists and linguists were happy to
go where right-thinking archaeologists feared to tread, they could not
prove the existence of pre-Clovis. Neither genes nor languages can be
dated: only archaeological materials can.

Then the site of Monte Verde, Chile, excavated and analyzed by Tom
Dillehay, came along. Monte Verde is an extraordinary locality, and what
makes it so is that soon after this creek-side spot was abandoned, the
remains left behind were submerged and ultimately buried in waterlogged
peat, thereby stalling the usual decay processes and preserving a
stunning array of organic items rarely seen archaeologically. These
included wooden artifacts; planks used in hut construction; burned,
broken, and split mastodon bones and ivory, along with pieces of its
meat and hide, some still stuck to the wood timbers, the apparent
remnants of coverings that once draped over the huts; and Juncus reed
string wrapped around wooden stakes (Figure 3). There were also human
footprints; a wide range of plants, some exotic, others charred, still
others apparently well chewed, as well as a complement of stone
artifacts. All of which dated to 12,500 years ago.

At Dillehay's invitation, a group of Paleoindian experts visited Monte
Verde in January 1997, having studied in advance the 1,000 pages of his
massive, soon-to-be-published second and final volume on the site. We
came away convinced of its pre-Clovis antiquity. This was news even the
New York Times deemed fit to print.

Although just 1,000 years older than Clovis, Monte Verde's distance
(approximately 16,000 km) from the Beringian entryway and its decidedly
non-Clovis look, raises a flurry of questions about who the first
Americans were, where they came from, what triggered their migration,
when they crossed Beringia, how they came south from Alaska (given the
ice-free corridor would not be open until after they had arrived in
South America), whether Monte Verde and Clovis represent parts of the
same colonizing pulse, how many migratory pulses there were to America
in Pleistocene times, how and how fast the first Americans traversed the
continent, and why (at the moment at least) the oldest site in the New
World is about as far from Beringia as one can reach, with no sites in
between as old or older.

[images]

FIGURE 3.
Two of the more than eighty “tent stakes” found at the Monte Verde site.
These stakes have flattened heads from being pounded into the ground,
were set behind timbers hewn from a different kind of wood, and had
wrappings of string made from a third type of plant (Juncus reed).
(Photograph courtesy of Tom Dillehay.)

The good news is we have plenty of answers to all these questions. The
bad news is we cannot tell which answers are right. But I'll try to sift
through what we know and don't, and what we can say or not.

TRACING FIRST PEOPLES

The chapters that follow explore the origins, antiquity, and adaptations
of the first Americans. When they arrived, which at the very least was
by 12,500 years ago, the world was still in the grip of an Ice Age, and
North America was a vastly different place than it is today. Chapter 2
sets that stage. It explores the causes of Ice Ages in the intricate
links between changes in the earth's orbit, solar radiation, ocean
circulation and salinity, and greenhouse gasses such as carbon dioxide
(CO₂), and their consequences, not least of which were the immense ice
sheets of higher-latitude North America (as well as at higher elevations
in lower latitudes). These were glaciers large enough to have bulldozed
landscapes, changed the course of rivers (including the Missouri and
Mississippi), altered atmospheric circulation (creating the paradox of
Ice Age winters that in places were no colder and possibly even warmer
than those of the present), and frozen so much water on land that sea
levels fell worldwide, creating land bridges across which people could
walk from one hemisphere to another.

South of the vast continental ice sheets and beyond their immediate
refrigerating effects, North America experienced climates and
environments unlike any at present, comprised of complex plant and
animal communities that were changing dramatically, or in some cases
heading toward extinction. The first Americans were there to witness and
experience some of those changes, as well as the end of the Ice Age,
which refused to die quietly but instead went out in a rush of
floodwaters of Noachian proportions and one brief, if failed attempt to
reassert its glacial dominance.

But just when did the first Americans arrive? During the most recent
glacial cycle, or earlier still? The next few chapters range widely over
the efforts, historical and contemporary, archaeological and
non-archaeological, to establish the origins and antiquity of the first
Americans. This is a problem that's been around, as detailed in Chapter
3, for well over a century, and has been disputed almost from the very
moment it was first posed. The initial round of controversy was
prolonged in part because archaeology itself was in its adolescence; it
hadn't well-established methods and techniques for finding, evaluating,
or reliably determining the age of ancient artifacts or sites; and it
was being tugged in different directions by practitioners who wanted to
craft the discipline in their own images.

Demonstrating people had arrived in the Americas by Ice Age times came
only after better chronological markers were established, and when a
particular kind of site was discovered, namely a kill site—as at
Folsom—in which the prey was an extinct Pleistocene animal. If the
animal lived during the Ice Age, then so did the people who killed it.
This enabled a site's antiquity to be assessed in the ground, a
necessity in those pre-radiocarbon dating years. That demonstration at
Folsom also taught archaeologists what to look for and how to look for
Pleistocene-age sites. Soon dozens more such sites were found, including
Clovis, which not only helped paint a picture of North American
Paleoindians, but also had the more subtle consequence of creating
expectations that guided much of the archaeological research into the
Paleoindian period over the ensuing decades.

One of those expectations—that Clovis sites were oldest and therefore
represented the first Americans—quickly became fact, and as Chapter 4
shows, sparked a decades-long effort to prove otherwise. The criteria
for demonstrating a pre-Clovis presence were straightforward in
principle—one needed unmistakable artifacts in a secure geological
context with reliable ages from radiocarbon or some other dating
technique—but they proved extraordinarily difficult to meet in practice.
Nature was partly to blame: it has the mischievous ability to break
stone and bone in ways that neatly mimic primitive human artifacts. But
we archaeologists shoulder part of the blame for not recognizing
nature's deviousness, or for using unproven dating techniques, or for
misreading geological circumstances. Even so, much was learned in the
decades of contentious debate over pre-Clovis and how best to meet the
standards of proof—which were finally met at Monte Verde in 1997.

How resolution came about was in some ways reminiscent of events that
took place seventy years earlier at Folsom—including the venerable
tradition of a site visit by outside experts—but in important ways, the
events were very different, not least in the way that Monte Verde gave
fewer clues of how to find sites like it. But it has certainly
redirected where we look. In Monte Verde's wake, archaeological
attention has shifted to the coast as a possible entry route, which was
available for passage well before the ice-free corridor opened. It has
also redoubled efforts to find sites of comparable age here in North
America, but so far these have proven elusive. It leaves us wondering:
why are pre-Clovis sites so hard to find, and how do they relate to
Clovis? Are they different parts of the same colonizing pulse into the
New World?

Archaeology speaks directly to questions of when and where, and
sometimes how, the first people came to the Americas, but struggles
mightily with the question of who these people were, in tracing their
population histories (forward or backward) or in ascertaining their
relationship to contemporary American Indians. It is no easy task to
measure the historical affinity between groups widely separated in space
and time from the manner in which they crafted their stone tools.
Accordingly, Chapter 5 turns to DNA, language, teeth, and skeletal
remains to attempt to fill the gap between the most ancient and modern
Native Americans. By grouping together similarities in the words and
grammar of many hundreds of native languages, and by examining the
diversity and patterning in mitochondrial and Y chromosome DNA, it
should in principle be possible to unravel the complex relationships
among American Indians, and then go the next step to infer the number
and timing (using molecular clocks or inferences about rates of language
change) of their ancestors’ migration(s) to the New World.

Assuming, that is, there is an unbroken chain from the present back into
the past, and that modern Native Americans are descendants of the first
Americans, a matter that's now hotly disputed by some physical
anthropologists. They see among rare ancient human skeletal remains
skulls that do not resemble the crania of American Indians—the most
famous (infamous) being Kennewick, which after its discovery was
described at a press conference by the arcane term “Caucasoid,” which on
the notepads of the assembled reporters quickly morphed into
“Caucasian.” Could the Americas have originally been peopled by
Europeans? Were ancestors of American Indians not the discoverers of
America, but later arrivals? These are not innocent academic questions,
but ones that inevitably take on a political character with real-life
implications for modern-day American Indians. Even so, a couple of
archaeologists blithely leaped on that bandwagon, and proclaimed that
Solutreans from Stone Age Europe had paddled the iceberg-choked
Pleistocene North Atlantic and landed on the east coast of North America
several thousand years before Clovis. But are there traces of non-Asian
ancestry in genes or language? How reliable are skulls for tracing the
origins of populations? Just what do crania tell us about
“race”—whatever that loaded term implies? That's why Chapter 5 aims to
detail how all these methods work, what they can and cannot reveal, and
the reliability of the conclusions drawn from them.

That chapter also shows that compounding the evidence and methods being
brought to bear on the peopling of the Americas has in no small measure
compounded the controversy. Now, instead of archaeologists arguing with
one another—as we still do, even in these post-Monte Verde
days—linguists, physical anthropologists, and geneticists are haggling
among themselves, and all of us with one another. There's a good reason
for that, as explored in Chapter 6: linguists, physical anthropologists,
and geneticists speak with no more unanimity on this question than
archaeologists, nor is it easy to reconcile such radically different
kinds of evidence. Each of these disciplines approaches the central
questions from very different angles. Linguists and geneticists view the
peopling of the Americas backward from the present, through the
languages or DNA of living American Indians. Archaeologists and physical
anthropologists, working with ancient sites and skeletal remains, come
from the opposite direction.

Naturally, there are advantages and disadvantages to each, and
significant differences in data and method, such that linking modern
languages or genes with Pleistocene archaeological or skeletal remains
proves no easy task—not that we haven't tried. We have many scenarios
for the number, relative timing, and antiquity of migrations to America.
Although there is no consensus among them, we have begun to answer
questions about who the first Americans were and where they came from,
and can perhaps narrow down the window of time within which the
migration (migrations?) occurred, and what our best chance is of more
precisely resolving such questions. Even so, controversy remains.

Of course, the search for the first Americans is not just about origins
and antiquity—it's also about adaptations. Once here, they apparently
colonized the length and breadth of the hemisphere in less than a
millennium. That's a stunning achievement for any human group, but
especially for hunter-gatherers in a novel and changing setting.
Chapters 7 through 9 look into how it is they moved so far so fast, what
life was like in Ice Age America for the new arrivals, and what adaptive
strategies keyed their successful colonization of a continent as diverse
and dynamic as late Pleistocene North America.

Central to these issues is the matter of adapting to a new land,
considered in detail in Chapter 7. As these bygone Siberians moved south
into an ever-more-exotic New World, they surely possessed a general
knowledge of animals and plants, but were increasingly encountering ones
they had never seen before. Which would feed them, clothe them, cure
them, or kill them? There was no one to greet them or provide helpful
advice about, say, rattlesnakes or poisonous plants. Nor were there
signposts at the gateway to America as there are today (tongue-in-cheek)
in downtown Barrow, Alaska, pointing the way to New York City or
Ayachucho, Peru.

Colonists in new landscapes face great risks, especially early on when
their numbers are low and they know little of the availability,
abundance, and distribution of plant and animal foods, or of how severe
local climates might be, or of where (and what) potential dangers might
lurk. To reduce that risk, it would have been to their advantage to
learn about their new world as quickly as possible, a strong incentive
to range widely and rapidly. Yet, doing so would have meant moving away
from other people.

The first Americans are often stereotyped as manly hunters, Pleistocene
versions of the mountain men and fur traders who boldly ventured across
the American West in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. But if the
goal was not merely to exploit but also to explore, adapt, and settle,
“early man” would not get very far without early woman, and without
producing early children. And when those children came of age, they
needed spouses. Where were those to be found? Within their immediate
band, or among distant kin who'd split off to find their own way? And
how could or did groups maintain longdistance contacts with others with
whom they could exchange information, resources, and mates, and do so
over a vast and uncharted landscape with few known landmarks, across
which they and others were possibly moving rapidly?

We have only recently begun to model the processes of colonization.
Central to seeing if those models work is an understanding of the
archaeological record and what it reveals of Paleoindian adaptations,
the subject of Chapter 8. The first Americans surely hunted more than
gathered: their long Arctic traverse from Asia to America had few other
options. Those habits continued as they moved south of the ice sheets,
where Clovis Paleoindians took down mammoth, mastodon, and giant bison.

But just how often were they out hunting big game, or better, how often
were they successful at it? So successful they drove the Pleistocene
megafauna to extinction? By 10,800 years BP, soon after Clovis groups
appeared, that extraordinary assortment of large mammals (some
thirty-five genera all together) had disappeared, vanishing in a
geological instant from a world where they had thrived for tens and
hundreds of thousands of years. Paleoindians are charged with killing—or
more properly, overkilling—the Pleistocene megafauna, a wholesale
slaughter routinely invoked today by conservationists as a grim homily
of human destruction.

Yet, if Paleoindians are guilty as charged, then they behaved unlike any
other hunter-gatherer groups known before or since, and then artfully
covered up virtually all evidence of their wrongdoing. It is possible,
of course, that we've not found their kill sites, or that we do not know
what members of our own species are wont to do on a rich, virgin
landscape teeming with game never before hunted by wily human predators.
Perhaps the rules that govern hunter-gatherers in other times and places
do not apply here. The first Americans were unique in many ways; this
may be another.

Of course, those extinctions also coincided with the end of the
Pleistocene. The sweeping climatic and ecological changes that marked
that transition are just as likely (maybe even more likely) to be
responsible for this massive extinction event. But if that's so, more
questions remain: why did horses disappear from North America at the end
of the Pleistocene, and yet flourish when reintroduced by the Spanish in
the early 1500s? And isn't it odd that the plants that comprised the
diet of the giant ground sloths are common today outside the very
southwestern caves these now-extinct animals once frequented? These are
good questions for which we have, as yet, no good answers.

What is certain is that during Paleoindian times, climates were warming,
glaciers worldwide were in full retreat, sea levels were rising, plants
and animals were shifting their ranges (or going extinct), and the end
of the Ice Age was just over the horizon. But around 11,000 years ago,
the world's climates took a sharp turn. According to one prevailing
theory, when the retreating Laurentide ice sheet uncovered the St.
Lawrence seaway that apparently diverted glacial meltwater—which to that
point mostly drained down the Mississippi River into the Gulf of
Mexico—into the North Atlantic. Flushing very cold, very fresh water
directly into the northern ocean upset circulation patterns in the
Atlantic and triggered a nearly instantaneous climatic response: the
Northern Hemisphere was plunged back into near-glacial conditions that
lasted a thousand years. The Younger Dryas, as it's called, was no Ice
Age rerun, since by then many of the conditions that had put the earth
under Pleistocene ice had changed. Even so, the sudden polar freeze of
the Younger Dryas is blamed for the “fragmentation of Clovis culture”
and even the extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna: it wasn't
Pleistocene Overkill. It was Pleistocene Overchill. Or not.

Regardless, the Younger Dryas set the stage on which the final
millennium of colonization was played out. It was during this time, as
discussed in Chapter 9, that the Paleoindian descendants of wide-ranging
and highly mobile Clovis groups began to settle in different regions. As
they did, they developed distinctive adaptations: lifeways in the
mountainous and semi-arid Great Basin soon became very different from
those on the grasslands of the Great Plains, or in the rich forests of
eastern North America.

This settling in inevitably severed ties among populations, and over the
next ten millennia, their descendants developed new dialects and
languages, along with distinctive genetic lineages, cultures, and
material culture. Evolutionary pathways diverged and converged as
populations sporadically reconnected (peaceably or not) and exchanged
genes, words, or artifacts. By the time Europeans arrived, some 400
generations of intermittent isolation, migration, and gene flow had
passed, and the descendants of what may have been a single band of
colonists was now many hundreds of separate peoples, cultures, and
languages, whose histories were hopelessly entangled in complex skeins.

All shared, however, a Pleistocene ancestry, and it was nearly their
undoing—as explored in Chapter 10. For when more than 12,000 years of
isolation ended in 1492 and the peoples of the Old and New worlds came
into contact, the consequences were profound, not least in the
devastating impact of repeated waves of Old World epidemic disease on
American Indians. The worst was smallpox, and against it—as well as
against measles, influenza, plague, and other contagions—Native
Americans had little, if any, immunity. Mortality rates may have spiked
at over 90% in native populations and, in so doing, arguably altered the
course of American history. But to understand why American Indians were
so extraordinarily vulnerable to introduced infectious diseases, and
harbored none of their own (which could have slowed the colonization of
the Americas by Europeans), the answer must be sought deep in their
prehistory.

And something more: American archaeology has changed dramatically in the
last decade, not least because of events well outside the shelter of
academia where we've long cloistered ourselves. Federal legislation—the
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA)—aimed at
righting the often egregious wrongs of history, mandated that skeletal
remains held in museums and universities receiving federal funding
(that's just about all of them) must be returned if requested to the
American Indian tribes that are biologically or culturally affiliated.
It's easy enough to identify affiliation if the remains come from sites
of no great antiquity, where there is clear continuity from past to
present. The task is immeasurably harder when attempting to identify
specific tribal descendants of the first Americans. That has sparked
plenty of fights about how or even whether ancient skeletal remains can
be linked with modern peoples. Legally they can be, ethically they
should be, but scientifically they can't be (at the moment anyway). And
so at times, as with Kennewick, it's gotten ugly.

But there have been positive steps, too, often made far from the harsh
partisan limelight: archaeologists and Native Americans have become
increasingly more aware and appreciative of the other's perspectives.
And all sides now recognize that questions about the peopling of the
Americas matter, and can matter deeply—even if for very different
reasons among different constituencies.

Getting the answers to those questions is a long story, and to start the
telling requires returning, ever so briefly, to where it all began.

GETTING TO BERINGIA ON TIME

The deep roots of human prehistory reach back to Africa, and a long
evolutionary line of early hominids. When our very earliest hominid
ancestors become recognizable about 6 million years ago (we cannot call
them humans just yet), they were barely refined apes, and certainly were
not in possession of the adaptive abilities necessary to venture into
the far north, let alone make their way to Siberia and then on to
America.

The first groups to do that were members of the genus Homo, of which
there are various species that first appeared nearly 2 million years
ago. Within a few hundred thousand years of their emergence, they had
mastered fire and learned to build shelters, which enabled them to
establish beachheads in colder climes outside Africa, even with the
astonishingly primitive stone tools that mark the Lower and Middle
Paleolithic cultural periods. Homo erectus and its evolutionary kin
ranged widely over temperate Eurasia and lived during glacial times, yet
do not appear to have expanded in any significant numbers into northern
latitudes, at least not until a few hundred thousand years ago when they
and their descendants occupied Pleistocene Europe. By then they were
clothed, revealed by the fact that body lice (which feed on the body but
live in clothing) have made their evolutionary appearance.⁷ Still, there
were limits to humanity's range. They spanned the distance from western
Europe to China, yet few (if any) descendants of this first wave to
leave Africa made it to the far northern or eastern regions of Asia or
Siberia, nor were they ever within striking distance of the Americas.

It was, instead, descendants of the second major wave out of Africa who,
bearing a more sophisticated stone tool technology (not to mention
increasingly elaborate artifacts of bone and ivory), pushed into Europe
and all the way across Asia. These were our earliest direct ancestors,
the first modern humans—Homo sapiens—that, based on genetic and
archaeological evidence, arose in Africa nearly 200,000 years ago, and
from which they subsequently dispersed.

The degree to which these early moderns are related to the descendants
of the first wave of humans who left Africa, such as Europe's
Neanderthals, has for many years been hotly debated. Because they
briefly co-existed on the same landscapes—the one using vintage Middle
Paleolithic stone tools, the other the more elaborate Upper Paleolithic
technology—some paleoanthropologists insist we are descended from a
genetic mix of Neanderthals and early moderns. That claim has steadily
lost adherents over the years, precipitously so after ancient DNA
extracted from Neanderthal skeletal remains showed a genomic sequence
very different from that of living humans. Based on the molecular clock,
it is estimated Homo neanderthalensis and Homo sapiens went their
separate ways over 500,000 years ago (which is to say, they are both
descendants of a deep common ancestor, but we trace our evolution via
the Homo sapiens line).⁸

Once Homo sapiens struck out on their own, they scarcely stopped. It is
this species that first traveled beyond temperate Eurasia to colonize
the distant corners of the globe, including Australia and the Americas,
the last of the habitable continents of prehistory. Although brainy,
innovative, and highly adept hunter-gatherers, getting to America was no
easy journey even for Homo sapiens, not with Siberia in between and
especially not during harsh, full-glacial times. As archaeologist Ted
Goebel observes, it appears no one was in Siberia (even southern
Siberia) during the LGM, and understandably so. Climates were cold and
harsh though, ironically, glacial ice was no barrier: virtually all of
central and western Siberia was ice free, even during the LGM.⁹

Not that there is evidence humans had reached Siberia much before then.
There are only a few archaeological sites north of 55°N latitude and
east of 80°E longitude (near present-day Novosibirsk) that possibly
predate the LGM. And the oldest of these, Nepa I in central Siberia,
which dates to 35,000 years ago, and Yana RHS in northern Siberia near
the Laptev Sea, dated to 27,000 BP, are both still many thousand
kilometers shy of the western edge of Beringia, the New World's entry
point.

Humans more or less permanently colonized far northeastern Asia only
after 18,000 BP. By then, they had reoccupied the Lena and Aldan river
basins and left behind a number of sites, including Dyuktai Cave,
occupied as early as 14,000 years ago, where bifacial knives, blades,
scrapers, and points were found with a range of animal remains,
including mammoth, bison, musk ox, horse, reindeer, and moose. Even
then, they were still several thousand kilometers away and well shy of
the latitude of Beringia, which is mostly north of 60°N, about the
latitude of Seward, Alaska (Figure 4).

Over late Pleistocene time, humans moved further north and east, and
finally approached the gateway to America. Archaeologist John Hoffecker
and paleoecologist Scott Elias suggest that improved stone tool
technology, more efficiently insulated clothing, and a post-glacial
expansion of trees (to provide wood for hearth fires) likely aided that
expansion. But humans were still sparse on the ground. Their presence is
well documented and securely dated only at the sites of Berelekh on the
Indigirka River close to the Arctic Coast (at 70°N latitude), and at
Ushki in central Kamchatka. These two localities were relatively late in
the grand scheme of prehistory: they are no more than about 14,000 and
11,300 years old, respectively. Importantly, they contain artifact
types—including the distinctive Chindadn point—we will soon see on the
Alaskan side of Beringia.

Otherwise, it has so far proven difficult to pinpoint archaeologically
when and from where in Siberia the earliest Americans originated. Could
it be that they did not come this way at all? More on this later
(Chapter 6), when we confront a bold daylight attempt to rob Siberia of
its role as the jumping off point for the colonization of the New World.

Taken at face value, it appears that far northeastern Siberia and
Beringia were not occupied by humans until as late as 14,000 years ago.
But let's not leap to that conclusion just yet. The Siberian
archaeological record on the whole is sparse, and gets even more so as
one approaches the Bering Land Bridge. The timing of the peopling of
Siberia will not be known until Siberia is peopled by more
archaeologists. Given the archaeological near invisibility of what must
have been small and highly mobile human populations, the vast area to be
searched for their sites, and the relatively limited archaeological work
that's been done to date, this negative evidence is sure not to endure.

[images]

FIGURE 4.
Map of the extent of Beringia at the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), showing
the location of early Siberian and Alaskan archaeological sites
discussed in the text.

But prehistory in this region (or in the Americas) will likely not go
too far back. No Neanderthals or any other earlier (non-sapiens) form of
human has ever been found in far northeast Asia and Siberia, let alone
in the New World. One should never say never in archaeology, but at this
point, it seems exceedingly unlikely that premodern humans made it to
the Americas, though that hasn't stopped speculation on this score—or
claims from sites like Calico (California) or Old Crow (Canada) that the
first Americans arrived some 200,000 to 350,000 or more years ago.

Of course, if such claims of deep antiquity (or European ancestry) are
right, then our hard-won understanding of human evolution is badly
wrong. But there's no need to rush a textbook rewrite just yet. More
likely, such claims are simply flawed. We have long assumed, and have no
reason to doubt, the Americas were colonized by anatomically modern
humans, coming by way of Asia and bearing an Upper Paleolithic artifact
technology, and arriving at some time during the latter stages of the
Ice Age.

But what kind of place was this New World?

