9

SETTLING IN

Late Paleoindians and
the Waning Ice Age

In the 1930s, the United States was staggering from a wicked one-two
punch. The Great Depression, fast on the heels of the 1929 stock market
collapse, halved the country's industrial output, flung nearly a quarter
of its workers from their jobs, and led to the failure of thousands of
banks, and with them the disappearance of millions of savings accounts.
Homes and businesses were foreclosed, displaced people hit the roads and
rails, and even organized crime foundered when Prohibition's repeal
dropped the bottom out of the bootleg liquor market. Evidently the
distressed nation needed a drink more than it needed temperance.

Then conditions got worse. In early 1932, rain stopped falling across
much of the American West, and the consequences of decades of
short-sighted agricultural practices hit hard. Having stripped away tens
of million of acres of native grassland, and unable because of drought
to plant crops to protect the naked land from erosion, a horrified
nation watched as massive dust storms carried tons of Great Plains
topsoil east across the continent, shading the midday sun in Chicago,
and dusting the decks of ships hundreds of miles off the Atlantic coast.
Plains residents fled in the opposite direction, their journey to
California's farm fields immortalized in John Steinbeck novels, Woody
Guthrie ballads, and Dorothea Lange and Arthur Rothstein photographs.

Yet, grim as the combination of Depression and Dust Bowl drought was for
the country, it was a boon for archaeology. Large-scale archaeological
surveys and extensive excavations were a vital part of President
Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal recovery programs. (Why? They cost little
in tools and supplies, employed thousands, and produced scientific
results.) Moreover, the scouring of land across the West exposed deeply
buried late Pleistocene deposits—and Paleoindian sites long hidden from
view. Nearly two dozen were found in the span of the Dust Bowl decade.¹

But the more sites that appeared, the more complicated matters became.
Some had projectile points reminiscent of Folsom, others like those at
Clovis. Occasionally the newfound points were fluted, but many were not.
Clovis and Clovis-like points proved to be widespread, implying the
“existence over a wide terrain of a common culture horizon,”² but most
appeared more geographically restricted. All were obviously Paleoindian
in age—they'd been found alongside remains of extinct bison or mammoth
(the lesson from Folsom about what and how to look for Paleoindian sites
had been well learned). But how old were they, exactly? There was
clearly a great deal more to the Paleoindian occupation than anyone had
imagined, but how did these forms relate to one another in time and
across the continent? Did they represent different adaptations to
different environments? Different peoples? Different styles of
fashioning stone weaponry? It was hard to say.

Certainly, by the 1930s, American archaeologists appreciated that
cultures in the past must have varied, as did those of the present. In
1939 the eminent American anthropologist Alfred Kroeber showed them just
how complex that variation could be. In his Cultural and Natural Areas
of Native North America, he brought to fruition an ambitious effort to
map all the cultures of North America and show their “environmental
relations.” It was an effort borne of Kroeber's frustration at his
colleagues who'd been giving steadily less attention to the role of the
environment. As a consequence, much of anthropology had become
“virtually a sociology of American Indian culture.” Kroeber did not
intend that as a compliment. Anthropologists could speak at length about
native ceremony, social organization, art, and myth, but hardly at all
about how groups made a living—a glaring omission, he complained, since
“no culture is wholly intelligible without reference to
the…environmental factors…which condition it.”³

And so Kroeber defined a half-dozen major and over fifty minor culture
areas, correlated those with their environment, and attempted to
understand the challenges and opportunities in those settings, which
might in turn help explain the historical trajectories of different
groups and, more broadly, the grand cycles of human history. Cultural
and Natural Areas of Native North America became an instant classic.

Kroeber rightly appreciated that mapping culture areas provided at best
a brief snapshot of a changing human phenomenon (in his case, cultures
as they were constituted at first European contact). Yet, though he was
aware of the dynamic nature of culture, he took the stability of the
environment for granted, and perhaps reasonably so, since he was only
looking back several centuries.

In fact, even though it was generally appreciated in 1939 that the Ice
Ages had happened, their effects on ecological communities and how these
might have changed over time was poorly known. Knowledge would improve,
however, as studies of fossil animals and plants, and glacial geology,
painted an ever-more-detailed canvas of past climates and environments.
By 1954 archaeologist George Quimby voiced what many were thinking:
Kroeber's landmark study might be invaluable for understanding the
ecological stage of recent cultures, but “it has become increasingly
evident that the cultural and natural areas of the neo-Indian were not
necessarily those of the paleo-Indian.”⁴

So Quimby tried his hand at describing what might have been the
environments of late Pleistocene peoples. “Cultural and Natural Areas
before Kroeber” he called his paper, and asked Kroeber for permission to
use his name in the title. The great man seemed mildly amused.

With a series of maps, Quimby illustrated the changing North American
landscape over the final millennia of the Pleistocene, and suggested
where and how Paleoindians may have adapted to that emerging New World.
It was, he admitted, a preliminary effort. Even so, fellow archaeologist
Homer Aschmann insisted Quimby's hypotheses demanded “immediate
examination before they become established dogma.” Quimby assured him he
needn't worry: “The mortality rates on my previous dogma are too high.”
Besides, Quimby added, it would be some time before there was a
“generally accepted reconstruction of cultural and natural areas in late
glacial times.”⁵

Quimby was right. We're still working on it.

FILLING IN THE LANDSCAPE

The broad outlines by now are evident, however. As Clovis populations
increased in number and expanded into new habitats, cultural drift
(Chapter 7) became more pronounced. It's a process that, once begun,
continued over the next 10,000 years as environments changed and
populations expanded, dispersed, adapted, and evolved. As Clovis
descendants settled into different regions of North America, the links
between them—so vital when there were few people on the landscape, and
they needed to keep in contact with one another—began to break down. It
is perhaps no coincidence that a few centuries after the initial Clovis
dispersal, there was a shift from the early, broad, and relatively
homogeneous projectile-point style to multiple Late Paleoindian point
styles in different regions (Figure 55). Although the precise timing
varied by area, sometime after 10,900 years ago in the central and
western portions of the continent, and after 10,600 years ago in eastern
North America, Clovis and its related forms disappeared. By 10,500 years
ago, the Clovis fluted form had been supplanted by a variety of
regionally distinctive projectile points.

Archaeologists know not to place undue weight on stylistic change in
projectile points, for like selectively neutral traits (such as mtDNA
mutations), their style can be arbitrary and change randomly, so long as
style does not interfere with the workings of the point (which is why
invoking a point style change as evidence of the Younger Dryas
extraterrestrial event is meaningless [Chapter 2]). That said, point
styles are often emblematic of a group, just as boy scouts and street
gangs have their emblems. Assuming Late Paleoindian point types mark
cultural groups (however defined), and different forms mark different or
evolving groups in time and space, we can use them to refer to time
periods—the Folsom period, for example—much as historians refer to, say,
the Middle Ages.

[images]

FIGURE 55.
A sample of Late Paleoindian projectile point types in North America,
ca. 10,500-10,000 BP. From left to right, the types (by region) are Lake
Mojave (Great Basin), Agate Basin (primarily northern plains), Plainview
(primarily southern plains), Barnes (northern Midwest), Dalton (central
Mississippi Valley and east), and Simpson (southeast). (Arranged by
Katherine Monigal.)

Let's keep with that analogy for a moment. It's easy to put one's finger
on the middle of the Middle Ages, less so on its beginning or end. But
at least with historic periods, one can identify specific tipping
points: the Middle Ages ended with the beginning of the Renaissance in
fourteenth-century Italy. An arbitrary demarcation to be sure, and hard
to pin down tighter than a century, but it makes for a relatively clean
break (in Europe, anyway). Not so with archaeological periods based on
projectile point styles. They do not have discrete boundaries in time
and space, and can overlap on their edges. Moreover, though we often
assume a point type is unique to a group—the Folsom folk, or the Agate
Basin people, we say—that may not be the case either.⁶ A point style is
just what the term implies: it's the current fashion. And fashions
change, even within a population. Perhaps in those Paleoindian sites
where more than one point type occurs (and there are many), we are
glimpsing the transition from one style to another. The bottom line:
styles probably do mark broad periods in time and space, just don't look
too closely for well-defined and discrete boundaries.

On the Great Plains and in the Rocky Mountains, Folsom points follow
Clovis, a fact made certain when Folsom points were found in deposits
stratigraphically above Clovis points at the Clovis site (thank you,
Nicholaus Steno), and later bolstered by radiocarbon ages that showed
Folsom appeared just after 10,900 BP and lasted until about 10,200 BP.
Makers of Folsom points ranged over the North American plains from
Canada to Texas, but also ventured west into the Rockies and as far east
as Wisconsin. Those who followed Folsom had smaller ranges: some
occurred primarily on the southern plains (e.g., Midland, Plainview,
Milnesand), others on the northern plains (e.g., Goshen, Agate Basin,
Hell Gap), and some in the central plains (Firstview).

Most of these point forms are rare, if not absent, in far western North
America where, curiously, Clovis is not followed by multiple styles over
time and space, but instead by the Great Basin Stemmed Series, points
like Haskett, Parman, Lake Mohave, and Cougar Mountain, which are mostly
geographic variations on the same lanceolate theme (with stems for
hafting, not flutes). And a long-lived theme it was, persisting over
nearly 4,000 years, appearing as early as 11,200 (though most are at
least a millennium younger) and lasting as late as 7,000 years ago.⁷

Those relatively few varieties hardly match the explosion of point
styles in eastern North America in the millennium after Clovis, though
for want of radiocarbon dates their precise ages have in most cases
proven difficult to pin down. It appears the early Clovis-like Gainey
style is followed in the Upper Midwest and Great Lakes by Barnes points
(lanceolates with long, Folsom-like flutes), and in New England by
Michaud forms. In turn, these are evidently succeeded (west to east) by
Holcombe, Crowfield, and Nicholas points.

South of that region, across northern Alabama, Tennessee, Kentucky, the
dominant post-Clovis form appears to be the Cumberland point, which also
has long flutes but is much thicker and heavier than Folsom or Barnes.
Prevailing in the Carolinas are triangular and elongated Redstone
points; Quad points occur in the piney woodlands of Mississippi,
Alabama, and the Florida panhandle; and Simpson and Suwannee forms
fanned out across much of the rest of Florida and into Georgia. This
stylistic proliferation slowed in the centuries after 10,500 BP with the
appearance of Dalton points across a broad swath of the Southeast,
though there are plenty of variations on the Dalton theme (such as
Hardaway points in the Carolina Piedmont, Greenbrier in
Alabama-Tennessee, and San Patrice in Louisiana and east Texas).

Lots of types, but no need to fret the details. Instead, let me paint
some broad brush strokes. First and most notably, the post-Clovis
projectile point sequences west and east do not correspond to one
another. After Clovis, Paleoindians go their separate ways
stylistically, if not literally. Second, with the exception of the far
West and Great Basin, these style zones become progressively more
numerous as well as smaller over time. Third, that process seems fastest
in eastern North America, where the stylistic landscape is more
variegated, and by the end of the Paleoindian period has more style
zones in smaller areas than any other region of North America (David
Anderson calls the East a “center of technological and social
innovation”⁸). Finally, we're now squarely in the midst of the Younger
Dryas (11,000-10,000 BP) with its radiocarbon-confounding plateaus
(Chapter 2), which means that 900 radiocarbon years of Late Paleoindian
time from 10,900 to 10,000 BP translates (with current calibrations) to
1,360 calendar years. That apparent explosion of styles and the process
of settling-in wasn't quite so fast as it appears.

As in Clovis times, later Paleoindians used high-quality stone, and out
on the open plains and in the Great Basin went great distances to
acquire it, at least initially. The closest of the outcrops used by the
occupants of the Folsom site, for example, was 190 kilometers to the
southeast, and the most distant was 450 kilometers due north. The
oblique triangle formed by just these three stops on their rounds (they
made more)has an area of around 90,000 km². That's a substantial
territory, but hardly excessive by Paleoindian standards. Comparable
ranges are known from the far West and parts of eastern North America
(particularly the Upper Midwest). These ranges shrink over Late
Paleoindian time, though more slowly on the plains.⁹

Moreover, and also unlike in Clovis times, Late Paleoindians had “home”
ranges. As Daniel Amick has shown, Folsom groups on the plains primarily
used stone found on the plains and to the east, while those in the Rio
Grande Valley obtained their stone mostly from the valley or the
mountains to the southwest. Groups in the Great Basin, George Jones and
colleagues show, likewise collected obsidian from within clear-cut
geographic areas that were roughly oblong in shape and extended some 450
kilometers north to south, and about 150 kilometers west to east.
Little, if any, stone moved between those tracts.¹⁰

Such patterns suggest that territories—if we can use the term without
conveying the sense these were jealously guarded—were recognized by this
time in prehistory. And, as was apparent with the style zones, the stone
“conveyance zones” vary in size across the continent. They are larger on
the open terrain of the far West and plains, smaller in eastern North
America. Such differences are surely tied to the way in which Late
Paleoindian hunter-gatherers used their habitats, and indeed, in some
areas they appear to correspond to region-specific or even prey-specific
foraging strategies. These were occasionally accompanied by new
technologies, presumably in response to the different adaptive
opportunities and challenges in these diverse settings. Broadly
speaking, Folsom and later Paleoindians of the plains and Rocky
Mountains of western North America had a subsistence strategy tied to
exploitation of Bison antiquus. Dalton groups were thorough-going
denizens of the resource-rich forests of eastern North America. Many
Great Basin peoples had lifeways focused on animals and plants available
in or near marshes and wet meadows. And, in the Pacific Northwest and
along the California coast, groups were dining on shellfish.

Taking all this at face value, the increasing stylistic diversification
and the ever-shrinking style and stone-conveyance zones, can be read as
a relaxation in the pressure to maintain contact with distant kin, a
reduction in the spatial scale and openness of the social systems, and a
steady settling-in and filling of the landscape. Later Paleoindians no
longer spanned the continent as their ancestors had, and their universe
had become much smaller.

All this played out in varied ways across the continent. I'll begin
(and, admittedly, spend much of my time) on the Great Plains, where
Clovis is earliest replaced, and where the subsistence strategy came to
center on the largest mammal left standing in the wake of Pleistocene
extinctions.¹¹

BISON TO THE FORE

Pleistocene extinctions had a profound impact on plains Paleoindians,
though it had little to do with depriving them of their favorite foods,
but much to do with providing an alternative food source. In the warmer
and drier millennia of the late Pleistocene, the plains grassland became
less diverse and increasingly dominated by warm-season grasses, which
(recalling Chapter 2) grow during the summer and are available well into
the fall and winter (in contrast to cool-season grasses, which grow in
spring and require cooler and wetter habitats, and were more prevalent
in the Pleistocene).

The shift from cool-season-to warm-season-dominated grassland at the end
of the Pleistocene would have spelled trouble for most herbivores, since
warm-season grasses taste lousy (they produce anti-herbivory enzymes)
and for animals that are not ruminants, these grasses have limited
nutritional benefit. If mammoth, horse, camel, and other grazers
depended on cool-season forms, there would have been less to eat, more
competition, and overgrazing of dwindling patches, all of which could
spell trouble for individual animals, local populations, and perhaps
even species. But what of bison? The answer is buffalo grass and
blue-grama grass. These are both warm-season grasses, were among the
main constituents of the newly forming late Pleistocene grassland and,
most important of all, are a favored food of bison, which as ruminants
have the digestive tools (including a four-chambered stomach) to
maximize the nutritional value of these grasses.

Although intriguing, there is no direct evidence that the expansion of
the warm-season grassland, triggered by changing climates and benefiting
from bison grazing (which helped the grasses spread), led to the
extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna. Regardless, with the
disappearance of the last of the Pleistocene animals, bison had the
plains virtually to themselves. Lacking competitors or significant
predators (the mega-carnivores were gone, too, replaced by the gray
wolf), bison populations on the plains skyrocketed.

It is surely no coincidence that bison hunting began in a significant
way in Late Paleoindian times, for here was a high-ranked resource that
could be dispatched at relatively low risk, and one that was becoming
increasingly numerous, predictable, and reliable. Paleoindian bison
kills were modest, at least at first. We know of only a dozen or so
bison killed by Clovis hunters (and virtually all of those met their
death at Murray Springs). Folsom-age bison kills typically netted an
average of fifteen animals. But just a few centuries later, bison kills
averaged nearly sixty animals, a four-fold increase. Had hunters become
more adept, or were bison more abundant and easier pickings? Maybe both.
Regardless, bison became a primary resource for Paleoindians, and would
continue in that role for plains peoples over much of the next 10,000
years, ending only with the animal's near destruction in the nineteenth
century.

We have no reliable numbers of the size of bison herds in the late
Pleistocene. In fact, there are few reliable tallies of the size of
bison populations in historic times. It has been said that in the 1800s,
before commercial hide hunters took to the plains, there were upwards of
60 million bison. The reality was probably half that.¹² That's still a
lot of bison, and stories abound of single herds—like one seen in Kansas
in 1871 said to contain some 4 million animals—that could blacken the
plains well into the distance, and take days to pass by.

[images]

FIGURE 56.
Life-size reconstruction of Bison antiquus at the Lubbock Lake Landmark,
Texas, with Ryan Byerly (who is over 6 ft tall) for scale. (Photograph
by David J. Meltzer.)

Bison are wide ranging, traveling hundreds of miles season to season.
They are gregarious herd animals, and arrange themselves in groups
according to sex, age, season, and habitat.¹³ Cow-calf herds are
composed of females, males under 3 years of age, and a few older males.
Males live either individually or in herds that may be as large as
thirty animals.

Modern bison (Bison bison) are huge animals: males are upwards of 3.8
meters in length, are over 1.86 meters at the shoulder, and weigh on
average 820 kilograms. The largest bull on record weighed about 1,350
kilograms (that's 1.5 tons). Females range up to 3.2 meters in length,
are just over 1.6 meters in shoulder height, and weigh on average 450
kilograms. Yet, the species roaming the Paleoindians’ landscape, Bison
antiquus (Figure 56), was 15%-20% larger and boasted horns about 30
centimetersm longer.¹⁴

Despite their massive bulk and deceptively sluggish behavior, bison are
powerful runners, capable of reaching speeds of 65 kilometers/hour and
turning on a dime. At least on dry land. They don't do as well on ice or
in deep snow, but are surprisingly sure-footed in shallow water. They
tend to stampede when frightened, a trait often exploited by human
hunters, for the bison's speed, combined with its poor eyesight and
tendency to run with head low to the ground, makes it very difficult for
animals at the front of a stampede to change direction, or for followers
to stop suddenly in the event they unexpectedly encounter a deep arroyo
or cliff edge. But hunters had to be careful. As Dale Lott observes, the
bison's speed, quickness, massive head (a formidable battering ram),
hooves like sledgehammers, sharp horns (in both sexes), and, he adds, a
“very short fuse,” made it a dangerous adversary for people and other
animals (wolves, mostly) that intended harm. Almost certainly, if
Pleistocene bison were as fast, nimble, and unpredictable as bison are
now, they challenged the wits and skills of pedestrian hunters.¹⁵

HUNTERS AND HUNTED

But Paleoindians met that challenge with sometimes-spectacular success,
killing hundreds of animals in a single, deadly slaughter. These large
kill sites are the iconic images of Paleoindian times, conjuring visions
of stampeding animals crashing chaotically into an arroyo, massive
bodies cracking and bones snapping, spears flying in thick clouds of
dust, a sound wall of painful bellows of dying animals, and blood and
gore everywhere. Symbolic these images may be, but representative
they're not. Killing just one or two bison at a time, quietly, away from
the herd, and with less fanfare, was probably the more-common
strategy—George Frison suggests it was the best strategy. The smaller
kills could have been accomplished by small family bands; the large
kills likely required a multi-band, communal effort, though what that
translates to in actual numbers is anyone's guess. It is certain a lone
hunter could not drive 200 animals to their deaths: many hands (and
spears) were needed.

Naturally, the smaller-scale kills are not as readily spotted
archaeologically as the larger ones, and—I must confess having worked on
both—are not nearly as interesting, with the result we know less about
them (and the corollary: large, communal kills probably distract us from
seeing other aspects of Paleoindian adaptations). Yet, Jason LaBelle and
colleagues show that large kills, despite their archaeological
visibility and influence on our interpretations of Paleoindian
adaptations, represent less than 3% of all known Folsom sites, and
perhaps an equal measure of later Paleoindian sites as well.¹⁶

Whether setting off on a communal hunt or not, Paleoindian hunters
surely aimed to reduce their risks—always a good idea when pursuing
animals this large—and were highly skilled at trapping, hindering, or
otherwise disabling their prey, using the topography to great advantage.

But it's not the topographic feature you think, although that does make
an engaging scenario: a herd of bison rushing toward a near-invisible
cliff, seeing it too late to change direction, flying over the edge
“Wile E. Coyote” style (legs grabbing wildly for firm ground) and
smashing on the rocks below. Any broken-bodied survivors would be
finished off by armed hunters. This hunting trick can be deadly
effective and almost risk free when the topography and the animals
cooperate, but it's hardly foolproof. Bison are too nimble to always
play their assigned role.

More telling, no Paleoindians appear to have used the tactic. The first
jump kills are no more than 5,000 years old (the oldest is
Head-Smashed-In, Alberta). The only purported Paleoindian bison jump is
Bonfire Rockshelter (Texas), where some twenty-five animals were found
at the base of a twenty-three-meter-high cliff. How they died seemed
obvious enough: it was from the plunge over the precipice. But just as
in a good murder mystery, the obvious clues are deceiving and the crime
scene not as it appears: the bison seem to have been killed elsewhere,
and carcass parts moved here afterward. Analysis of the bison remains by
Ryan Byerly and colleagues revealed the bones at the site are those
meaty parts of a carcass normally transported back to a camp, and not
the ones discarded at the spot of a kill. Bonfire may have been an ideal
bison-jumping spot (and was so used nearly 7,000 years later), but its
protected overhang also made it an ideal place to camp, providing a cool
respite for a Paleoindian summertime bison kill.¹⁷

[images]

FIGURE 57.
The base of the arroyo at Olsen-Chubbuck, jammed with bison bones.
(Photography by J. B. Wheat, courtesy of University of Colorado Museum
of Natural History.)

BACK TO FOLSOM

The Folsom site in New Mexico is one of the best known sites in North
America: it's routinely mentioned in archaeology texts, regularly
appears on maps of notable localities, and of course, bestowed its name
on the Paleoindian culture.¹⁹ All this because excavations here in 1927
uncovered fluted points between the ribs of what became the type
specimen of Bison antiquus. That these extinct animals were hunted at
Folsom demonstrated for the first time and after decades of controversy
that American prehistory began in the Pleistocene (Chapter 3). That
distinction earned the site a spot on the very exclusive National
Register of Historic Places.

But while Folsom is one of the best-known sites in American archaeology,
for a time it was also one of the least known—scientifically speaking.
The initial goal of the 1920s work was to recover bison skeletons for
museum display, and once its significance became apparent, to document
the association of the artifacts with the bison and thereby determine
the site's age. That was done well. As the decades passed, our knowledge
of these Paleoindians grew with the discovery of other sites of this
antiquity. Yet, knowledge of Folsom itself lagged behind, owing to the
narrow goals of the 1920s work, the methods in place at the time, and
the few publications that resulted. Everyone had been so keen to link
artifacts to bison that scarcely little more was learned about Folsom
than bison were killed here a very long time ago

Nor was any significant work done at Folsom in the decades afterward.
That was Barnum Brown's legacy, for he claimed that after his crews
finished excavating in 1928, there was nothing left of the site. Yet,
Brown often said such things about sites he excavated to keep others
from “poaching” them, and while investigating Folsom's archaeological
history, I saw clues Brown just might have been bluffing. Even if he
wasn't, we knew so little of Folsom something surely would be learned by
working there. Besides, at 2,100 meters above sea level, in the cool and
green Dry Cimarron Valley, Folsom is a much nicer place than the
blistering hot sand dunes in west Texas where I'd been excavating much
of the previous decade. When opportunity knocked with the chance to work
at Folsom, it was impossible to resist.

In 1997 I began a multiyear, interdisciplinary project at Folsom,
working off the edges of the 1920s excavation where, as it turns out,
intact deposits remained (Brown was bluffing). With the help of
colleagues, the thousands of bison bones and two dozen artifacts found
in the 1920s investigations were also analyzed. Although separated by
seventy years, the work was complementary. The value of our
less-extensive excavations was enhanced by joining our finds with
theirs, just as making sense of what was found in the 1920s was improved
by interpreting their results in light of what we learned of the site's
archaeology, geology, and environment.

And what we learned was this: the site is set within the ancestral Wild
Horse Arroyo, where it was joined by a now-buried tributary. The
paleovalley and paleo-tributary had cut deeply into the Smoky Hill Shale
bedrock, but by 11,500 BP had begun to fill with a fine-grained silt or
loess—wind-blown dust (Chapter 2). By the time the Paleoindian hunters
arrived, which we have now pinned down to 10,490 BP (Chapter 4), a meter
of loess had built up.

Even so, the paleovalley and paleotributary were still flanked by steep
bedrock walls, and almost certainly the Paleoindian hunters put the land
form to use. We don't know exactly what their tactics were, but we do
know, based in part on reconstructions of the 1920s work, that the
greatest density of bison remains occurred at the
paleotributary/paleovalley junction. If carcass parts were left where
the bison were dropped, it would appear the animals died bunched against
the high bedrock walls. Although it is tempting to suggest the
paleotributary is the main area of the kill, bison bones were also found
in the paleovalley, raising the possibility some bison managed to
scramble down and out of the paleotributary, only to be killed by
hunters waiting in the paleovalley. Or vice versa.

The hunters’ weapons included at least twenty-eight fluted points, the
majority made of high-quality stone from the Alibates and Tecovas
outcrops in the Texas Panhandle, the remainder of Flattop and Black
Forest chert from outcrops in eastern and northeastern Colorado,
respectively. No source was closer than 190 kilometers. The hunters’
last resupply probably occurred at Alibates, since most of the points
were made of this stone. The low number and intensive resharpening of
the points made of Flattop chert are more distant echoes of sources
visited earlier. By the time the hunters arrived at Folsom, over 25% of
their points had been resharpened and reused. Once there, the assemblage
suffered badly: most broke on the spot, a third from impacts.

By all measures, this was a successful hunt. A cow-calf herd of
thirty-two bison were killed in the fall when the animals were at their
peak of body fat. With a complement of flake tools and a quartzite
skinning knife, the hunters dismembered the bison, and packed up the
meaty parts for transport (they made off with lots of rib racks). Given
the time it takes to butcher animals this large, the process must have
lasted several days, during which time the hunters must have camped
nearby.

And so we searched for their camp, walking the surrounding area,
excavating test pits, machine-drilling sediment cores, and
found…absolutely nothing. Was there no camp, or no camp preserved? Part
of the answer came from a test pit dug on the uplands immediately
overlooking the bone bed. The excavation bottomed out on Smoky Hill
Shale, and charcoal on that bedrock surface yielded an age of 9820 BP.
That told us the uplands had been swept clean by heavy rains sometime
after the kill, along with any Folsom-age camp debris that might have
been there. But perhaps the camp was not up top but down below, in the
paleovalley where the hunters would have been less exposed to the wind
and elements. No traces of one were found, so if it's there, it's deeply
buried, lurking undetected beneath 4-5 meters of sediment.

Yet, I'm not sure there ever was a camp of any significant duration
here, given what we learned of the climate at the time. The kill
occurred amid the Younger Dryas, when temperatures at Folsom were cooler
than they had been a thousand years earlier, or would be just centuries
later. The bone bed yielded nearly a dozen snail species that today can
only survive at elevations 600-900 meters higher (though it was not cold
enough for long enough that alpine trees moved down into the area). It
was also drier, judging by that thick drape of loess and the absence of
aquatic snails.

In Younger Dryas times, the Folsom landscape was open, grassy parkland
with scattered trees, with more heavily wooded areas on the edge of
Johnson Mesa to the west, and in the valley of the Dry Cimarron below.
Isotope analysis of bison bones and snail shells revealed the grassland
was rich in warm-season grasses. It must have been prime bison habitat,
at least in summer and early fall, when these grasses covered the
landscape. But what of the rest of the year? Today, this is an area of
harsh winters and heavy snowfall, as it likely was in the Younger Dryas.
Bison don't do well in snow, and there is no isotopic evidence they were
grazing on the cool-season grasses of late winter and spring.

This is not an area humans likely overwintered in either. Folsom today
is a mix of grassland and woodland scrub, with ample plants for snacking
and tea, but almost none that provide the return in fatty acids or
carbohydrates that are vital during the winter and spring months. There
is no indication foraging conditions were any better in the Younger
Dryas. Without the promise of sufficient food, and with winter coming,
this would not have been a place for hunters to linger long after their
kill.

So why were they here? By the numbers and condition of the stone used to
make their points, they'd arrived at Folsom from the Texas Panhandle.
It's easy to see how: many of the rivers and streams that flow through
the Panhandle have their headwaters in this corner of New Mexico. If the
hunters were following those drainages, they would have found themselves
in the general vicinity of Folsom. This is not to say all rivers lead to
Folsom, only that coming into the area may not have been altogether
random, especially if the group left the Panhandle heading north by
northwest to areas where we know—based on their stone tools—they'd been
before.

Once in the Folsom vicinity, there are only a few places where
northbound traffic can easily traverse the high mesas and broken terrain
that extend across the boundary land between New Mexico and Colorado.
One is Raton Pass, through which the Santa Fe Trail (and now Interstate
25) travel; the other is Trinchera Pass, just 8 kilometers north of the
Folsom site, through which Charles Goodnight once trailed cattle to
Montana. Perhaps the Folsom hunters were aiming for Trinchera Pass when
a herd of bison was spotted, plans were made, and the kill took place.
The bison were butchered, meaty parts were readied for transport, and
the hunters left before winter set in.

Although it was a highly successful kill, beyond the food these bison
provided I suspect the long-term consequences of this episode were
insignificant. The hunters’ stay was brief, and there is no evidence
they ever returned to this spot, though they or others may have come
through Trinchera Pass on later occasions. Within a few years, all
traces of the kill were buried, and mostly remained so until a
town-breaking flood over 10,000 years later brought an astute cowboy out
to check his cattle, and spot something unusual in the bottom of the
arroyo where he broke wild horses (Chapter 3).

Ironically, however fleeting, ordinary, or even inconsequential this
episode may have been in the lives of the Paleoindian hunters who killed
those bison some 10,500 years ago, their actions had enormous and
lasting impact on American archaeology.

Most commonly, Paleoindians stampeded or maneuvered animals into
arroyos, where steep walls, injuries, or both prevented their movement
or escape, giving the hunters time and a safe vantage from which to
spear the bison. At the Folsom site, 32 animals were killed in an arroyo
where it joins one of its tributaries, the former flanked by bedrock
walls 5-6 meters high, the latter by 2-3-meter-high walls. Bison can
scramble up a slope, but not a nearly vertical one ringed by armed
hunters. At Olsen-Chubbuck in Colorado, the trap was hit harder and
faster when 190 bison were stampeded into an arroyo over 2 meters deep
(Figure 57). The animals in front had no time to stop or change
direction when they finally saw the trap before them (remember: they
don't see well), and the herd behind pushed forward oblivious of their
doom. The result was a thrashing, bellowing pile of bison, with some of
those at the bottom wedged head first into the arroyo floor, others
violently twisted and contorted from being crushed by the mass and
impact of those that followed them in. Survivors were finished off by
the hunters.¹⁸

Elsewhere, other types of landforms or features (natural and artificial)
were used, but with the same principle in mind: at the Casper and Horner
sites (Wyoming), and Jones-Miller (Colorado), the bison were trapped and
killed amid, respectively, sand dunes, an artificial corral, and
(possibly) snow drifts.

Trapping the animals was only the first step; keeping them bottled up
and speeding their death was the second and sometimes harder task. A
wounded wild animal is dangerous and destructive, and bison did not
necessarily die immediately on being speared. Modern bow hunters will
tell you that even after a direct lung shot, a bison may struggle for
life for 30 minutes or more.²⁰ And from time to time, some animals
surely escaped the hunters’ traps to live or die elsewhere (like the
Naco and Escapule mammoths). All of which meant the weaponry had to be
in top working order.

TOOLS OF THE TRADE

The weapons of choice were lanceolate spear points. The earliest of
these in the post-Clovis sequence on the plains, Folsom points, like
their immediate predecessors, were fluted (see Plate 13). Unlike Clovis,
Folsom fluting often extended the full length of the point, which
entailed removing a flake upwards of 5 centimeters long yet less than
1.5 millimeters thick, typically from both faces of a point that was
itself no more than 4 millimeters thick. That was no mean feat of
flintknapping, and it has been the envy and challenge of generations of
modern knappers seeking to replicate how it was done. They've tried
every technique imaginable, realistic or otherwise (Folsom groups did
not have rock-cutting band saws), and there is no consensus on how it
was done, or even if there was a single technique. As with all
experiments, these reveal how points may have been fluted, but not
whether they actually were fluted in the tested manner.

Once fluted, the tip and edges of a newly minted Folsom point were often
carefully trimmed with tiny flakes, to give the point symmetry, and the
lower edges and base were ground smooth—again, presumably, so they would
not cut the sinew used in firmly hafting the point to a shaft.

Folsom points were smaller and more delicate than Clovis, averaging just
over 5 centimeters long and 2 centimeters wide (Clovis points are wider,
longer, and nearly twice as thick [Chapter 8]). This was so,
conventional wisdom had it, because they were aimed at bison, not
mammoth, and bison could be taken down with smaller-caliber shot (though
as Emil Haury observed, several “small caliber” Clovis points speared
some of the Lehner mammoths). Of course, stone projectile points are not
bullets, which aim to kill instantly and from far away, the larger
caliber being more efficient against big game with tough hide, muscle,
and especially, thick-boned skulls.²¹ Still, even a small-caliber bullet
(or projectile point) propelled at high velocity can be lethal: in Late
Prehistoric and Historic times, bison were killed by tiny triangular
arrowheads. Fired by a bow, velocity more than compensated for their
size and weight (remember Newton's second law: force = mass x
acceleration).

There were probably very few circumstances in which a spear thrust or
thrown at an animal would kill it instantly, although these could be
propelled with accuracy and force. A Folsom point was found embedded
deeply in the neural arch (which encloses and protects the spine) of a
bison vertebra at the Lindenmeier site (Colorado).²² Rather, these
sharp-edged weapons were likely designed to tear a hole in the hide
large enough for the point and foreshaft to penetrate and cause
bleeding.²³ Aim, fire, and be patient: the animal would die in time. In
this regard, the only “caliber” that might have mattered was point width
(critical to enabling the point and foreshaft to enter) and not length.
Clovis points are a mere 6 millimeters wider than Folsom points, hardly
a ballistically meaningful difference.

Fluting disappears from the Paleoindian repertoire after Folsom times,
though later Paleoindian points retain other ancestral vestiges: a
lanceolate form, sharp tips and upper blade edges, and ground lower
edges, where the point had been nestled within its haft. Paleoindian
point aficionados argue the merits of the various forms as weapons, but
Frison, who has experimented with virtually all point types on game
animals large and small, was unable to establish that any one was
significantly more lethal than another. Like all hunters, however, he
has his preferences: he'd arm himself with an Agate Basin point.²⁴

Whatever the point type, breaking on impact was common. The broadside of
a bison is a picket fence of wide, thick ribs. Weapons failure could be
dangerous if the hunter thrust the spear from close by and was still
holding on when it broke, leaving no chance for a second stab—and it
could take multiple stabs to kill a large animal (which requires quickly
pulling the spear out of a moving animal, increasing the chances it will
break). Not surprisingly, Christopher Ellis found that among the
majority of spear-using hunter-gatherers, their weapons were more often
used as javelins (thrown) than as lances (thrust), and when used as
lances, mostly served to deliver the close-in coupde grace to a dying
animal.²⁵

Throwing might have been accomplished by hand, or perhaps with the aid
of an atlatl, a throwing stick with a hook at the end that temporarily
holds the base of the spear. An atlatl and spear are hurled in an arc
that starts behind the thrower's head and comes overhand (much like the
motion of a baseball pitcher). As the spear travels the arc, it flexes
and stores energy, which is then explosively released, flying from the
atlatl at velocities that can average 135 kilometers/hour and exceed 200
kilometers/hour (in contrast, a hand-thrown spear averages about 90
kilometers/hour). A native hunter with an atlatl, one sixteenth-century
Spanish chronicler wrote (with a mixture of awe and fear), could throw a
spear completely “through a man armed with a coat of mail.”²⁶ With
velocity comes distance, which if the modern record for atlatl-aided
spear throwing—nearly 300 meters—is any indication, could have been
considerable.

Maximizing velocity and distance might require the hunter's entire body
be brought into play by standing to throw. That's not always easy or
desired if one is crouched behind rocks or brush, or trying to keep an
animal or herd from spooking and scattering, but of less concern when
animals are trapped.²⁷ Regardless, the hunter better keep back-up spears
close at hand, because once launched, a spear is not easily retrieved,
especially from an injured and dangerous animal. In some sites, and
Folsom is a good example, one can spot sets of points that are so alike
in material and workmanship it appears they were made by the same hand,
and possibly launched from the same quiver. But launched by hand or
atlatl? Because atlatls were made of wood or bone, they are rare
archaeologically, and unknown from Paleoindian times. Evidence of their
presence is strictly circumstantial. Studies by Karl Hutchings of
fracture velocities on Paleoindian points show some shattered from being
propelled at velocities only attainable with an atlatl.

After the kill was made, points were sometimes pressed into service for
butchering, but only if tools better suited to the task were
unavailable. Often used were skinning knives customized for the task. At
Folsom-age sites, these include palm-sized, exquisitely made, ultra-thin
bifaces (often no more than 5 millimeters thick), which must have been
highly prized, judging by the quality of their material, workmanship,
and scarcity. At later Paleoindian sites, the oddly asymmetrical Cody
knife served a similar function.

The toolkit found at a kill site can be relatively uncomplicated:
points, knives, and perhaps bone butchering tools, the latter often
fashioned on the spot for use in dismembering the carcass. But then,
kill sites offer only a small window into the full range of activities
engaged in by Paleoindians. In their longer-term residential camps (of
which, more below), the tools found include scrapers, knives, cores,
flakes, wedges, spokeshaves (tools with a concave edge for trimming
spear shafts), gravers, drills, and awls, as well as a complement of
bone and antler artifacts (see Plate 14).²⁸

PRODUCTS OF THEIR LABOR

Paleoindian hunters pursued bison throughout the year, but as Matthew E.
Hill shows, there are seasonal trends to the large kills, which partly
sort by geography. On the southern and central plains, the peak period
for bison hunting was in the late summer and early fall; it was later in
the year on the northern plains.²⁹ Why the difference? Winters are
longer and harsher on the northern plains, and meat from kills made at
the onset of the cold months could be stored frozen. (We can ascertain
when a kill was made because bison calve between mid-April and late May,
and their teeth have a regular eruption and wear sequence. Calves found
in a site that have only early stage lower first molars, say, were about
4-5 months old at death, so the kill likely took place in late summer or
fall, assuming calving and tooth eruption schedules of Pleistocene bison
were roughly the same as those of their modern counterparts.)

There's a related fact as well: kills made later in the year often
targeted cow-calf herds. Why them, then? In the fall, body fat and
nutritional value of cows and calves are at the peak from a summer of
grazing; bulls, in contrast, burn off much of their body fat in the fall
rut. At the same time, cow-calf herds are less dangerous and more easily
manipulated than bull herds. Cow-calf herds are otherwise difficult to
hunt during and immediately after spring calving: when frightened, very
young calves commonly bolt from the herd, and their mothers follow,
creating a chaotic situation that reduces the chances of success.³⁰

Although bison was a prime food, not all animals that were killed were
butchered, especially at large communal kills, and not all parts of all
animals were used. On occasion, Paleoindians practiced gourmet
butchering, as Lewis Binford calls it, with select cuts of meat removed
and eaten on the spot, or dried or frozen (depending on the season), and
then taken off-site. In any case, it's unusual to find all the animals
at a Paleoindian kill to have been completely butchered, or to have had
their bones smashed for marrow, or rendered for grease in hearths and
boiling pits. Bone grease is a key ingredient in making pemmican, a
highly nutritious, long-lasting, and easily transported food of pounded,
dried bison meat mixed with fat, berries, and bone grease in skin bags
(which historically was a valuable food for the lean winter and spring
months).³¹ That Paleoindians were not making pemmican, nor apparently
transporting or storing of quantities of meat (practices common among
later bison hunters), indicates their food needs were more easily met,
perhaps in no small measure because they were able to move freely over
great distances, and could exploit bison when encountered.

And sometimes they encountered and killed more animals than they could
possibly eat, especially in the near chaos of a communal hunt in which a
large herd was being stampeded into a trap. This was not like rounding
up slow, dopey cattle. Naturally, there was waste. Olsen-Chubbuck's
excavator, Joe Ben Wheat, estimated that 16% of the 190 animals killed
here were only partially butchered, and at least 10% of the animals at
the bottom of the pile were untouched. Even so, there was still an
enormous payoff. Based on the number, sex, and age of the bison in the
kill, and using meat weights of modern bison, Wheat calculated the
hunters butchered over 21,700 kilograms (23.8 tons) of meat. If
Pleistocene bison were 25% more massive than their modern counterparts
(his estimate), the harvest would have been 27,100 kilograms (29.8
tons).³²

If one assumes a single person could butcher an animal every 1-2 hours
(the figure varies depending on a host of factors), and that the
Olsen-Chubbuck hunters worked steadily at the task, then the butchering
process would have taken anywhere from half a day (if, say, 100
individuals were on the job) to several days (if there were only 10
people at work). Whatever the timing, Paleoindians needed to move
quickly, particularly in warm weather. Animals had to be disemboweled to
prevent internal fluids from spoiling the meat, and the meat filleted
and dried before blowflies came to lay their eggs. In cold weather,
spoilage would have been less an issue, but butchering more difficult as
carcasses froze and hands grew numb. And if there were carnivores or
scavengers within smell of the kill, they would have soon become
unwelcome guests.³³

If the hunters were en route elsewhere, the carcasses had to be cut into
segments for transport along with the tools, water containers, fire
starters, and other gear already being toted. Drying the meat surely
helped make it easier to transport, since it would shrink by about 30%
and be as much as 75% lighter.³⁴ Parts hauled away commonly included the
high-meat-yielding bones such as ribs, upper forelimbs and hind limbs
(bison drumsticks—easily hefted!), and shoulder meat, possibly still
attached to the shoulder blade for easy carrying. Often taken, too, were
the tail bones (caudal vertebrae), which at first glance makes little
sense. There's hardly any meat on these bones. But then it probably
wasn't meat the hunters were after, but what was attached to the tail:
the hide, which could be made into robes and shelter covers. As the old
saying goes, the “tail follows the hide.” Routinely discarded at these
kills were the low-meat-yielding parts such as skulls, lower limbs and
feet, and jaws (see Plate 15), but the jaws were usually not discarded
until after the tongues were cut out, these being delicacies often eaten
raw on the spot.

If the group was in less of a hurry, or the season and place was right,
instead of moving meat to camp, they might move camp to meat. There are
several Paleoindian kills with adjoining camps, such as Cattle Guard
(Colorado), excavated by Margaret Jodry. Nearly fifty bison had been
killed amid sand dunes (Great Sand Dunes National Monument is nearby) in
one late summer or early fall. At an adjacent camp, Jodry found that the
carcasses had been thoroughly butchered and roasted. Unusual for a
Paleoindian site, but perhaps indicative of the longer time spent here,
the bones had been smashed for marrow. Over 90% of the 200 projectile
points at Cattle Guard were broken and showed impact damage, or had been
used and reused so often they were worn down to slugs barely 3
centimeters in length. While enjoying the fruits of their labor, the
Cattle Guard hunters refurbished and replaced their broken weaponry,
leaving behind more than 18,000 waste flakes, several hundred point
preforms, and some 275 channel flakes (created in fluting) indicative of
point manufacture.³⁵

Cattle Guard was occupied longer than many Paleoindian kill sites, but
“longer” is strictly a relative measure based on the density and
diversity of archaeological remains. All things being equal, both
increase with a longer stay. Unfortunately, we have no means of gauging
the actual time that a longer stay represents, though it was probably
measurable in weeks. As mobile as these groups were, they likely did not
dwell in one spot for very long, except perhaps in winter when movement
across the plains and through the mountains was far more difficult, and
groups may have slowed or for a time stopped all together.

COPING WITH PLEISTOCENE WINTERS

At Agate Basin, on the high plains of eastern Wyoming, a Folsom group
camped on the floodplain of an arroyo some 10,800 years ago, near where
at least eleven bison and five pronghorn were trapped and butchered. The
people were here through the harsh, cold late winter until early spring,
judging by the presence of fetal and neonatal bison remains. They
pitched hide-covered structures (with one “tent peg”—a bison rib—found
still stuck in the ground), around which was a dense litter of
projectile point manufacturing debris, end and side scrapers, cutting
tools, gravers, knives and choppers, a crystal-studded abrader (for hide
softening?), bone and antler artifacts (including eyed needles), and the
slab used to pulverize the red ocher that covered many of the bones and
artifacts.

The site's inhabitants had plenty of time on their hands, which they
devoted to preparing bison robes—the scrapers are telling us that—and
gearing up for hunts that would take place when spring came. Frederic
Sellet estimates they fashioned a minimum of thirty-eight new points,
more than needed to replace the three broken ones they left behind. That
they intended to make camp for a long period is apparent in the stone
they used to make those points: it was hauled in from the Knife River
chert outcrops about 400 kilometers distant, a trip that would have been
extraordinarily difficult once winter set in. And it was a harsh winter:
Matthew G. Hill's analysis of the bison remains revealed that the
near-starving residents smashed open bison foot and toe bones to suck
out the meager marrow they contained.³⁶

Folsom groups stayed as long and weathered even harsher climes at the
Mountaineer site in the Colorado Rockies, where Mark Stiger uncovered
the foundation stones of a couple of Folsom-age structures (Figure 58),
the walls of which were made of aspen poles, smeared over with clay
mud.³⁷ To archaeology's good fortune, one of the houses burned after it
was abandoned, which fired the mud brick hard, preserving aspen bark
imprints on the clay. Within the houses are hearths and artifacts
indicative of various domestic chores, such as cleaning hides, fixing
tools, and making points. Bison bones from one of their meals yielded an
age of 10,400 BP, making Mountaineer one of the oldest home places in
America.

[images]

FIGURE 58.
The “floor plan” of one of the Folsom-age house structures at the
Mountaineer site. The larger dashed oval represents the approximate
outside edge of the structure, based on the distribution of artifacts
and features; the smaller dashed circle indicates the location of an
interior hearth. (Photograph by Mark Stiger.)

At first glance, it's in an odd spot for one. Mountaineer sits atop
Tenderfoot Mountain, a tabletop mesa that looms nearly 330 meters above
the surrounding valley, which is itself already 2,400 meters above sea
level. There is no permanent water atop the mountain, and most of the
game to hunt or plants to gather would have been in the valley below,
where the Gunnison River and several large streams flow. But two aspects
of the mesa might have made it attractive: It's got a stunning and
unobstructed view of the landscape below, making it a great vantage
point to spot animals grazing in the valley and plan a hunt (even this
fifty-something college professor can make it down the rocky slopes to
the valley below in under 20 minutes). Second, in winter, the top of
Tenderfoot Mountain is warmer and sunnier than the valley floor, since
no mountains shade it and the cold air sinks into the lower-lying basin.
And it almost surely was a winter occupation. Why else take the trouble
to build insulated, mud-walled huts atop a waterless mesa? In winter, of
course, melting snow would provide ample freshwater.

Perhaps not surprisingly, the majority of the artifacts from Mountaineer
were made of locally available, fine-grained quartzite, not the usual
chert, and bespeak movement restricted to this basin, at least for the
period they were at Mountaineer. Judging by the investment they made in
their housing and the amount of debris left behind, it was a lengthy
stay: weeks or even months (year-round settlement only occurs much later
in North American prehistory).

In fact, recent investigations in the Gunnison Valley, as well as
similar intermountain basins such as the central Rio Grande Valley (New
Mexico), as well as the San Luis Valley and Middle Park (both in
Colorado), suggest Paleoindian groups overwintered in these more
protected places, rather than spending the cold months on the open
plains. “Protected” is something of a loose term. The Gunnison Basin is
one of North America's coldest spots today, and likely was in the late
Pleistocene, though at least one would not have to contend with the
bone-chilling winds of the plains.

A BALANCED MENU

Staying put for long periods has its drawbacks, resource depression most
obviously. Food runs away or runs out, as the smashed-for-marrow bison
feet and toes at Agate Basin testify. A band of twenty-five families
living on bison alone, Frison estimates, would need to kill five or six
bison a month for their sustenance. Those might be hard to come by in
the dead of winter in a high-mountain basin.³⁸

But then, their diets were not dependent on bison alone, however highly
these were ranked and prized—especially on the open, treeless high
plains, where there are fewer food choices. Most large, communal bison
kills made in Late Paleoindian times were made in that setting, but
that's not necessarily what the majority of Late Paleoindian sites look
like or where they are found. As Jason LaBelle shows, most Paleoindian
sites are kills of smaller game or of fewer bison, quarry localities,
small artifact scatters (overnight bivouacs, perhaps?), or the
occasional isolated point. More telling, many of these occur not on the
open plains, but instead in mountain and foothill settings, which
provide a greater variety of food resources than the plains proper. The
high-ranked food (bison) is there to be sure, but also deer, pronghorn
antelope, other smaller animals, and plants.³⁹

The conclusion LaBelle draws is that Paleoindians engaged in large,
communal hunts on occasion, but for most of the year, the monitoring and
hunting of bison was a task left to hunting parties, which would kill a
few animals, then transport the meat back to camps. Otherwise, camps
were established around less mobile and more predictable resources like
water, small game, plants, and stone. These, as Douglas Bamforth
observes, often were used repeatedly over time (unlike bison kill
spots), and show a far greater reliance on locally available stone.

At these non-bison kill sites, we get a glimpse of the wide range of the
Paleoindian diet. One of the more striking examples comes from the Allen
site along Medicine Creek in southwestern Nebraska, where Bamforth and
colleagues have shown that Paleoindians consumed bison, deer, pronghorn,
jackrabbit, cottontail, and prairie dogs, as well as freshwater mussels
and fish. Likewise, on the far side of the plains in Wyoming's Big Horn
Basin, inhabitants of the Hanson site exploited mountain sheep, deer,
marmot, and cottontail rabbit. Even on the plains proper, at Lubbock
Lake (Texas), a permanent freshwater spring and pond attracted
hunter-gatherers, who took bison, deer, pronghorn, jackrabbit,

muskrat, and a variety of ducks that were also drawn to this setting.⁴⁰

GATHERING THE CLAN

During the Late Paleoindian period, we get our first archaeological look
at a phenomenon that must have occurred in earlier times and certainly
did later: the rendezvous. Such events would have been especially
important in the Paleoindian era, since groups likely spent much of
their time widely scattered in small family bands. From time to time,
they must have gathered to exchange information, resources, and mates;
initiate adolescents into adulthood; provide proper ceremonial attention
to the sick or recently dead; or just enjoy the company of other people
(Chapter 7). How often? No one knows for sure, but among mobile
hunter-gatherers of the Arctic, Lewis Binford reports aggregations were
timed to children's coming of age: when they were ready to be initiated
or married, it was time to gather the clan.⁴¹

Given the distances bands may have had to travel to the rendezvous, and
all they had to carry under normal circumstances, it would have been
difficult to come bearing large stores of food (no pot luck dinners
these). So we suppose gathering spots were selected for the richness of
the local food resources rather than, say, the presence of abundant
stone. The location also had to be well known or easily found, so no one
missed the event.

The Lindenmeier site in northern Colorado fits the bill. As LaBelle
observes, it is tucked into a topographic corner near where a set of low
hills comes in perpendicular to the Front Range, and is immediately
adjacent to a multistory geological exposure of red and white rocks—a
gigantic barber pole that can be spotted from 30 kilometers away.⁴² The
area was well watered, and there were stands of trees nearby to fuel
hearth fires and locally available stone to replace broken tools.
Because the site is at the intersection of two biotic communities (the
plains and the Front Range), it likely provided ample and diverse plant
and animal food for those who gathered here. At the very least, we know
Lindenmeier's occupants fed on bison, pronghorn, deer, jackrabbit, wolf,
coyote, fox, and turtle.⁴³

As Edwin Wilmsen showed, several areas of the site were simultaneously
occupied by groups with stylistically distinctive Folsom points, made of
different types of stone evidently carried in from different points on
the compass, all at least 150 kilometers distant.⁴⁴ While here, the
groups kept busy making projectile points: several hundred point
preforms and nearly 1,000 channel flakes were found. Looking at some of
the failed preforms, it's hard not to suspect they were made by novices
learning to fashion a Folsom point, or mimicking the activities of the
elders.

There was plenty of hide working, with many of the scrapers heavily worn
and resharpened, as well as wood, bone, and stone working, judging by
the notched stone tools and coarse sandstone blocks for carving and
sanding spear shafts and other tools. Delicately made bone needles hint
at the manufacture or repair of tailored clothing, which may have been
dyed with red ocher (imported from the Laramie Mountains to the north)
and decorated with bone “sequins” or stone beads (Figure 59), which were
frequently incised on their faces, notched on their edges, and
occasionally stained with ocher. But were those bone and stone items
more than ornaments? As Wilmsen admits, there may be more to these
pieces than we can see or even imagine.

Indeed, more surely occurred at Lindenmeier than we will know from the
archaeology, for most of the activities that would take place at a
rendezvous may have had little material expression—like conversation—but
were a vital part of their lives all the same. So, too, was this
particular rendezvous spot. Wilmsen reports Folsom bands periodically
returned here to complete the important ritual cycles of their lives.
Cycles and movement. Paleoindians were highly mobile some of the time,
less so at other times.

And one time they traveled out of archaeological sight.

BACKWASH

The Late Paleoindian period witnessed one final pulse of movement
between Alaska and unglaciated North America, only this time populations
were not just headed south, and the movement didn't just involve humans.
By 10,500 BP, the ice-free corridor was wide open and blanketed by a
rich grassland that formed a virtually uninterrupted greenbelt from the
Yukon to the Rio Grande.

[images]

FIGURE 59.
A stone drill and engraved stone bead from the Lindenmeier site,
Colorado, shown separately and showing how the drill may have been used
to fashion the bead. This particular drill may not have been the one
used to craft this bead—though it fits precisely in the center hole of
the bead—but the images show how it might have been. (Photographs
courtesy of Jason M. LaBelle; arranged by Katherine Monigal.)

Ancient bison DNA reveals what happened next. As Beth Shapiro and
colleagues have shown, bison populations in eastern Beringia and
unglaciated North America, which had been kept apart since the onset of
the Late Wisconsin, began to move. Those in the north headed south,
getting as far as the Peace River in northwestern British Columbia by
10,200 BP. In turn, those in the south moved north, hitting their
high-water mark near Athabasca, northern Alberta, by 10,400 BP. For a
brief period, the two populations of bison overlapped in the center of
the ice-free corridor region. Oddly, there was virtually no gene flow
between the two, and the southern bison never reached Alaska, nor did
any Alaskan bison ever graze in Montana.⁴⁵

However, the people who hunted them may have gone the full distance,
judging by the sites of the Mesa Complex, which are found primarily on
Alaska's North Slope (the region between the Brooks Range and the Arctic
Ocean). These sites were occupied in the several centuries leading up to
10,000 BP, putting their occupation at the tail end of the Younger Dryas
and making them essentially contemporary with, but slightly later than,
the Paleoarctic sites of interior Alaska (those microblade and microcore
sites described in Chapter 6). That also makes them the same age as Late
Paleoindian Agate Basin complexes on the northern high plains of the
Lower Forty-eight, to which, as it happens, the Mesa projectile points
bears more than a passing resemblance.⁴⁶

Michael Kunz discovered the original Mesa site on a large, isolated
ridge some 225 kilometers north of the Arctic Circle (but still 290
kilometers south of the Arctic Ocean), which rises 60 meters above the
surrounding plain (see Plate 16). Most of the other Mesa Complex sites
occupy similar high spots on the landscape. They are in an area of harsh
climate, with a mean annual temperature of -9.5°C (15°F) and annual
precipitation of just over 20 centimeters. Winds can whistle in excess
of 65 kilometers/hour, sometimes for days on end, which has the virtue
of keeping the ever-present mosquitoes at bay, but makes for chilly
conditions in summer and especially in winter. During the Younger Dryas,
it was even drier and colder, which likely explains the nearly twenty
small hearths found at Mesa. These were small hearths, for this was not
a habitation site but a hunting lookout. The hearths would have warmed
hands and feet as hunters sat atop Mesa and took advantage of its 360°
view of nearly 100 km² of the surrounding terrain, watching for prey.

The artifacts from Mesa are mostly projectile points (over 125) in
various stages of their life histories. As Michael Bever has shown, the
hunters sitting up here busied themselves making new points from
preforms of locally available cherts, sharpening still useable ones, or
discarding those too exhausted to salvage (sometimes first heating them
in the fire, likely to loosen the haft that bound them to a spear), and
otherwise retooling their weaponry and making ready for the hunt (and
incidentally littering the site with more than 20,000 pieces of
debitage). There were also some seventy gravers, indicative of working
bone. That not much else was going atop this hill is indicated by the
scarcity of habitation debris. The rest of the artifact inventory
includes a meager collection of flakes pressed into service as cutting
tools, scrapers, some hammers and anvils, a few quartz crystals, and
small bits of red ocher.

A similar toolkit appears in the other Mesa Complex sites of the far
north, the similarity likely reflecting the fact that they were all the
by-products of related, wide-ranging, rapidly moving hunters. Hunting
what is uncertain. Kunz and colleagues suspect the prey was bison or
perhaps musk ox, but not caribou, the denizen of the modern
tussock-tundra of the North Slope. The reason? In the late Pleistocene,
this was dry grassland better suited to bison, the bones of which are
abundant in nearby fossil localities of this age.

Watching for bison and other game may have been something these groups
had been doing for some time, and over a large area, for as mentioned,
Mesa projectile points bear a striking resemblance to points found on
the northern high plains, notably Agate Basin forms, which are
approximately the same age. Agate Basin and Mesa appear related, but
how? That's unclear, since there are but a couple of sites in the
intervening areas of Canada that look like either. Whether Mesa
represents Agate Basin hunters moving north up the recently deglaciated
ice-free corridor following bison herds in a still-expanding grassland,
or the reverse, we cannot say. Yet. But the betting money is on the
former.

As such, this may be the most contrarian population movement in human
prehistory. During cold intervals, and it was surely cold in the Arctic
during the latter part of the Younger Dryas, humans routinely abandoned
the far north, not migrated into it.⁴⁷ Indeed, while these Paleoindians
were following open grasslands to the north, there was southbound
Paleoarctic traffic down the Pacific coast and through the adjacent
forested interior of British Columbia (Chapter 6). But over on the
southbound lanes, the traffic moved more slowly: descendants of
Paleoarctic groups would not approach the Lower Forty-eight until many
thousands of years later.

Over on the northbound lane, Mesa groups traveled much faster
(centuries, not millennia), but it was a brief and short-lived movement
of people (and bison). Soon after 10,000 years ago, wetter and warmer
conditions came to the far north, and in their wake tundra took over the
North Slope, spruce forest and peat bogs spread across western and
northwestern Canada (Chapter 2), and the grassland corridor between
Alaska and the Lower Forty-eight was closed. With that, northern bison
populations declined, caribou numbers surged, and the Mesa Complex
disappeared.

That disappearance neatly correlates with climate changes that mark the
end of the Younger Dryas. As such, it may be one of the few instances of
a causal link between Younger Dryas climates and Paleoindian
adaptations. Not that we haven't sought others.

LOOKING FOR THE YOUNGER DRYAS

Archaeologists often invoke changes in climate and environment to
explain changes in culture. It's a tricky exercise: not all climate
change causes culture change, nor does all culture change have a
climatic trigger. But if there was a moment when people might have been
caught by changing climates, the Younger Dryas certainly seems a likely
one. Archaeologists have most assuredly noticed the possibility: the
“unexpected onset” of the Younger Dryas is blamed for Pleistocene
extinctions (remember overchill?), the “fragmentation of Clovis culture
and the emergence of more localized regional…cultural traditions,” and
evidently required Florida Paleoindians to dress in furs.⁴⁸ But did
Paleoindians notice the Younger Dryas? There are reasons to be
skeptical.

The most rapid and severe plunge in Younger Dryas temperature occurred
at high latitudes, which for the most part were still lacking human
occupants. Elsewhere across North America, climates varied, and in
places were relatively benign (Chapter 2). Vegetation change was not as
abrupt as climate change (there is that century or more lag), and though
those changes could be significant, they were most pronounced in more
northern regions.

We must be mindful, too, that Paleoindians were highly mobile, still
relatively new to the landscape when the Younger Dryas began, had yet to
experience relatively stable climates or environments, and weren't fully
settled in or dependent on particular resources in specific
environments. Adapting to changing environmental conditions was nothing
new to them. It was what they did. Only in this case, as Metin Eren
aptly notes, instead of people moving to different environments, if
anything the Younger Dryas brought different environments to people.⁴⁹

So the notion that the Younger Dryas somehow caught Paleoindians
flat-footed seems overly dramatic if not simplistic (especially the
stereotype of a suddenly devastating global Big Chill). But even if
Paleoindians were not constantly scrambling to keep up with Younger
Dryas changes, which mostly occurred on a scale of multiple decades or
centuries (still possibly not fast enough to be noticed by people, who
directly respond to daily, weekly, and seasonal conditions), the
cumulative effects of the Younger Dryas nonetheless may have required a
response. The best place to look is on the northern margins of the
Paleoindian world: perhaps Mesa in Alaska, or in northeastern North
America.

Paige Newby and colleagues observe that during the Younger Dryas, the
northeast was largely open tundra, as spruce woodlands (and the northern
tree line) had shifted south in response to colder and drier climates.
But as the Younger Dryas came to an end and climates warmed, both tundra
and spruce woodland retreated north, replaced by closed, mixed pine
forests. They “guarantee” that vegetation change had an impact on herd
size and migratory behavior of large mammals, namely caribou.⁵⁰

Guarantees aside (there's no fossil record to back it up), that's
probably right. Caribou live in arctic and subarctic environments,
summering on open tundra and wintering in sheltered forests. The Younger
Dryas would have suited them well. When those habitats shifted northward
as the Younger Dryas came to an end, caribou likely went along with
them, ending up where they were found historically: in far northern
Labrador. Moving into now-forested New England and the Canadian
Maritimes were non-herd animals like moose and deer.⁵¹

Newby and colleagues see a correlation between this ecological change
(caribou to moose and deer) and the near-simultaneous transition from
fluted to non-fluted points (the radiocarbon dating of that transition
is a bit wobbly, but we'll grant the point). They think that's no
coincidence, but reflects hunters adapting to new prey (that point's
harder to grant).

Bear in mind, however, that projectile points were but one element of a
much larger toolkit in use. Newby and colleagues admit the changes in
the rest of the Paleoindian toolkit over that transition were “more
incremental,” which is another way of saying there were virtually none,
despite apparently changing prey types. Nor is there compelling reason
why the method of hafting a point to a spear (whether fluted or not)
would change if the target was caribou as opposed to moose or deer. All
the points in question were lanceolate spear points, so their killing
potential was essentially the same.⁵²

More likely, Newby and colleagues are correct in their suspicion that
the correlation in the changes in hafting and landscape resources may
simply be fortuitous. After all, point styles were changing throughout
eastern North America at this time. It is no surprise one landed on this
moment of ecological change, especially when that “moment” extends over
several centuries.

Still, let's not give up on a possible Younger Dryas influence just yet,
for there is no denying the end of this period brought significant
ecological change to the northeast and New England, and there was an
apparent human response: it's not in the hafting technology, but instead
in the number and types of sites. In northeastern North America, tundra
and spruce forest gave way to mixed pine forests about 10,000 years ago
(depending on location). When that happened, the archaeological record
across much of the region essentially went blank. Although there's
debate as to why, the most compelling explanation is that the emerging
pine-dominated woods, a notoriously unproductive habitat, so limited
food options that there was little incentive to stay—and few did.⁵³

Those who remained situated themselves close to the area's lakes and
rivers, which would have attracted game, migratory birds, and possibly
fish (depending on the timing of natural, postglacial re-stocking).
Others of their sites are on the floors of what were recently drained
glacial lakes, open meadows where moose, deer, and elk would have
grazed. These sites are much smaller than those from earlier times
related to caribou hunting. The reason, Christopher Ellis and Brian
Deller suggest, is that these people were not participating in communal
hunts of migratory herds, but rather were targeting individual animals
roaming in smaller numbers in these open settings.⁵⁴ All the while, the
groups were using the same basic toolkit they had in earlier times,
though the points themselves changed hafts.

THE DALTON GANG

The biotic communities of northeastern North America were in flux as the
Pleistocene came to an end, but that was far less the case in
southeastern North America, where the forests were essentially already
modern looking, and which provided a much richer variety of foods. The
Late Paleoindian presence in this region was correspondingly much more
abundant, and characterized by a plethora of point style zones in
different regions. In general, all these groups exploited a wide range
of animals and plants, though across southeastern North America, there
were subtle differences in adaptation, depending on local resources and
environment.

The most complete record we have of Late Paleoindian forest adaptations
comes from Dalton period sites, which are concentrated in the central
Mississippi Valley, but extended from the Ozarks into the Carolinas and
date between 10,500 and 10,000 BP.⁵⁵ These sites are readily recognized
in their Mississippi Valley heartland by the presence of Dalton points,
and elsewhere by related types: Colbert, Greenbrier, Hardaway, Nuckolls,
and San Patrice. These generally have a lanceolate shape, a slight to
deeply concave base, which is thinned in what appears to be a last-gasp
effort at fluting, and are often finely serrated (saw-toothed). Over
their use lives, Dalton points were frequently resharpened in a way that
led to strongly beveled edges, giving them a trapezoidal cross-section.
Studies of wear patterns indicate these were multifunctional, serving as
projectile points as well as knives and saws for woodworking—which in
the late Pleistocene southeastern forests would have had no small
importance.

Nor are the points the only woodworking tools in use. Newly invented at
this time was the Dalton adze, a large, thick, triangular, and
relatively heavy biface, presumably used to rough out wooden artifacts
from food bowls to dugout canoes (in Historic times, canoes were
fashioned by carefully burning the surface of a log, then chipping out
the charred portions with an adze; microscopic bits of charcoal have
been found adhering to the bits of some Dalton adzes).⁵⁶ Given Dalton
sites are often located along rivers and streams, and in the bayous of
the Mississippi bottomlands, canoes would have been handy transport.

Dalton groups made a good living in the forest. By now all the
Pleistocene mammals going extinct had gone, but there was still plenty
of food to be had. Dalton peoples exploited mammals from small (chipmunk
and cottontail) to large (deer and elk), as well as birds, including
turkey and prairie chicken, quail and passenger pigeon, ducks and swans.
They pulled muskrat, fish (catfish, gar), aquatic turtles, and shellfish
(mussels) from the rivers and streams. They collected walnuts,
chestnuts, hickory nuts, persimmons, and acorns from the forest to
balance out the diet. And balanced it was: as Joseph Caldwell observed
of the remains at one Illinois Dalton site, with only slight
exaggeration, “Everything that walked, flew, or crawled” was swallowed
by the inhabitants of Modoc Rockshelter.⁵⁷

The Dalton diet speaks, if indirectly, to the matter of landscape
learning. Acorns contain high concentrations of tannic acid, and when
eaten raw have a bitter taste. To make them palatable, the acid must be
removed by leaching, which in prehistory involved placing mashed acorns
in a basket and running water through them. No baskets preserve, but
Dalton sites have grinding tools that would have served the mashing
purpose. Evidently, experimentation by Dalton times had shown how to
make acorn meal suitable as food, perhaps as bread flour.

Processing acorns and, for that matter, eating from top to bottom on the
food chain indicate diet breadth was expanding in these post-Clovis
times. This dietary expansion was traditionally credited to eastern
Paleoindians’ gradual and increasingly successful adaptations, enabling
them to plan more intricate movements across the landscape so as to
catch plants and animals at their seasonal peaks of availability or
productivity. Archaeologists termed this “primary forest efficiency.”

But that's a misnomer. As more food types are added to a diet,
efficiency actually drops. Think about all that time that must be
invested to make acorns edible, or to juggle all the tactics for
pursuing, killing, butchering, and processing very different prey.
“Primary forest inefficiency” may be a more apt term. Furthermore,
expanding the diet is not necessarily a sign of good times.

Unlike their Clovis predecessors, Late Paleoindians in eastern North
America were not ranging so widely across the landscape, judging by the
fact their stone was mostly acquired from local sources, not exotic
ones. And we suspect—based on a greater number of sites—that population
density was higher in the later period than it had been earlier. When
larger populations and smaller territorial ranges collide,
hunter-gatherers have a problem. Mobility is their first order of
response to cope with food shortages (Chapter 7): if one hunts out all
the local deer or gathers up the available plants, the best option is to
pack up and move. That option was readily available when the landscape
was still mostly empty and territories had yet to emerge. However, when
mobility is no longer possible because someone else is already occupying
the adjacent valley, the next option is to stay put but expand the diet,
eating more lower-ranked foods.

It still was a good idea to stay on friendly terms with the neighbors,
and Dalton groups apparently did. Among the sites in the central
Mississippi Valley there occur a small number of points that are longer,
wider, thinner, and more finely made than most garden-variety Dalton
points, and are routinely fashioned of high-quality Burlington chert,
obtainable only at a small outcrop just west of St. Louis. So unusual
are these the Dalton label doesn't quite fit, so they are called Sloan
points. Points that long and thin break too easily to be useful, and
befitting their impractical nature, Sloan points are rarely found in
everyday Dalton sites. Instead, they occur as isolates or in caches, a
half dozen of which are known from the central Mississippi Valley. Don't
think of these as being comparable to Clovis-age caches, for Sloan
points could not readily be pressed into service as points or raw
material sources, as could a cache of Clovis points, bifaces, and
blades. So why the investment in making these fancy, if unusable
artifacts?

John Walthall and Brad Koldehoff suspect these had a role in ceremonial
exchange, as indicators of wealth or status, or perhaps as symbolic
representations of hunting prowess. If the anthropological record is any
indication, the Sloan points were cached to stay hidden from view, only
to be displayed during public rituals or a when ceremony required their
appearance: for example, when rendezvousing with another group and
looking to cement an alliance with the exchange of a ritually valuable
item.⁵⁸

A SHELTERED EXISTENCE

Just when this process of decreasing mobility and increasing diet
breadth began is uncertain, though it was well underway by Dalton times.
But a caution here: Dalton sites yield a wide range of food remains in
part because many are domestic sites occurring in settings that preserve
bones and plant parts: namely, in rockshelters and caves (for
archaeological purposes, a rockshelter is a cliff overhang or hollow
into which sunlight penetrates; caves go deeper underground and have
chambers of permanent darkness).

Curiously, it is only in this period that Paleoindians took up regular
residence in nature's indoors. And in the grand scheme of human
evolutionary history, it's about time. The world over and deep into the
human past, people have occupied caves and shelters, and for good
reason. They provide protection from the elements so residents do not
have to contend with rain or snow or high winds; in summer they are cool
in daytime and warm at night (rock walls absorb heat, then radiate it
back); they can be good settings to stash food from the elements,
rodents, and vermin; and if one has reason to worry about such things,
they can provide a measure of protection from predators. With all those
advantages, it is reasonable to ask why, with the obvious exceptions of
the Meadowcroft and Paisley caves, no cave or rockshelter in eastern or
western North America was inhabited earlier than 10,500 years ago? Why
are the oldest and most common artifacts at the bottom of these natural
shelters so consistently Late Paleoindian in age?

One school of thought (Chapter 4) attributes the absence of earlier
remains to the newcomers’ unfamiliarity with the landscape. They did not
know where the caves were, and were moving so rapidly they did not
linger in an area long enough to find out.⁵⁹ Leaving aside the fact
these fast-moving and wide-ranging groups found many isolated and
obscure stone sources, it is certainly true that where the Clovis
presence was thin and shelters are rare, one would not find the other.
But what of eastern North America, where Clovis was abundant, and thanks
to the porous limestone that rules much of the bedrock geology, the
region is pockmarked with caves and shelters? Clovis people may have had
reasons for not moving indoors, even when they knew where the indoors
were. What those reasons might have been, we cannot say.

Or perhaps there's another explanation. Caves and rockshelters are
geologically active features: they weather and erode, fill with
sediment, collapse, and retreat. That activity is driven by water and
sharply fluctuating temperature, especially freezing and thawing. In the
cooler and wetter Pleistocene, there was plenty of that; less so in
warmer and drier Holocene climates.

The consequences for archaeology? Michael Collins suggests only a
fraction of caves open for occupation by Clovis people are still around
today, and those that have not entirely collapsed or filled have
nonetheless experienced repeated episodes of erosion and roof fall that
have deeply buried their Pleistocene surfaces. Recall that at
Meadow-croft Rockshelter, the oldest artifacts were found only after
looking under large blocks of sandstone that had crashed from the
ceiling (Chapter 4). In other instances, shelters were unopened prior to
Late Paleoindian times. Sarah Sherwood and colleagues showed that the
Tennessee River near Dust Cave flowed 6 meters higher during the
Pleistocene than at present, and its flood sediments choked the cave. It
was only after the Tennessee River fell that springs flowing out of Dust
Cave flushed it of sediment, and only after the springs dried (after
10,590 BP) that the shelter was open for human occupation (Figure 60).⁶⁰

Archaeological field techniques may be partly to blame here as well,
since excavations often take place where the shelter is today, and not
where it was in Pleistocene times, which can be somewhere in front of
the present entryway. Or, the excavations were unable to penetrate below
massive fallen roof blocks. In any case, the result is that the
“basement” culture found in the caves and rockshelters is almost always
Late Paleoindian in age, and in eastern North America that means Dalton.

There are, by John Walthall's count, at least forty-five rockshelters in
eastern North America—from the Ozarks to the southern Appalachians—that
have yielded Dalton remains. Most of these are relatively small (say,
less than 100 m² of floor area), but a dozen or so are quite large. The
largest, Stanfield-Worley (Alabama), is 55 meters wide and 17 meters
deep, with a 9-meter-high ceiling, and with more than 800 m² of floor
area suitable for occupation—not bad for a Paleoindian starter home.

[images]

FIGURE 60.
Excavations in the Paleoindian levels in Dust Cave, Alabama. (Photograph
courtesy of Boyce Driskell.)

These shelters were used repeatedly, for they were fixed and predictable
spots on the landscape. The smaller ones served as brief overnight
bivouacs for hunting parties, the larger ones accommodated bands for
weeks at a time, and both appear to have been preferred residences in
the cold and rainy months of fall and winter when it was better to be
indoors. The inhabitants slept inside and stayed warm and dry behind
slow-burning hearths, but went out front for most other activities,
presumably so as not to carpet their floors in sharp-edged debitage and
other debris.⁶¹

The larger shelters have yielded a rich collection of food remains (as
earlier noted) and a wider range of artifacts, including scrapers,
gravers, flake knives, blades, and wedges used in the activities with
which people passed the time. As is true elsewhere, artifact production
was high on that list. At Rodgers Shelter (Missouri), the inhabitants
stockpiled trumpeter swan bones and stone cobbles from the nearby Pomme
de Terre River, in order to fashion bone and stone tools. Found as well
were hammer stones and anvil flakers for making the tools, and the worn
and broken projectile points that had been brought back from the hunt,
unwrapped from their hafts, and discarded.

But it wasn't just tool manufacture and maintenance taking place here: a
large number of end scrapers, side scrapers, and awls hint at extensive
hide working. Similar tools, along with bone needles, have been
recovered at other Dalton shelters, such as the Graham and Arnold caves
in Missouri, revealing that clothing manufacture or repair was a regular
occurrence. It was colorful clothing, too, if the red ocher that was
ground in pitted anvil stones at these sites had been applied as a dye.

PALEOINDIAN OR PALEOARCHAIC?

On the other side of the continent, caves and rockshelters in the Great
Basin, although rare, are equally rich sources of information on Late
Paleoindian occupations, which in this region are marked by Great Basin
Stemmed points. These, as earlier noted, appear in terminal Pleistocene
times, but last well into the Early Holocene.

Over that time, the Great Basin experienced far-reaching climatic and
environmental changes (Chapter 2). After the jet stream retreated to the
north in the wake of the retreating ice sheet, rainfall was no longer
funneled into this region, and by late Pleistocene times, the once-deep
pluvial lakes had been replaced by shallow ponds and marshes, and
occasional springs and streams. The vegetation was changing as well:
alpine trees had begun their ascent to higher elevations and cooler
temperatures, while the lowlands—first in the south then toward the
north—increasingly took on a more scrub-steppe cast of grasses and bushy
plants, including sagebrush, saltbrush, creosote, rabbitbrush, and
shadscale.

As Charlotte Beck and George Jones have observed,⁶² fluted point groups
in the Great Basin spent most of their time in the lowland marshes and
wet meadows, and on or near the terraces of now-extinct Pleistocene
pluvial lakes (Chapter 8). Not so the makers of the Stemmed points, who
ranged widely into upland settings and, presumably, exploited a broader
range of resources and environments. By virtue of the extraordinary
preservation of organic remains in caves and rockshelters in this very
dry environment, archaeologists have gotten a rather personal glimpse
into what individuals were eating, for these sites yield what they were
excreting. In the human coprolites in the late Pleistocene levels in
Danger Cave, Utah (Figure 61), for example, were the traces of
well-rounded meals that included pronghorn (identified by bits of hair
and crushed bone), pickleweed seeds, prickly pear fruits, bulrush, pine
nuts, and many insects. This was hardly an atypical case.

Of course, these are just scatological snapshots of individual meals,
and not representative of the full range of foods exploited by people
who, from the animal bones found in their sites, were also hunting elk,
deer, bighorn sheep, the occasional bison, a variety of smaller mammals
(especially rabbits), waterfowl, and fish, as well as eating plants. It
was a thoroughly mixed diet, the ingredients depending on what was
locally available. That diet varied little in the centuries before or
the millennia after 10,000 BP (it changed appreciably only later, when
climatic conditions deteriorated in Middle Holocene times between 7500
and 5000 BP, and the role of seeds—drought and starvation food—jumped
dramatically). So seamless is this record of generalized subsistence
across the Pleistocene-Holocene boundary that Great Basin archaeologists
have given up any pretense that Paleoindians in this setting were
big-game hunters, or somehow distinct in adaptation from later Archaic
groups. They refer to all peoples from this span of time as
Paleoarchaic.

[images]

FIGURE 61.
Danger Cave, Utah, taken from the floor of the basin, which would have
been a salt marsh at the time of the earliest occupation. (Photograph by
George T. Jones, courtesy of Charlotte Beck.)

[images]

FIGURE 62.
A serrated bone harpoon or leister made of mammoth rib dated to 10,340
BP, from the site of Pyramid Lake, Nevada. (Photograph courtesy of
Eugene Hattori and the Nevada State Museum, Carson City, Nevada
Department of Cultural Affairs.)

Mammoth appear, if briefly, on the Paleoarchaic stage. A point fashioned
of mammoth ivory and a serrated mammoth bone harpoon, or leister (Figure
62), were found on the shores of Pyramid Lake, Nevada, a lake that
historically was home to a giant species of cutthroat trout (which
weighed upward of 28 kilograms). Both artifacts date to a statistically
identical 10,350 BP, opening the possibility they came from the same
animal.⁶³ Since the elaborate carving of the leister is the sort of
thing best done when bone—mammoth rib, in this case—is relatively fresh
or well preserved (bone becomes less malleable as it dries and cracks),
these were likely not pieces scavenged from a fossil skeleton, but
instead obtained from a recently dead mammoth. There's no small irony in
the fact that mammoth survived in the Great Basin until well after
Clovis (and overkill) times, and that in the Paleoarchaic at Pyramid
Lake, mammoth fishing tackle was used to go after a mammoth-sized fish.

Great Basin fluted points were made with the usual preference for
high-quality chert or obsidian. Yet, in fashioning their Stemmed points,
knappers often used crystalline volcanic rocks such as basalt and
andesite. Projectile points fashioned of such stone can be deadly,
though are too coarse grained to allow the razor-sharp edges possible
with chert or obsidian. More significant, perhaps, many Great Basin
Stemmed points have rounded edges and tips, which Beck and Jones
attribute to their use as projectile points as well as tools for cutting
and scraping.

Other elements of the Paleoarchaic toolkit included knives, gravers,
scrapers, spoke-shaves, a few milling and grinding stones (signaling the
use of plant foods), and crescents, a tool largely restricted to the
Great Basin. As the name implies, these are shaped like a crescent moon,
flaked on both faces, often heavily ground along both convex and concave
sides, and crushed and abraded on their ends. When first found, they
were interpreted as surgical instruments, prompting William Clewlow to
wryly observe that if that were so, there must have been “a vast
pre-Columbian medical center on the shores of the Black Rock Desert.”
More likely, he supposed, crescents were used to cut or carve animal
hide and flesh, or slice plants such as tule reed, which was used to
make fibers for fashioning burden baskets, fish nets, sandals, and the
other rare, perishable items found in many of these dry caves and
shelters.⁶⁴

It is by virtue of that extraordinary preservation we also glimpse some
of the rarest of the perishable artifacts, those related to burial
practices. A partially mummified man found in Spirit Cave (Nevada), was
laid to rest some 9,500 years ago in a sagebrushlined pit, wearing a
rabbit-skin robe and leather moccasins, and had been carefully wrapped
and sewn into a death shroud of woven fiber mats.

THINKING ABOUT LIFE AND DEATH

In fact, in the Late Paleoindian period across North America, we are
able to peer further into ritual and ceremony than was possible in
earlier times. This is not to say such matters were previously
unimportant, only that our knowledge of them is limited to a very few
sites, exemplified by the ocher-covered bones of the child buried at
Anzick, or the Buhl skeleton with its small collection of grave goods
(including stone and bone tools, and a badger baculum).

Part of ritual and ceremony in Late Paleoindian times was related to the
food quest, particularly the hunt. At the Folsom-age Lake Theo site
(Texas), for example, a small “shrine” (for want of a better term),
consisting of several bison jaws, two tibia (the lower and larger rear
leg bone), a femur (upper leg), and the spine of a thoracic vertebra
(the spine serves as the cantilever for the bison hump), were found set
standing vertically in a carefully dug, small, round hole in the midst
of a bison kill. It was likely created following the successful hunt.⁶⁵

Some 10,000 years ago at the Jones-Miller site, a wooden post
(identified archaeologically by a circular stain in the ground) was set
in the earth, and placed alongside it was a miniature Hell Gap point, a
fragment of a bone flute or whistle, the jaw of a wolf, and leg parts of
what might have been a dog. Soon thereafter, a great bison kill was made
over this spot. Coincidence? In historic times on the plains, when a
hunt was planned to trap bison in a surround of brush, snow, or some
other material, bets were hedged by a shaman planting a “medicine post”
in the center of the surround, where offerings were made for a
successful kill. If the Jones-Miller feature had the same intent, this
was a ritual with very deep roots, and it worked like a charm: some 300
bison were killed at Jones-Miller, possibly on two separate occasions.⁶⁶

At other sites, ritual was less obviously related to empty stomachs. At
Powars II in southeastern Wyoming (just 16 kilometers from the Hell Gap
site, which was occupied throughout Paleoindian times), a rich outcrop
of red ocher was mined by Paleoindians (and only Paleoindians), starting
in Clovis times.⁶⁷ Recovered at Powars II were many of the usual
Paleoindian tools, but they were not necessarily there for the usual
reasons. Half a dozen fragments of bison forelimbs and ribs had been
pressed into service as digging implements to wrest blocks of red ocher
out of the ground. Several dozen flakes had been employed as scrapers to
shave red ocher blocks, possibly to put it into a powdered form to be
mixed with water, sap, or some other liquid to make a paint (though
ocher is an effective coloring agent even as powder). Also found at the
site: a few seashell beads, which had been carried (or traded?) a great
distance, since the Pacific Ocean is at least 1,600 kilometers away
(there used to be a saltwater sea in this area, but that was at least
570 million years earlier).

As intriguing are the forty-two projectile points at Powars II. This was
no kill site, yet all the points had been heavily used, worn, and
repeatedly reworked; more than half were broken. Virtually all were made
of locally available stone. Evidently they'd traveled far and wide, been
used often, and were even rendered useless; but instead of being
abandoned where they had broken, they were kept and ultimately returned
to the red ocher mine near where the stone was first quarried. But why?
Michael Stafford and colleagues, puzzling over the matter, drew the
reasonable (if hard-to-verify) conclusion the points and beads were left
as offerings. Ocher is a potent symbol of life and death, and offerings
made at its source a correspondingly powerful ritual act. But why used
points? Stafford and colleagues wonder if these broken bits had once
been the hunters’ most successful weapons. Although their hunting value
had long since been spent, perhaps some of their power and accuracy
could be conveyed to newly-minted ones by the act of their ritual
offering.

From sustaining life to accompanying those after death: at the Sloan
site, on the summit of an old sand dune in northeast Arkansas,
excavations by Dan Morse recovered some 200 small, badly eroded pieces
of bone, spread over an area of about 144 m². On careful analysis, the
bone appeared to be human, from both adults and children. With the bones
were nearly 450 Dalton artifacts, arranged in twenty-nine discrete
clusters, perhaps having been placed into pits dug into the dune sand.
In some instances, the artifacts were so close together it appears they
were buried in leather bags or some other containers.⁶⁸ The pattern of
artifacts and bone suggested individual graves, but demonstrating that
(given the poor preservation) is no easy task, as Morse admits. But if
one assumes they were, then about thirty people had been interred here,
representing at least a couple of generations.

Fully one-third of the artifacts were Dalton points, the remainder
bifaces, adzes, scrapers, abraders, and a variety of other cutting and
scraping tools. And then there were a dozen or so Sloan points made of
Burlington chert, quarried about 300 kilometers away. Most of those were
newly minted or refurbished. In so far as these represent grave goods
that accompanied in death what individuals might have used in life, they
reveal the toolkit carried by a well-equipped Dalton person. The adzes
and bifaces with traces of red ocher on them symbolize something more.

Among societies that are sharply differentiated by social rank, one's
standing in life is often carried into death. High-status individuals
are buried with expensive grave goods marking their standing (think King
Tut). Yet, the grave goods at Sloan—the finely crafted points and tools
made of high-quality and hard-to-obtain stone—were evenly spread across
individuals of different ages or sexes. Morse concludes there was only
minimal social differentiation among the Sloan populace.

Sloan is North America's earliest known cemetery. Cemeteries, of course,
are sacred spaces, and this one is no exception: it is located well away
from other Dalton sites. There were no distractions or profane acts to
take away from any solemn rituals enacted here. Cemeteries were also
places to which people repeatedly returned. Of course, that was true of
other spots on the landscape, such as stone quarries, for example. But a
cemetery was a place of meaningful return as no quarry could ever be.
And so it is that after a millennium or more of wide-ranging and
untethered mobility, the first peoples have at last become firmly
attached to place. They could and, in the end, did come home.

THE END OF THE BEGINNING…

Geologists set the date for the end of the Pleistocene at 10,000 BP.
Doing so was arbitrary (Chapter 2), but as arbitrary numbers go, it's
not bad, coinciding as it does with the end of the Younger Dryas, as
discrete a climatic boundary as one could find. Once the Younger Dryas
was finished, there was no turning back toward the Ice Age, though the
Pleistocene was still in the process of wrapping up. In the far north
10,000 years ago, the once-vast ice sheets continued shrinking; sea
levels worldwide were still rising. In the Upper Midwest, the Great
Lakes were just reaching their present configuration, and throughout the
continent, plants and animals continued shuffling toward their modern,
postglacial positions on the landscape. North America as we recognize it
would finally appear around 5,000 years ago.

Likewise, archaeologists have traditionally divided the Paleoindian from
the subsequent Archaic period around 10,000 BP as well, using as a
benchmark the separation of highly mobile Paleoindian “big-game hunters”
from the “broad-based foragers” of the Archaic. As should now be
apparent, that's an equally arbitrary division. Paleoindians were not
strictly big-game hunters, and it was they who first established some of
the adaptive themes of the Archaic: use of a wider variety of food
resources, smaller territories and mobility, and the advent of new
technologies.

In fact, the most significant differences between Paleoindian and
Archaic adaptations emerge only much later in the Holocene, when new
communities began living in semi-permanent villages, manufacturing
pottery, burying their dead in artificially constructed earthen mounds,
and domesticating a wide range of plants. The timing of these
developments varies by region, and in some the vestiges of ancestral
adaptations linger for a very long time.

Although the narrative of North America's first peoples stops here with
the end of the Pleistocene and the dawn of the Holocene (doing more goes
far beyond the scope of this volume), prehistory in North America does
not stop. The descendants of North American Paleoindians weathered
severe drought on the Great Plains; bartered Wyoming obsidian for Great
Lakes copper and Gulf Coast shells in Midwest commodities exchanges;
teased wild plants until they bore seeds and fruits fit to eat, drink,
or smoke; dug thousands of kilometers of canals across the arid
Southwest and made desert gardens bloom; settled down from their
ancestor's mobile ways, and built towns of stone, earth, and wood; and
much, much more. Over those 10,000 years, populations boomed, people
moved, put down roots, then moved again; environments and adaptations
changed, sometimes dramatically; new languages, genetic lineages, and
cultures emerged. All independent of any contact with Old World peoples.

…AND THE BEGINNING OF THE END

Around AD 1000, the long separation of Old World and New came to an end,
though only in one far corner of North America. Thule Eskimo and Norse
Vikings, moving east and west (respectively), finally closed a circle
that had been open since the Pleistocene.

The first signs of their encounters appear in the eleventh century in
Thule sites around Baffin Bay, which yield iron, copper, and bronze
tools, and even (from a Thule site on Ellesmere Island) chain mail
armor, woolen cloth, smelted iron rivets and tools, a carpenter's plane,
and a bronze bowl and balance scale fragment. Whether these items moved
via peaceful trade (metal for ivory), mutual plunder, or both, we cannot
say. But then an exchange of goods was not vital to either party. Norse
and Native Americans were evenly matched in technology. The artifacts
and scrap metal the Thule got from the Norse merely supplemented their
own supplies of native copper and meteoritic iron.

Indeed, it's strongly suspected the contacts between the groups were
brief, misunderstandings common, and violence occasionally the end
result.⁶⁹ A stone arrowhead, like those made by Newfoundland's natives
in the centuries around AD 1000, was found having fallen out of a grave
in a Norse cemetery in Greenland, possibly carried there stuck in
someone's flesh or bone. At the very least, Norse and Native Americans
were unsure what to make of one another. The Norse puzzled over
Vinland's “Skraelings” in their sagas,⁷⁰ and a Thule on southern Baffin
Island tried to capture the image of a Norse figure in wood.

Perhaps their only chance for extended interaction was on the northern
tip of Newfoundland, where at the site of L'Anse aux Meadows, the
Norse—under the leadership of Leif Eriksson according to the sagas—built
three timber-and sod-walled long houses (up to 25 meters in length) and
several smaller outbuildings overlooking a shallow bay, sometime between
AD 980 and 1020. Excavations by Helge Ingstad and others also uncovered
remains of a smithy for smelting and forging, a carpentry shop, and a
boat shed. Norse ringed pins, loom weights, iron tools and debris,
wooden artifacts, hearths, and cooking pits were found amidst the
structures.

The very same spot had been used before and after by Native Americans,
although there is no evidence they and the Norse were there
simultaneously. But then the Norse were not on the ground for very long,
as both the sagas and the archaeology attest. The Norse did not plant
the farms they had in Greenland, but instead used the site as a winter
camp and summer base of exploration.⁷¹ It appears to have never housed
more than 100 people, was not kept in good repair, and burned soon after
it was abandoned.⁷²

It's the only settlement the Norse apparently tried to establish in
North America. Their exploration, which possibly reached as far south as
Quebec City (judging by butternuts found at L'Anse aux Meadows), never
became colonization. The sagas hint they put down no deeper roots in
North America because of the Natives, for when Leif Eriksson, his
shipmates, and kin landed, and the Old World and New came face to face,
the Old World contingent got the worst of it. The Norse were hamstrung
by having smaller forces (their ships could not carry large numbers),
tenuous lines of support, and no advantage in weaponry—and they faced
Natives possessing superior homeland knowledge and survival skills.

Losses at the hands of the “Skraelings” were a fatal blow to Norse
intentions: their plans for western expansion died with the Vinland
settlement. Later visits to the continent—likely to satisfy the demand
for timber back in Greenland—were fleeting and sporadic. As Leif's
brother Thorvald, fatally shot in a skirmish with “Skraelings” on the
Labrador coast, gasped in the end, “We've found a land of fine
resources, though we'll hardly enjoy much of them.”⁷³

This initial contact loomed large in the lives and deaths of the players
who were immediately involved. But for the vast majority of American
Indians living far from the front, those brief encounters in the distant
North Atlantic were completely unknown and utterly inconsequential. All
that would change with the next round of contact, beginning that October
night in 1492 when Old World sailors once again caught sight of the New.
For this time, the Europeans brought with them something far deadlier
than mere weapons.

10

WHEN PAST AND
PRESENT COLLIDE

On March 18, 1835, Charles Darwin disembarked the H.M.S. Beagle at
Valparaiso, Chile, and set off with “two Peons & 10 mules” on a
three-week round trip over the Andes to Mendoza, Argentina. Mules and
weather cooperated, the mountains enchanted. He wrote his sister, Susan,
that it was all so new and spectacular he “could hardly sleep at nights
for thinking over [his] day's work.” Best of all, what he saw of Andean
geology promised “a very important fact in the theory of the formation
of the world” (and, incidentally, inspired his explanation of the
Parallel Roads of Glen Roy). Little wonder he ranked this Andean
excursion his most successful since leaving England three and a half
years earlier.¹

But in the end, a night spent in Luxan, a small village south of that
“stupid, forlorn” town of Mendoza, had far more lasting consequences.
There, on the night of March 26, 1835, Darwin was attacked by the giant,
blood-sucking Vinchuca bug, Triatoma infestans, the “great black bug of
the Pampas.” It was, he said, “most disgusting to feel soft wingless
insects, about an inch long, crawling over one's body. Before sucking
they are quite thin, but afterwards they become round and bloated with
blood, and in this state are easily crushed.” Still, no pain was caused
by the wound, and though Darwin and his fellow shipmates were mildly
amused by the insect (one of them allowed it a meal), he thought little
of the attack then, and not at all later. He left Mendoza the next
morning and re-crossed the Andes.² Six months later, Darwin was on the
Galapagos Islands, where he glimpsed, but could not yet appreciate, the
meaning of its wonderfully varied life forms.

No matter. The seeds of the theory of evolution by natural selection
were planted, and when they bore fruit a few years later, Darwin could
look back at the Galapagos Islands and see what a marvelous laboratory
of evolutionary divergence these were. But it was a laboratory to which
he could never return. Crippling headaches, dizziness, nausea, stomach
pains, and fatigue began just a few years after his return to England,
and dogged him the rest of his life. His night in Luxan had caught up
with him.

The bug that bit Darwin is the primary vector for Trypanasoma cruzi, a
microorganism causing Chagas’ disease, which attacks the heart, stomach,
and intestinal system. Those bitten rarely escape Chagas. Even today,
despite concerted efforts to eradicate it (using insecticides, in heavy
doses, to kill off Vinchuca populations), Chagas causes more deaths in
the Americas than any other parasitic disease, and more than 18 million
people are affected by it.³ The Vinchuca does its work at night, and
those bitten often hardly notice the bite or its effects—at least at
first. Chagas is a time bomb, Sir Peter Medawar explains: years
afterward, the victim suddenly drops dead or, like Darwin, becomes
chronically ill with diagnosis-defying symptoms. It was worse for
Darwin, since Chagas was then unknown, and his physicians suspected he
suffered from hypochondria. And, as Medawar adds, “ill people suspected
of hypochondria or malingering have to pretend to be iller than they
really are and may then get taken in by their own deception.”⁴

Darwin fell prey to one of America's pathogens, a victim of the exchange
when an Old World host met a New World parasite. But he was an
exception. Old World populations were not overrun by Chagas, nor any
other New World pathogen. Through it all, using the excuse his illness
provided to free him from Victorian society's distractions, Darwin
produced the Origin of Species and more than a dozen other books that
introduced the concept of evolution, and in so doing forever changed our
view of life on earth.

Not so fortunate were the untold millions of anonymous American Indians
who died from imported Old World diseases in the decades and centuries
after the last discovery of America in 1492.⁵ The successors of Columbus
brought to America an arsenal of lethal pathogens, including smallpox
(Variola major)—the most horrific killer by far⁶—measles, influenza,
bubonic plague, trachoma, diphtheria, malaria, amoebic dysentery,
typhoid fever, cholera, chicken pox, yellow fever, scarlet fever, and
whooping cough. In many instances there were repeated epidemics of each.
Since these diseases were not endemic to Native American populations,
each new breakout proved just as deadly to those born in between
episodes of epidemics.

But why, asked Antoine Le Page du Pratz, who lived among the lower
Mississippi Valley's Natchez in the 1720s, should “distempers that are
not very fatal in other parts of the world, make dreadful ravages among
them?” American Indians were dying from what were childhood ailments in
other parts of the world. Even at its worst in Western Europe during the
1700s, smallpox accounted for just 10%-15% of all deaths, and 70% of
those, Alfred Crosby reports, were children under the age of two.⁷

Why were Native Americans of all ages vulnerable to what were in Europe
mere childhood diseases? And why had they no epidemic diseases of their
own that might have devastated Europeans, and perhaps even checked their
advance into America?

The answers to these questions have little to do with events after 1492.
They have a great deal to do with events that occurred before 1492. They
have everything to do with the peopling of the Americas.

THE BEHEADING OF PREHISTORY

Precisely how many Native Americans died in the decades and centuries
after 1492 is impossible to know, since early on, no one was keeping
census records. But Thomas Jefferson suspected the worst. After
comparing a tally of Virginia's forty tribes from 1607 when Captain John
Smith made contact, to a count made in 1669 by the Virginia assembly,
there was no mistaking the “melancholy” message. In only sixty-two
years, the tribes had been reduced to one-third their former number.⁸

Jefferson believed diseases were not entirely to blame: “spirituous
liquors,” war, and land grabbing had played their insidious roles.
Still, he knew the fearful toll of disease and, already aware of Edward
Jenner's newly discovered vaccine for smallpox, instructed Meriwether
Lewis and William Clark to carry on their expedition west “some matter
of the kinepox [cowpox fluid] [and] inform those of them with whom you
may be, of its efficacy as a preservative from the smallpox; & instruct
& encourage them in the use of it.”⁹ Well intentioned to be sure, but
inevitably Lewis and Clark discovered smallpox had arrived long before
they did. Even along the Columbia River in the far Pacific Northwest in
April 1806, Clark came upon a large, ruined village and the few,
pox-scarred survivors of a terrible smallpox epidemic that had roared
through three decades earlier. Disease had reached this remote corner of
North America long before European liquor, war, or land grabs—and well
in advance of any Europeans.

That was hardly an unusual occurrence. Nearly three centuries earlier,
in the spring of 1540, Hernando de Soto entered the chiefdom of
Cofitachequi (in present-day South Carolina). Although his was the first
significant European presence in the region, he saw several “large
uninhabited towns, choked with vegetation, which looked as though no
people had inhabited them for some time.” He learned that “two years ago
there had been a plague in that land and they had moved to other
towns.”¹⁰

Disease, the enemy no one saw, traveled much farther and frighteningly
faster than the Europeans who brought it to America. The reason was
deadly simple. Take smallpox: it has no known nonhuman host, but it can
survive for extended periods outside its human host in a dried state,
including on infected blankets or clothing, where it can remain viable
for more than a year. It is also readily spread by breath. With an
incubation period of 10-14 days, that's plenty of time for an apparently
healthy person to flee a stricken area when the first gory symptoms
break out, and unwittingly spread the virus to others in neighboring
villages.¹¹

So it was that the disease spread among American Indians with
astonishing speed and deadly efficiency. Just how far and how fast it
could burn through Native populations can be seen in the smallpox
epidemic of 1775-82 (which took a small share of the colonial population
as well). As Elizabeth Fenn has detailed, that bout began in Mexico
City, and by the time it exhausted itself of victims seven years later,
it had killed American Indians trading at remote Hudson's Bay Company
outposts in far northern Canada (probably reaching there via
long-established trade networks).¹²

By the time Europeans arrived on a scene, native populations were often
already devastated. Under such circumstances, counts of native
populations can be highly suspect, and we must rely more on
archaeological evidence—of site and regional abandonment, for
example—than on any historic records. Even where Europeans showed up
before disease hit (Hernan Cortes in the Valley of Mexico in 1519, for
example), reliable numbers are elusive. The earliest explorers,
conquistadores, and missionaries could be notoriously bad census takers,
often overestimating or underestimating native populations, depending on
whether they were in the business of converting native souls (report
high numbers to testify to one's good work) or capturing native lands
(report low numbers to justify a land grab).¹³

We may never know how many Native Americans were here on the morning of
October 12, 1492. Indeed, no one knows how many people lived just about
anywhere in those days (census records are a phenomenon of more recent
centuries). One school, championed by Henry Dobyns, estimates Native
America numbers using a “depopulation ratio,” the difference between the
“known or confidently estimated preconquest population” in an area
against the estimated nadir population for that same area. After
examining multiple cases, he concluded that a “sound, if conservative”
estimate would put the ratio at about 20:1. It would be even higher if
the preconquest population had already suffered a wave of disease. From
that, he concluded, the New World pre-European contact population
numbered 90 to 112 million, of which 18 million people occupied North
America north of Mexico.¹⁴

These astonishing figures are orders of magnitude higher than all
estimates before or since, and have been hotly disputed. Too many
unsupportable assumptions, critics say, are behind the numbers, not
least Dobyns's belief that there were multiple epidemics, each with
extremely high mortality rates, and that most populations had already
declined before any Europeans arrived to make a count. It is better, the
critics say, to tread cautiously and use more direct evidence.

Douglas Ubelaker, drawing on tribe-by-tribe census figures and available
archaeological evidence, puts Native North American populations at the
time of European contact at a far more conservative 2.4 million.¹⁵
Carefully derived as it is, this estimate is also suspect since it is
based on counts that came in, Ubelaker readily admits, too low and too
late. Recall that by the time Rene-Robert de la Salle arrived in
southeastern North America in the late 1600s, the region was virtually
depopulated. He saw only remnants of once-teeming communities that had
greeted de Soto a century earlier (Chapter 6).

The actual number surely lies somewhere between these two extremes, but
no one really knows. What we do know is that American Indian populations
bottomed out in the late nineteenth century, the timing varying by tribe
and area. At the nadir, there were an estimated 514,510 Native North
Americans (their numbers have since rebounded).¹⁶ Here's the root of the
claim that from European colonization until the twentieth century, more
Native Americans died than were born.

Overstatement, maybe. But no matter the actual number, imported
pathogens caused Native deaths in fearful numbers. By Dobyns's estimate,
it was a decline of 97%; by Ubelaker's lower figures, at least 78%.
Those are staggering losses either way. Even in the 1960s and 1970s,
more than four centuries after initial contact, mortality rates for
remote Amazonian tribes exposed to measles for the first time were
upwards of 75%.¹⁷

The post-European contact population history of Pecos Pueblo is probably
typical in microcosm of what was happening continent-wide (although
atypical in that we have record of it). By 1927 Pecos was a
long-uninhabited archaeological site (Figure 63) where A. V. Kidder was
excavating when he was called by Frank Roberts to come see the first
Folsom point found in situ (Chapter 3), and from which Earnest Hooton
thought he spotted so many varieties of human crania (Chapter 5). Yet,
300 years earlier, Pecos Pueblo had been a thriving community, with a
population of more than 2,000 people (as estimated by a Franciscan friar
living among them). The numbers might have been higher still if the
Pueblo hadn't already experienced one (or perhaps more) epidemics. In
the intervening centuries, Pecos was battered by repeated smallpox
epidemics—possibly a dozen altogether—and weakened by raids from mounted
Comanche warriors; the loss of labor for planting and harvest, and the
famine that followed; out-migration and social disruption (especially as
the older leaders of the community, its rituals and ceremonies, who
would have been more susceptible to disease, died off); and the other
grim collateral consequences of a village reeling from recurrent and
cumulative waves of death. By 1838 only 18 survivors remained. That
year, they packed up their belongings and abandoned the Pueblo.¹⁸

[images]

FIGURE 63.
Pecos Pueblo. The rooms in the foreground were part of the South Pueblo.
The large building in the background is the ruin of the church built by
Spanish missionaries in the early 1700s (an earlier church was razed
during the Pueblo Revolt of 1680-92). (Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

Depopulation on a scale of 78%—let alone of 97%—inevitably had
far-reaching and devastating effects on people (of which more below),
and possibly even on nature itself. As millions died, farm fields
returned to forests, bringing about an artificially induced ecological
succession (what European colonists in eastern North America described
as pristine woodlands were often second-growth forests). Animals whose
numbers had previously been reduced by hunting pressure returned; the
chroniclers of de Soto's expedition make no mention of bison, but when
de la Salle arrived the next century, many villages and farms had been
supplanted by large bison herds grazing areas of open parkland.¹⁹

Human population losses might even have been large enough to alter
global climate—a not-uncontroversial suggestion made by William
Ruddiman, who plotted changes in atmospheric CO₂ concentrations from ice
cores against historical epidemics. The sharpest decline in atmospheric
CO₂ over the last 2,000 years occurred between the 1500s and the 1750s.
That suggested to him that the decimation of American Indian populations
during these centuries, when abandoned farm fields were overtaken by
carbon dioxide-consuming forests, temporarily checked rising atmospheric
CO₂ levels. He even supposes this was the trigger for the Little Ice Age
(Chapter 2).²⁰ That CO₂ levels rose again in the late eighteenth century
is less a testimony to the rebound of Native American populations than
it is evidence of the influx of Old World colonists clearing
then-vacated New World forest lands.

THE CHILDHOOD OF DISEASE

European colonists thrived in the New World, while around them, American
Indians died. Blame that disparity on evolution and the contingencies of
history.²¹ Many of humanity's deadliest diseases come from species with
whom we come in contact, for viruses or pathogens that might be
relatively benign in one organism can turn deadly in another (e.g.,
Ebola or HIV/AIDS). When a pathogen first appears in a human population,
neither young nor old are spared a bout with the illness, and the result
is either death or lifetime immunity. Early on in many cases, the result
is fatal. But as individuals most vulnerable to the pathogen are
eliminated from the gene pool through natural selection, it is the genes
of the hardier survivors, who mature and reproduce, which over time come
to dominate the gene pool. Humans co-evolve with the disease. As a
result, diseases once deadly to both adults and children eventually
become just childhood ills. The longer a community has lived with a
disease, the less destructive its epidemics.

Old World communities did not start out riddled by disease. For the
first few million years of human prehistory, our collective ancestors
were few, subsisted by hunting and gathering, and were mobile, much like
the first Americans. That had to change in order to spark the evolution
of epidemic diseases, for these require two essential ingredients: a
pathogen source—usually animals living close by—and a large supply of
victims to sustain a chain of infection (measles, for example, requires
a minimum of 200,000 to 300,000 hosts to ensure its survival). In the
Old World, these vital ingredients only appear with the advent of
agriculture, pastoralism, and settled village life.

When humans began to settle in place, clearing land for farming, piling
up trash, and fouling their water, they created breeding grounds for
rats, lice, worms, mosquitoes, and all manner of disease-causing or
carrying organisms. And when they began living with their newly
domesticated animals, drinking the same water, breathing the same air,
and using animal waste to fertilize their crop fields, they unwittingly
shared a volatile mix of pathogens from which sprang potent new
diseases. Domesticated animals are a major source for many of
humankind's most deadly diseases, like smallpox, which is similar
genetically to other orthopoxvirus forms hosted by camels, cows, and
rodents;²² measles appears to be derived from bovine rinderpest or
canine distemper; influenza seemingly originated in avian influenza or
hog diseases. In all, humans inherited dozens of diseases from animals,
domesticated and wild.

Lots of people began living in close contact with one another around
9,000-10,000 years ago, earliest in Mesopotamia and then later
throughout the Old World from Africa to Asia. Within a few thousand
years, they had tamed wild cattle, sheep, pig, and goat (among other
animals), and the combination of farming and herding fueled a steep rise
in human populations. More mouths demanded more farmland and pasture.
Sanitary conditions declined: it was life cheek by jowl with other
people and other animals. In involuntary experiments taking place in
countless early villages and towns, new diseases were born and spread.
Their arrival went unchallenged.

Epidemic diseases make their archaeological debut some 3,000 years ago,
in smallpox pustules visible on Egyptian mummies, though this was
apparently a milder form of the virus. The earliest historic record of
pandemic smallpox comes from fourth-century AD China (suggesting, as has
since been shown in a study of the smallpox genome, that two separate
strains of this virus made the jump to humans).²³ Diseases, of course,
figure as biblical plagues. A wave of typhoid fever struck Athens during
the Peloponnesian War, while the Antonine (smallpox) and Justinian
(plague) pandemics, nearly 400 years apart, crippled the Roman Empire.
These infectious pathogens reached the distant corners of Europe by
Medieval times.

By 1492, having been exposed for thousands of years to dozens of
pathogens, Old World populations had effectively “adapted.” Natural
selection had done its work well. Old World populations still suffered
occasionally spectacular epidemics, like the Black Death of the
fourteenth century (1347-51). Yet, their populations emerged, sometimes
deeply scarred but largely intact. Mortality rates during the Black
Death were a mere 30%.

Not so the Americas, where neither old nor young were spared. American
Indians were so utterly defenseless against imported European diseases
that it was taken by some as a sign of higher authority. “The natives,”
John Winthrop wrote in 1634, “are neere all dead of small Poxe, so as
the Lord hathe cleared our title to what we possess.”²⁴ The Natives
themselves, discouraged by their losses and the seemingly stunning good
health of the invaders, were often convinced their own deities were no
match for the European God.

Others blamed native health care: “When a nation is attacked by the
smallpox,” du Pratz wrote in 1758, “it quickly makes great havoc; for as
a whole family is crowded into a small hut, which has no communications
with the external air, but by a door about two feet wide and four feet
high, the distemper, if it seizes one, is quickly communicated to all.
The aged die in consequence of their advanced years and the bad quality
of their food; and the young, if they are not strictly watched, destroy
themselves, from an abhorrence of the blotches in their skin. If they
can but escape from their hut, they run out and bathe themselves in the
river, which is certain death in that distemper.”²⁵ Du Pratz could not
understand why native physicians, otherwise quite skilled, could not
cope with these common ailments.

They were quite skilled, but their skills were honed against
long-familiar ills and were no match for alien pathogens. They were
understandably baffled by disease transmission. When smallpox broke out
among the Piegen Blackfoot, one survivor reported, they had no idea
“that one Man could give it to another, any more than a wounded Man
could give his wound to another.”²⁶ More to the point, in those
centuries, no one on either side of the ocean understood disease
etiology, let alone could have stemmed the viral and pathogenic assault
on New World peoples.

The obvious answer, then, to why Native Americans suffered so terribly
from introduced infectious disease is because they had no previous
exposure and hence had built up no immunity. And when a group with adult
immunity spreads the disease to one without, mortality is nearly
universal. Crosby likens the process to a forest that has not burned for
a very long time: when ignited, burning is swift, and destruction is
nearly total.²⁷

So we know the immediate cause for the catastrophic population loss
among American Indians: a lack of immunity. But that begs the larger
question: why did they lack immunity? It's not that they didn't have the
ability to develop immunity to diseases. It's that they didn't have
immunity to these specific diseases. For that, they needed exposure time
and proximity. They had neither, which brings us back to the peopling of
the Americas.

FROM SIBERIA TO SMALLPOX

No matter the haggling over the precise homeland of the first Americans,
archaeological, dental, genetic, linguistic, and skeletal evidence
indicates American Indians were descendants of Asian populations, not
groups emigrating directly from Europe or the Middle East. Moreover,
their ancestors had left Asia and the Old World thousands of years
before the first cow, pig, camel, or sheep was ever penned, and well
before village life hatched the first epidemic diseases. No ancestral
American suffered through the thousands of years of agony and illness as
diseases jumped species and then co-evolved with human hosts.

The port of entry for America's first peoples was the Bering Sea region.
They could, and likely did, walk across from Siberia to Alaska when
expanding continental ice sheets dropped sea levels worldwide and
Beringia surfaced. Crossing its Mammoth Steppe, blanketed by parkland
and grazed by mammoth, horse, and bison, was possible anytime between
27,000 and 10,000 years ago (during the last millennium, when the breach
was still narrow enough to freeze in winter). The recent genetic
evidence of a possible Beringian standstill (Chapter 5) suggests the
first peoples may have been relatively isolated in this region for much
of that time.

From there they traveled south, either between retreating margins of the
Laurentide and Cordilleran ice sheets, or down the Pacific coast. Both
entry routes were blocked for much of Late Wisconsin time, and may have
been biologically impassable when first opened (the coastal route
opening sooner). In any case, it appears from the evidence at Monte
Verde that the first Americans were here by at least 12,500 BP and
possibly earlier still. Certainly by 11,500 BP, Clovis Paleoindians were
widespread, possibly representing a second migratory pulse to the New
World, one that may have spread across the continent in less than a
thousand years.

Beringia and the routes south served as more than just passageways.
These were also, in physical anthropologist T. Dale Stewart's words,
“germ filters”²⁸ that would have effectively stripped away any diseases
lurking among the colonizing populations. For as Stewart observed, the
harsh Arctic cold would have killed off the vectors (carriers) of many
infectious diseases (such as snails, worms, or mosquitoes), along with
any of their diseased hosts. If a pathogen somehow infected a small band
on this thinly settled landscape during its journey, the group would
have been naturally quarantined, and would have disappeared with little
notice and no widespread effect. All diseases are parasites: they need
hosts to sustain their deadly work. Beringia did not then, as the Arctic
does not today, support dense populations that would prolong a disease's
run.

Once the first Americans made it here, their rear flank was well
protected by the vast distance between the source regions of disease and
northeast Siberia. Smallpox only reached this far corner of Eurasia in
the seventeenth century. Given more time, infectious epidemic diseases
might have crossed the Bering Strait and entered the Americas from the
west, or perhaps not. The small and scattered populations that lived in
far Northeast Asia and the relatively low level of traffic across the
Bering Sea would have made it difficult for Old World diseases to sneak
up on New World peoples from behind (the Bering Sea would have been just
as effective a barrier preventing the backwash of diseases from the New
World to the Old, were there any New World diseases to wash back).

The timing, route(s) of entry, and subsequent geographic isolation of
the first Americans helped ensure there were no opportunities for them
to adapt and co-evolve with Old World diseases.

But there's more to their lack of immunity than just geography—there's
genetics, too. Whether Clovis or pre-Clovis, the first Americans came
here as a relatively small founding population, possibly having passed
through a population bottleneck, the signature of which is apparent in
the small number but widespread distribution of mtDNA and NRY founding
lineages among Native Americans, and in the frequency differences of
those lineages here relative to Asia (Chapter 5). A founder effect is
also apparent in other aspects of their genome, most importantly on
chromosome 6, which houses the large cluster of genes that comprise the
major histocompatibility complex (MHC).

The MHC is one of our main lines of defense against viruses or other
pathogens that have found their way into our cells. Once embedded inside
the cell walls, the pathogen is invisible to the body's other defenses
(lymphocytes, for example). To scan for those, the MHC encodes human
leukocyte antigens (HLAs) to bring to the cell's surface bits of peptide
antigens lurking within, enabling them to be scanned by the immune
system. It's a constant “news scroll” across a molecular screen of cell
health. If the antigens detected are the body's own, they are ignored;
if they are foreign (say, fragments of a growing virus or traces of a
malignancy), the body's T-cells go on the attack, and destroy the cell
and all within it.

The susceptibility of New World populations to epidemic disease, as
epidemiologist Francis Black carefully explained, “was not [because
they] had inappropriate genes or, individually, deficient immune
systems,” but because the people of the New World were unusually
homogeneous in their MHC antigens (by one estimate, Europeans have
thirty-five classes of HLAs, Native Americans fewer than seventeen).
That genetic homogeneity, of course, is an echo of their “bottlenecked”
Pleistocene population prehistory. And because of that smaller diversity
of HLA alleles, there was a far greater chance that a deadly virus
introduced into a population would encounter the same allele in
successive hosts. Having survived one host, it was essentially
pre-adapted to the next, and so was able to readily sustain its deadly
progress through the population. Black reports, for example, that there
is a 32% chance that a virus passing between two Native South Americans
will not encounter a new MHC type, but only a 0.5% chance when it passes
through a more MHC polymorphic African population.²⁹

Population history matters, and though it helps explain why American
Indians lacked immunity to Old World diseases, it fails to account for
the flip side of the question: why they had no evolutionary experience
of their own with epidemic diseases on this continent, nor infectious
pathogens that could be passed to Europeans. Those answers, too, are
found deep in prehistory.

When the first Americans arrived, the North American landscape was
crowded with now-vanished animals. A common feature of all, aside from
their mostly enormous size, was that all were extinct by the end of the
Pleistocene. Paleoindians were assuredly contemporaries with more than a
dozen of the greatest of these beasts, and Paul Martin has argued
vigorously, though not persuasively, for a human hand (or Clovis point)
in their extinctions (Chapter 8). More likely, the climatic and
ecological changes at the end of the Pleistocene—when it became warmer
and more seasonal, and summers grew longer—ultimately did in these
Pleistocene mammals, just as it caused the extinction and range changes
in a wide range of other animals (and plants).

These were the very same changes occurring halfway around the world that
set the stage for the domestication of cattle, goat, pig, sheep, camel,
ass, elephant, horse, duck, goose, water buffalo, yak, and cat. In sharp
contrast, indigenous animal domestication was insignificant in the New
World: just three species of South American camel, the turkey, possibly
the muscovy duck, and the guinea pig (they'd brought their dogs with
them).

There are two reasons for that striking imbalance in the number of
animal domesticates. First, the New World fauna was impoverished.
Pleistocene extinctions had wiped out thirty-five genera of animals:
that was 80% of North America's large mammals. Gone were horses,
elephants (mammoth and mastodon), and camels, animals whose Old World
relatives survived the end of the Pleistocene, thereby allowing Genghis
Kahn to gallop on horseback to global empire, Hannibal's army to ride
elephants over the Alps, and camel caravans of the Persian Empire to
travel the Silk Road. All that remained of North America's large mammals
were bison, moose, elk, deer, musk ox, mountain goat, and pronghorn
antelope. This was a narrow pool from which to seek potential animal
domesticates.

Second, not all animals, especially not those North American survivors,
are easily domesticated. Animals so suited, Jared Diamond argues, must
be social and display dominant and submissive behaviors. They should not
compete with humans for food and, better still, should be a potential
food source. They cannot have an instant flight reflex when startled.
They must breed readily in captivity. And, they must be adaptable to a
wide range of climates and environments.³⁰

Of the surviving New World large mammals, only bison come close to
meeting those strict requirements. But penned bison are unruly animals
(Chapter 9). Besides, what's the incentive to domesticate? Domestication
is partly a response to food shortages. For more than 10,000 years,
bison were an abundant, predictable, and reliable food source. Why take
the trouble to corral them? No one did.

The combination of Pleistocene extinctions and the difficulty or
disincentive for taming surviving mammals produced no significant New
World animal domesticates with which to share and hybridize deadly new
pathogens. Only in South America, where several camel species were
herded, was there a likely animal source for disease strains. These
animals and their herders, however, lived high in the Andes in small and
dispersed groups, and were too few and too isolated, William McNeill
explains, to sustain infections in the wild. Guinea pigs, also
domesticated, served as the primary reservoir for Chagas’ disease, but
Chagas does not have the pandemic power of smallpox or measles.³¹

However, New World peoples did domesticate a cornucopia of plants (more
than in the Old World, in fact), from acorn squash to yams, as well as
avocado, cocoa, chili pepper, cotton, gourd, lima bean, manioc, potato,
peanut, pumpkin, sunflower, tomato, and tobacco (virtually all of which
were carried across the ocean, indelibly altering Old World menus). The
most important, however, was the triumvirate of corn, beans, and squash.
These plants fed the great pre-Columbian towns of North America, and the
Mesoamerican civilizations of the Olmec, Maya, Toltec, and Aztec.
Potatoes, peanuts, and yams did the same for South America's Chavin,
Moche, Wari, Chimu, and Inca.

So successful was food production in the New World that by 1492, there
were cities and towns in the Western Hemisphere to rival in size and
complexity any in the Old. The Aztec island capital of Tenochtitlan (now
Mexico City) had broad avenues lined with palaces, temples, and houses,
and was surrounded by a lake filled daily with canoes, bringing to its
markets goods traded near and far. It had a pre-European contact
population estimated at over 150,000, with perhaps 1 million in the
surrounding valley.³² That's about as many people in one valley as there
were in all the British colonies on the eve of the American Revolution.
A city on the scale of Tenochtitlan testifies that crowds are necessary
but not sufficient for the evolution of epidemic disease, though they
can spread one with lightning speed and deadly efficiency.

But there were no epidemic diseases for the city's inhabitants to
spread. The manner and timing of their ancestors’ journey to the New
World, the long-term genetic consequences of their having passed through
a population bottleneck, the more than 12,500 years of prehistory they
spent in isolation from the rest of the world's populations, and their
lack of animal domesticates, all rendered their descendants defenseless
against the infectious diseases introduced on these shores in the
decades and centuries after Columbus.

It was an unfair fight. The New World had its native infections,
particularly in the tropics of Central America, including Carrion's
disease, tapeworm, hepatitis, encephalitis, yaws, and venereal syphilis
perhaps, and of course, Chagas’ disease—the bane of Darwin's later
life.³³ Although all could be debilitating, none seem to have done well
outside the Western Hemisphere (with the possible exception of syphilis)
or against arriving Europeans. Certainly none of these ills changed the
demographic course of Old World colonial history in America.

For European colonists, the New World was a vast, rich, and so far as
they were concerned untapped land (never mind that it was already
inhabited) in which they thrived. Time and again, Crosby relates,
Europeans in America remarked on the healthiness of their new homes, and
their claims are probably true, despite their Chamber of Commerce ring.
To be sure, the English colonies of Roanoke Island and Jamestown got off
to terrible starts because of their stubborn disinterest in Native
adaptations, an inordinate amount of time spent searching for gold, an
initial refusal to learn their new landscape but instead attempt to
impose their knowledge of English landscapes and land use practices on
Tidewater Virginia, and—not least—their arrival in the midst of record
drought years.³⁴ But even in the Tidewater, the colonists’ lives soon
improved, and indeed, with a bit of learning of their new landscape, and
a few concessions to the ecological differences between Europe and
America, it was soon apparent that many Old World plants and animals
could also thrive in this new setting.

As early as Columbus's second voyage, “the Admiral [Columbus] took on
board mares, sheep, cows and the corresponding males for the propagation
of their species; nor did he forget vegetables, grain, barley, and
similar seeds, not only for provisions but also for sowing; vines and
young plants such as were wanting in that country were carefully
taken.”³⁵ Later colonists imported crops like wheat, oats, and rye, as
well as (perhaps unintentionally) dandelions, ferns, thistles, plantain,
clover, stinging nettles, crab grass, and other weeds. These plants
exploded in areas now cleared of forest, and overgrazed by the
domesticated animals the Europeans brought with them both intentionally
(pigs, cattle, sheep, and horses) and not (rats).³⁶

Walking larders of pigs and cattle often accompanied Spanish entradas.
Horses came too, serving as transportation and beasts of burden and
providing a lopsided military advantage. The animals that came with
Europeans may also have had another, more insidious role.
Fast-multiplying and rapidly spreading pigs may have been equally to
blame for the transmission of diseases such as trichinosis,
tuberculosis, and leptospirosis—first to the native fauna, then to
native peoples.

Within a few centuries, introduced plants and animals, coupled with
imported farming and land use practices, utterly changed the American
landscape. Ecological imperialism, Crosby calls it, and it was almost
entirely one-way. Virtually no New World animals gained a toehold in the
Old World, although as mentioned many plants domesticated by American
Indians were carried to Europe and became successful staples—corn,
potatoes, peppers, and tomatoes—or addictive vices, like tobacco
(tobacco may be a small measure of retribution for European depredations
in the New World, but it was at best a pyrrhic victory: the great demand
for labor to tend the New World's tobacco fields was one of the sparks
that set off the slave trade³⁷).

European colonists and their descendants in America found themselves
free from crowds, possessing plenty of farmland and pasture, and
enjoying higher living standards than they had back home. They could,
and usually did, build far better lives.³⁸ For the descendants of the
first peoples of the New World, it was a very different story.

THE CONSEQUENCES OF CONTACT

Although their numbers were decimated, Native Americans ultimately
survived the waves of disease and depopulation, and the collateral blows
of warfare, famine, enslavement, and exploitation. But they did not
survive unchanged. The consequences of European contact for American
Indians were many and deep, often cascading in unpredictable ways
through native culture. Consider, however, a few critical aspects that
bear directly on our study of the first Americans.

In the aftermath of epidemics, survivors abandoned old towns and
regions: sixteenth- and seventeenth-century documents hint of extensive
refugee movements throughout North America. Refugees banded together
with other survivors, who were often from previously unrelated
communities, possibly speakers of different languages, and occasionally
even traditional enemies. Naturally, as cultural and linguistic
strangers came together, the social and political rules that once
governed their lives—often deeply rooted in kinship networks since
shaken or destroyed—had to change. Established relationships and
alliances as well as ritual and ceremonial systems were abandoned,
oftentimes because disease disproportionately killed the older members
of a community, who were the repositories of those traditions and lore.
The old rules no longer applied.

The Natchez of the lower Mississippi Valley were, in their heyday, one
of the most powerful tribes on the river. As de Soto and his entrada
approached the seat of their chiefdom (Quigaltam), he sent a Native
emissary ahead to announce to the Natchez chief that he (de Soto) was
the “son of the sun and that wherever he went all obeyed him and did him
service.” The chief would have none of that nonsense, since he believed
he was the brother of the Great Sun, and would not travel to pay homage
to anyone. If de Soto was who he said he was, let him prove it by drying
up “the great river” (the Mississippi). Unaccustomed to rebuke, a
furious de Soto vowed to “lessen that arrogant demeanor” and sent
horse-mounted shock troops to slaughter hundreds of innocents in a
nearby village.³⁹ The Natchez managed to survive, but not de Soto, who
was already ill from fever and died shortly thereafter.

The Natchez were still a powerful tribe two centuries later when visited
by du Pratz, but what he reported of their “peculiar” social
organization puzzled generations of anthropologists. According to him,
the Natchez had two major social classes, “stinkards” (the unflattering
name assigned by du Pratz) on the bottom, and “nobility” on the top. The
nobility, in turn, were comprised of three classes: “suns,” “nobles,”
and “honored people,” in that order. Du Pratz described elaborate rules
of intermarriage, descent, and inheritance among the classes that—if
they actually had been followed—would in a matter of generations have
caused the extinction of the so-called stinkards. Yet, they were the
largest class among the Natchez. Later attempts to explain the numerical
instability of the system included the possibility that the stinkards
were disproportionately fecund; that the system was demographically
unstable, and if allowed to play out, the stinkards would ultimately go
extinct (one source estimated within ten generations); or that maybe du
Pratz and other observers simply got it wrong.⁴⁰

As Jeffrey Brain and others argue, however, the reports were correct,
and the system was unstable over the long term, largely because it
represented an agglomeration of two separate social systems. As du Pratz
observed, the stinkards spoke “a language entirely different from the
nobility.”⁴¹ It appears that between the time de Soto first traveled
through the Southeast and when du Pratz arrived a century and a half
later, the Natchez population had collapsed, and their territory had
contracted as a consequence of introduced epidemic disease. The Natchez
that du Pratz encountered were different from those who had stood up to
de Soto, for the latter-day group included a fusion of Tunica-speaking
Chitimacha, Koroa, Tiou, and Grigra refugees.⁴²

The Natchez had become a haven for refugees, and by du Pratz's time
nearly half their villages were made up of Tunican peoples and speakers.
Their own population decimated, their territory abridged, and their
numbers composed of people who did not speak their language, the Natchez
had to adapt. And so they altered their definitions of status and rank,
and made up new rules regarding marriage, kinship, and inheritance.
Deeming the Tunica-speaking refugees lower-class but allowing
intermarriage enabled the Natchez to assimilate these once-strangers,
bolster their own sagging numbers, and ensure the continuance of their
nobility.⁴³

The Natchez are but one example of how a group was re-shaped as a
consequence of the ripple effects of European contact, and an
illustration of how genetic exchange may well have occurred far more
rapidly than linguistic or social assimilation. There is good reason to
suspect that the amalgamation that took place in the lower Mississippi
Valley was not unique, but repeated often and elsewhere in the Americas
as remnants of peoples and villages banded together in order to survive.

The inevitable result of all this was a post-1492 mismatch between
language, genes, and culture of a ‘group’, one that played out across
North America as survivors amalgamated, creating entities very different
from those previously extant (and with it, decreasing any possibility of
seeing Goldilocks-level consistency in artifacts, genes, and
languages).⁴⁴

Indeed, a sharp and deep divide separates American Indian populations
before and after 1492. The peoples whose customs and cultures were
systematically recorded in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries are the biological and cultural descendants of what were once
much larger and differently constituted populations now known only
archaeologically from pre-European contact times.

THE PRESENT MAY NOT BE KEY TO THE PAST

But tracing those lines of descent is complicated, since cultural,
linguistic, physical, and genetic lineages were likewise casualties.
Many languages simply died out along with their speakers in the
centuries after European contact. Lewis and Clark were explicitly
charged to record what they could of the languages they encountered, for
Jefferson well realized and deeply lamented the rapid disappearance of
Native languages. There had been a “profusion” spoken in the Carolinas
when John Lawson traveled through there in 1701. By 1743 these had been
reduced to about twenty languages and dialects. By 1760 there was but a
single tongue remaining, Catawba, the last speakers of which died out in
the 1950s.⁴⁵ For many Native languages, particularly in eastern North
America, no more than a few words were ever recorded.

Even where speakers survived, languages were altered or had disappeared.
To communicate with each other, refugees from different groups had to
adopt a single tongue, and over time lost their own. On the heels of the
1837-38 smallpox epidemic, the Arikara living in villages along the
Missouri River in what is now South Dakota—remnants of a farming people,
who may have once numbered 20,000—were down to just 380 members. Their
numbers were so devastated they were “compelled to come together for
protection” with Mandan, Hidatsa, and other surviving Missouri Valley
peoples, despite the fact that “the Different Villages do not understand
all the words of the others.” Arikara is in the Caddoan language family;
Mandan and Hidatsa were Siouan.⁴⁶ A similar scenario played out in many
areas, with the end result that overall American Indian linguistic
diversity plummeted in the centuries after European contact.

Yet, it is on that record of Native American languages that Greenberg's
Amerind family is constructed. By itself, this says nothing of whether
the specific words and grammatical forms he used to group languages
within Amerind are correct. That is for linguists to decide. But the
loss and borrowing of words does give pause to our accepting his Amerind
family, given the vulnerability of the method used to construct it and
the potential for errors in word lists. There may be much less to
“Amerind” than meets the ears.

Cultural changes were no less profound, as native peoples became
incorporated into or dependent on European economies, which imposed a
sapping demand for labor (now itself a commodity), opened a ravenous
market for items not previously valued, such as fur, gold and silver,
and tobacco, while it shut down demand for others, such as trade in
high-quality stone, feathers, and marine shells. Likewise, changes
occurred as Indians adopted Old World plants, animals, artifacts, and
technologies; as they were forced into unfamiliar environments, new
adaptations, or slavery; and as their rituals, ceremonies, traditions,
and bonds of kinship and society were torn apart and reconstituted in
the chaos of demographic collapse and the loss of lore and knowledge.

So, too, the rules of conflict and warfare were forever changed, and not
just by the shifting alliances and factionalism that accompanied the
jockeying of the European powers for New World dominance or the need to
offset population losses from disease. Europeans brought new weapons of
war—guns and horses—which made it possible to do battle on a much larger
geographic scale (horses greatly increased the combat reach), and also
made it far more deadly (one might be able to dodge an arrow, but not a
lead ball).⁴⁷ To be sure, there was continuity in elements of both
culture and material culture amid all these changes, but their contexts
changed in the centuries after European contact.

If the linguistic and cultural ties before and after 1492 were frayed,
no less so were physical and genetic links. Depopulation from epidemic
diseases created a population bottleneck in the decades and centuries
after contact, quite unlike any experienced by American Indians since
they had left northeastern Asia over 12,000 years earlier. Most of the
people responsible for the prehistoric record, as Robert Dunnell
observed, have no living descendants.⁴⁸ Yet, a population bottleneck may
not be a genetic bottleneck if losses from diseases were random with
respect to the founding haplogroups and haplotypes. However, the
lineages harbored among Native American populations surviving contact
are in some sense a sample—of indeterminate size—of lineages that were
present in the New World in early October 1492. Haplotypes and even
haplogroups that may have existed as recently as 1492 could have been
lost in the decades and centuries that followed. This is why aDNA has
such great potential in the study of the first Americans, and has
already begun to add in previously unknown lineages.

What then of modern American Indians, who today contribute their mtDNA
and Y chromosome DNA to our efforts to understand their ancestry? Can we
trace modern tribes back to Pleistocene ancestors? Or trace Pleistocene
artifacts, skeletal remains, or ancient DNA up to modern tribes? These
are no longer just academic questions.

TO WHOM DOES THE PAST BELONG?

Under the terms of the Native American Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act (NAGPRA), skeletal remains found in the United States
must be returned at the request of a “lineal descendant” or, shy of
that, the tribe with the “closest cultural affiliation.”⁴⁹ NAGPRA is a
complicated law, but at its core calls for repatriation when two
criteria are met: first, the skeletal remains must be demonstrably
Native American. That's defined as “of, or relating to, a tribe, people,
or culture that is indigenous to the United States” (italics mine: and
keep an eye on that is—it becomes important). Second, and if such
remains are deemed Native American, then NAGPRA requires they be
returned on request to the descendants of that person, as identified by
“geographical, kinship, biological, archeological, anthropological,
linguistic, folklore, oral tradition, historical, or other relevant
information or expert opinion.”⁵⁰ Under the terms of NAGPRA, all those
lines of evidence are equally weighted. Demonstrating affiliation only
requires a preponderance of evidence, not scientific certainty.

Where the skeletal remains come from a recently occupied site,
demonstrating affiliation is relatively straightforward, and remains
have been returned without dispute over their identity. All the
skeletons (nearly 2,000) excavated at Pecos Pueblo by Kidder and
described by Hooton (Chapter 5) were returned in 1999 for reburial at
what is now Pecos National Monument. There was no question they belonged
to the descendants of Pecos.

Kennewick, on the other hand, hits NAGPRA right where it is weakest:
establishing biological or cultural affiliation across a vast span of
time. An individual who lived nearly 10,000 years ago could be an
ancestor of many modern individuals and tribes and not just one, or
related to none at all. Directly linking past to present across that
long span is no simple matter. Geneticists have the best chance, if they
can identify in ancient mitochondrial or Y chromosome DNA a lineage that
can narrow down the potential population(s) of descendants. However, it
would have to be a very specific haplotype rather than, say, Haplogroup
A, which is found in 40% of all American Indians (of course, if that
haplogroup were found in an ancient skeleton, it would fulfill NAGPRA's
first requirement of establishing that an individual was Native
American). But even if such a specific haplotype is found in a skeleton
of that age, it will still prove difficult to identify one (and only
one) tribe of descendants—unless that group was largely isolated over
that entire time span. And, of course, this assumes the lineage was not
lost in the depopulation that followed European contact.

What of the other approaches? Archaeology can trace (and date) the
cultural evolution of artifacts, but the trail from past to present is
poorly marked, and one can hardly follow a single people through time by
their artifacts and tools, or by their skeletal or dental remains. In
fact, even where those appear morphologically unlike modern American
Indians—as is said to be the case for certain crania—we are still unable
to state conclusively that no historical relationship exists, or that
physical remains of an individual are not those of an American Indian.
Remember: such a conclusion is based on a tiny (and assuredly
unrepresentative) sample, from individuals that may have been members of
populations that were small and isolated, and that are separated from us
by 400 generations of population and evolutionary change. Linguistics
fares worst of all. The record of Native American languages is woefully
incomplete, and there is a limited time depth over which one can still
hear the echoes of a distant language (the radical historical linguists
notwithstanding).

In a sense, then, it's a good thing NAGPRA doesn't require scientific
certainty, since insisting on that standard for lineal descent at such a
span of time is scientifically impossible. For that matter, as David
Hurst Thomas reminds us, given what we know of modern population
biology, the “idea of tracking fixed, enduring, bounded ethnic groups is
outmoded and quaint, if not a little racist.”⁵¹

Yet, NAGPRA demands affiliation be established all the same. And that
sets scientific evidence on a potential collision course with tribal
traditions, and American Indians against archaeologists and physical
anthropologists, for NAGPRA allows “lineal descendants” to be identified
not just by physical remains but by equally weighted evidence from
folklore, oral traditions, and geographic proximity. To be sure, Native
American traditions of origins (and there are many) have rich and deep
resonance, but they cannot be uncritically accepted as detailed
population histories either.⁵² Under the ambiguous terms of NAGPRA, both
sides of the Kennewick dispute could be right, even if both were wrong.

And they were. The filing of the Bonnichsen et al. lawsuit in October
1996 blocked the Army Corps of Engineers from returning the Kennewick
skeleton to the five Pacific Northwest tribes that were claiming him as
one of their own. In 1998 the Corps instead handed Kennewick over to the
Department of the Interior, which was better prepared to deal with such
matters. The Interior Department, in turn, brought in a team of
scientists, conducted an investigation, and in 2000 they concluded from
their interpretation of the evidence and the law, that Kennewick was
indeed Native American (based on the skeleton's great age) and was
affiliated with the five tribes (based on their oral histories and
geographic proximity).

Although it was recognized there were “both cultural continuities and
cultural discontinuities between the modern day claimant tribes and the
cultural group that existed during the lifetime of the Kennewick Man,”
Bruce Babbitt, then secretary of the interior, declared that the
“preponderance of evidence” tilted in favor of the tribes.⁵³ There were
hushed, conspiratorial whispers that this decision had been made inside
the White House for raw political reasons.

No matter. Bonnichsen and his fellow plaintiffs challenged the ruling,
and thanks to the lawsuit Kennewick was by then under court control. Two
years later, federal Judge John Jelderks ruled that the secretary of the
interior had no grounds for concluding Kennewick was Native American
based merely on its antiquity, which simultaneously rendered moot the
conclusion that Kennewick was affiliated with the five tribes (moot or
not, the judge criticized that conclusion as well, citing the “difficult
challenge” of demonstrating affiliation over so many millennia).⁵⁴
Jelderks's ruling was appealed by the federal government (as well as by
a California man who claimed he was a descendant of Kennewick—this case
has never wanted for comic relief), but in 2004, the Ninth Circuit Court
of Appeals upheld Jelderks's ruling. The plaintiffs in Bonnichsen et al.
could proceed with their study of the Kennewick remains. They have,
though their results have yet to be published.

The Court of Appeals judgment pivoted on a single word. NAGPRA defines
remains as Native American if they are “of, or relating to, a tribe,
people, or culture that is indigenous to the United States.”⁵⁵ The Court
took the present tense of the verb “is” to be “significant”—being a
Native American meant bearing some relationship to “a presently existing
tribe, people or culture.”⁵⁶ But does “is” mean a present-day tribe only
or, as Babbitt argued, could “is” and “was” be used interchangeably? The
Court did not think so. This wasn't the only time during the Clinton
administration that a point of law depended on what the definition of
“is” is.⁵⁷

The Appeals Court ruled Congress's purposes would not be served by
requiring the transfer of human remains to modern tribes without
evidence of a clear-cut relationship. But does that mean this ancient
skeleton is not a Native American? Or, more generally, that there is no
relationship at all between ancient and modern individuals? Hardly: just
as we are hard pressed in the case of ancient skeletal remains to link
past to present, so, too, we cannot prove there is no affiliation at
all.

The battle over Kennewick was waged in federal courts—certainly not the
usual venue for debates over skeletal remains—and at a cost of several
million dollars. It also sparked plenty of fights within the
anthropological community about how, by what methods, or even whether
more ancient skeletal remains can be linked with modern peoples; about
the relationship between American Indians and those of us who study
their past; and about the peopling of the Americas. There's no small
irony here, since a skeleton that's only 8,400 years old (as Kennewick
is) may in the end say very little about the first peoples of the
Americas (Chapter 5).

But it certainly jangled nerves. Alan Schneider and Robson Bonnichsen,
lead attorney and plaintiff, respectively, in the Kennewick lawsuit,
paint the effort to repatriate ancient skeletal remains as nothing less
than an assault on Western Enlightenment thinking by the forces of
“ignorance, intolerance, and superstition.” They angrily railed against
the government officials in Kennewick, accusing them of having agendas
but no expertise, of conducting secret studies and dodging peer review,
and of imposing a “monopolistic control over research opportunities…to
promote the theories they favor and discourage investigation of theories
they oppose.”⁵⁸ One would almost think they lost the Kennewick case. But
they won, and gained the right to conduct radiocarbon dating, metric
analysis of the crania, DNA and isotope analyses, examination of the
site sediments—essentially the same studies performed earlier by the
government-selected scientists, putting the lie to the claim that the
government's “desire to promote personally favored theories of New World
human origins appears to have influenced the selection of the studies
conducted by the government in the Kennewick Man case.”⁵⁹

Yet, their voices were no less strident than those on the other side of
the repatriation aisle. Vine Deloria could hardly disguise his anger—and
glee—that Kennewick had finally exposed to the world that archaeology
had become little more than a discipline in which there is a “triumph of
doctrine over facts.” Like any other group of “priests and politicians,”
he snarled, “scientists lie and fudge their conclusions as much
as…lawyers and car dealers.” And there were scientists who agreed with
him. Kennewick was “never an issue of Indian beliefs versus science,”
Jonathan Marks wrote, “but of Indian beliefs versus pseudoscience.”⁶⁰

So to whom does Kennewick or, for that matter any skeleton of great
antiquity belong? Is it possible he/they has no living descendants at
all among any modern American Indians? Of course. Does that mean he is
not Native American? Of course not.

But that still leaves hanging several questions: In the absence of
demonstrable descendant groups, who should take custody when remains
surface? Should analysis be allowed? What should be the proper ultimate
disposition? How should the wishes of very distantly related or
unrelated modern American Indians be measured against the value of
knowledge about the human experience that might be gained by scientific
study of the remains? At what point, as David Hurst Thomas asks, do
ancient bones stop being tribal and become simply human?⁶¹ Put in the
most general terms: who owns the past?

There are many answers to these questions, depending not just on whom
you ask but how you ask, for there is no clear solution, and there are
several positions that can be reasonable (though perhaps not always in
the Kennewick case) and right. An answer can be sought in statute and
law, but there is enough ambiguity in NAGPRA one can arrive at several
different interpretations, all of which can be legally justified. Yet,
the legal answer NAGPRA provides may not be the ethical answer, let
alone the scientifically defensible one.

Thomas argues, rightly, that judges should be freed from having to carry
the burden of defining the future of America's past. We should try to
solve our problems ourselves, by having conversations across the divide
between American Indians and archaeologists, and seek common ground.⁶²
On this point even Schneider and Bonnichsen, and Deloria and Marks
agree. Grudgingly.⁶³

Common ground has been found before. In early July 1996, several weeks
before Kennewick turned up on the shores of the Columbia River, human
remains were discovered in On Your Knees Cave along the Alaskan coast
(Chapter 5). The excavators, who had a longstanding relationship with
the local tribes, immediately notified them of the discovery, and within
a week, a cooperative agreement for the excavation and analysis of the
remains was in place. The investigation proceeded over the next several
years without incident, rancor, or attorneys.

Outcomes like Kennewick are not inevitable, but they do show how much
the past can matter, and have consequences for those who study it and
those whose ancestors lived it. But that's not all.

REPLAYING THE TAPE OF PREHISTORY

Broad principles, such as Darwin's evolution by natural selection,
govern our collective human past, but they alone cannot explain why
human prehistory unfolded the way it did. That depends on a swarm of
factors, large and small, specific to the circumstances in which our
ancestors found themselves at a given moment in time, the decisions they
made to move forward, and even in no small measure to chance: such as
spending the night of March 26, 1835, in Luxan, Argentina.

There is, as a result, a contingency to prehistory. One supposes it was
“inevitable” that humans, once evolved (which was itself hardly
inevitable), would one day reach the Americas. But who the first peoples
were, why they came, when they arrived, where they came from, how large
the group was, and how quickly they spread, was not inevitable at all.
It only looks that way afterward, after a long and singularly
unpredictable string of choices made under a variety of circumstances
brought them to the western edge of Beringia at the end of the
Pleistocene.

But replay the tape, Stephen Jay Gould argued, change a few of the
quirky details, let their effects cascade over time, and the past would
have unfolded very differently, producing historical trajectories that
would be “equally explicable, though massively different in form and
effect.”⁶⁴

What if the first Americans hadn't left the Old World when they did. Or
if they had brought diseases or an immunity conferred by Old World
ancestry with them. Or if they had not come via Beringia, or gone
through a population bottleneck. Or if 80% of North America's megafauna
had not gone extinct at the end of the Pleistocene. Or if the remainder
had been more readily domesticated, or if there had been strong
incentive to do so. Or even if all those savants had been right, and the
American Indians had been the Lost Tribes of Israel. And what if Native
Americans had not been devastated by disease, or had their own to give
Europeans in return.

We cannot say. But consider this: in the spring of 1519, a Spanish force
under the command of Hernan Cortes landed on the Mexican mainland.
Cortes had been sent by Diego Velazquez, the governor of Cuba, to trade
and explore, but not to conquer. The governor wanted that plum for
himself. Cortes pretended to care. Trained in law and devious of mind,
the moment he touched the mainland he promptly side-stepped the
governor's orders by incorporating a town (Veracruz): according to the
canons of medieval Castile, that entitled him to shed any obligations to
the governor and appoint himself an agent of the Spanish king. The way
Cortes figured it, King Charles (recently elected Holy Roman Emperor)
would surely approve Cortes extending his ecumenical and imperial reach,
especially if it made them both rich.⁶⁵

Cortes learned from native Totonacs, who greeted him, of the great Aztec
Empire to the west and, more important, that the Empire's rule over the
region was riddled with pockets of violent resistance.⁶⁶ He headed
inland over the mountains, alternately fighting and gaining key allies
among the Aztecs’ sworn enemies (like the Tlaxcalan). The Aztec ruler,
Montezuma II, heard Cortes was coming. Runners streaming in from
outlying areas reported a procession of strange, “chalky faced” men atop
bizarre, deer-like beasts (thanks to Pleistocene extinctions, of course,
only the Aztec's most remote ancestors had ever seen a horse).⁶⁷ Worse,
he heard they had machines that could blow up mountains (cannons), kill
from great distance (guns), and wore impenetrable clothing (chain-mail
armor).

There had been prophecies the feathered-serpent god Quetzalcoatl would
return, which the strangers’ impending arrival seemed to match.
Uncertain whether the Spaniards were gods or enemies, Montezuma hedged
his bets: he'd treat them as gods, but try to keep them at a distance in
case they were enemies. Couriers bearing exquisite gifts of gold,
silver, and precious stones were sent to Cortes, hoping that would be
enough, and make him turn away. Montezuma must have soon regretted the
gesture, for it had precisely the opposite effect.⁶⁸

On November 8, 1519, as much of the city watched in astonishment, Cortes
led his army down one of the causeways across Lake Texcoco into
Tenochtitlan. Montezuma and his courtiers were there to greet him.
Cortes, knowing little and caring less what he actually heard, took
Montezuma's welcoming remarks as an abdication speech.⁶⁹ On behalf of
King Charles, he accepted the transfer of authority over the Aztec
Empire, then quietly put Montezuma under house arrest. For the next six
months, Cortes commanded the increasingly restless city, steadily
looting its treasuries of gold and silver.

While Cortes was pilfering Aztec riches, back in Cuba it finally dawned
on Governor Velazquez that Cortes was long past due, and was likely
playing him for a fool—or, worse, getting rich at his expense. Velazquez
dispatched a force under Panfilo de Narvaez to bring Cortes to heel.
Hearing from his native allies that another Spanish ship had landed on
the coast and guessing what was up, Cortes hustled away with most of his
army to confront Narvaez, leaving behind a small force under the command
of an unsavory lieutenant, Pedro de Alvarado, with orders to keep a
tight lid on Tenochtitlan.

By now, however, the Aztecs were acutely aware Montezuma was being held
against his will, and they were becoming openly defiant. Alvarado,
outnumbered and apprehensive, agreed to allow some 600 Aztec priests,
noblemen, and worshippers to use one of the great courtyards in the
palace complex for the feast of Huitzilopochtli. But while they were
inside, Alvarado's men sealed the doorways, trapped the unarmed
worshippers, and butchered them with broadswords. If Alvarado thought
the slaughter of these Aztec leaders would quell the unrest, he was as
foolish as he was cruel.

Word of the bloody massacre flashed through the streets of Tenochtitlan,
and the city exploded in open battle. The Spaniards were soon trapped
inside the palace when Cortes, having defeated Narvaez and receiving
desperate bulletins from his men in Tenochtitlan, quick-marched back and
reentered the city on June 24, 1520, this time with over 1,000 Spaniards
(now including many of Narvaez's men), and many thousand Tlaxcalan
warriors. Yet, Cortes was still vastly outnumbered, and his attempt to
use Montezuma to manipulate his people failed when the native ruler was
killed—though by which side, neither agreed, save to blame the other.

Seven days later the Spaniards and their allies were pinned down and on
the verge of annihilation. Cortes called for retreat under the cover of
darkness. But as his troops tried to sneak off, Native spotters sounded
the alarm, and fierce fighting broke out along the dangerously narrow
causeways across the lake. The Aztecs speared Spaniards into the water
where, weighed down by their chain-mail armor and looted gold and
silver, they sank and died. Cortes managed to survive, though he'd been
badly whipped, losing all but a third of his army that night.

[images]

FIGURE 64.
An image from the Florentine Codex, which was compiled in the latter
half of the sixteenth century, which shows Aztec victims of smallpox.
(Image courtesy of the American Museum of Natural History, Negative
number 286821.)

The Spaniards fought their way out of the valley, but the Aztecs didn't
pursue their advantage. Instead, they allowed Cortes to escape and take
refuge among the Tlaxcalan on the far side of the mountains. The
following spring, reinforced by more Spaniards and nearly 150,000 native
warriors, Cortes returned to lay siege to Tenochtitlan. After more
bloody fighting, he conquered the city in August 1521. It was an
astonishing victory against overwhelming numbers, especially since it
came so close on the heels of devastating defeat.

Some credit victory to Cortes's superior weaponry and horses, and the
terror these created in foes who'd seen neither. Others speak of his
missionary zeal, courage, and military genius in exploiting the strife
between the Aztecs and their native enemies, and using boats on Lake
Texcoco to choke off the canoe traffic that brought supplies to the
island capital. Zeal and courage Cortes had plenty of, but so did the
Aztecs. They hadn't his weaponry, but could a small number of firearms,
cannons, and horses make a difference? The previous June it hadn't. Once
the tactical surprise wore off, as it did quickly, the Aztecs began
mounting razor-sharp obsidian blades on long pikes to skewer
horse-mounted Spaniards.

In the end, what brought Cortes victory at Tenochtitlan was neither arms
nor tactics, but smallpox. One of Narvaez's men had been infected, and
in June 1520, the disease jumped to the Native population. While Cortes
and his mauled force were off licking their wounds a horrific, if
unintended, and utterly one-sided bout of germ warfare began. Smallpox
raged through Tenochtitlan, killing young and old alike. By the time
Cortes returned in 1521, the Aztecs were devastated by disease, hunger,
and death, and could offer little significant resistance. The siege was
the final blow. Spanish chroniclers tell of stepping over piles of
smallpox victims (Figure 64), whose rotting bodies choked the streets.

Cortes was badly whipped in June 1520. And though he returned a year
later with his horses, firearms, cannons, Tlaxcalan allies, a makeshift
navy and a grand strategy, it's doubtful he could have retaken
Montezuma's Aztec kingdom with its one million souls. The numbers were
against him. But with smallpox having cut a wide swath through the
native population, he could—and did—conquer the Empire.

Tenochtitlan's fall was unusual, but only because the devastation by
introduced epidemic disease was rarely so militarily decisive.⁷⁰ Still,
the triumphs of the conquistadores and all who followed were, as Crosby
put it, ultimately the triumphs of smallpox.⁷¹ We may not be able to say
what would have happened if we could replay the tape of prehistory, but
we can say that were it not for introduced diseases and their dreadful
effect on Native American populations, American history after 1492 would
have been very, very different.

And the triumphs of smallpox and other introduced epidemics had been
foreordained over 12,500 years earlier when a group of hunter-gatherers
stepped onto the western edge of the vast, grassy plain of Beringia,
then headed toward the rising sun.

FURTHER READING

There is a vast literature on the early archaeology of America.
Relatively recent overviews, which provide details on many of the sites
in question, but are pitched for a broader audience, include James
Adovasio and Jake Page's The First Americans: In Pursuit of
Archaeology's Greatest Mystery (2002, Random House, New York), Tom
Dillehay's The Settlement of the Americas: A New Prehistory (2000, Basic
Books, New York), James Dixon's Bones, Boats and Bison: Archeology and
the First Colonization of Western North America (1999, University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque), Daniele Lavallee's The First South
Americans: The Peopling of a Continent from the Earliest Evidence to
High Culture (2000, University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City), and the
papers in The First Americans: The Pleistocene Colonization of the New
World (2002, University of California Press, Berkeley), edited by Nina
Jablonski.

Recent scholarly works on the topic include the edited volumes by
Michael Barton, Geoffrey Clark, David Yesner, and Georges Pearson, The
Settlement of the American Continents: A Multidisciplinary Approach to
Human Biogeography (2004, University of Arizona Press, Tucson); Robson
Bonnichsen, Bradley T. Lepper, Dennis Stanford, and Michael Waters,
Paleoamerican Origins: Beyond Clovis (2006, Center for the Study of the
First Americans, College Station, Texas), David Madsen's Entering
America: Northeast Asia and Beringia before the Last Glacial Maximum
(2004, University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City), and Douglas Ubelaker,
Handbook of North American Indians, Volume 3, Environment, Origins, and
Population (2006, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.).

For a recent and highly readable discussion of the causes and
consequences of ice ages and climate change, see Wallace Broecker and
Robert Kunzig's Fixing Climate: What Past Climate Changes Reveal About
the Current Threat—and How to Counter It (2008, Hill and Wang, New
York). Other fine discussions include Doug Macdougall's Frozen Earth:
The Once and Future Story of Ice Ages (2004, University of California
Press, Berkeley), Richard Alley's The Two-Mile Time Machine: Ice Cores,
Abrupt Climate Change, and Our Future (2000, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, New Jersey) and (though now a bit dated) John and Katherine
Imbrie's Ice Ages: Solving the Mystery (1976, Enslow, Berkeley Heights,
New Jersey).

Dale Guthrie's Frozen Fauna of the Mammoth Steppe: The Story of Blue
Babe (1990, University of Chicago Press, Chicago) and the recently
published Human Ecology of Beringia by John Hoffecker and Scott Elias
(2007, Columbia University Press, New York) summarize Beringia's
geological, climatic, and environmental history. The most recent
syntheses of the Pleistocene glaciation, climate, and environment of
North America appear in the volume The Quaternary Period in the United
States (2004, Elsevier Science, New York), edited by Alan Gillespie,
Stephen Porter, and Brian Atwater; the articles, however, are written
for a more technical audience.

On Native American languages, the best single source is the Smithsonian
Institution's Handbook of North American Indians, particularly Volume
17, Languages, edited by Ives Goddard (1996, Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.). Joseph Greenberg presented the results of his
analysis in Language in the Americas (1987, Stanford University Press,
Stanford). Merrit Ruhlen's The Origin of Language: Tracing the Evolution
of the Mother Tongue (1994, John Wiley and Sons, New York) is a staunch
defense of Greenberg's (and his) method of mass comparison, and a
readable discussion of what that method yields for a linguistic history
of America and the world. For a thorough history of historical
linguistics and a synopsis of Native American languages, including a
relentless critique of Greenberg's method and results, see Lyle
Campbell's American Indian Languages: The Historical Linguistics of
Native America (1997, Oxford University Press, Oxford).

Turner has summarized his dental evidence in multiple places, most
recently in “Teeth, Needles, Dogs, and Siberia: Bioarchaeological
Evidence for the Colonization of the New World,” which appeared in
Jablonski's The First Americans: The Pleistocene Colonization of the New
World (cited above). See that same volume for a thoughtful and
accessible appraisal of the cranial evidence by Gentry Steele and Joseph
Powell, “Facing the Past: A View of the North American Human Fossil
Record,” as well as Powell's valuable book, The First Americans: Race,
Evolution, and the Origin of Native Americans (2005, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge). For an entertaining and appropriately
skeptical look at how the cranial evidence is sometimes presented, there
is Jack Hitt's “Mighty White of You: Racial Preferences Color America's
Oldest Skulls and Bones” (2005, Harper's Magazine, July, pp. 39-55).

The genetic evidence emerges so quickly that a book devoted to the topic
would be obsolete before it ever appeared in print; most discussion on
this topic is restricted to technical journals, but a few good summaries
for a broader audience are available, including Colin Renfrew's edited
volume, America Past, America Present: Genes and Languages in the
Americas and Beyond (2000, MacDonald Institute for Archaeological
Research, Cambridge); Andrew Merriwether's “A Mitochondrial Perspective
on the Peopling of the New World,” in the Jablonski volume (cited
above), and Theodore Schurr's “The Peopling of the New World:
Perspectives from Molecular Anthropology” (2004, Annual Review of
Anthropology 33:551-83).

David Hurst Thomas’ Skull Wars: Kennewick Man, Archeology, and the
Battle for Native American Identity (2000, Basic Books, New York) is a
superb and eminently readable treatment of Kennewick, NAGPRA, and the
relationship between archaeology and American Indians. Roger Downey
takes a journalist's look at the Kennewick controversy in Riddle of the
Bones: Politics, Science, Race, and the Story of Kennewick Man (2000,
Copernicus Books). James Chatters has his say in Ancient Encounters:
Kennewick Man and the First Americans (2001, Simon & Schuster, New
York). The National Park Service maintains an informative Kennewick
website with many of the primary documents at
www.cr.nps.gov/archeology/kennewick/index.htm; another valuable source
is the Tri-Cities Herald's Kennewick Man Virtual Interpretive Center at
www.kennewick-man.com/index.html.

Questions of landscape learning have only recently come to the fore in
discussions of colonization. In the past, we too often made simple
assumptions such as “it was just like the Thule,” and paid it no more
mind. The single best scholarly source is Marcy Rockman and James
Steele's edited volume, Colonization of Unfamiliar Landscapes: The
Archaeology of Adaptation (2003, Routledge, London). It's also a topic
of interest for several papers in the volume edited by Barton and others
(cited above). “Behavioral ecology and archaeology” by Douglas Bird and
James O'Connell (2006) and “Evolutionary foraging models in
zooarchaeological analysis: recent applications and future challenges”
by Karen Lupo (2007) provide excellent, if technical, discussions of
foraging theory.

Useful volumes on Clovis include those edited by Robson Bonnichsen and
Karen Turnmire and published by the Center for the Study of the First
Americans, including Clovis: Origins and Adaptations (1991) and Ice-Age
People of North America: Environments, Origins, and Adaptations (1999).
I find much to disagree with in Gary Haynes's The Early Settlement of
North America: The Clovis Era (2002, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge) but recognize it as a useful and detailed summary of the
Clovis archaeological record. Likewise, however much I disagree with my
friend Paul Martin, there is much to recommend in his Twilight of the
Mammoths (2005, University of California Press, Berkeley)—just not the
parts about overkill! The best single source on Pleistocene extinctions
is a volume edited by Martin and Richard Klein, Quaternary Extinctions:
A Prehistoric Revolution (1984, University of Arizona Press, Tucson).
Although a bit outdated, the book nonetheless presents a comprehensive
look at the issues involved. So, too, does Ross MacPhee and Hans-Dieter
Sues's edited volume, Extinctions in Near Time: Causes, Contexts, and
Consequences (1999, Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New York).

A deeply knowledgeable treatment of Paleoindian hunting is George
Frison's Survival by Hunting: Prehistoric Human Predators and Animal
Prey (2004, University of California Press, Berkeley). I relied heavily
on it here. Bonnichsen and Turnmire's edited volume Ice-Age People of
North America: Environments, Origins, and Adaptations (cited above)
provides a valuable, region-by-region look at Paleoindian adaptations,
not just Clovis. A handy, one-stop source for many of the Paleoindian
papers that appeared in American Antiquity is Bruce Huckell and David
Kilby's Readings in Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene Paleoindians:
Selections from American Antiquity (2006, Society for American
Archeology, Washington, D.C.).

More region-specific treatments include Haida Gwaii: Human History and
Environment from the Time of Loon to the Time of Iron People (2005,
University of British Columbia Press, Vancouver), edited by Daryl Fedje
and Rolf Matthewes, a thorough reporting of their cuttingedge
investigation into the human history of the Queen Charlotte Islands, and
the islands’ place in the colonization of the coast and continent. Still
focusing on Beringia and Alaska are the edited volumes by Michael Bever
and Mike Kunz, Between Two Worlds: Late Pleistocene Cultural and
Technological Diversity in Beringia (2001, Arctic Anthropology 38), and
Frederick West's edited volume American Beginnings: The Prehistory and
Palaeoecology of Beringia (1996, University of Chicago Press, Chicago).
Coming closer to mid-latitude North America is the volume edited by R.
Carlson and L. Bona, Early Human Occupation in British Columbia (1996,
University of British Columbia Press, Vancouver). David Anderson and
Kenneth Sassaman's co-edited volume The Paleoindian and Early Archaic
Southeast (1996, University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa) covers much of
the Southeast. There's been a great deal written about Folsom and later
Paleoindian adaptations and occupations of the plains, but few grand
syntheses or even edited compilations (though lots of articles and books
on specific sites and Folsom technology). We could use one. The early
archaeology of the Great Basin is covered in Donald Grayson's The
Desert's Past: A Natural History of the Great Basin (1993, Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.). The latest word on early
Californians can be found in California Prehistory: Colonization,
Culture, and Complexity, edited by T. Jones and K. Klar (2007, Altamira
Press, Lanham, Maryland).

For discussions of the impact of disease among Native Americans, see
Alfred Crosby's classic Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion
of Europe, 900-1900 (1986, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge), and
Elizabeth Fenn's Pox Americana: The Great Smallpox Epidemic of 1775-82
(2001, Hill & Wang, New York). For a more technical summary, see the
multivolume set edited by David Hurst Thomas, Columbian Consequences
(Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.). A readable treatment
of the pre- and post-European contact period is Charles Mann's 1491: New
Revelations of the Americas before Columbus (2005, Knopf, New York).
William Ruddiman's Plows, Plagues, and Petroleum: How Humans Took
Control of Climate (2005, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New
Jersey) is a provocative look at the impact of humans on global
climates, including the possible connection between disease
de-population and atmospheric CO₂ levels.

Finally, to see how the peopling of the Americas fits in the larger
context of world prehistory, excellent single sources are Steven
Mithen's After the Ice: A Global Human History 20,000-5000 BC (2003,
Weidenfield & Nicholson, London), and the more technical but nonetheless
valuable book, The Human Past: World Prehistory and the Development of
Human Society, edited by Chris Scarre (2005, Thames & Hudson, London).

