2

THE LANDSCAPE OF
COLONIZATION

Glaciers, Climates, and Environments
of Ice Age North America

In late June 1838, Charles Darwin set off on a geological mission to
Scotland to examine the famous Parallel Roads of Glen Roy, several long,
paired terraces that extended down both sides of this narrow mountain
valley at matching elevations. Local legend pegged these as hunting
paths of ancient Celtic warriors.¹ Geologists doubted that explanation,
but were mystified all the same.

It was “admitted by everyone,” Darwin later wrote, “that no other cause,
except water acting for some period on the steep side of the mountains,
could have traced those lines.”² Yet, how could water have been raised
to this elevation on land? Some surmised a lake had once filled the
valley (Loch Roy, it was called), and that its water level had dropped
over time. But this was an open-ended valley: where was the barrier that
dammed the water to form the lake? Nature had to have built and
destroyed several dams at successive periods, each at least a mile wide
and minimally a thousand feet high, in order to form the several
terraces. However, no evidence of any dams could be found.

Perhaps, Darwin suspected, instead of a dam pushing the water up into
the land, the land itself had once been down in the water. He'd recently
returned from a five-year voyage around the world on the H.M.S. Beagle,
where on the earthquake-prone Chilean coast, he'd seen unmistakable
evidence of a succession of wave-cut beaches that had formed as the land
rose (episodically and sometimes violently) from the sea. He was certain
the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy had been cut by a similar process, and
were testimony Scotland had once been submerged, but had since risen
from the sea.

Yet, as Darwin walked the Parallel Roads, he did not find a single
seashell from those ostensibly wave-cut marine beaches. The quarrymen
who worked in the area assured him they hadn't seen any shells either.
Perhaps it was just a matter of poor preservation: not all the terraces
on the South American coast were littered with seashells either.
Besides, there was other evidence that helped convince him Scotland had
emerged from the sea. Erratic boulders, so named because they were found
far from outcrops of that rock type, were sprinkled throughout the upper
reaches of Glen Roy. One giant granite boulder was perched 2,200 feet
above sea level, yet it could only have come from a granite outcrop 6
miles away and nearly a thousand feet lower. Darwin knew no “rush of
water so impetuous” that could wash a boulder that far and high up a
steep mountainside. Surely its present perch was once closer to the sea,
and the granite block had been deposited at a time when climates were
much cooler, and icebergs could have rafted it here from its bedrock
source.

Darwin spent a week tramping around Glen Roy, experiencing nature
“looking as happy” as he felt. He then returned home and straightaway
prepared a long paper, “Observations on the Parallel Roads of Glen
Roy…with an attempt to prove they are of marine origin,” which was
published the next year in the Philosophical Transactions of London's
Royal Society.³

Yet, scarcely two years later, Darwin was scrambling to defend his
theory of the origin of the Parallel Roads. And he continued to do so
for another two decades, though he was fighting a rearguard action and
knew it. Finally he gave up, admitting to his friend and geological
mentor Charles Lyell that he'd been “smashed to atoms about Glen Roy,”
his paper “one long gigantic blunder.”⁴ It was—one of the few gaffes
Darwin made in an otherwise brilliant scientific career. But this one
was understandable.

For Darwin in 1838 was unaware another geological agency was involved.
Vast ice sheets—far larger than the mountain glaciers he knew—had once
covered much of the Northern Hemisphere, northern Scotland included. His
ignorance is no surprise. In those days, no one knew the extent, complex
history, and role of glaciation in shaping the landscape, let alone that
meltwater lakes could form behind dams of glacial ice and carve parallel
terraces into valley walls, or that erratic boulders could easily be
plucked and moved great distances by glaciers (ironically, Darwin
supposed it was mountain glaciers reaching the sea during cooler periods
that had released the floating ice that had rafted all those erratics).

Fully understanding the role of glacial ice and the history of
glaciation on the planet—and for that matter, its role in the early
peopling of the Americas and the adaptive challenges it posed for the
first Americans—first required opening one's eyes to the geological
signs that ice was once far more extensive than the glaciers that still
sat atop Europe's alpine peaks.

STARTING AT THE TOP

Chamois hunters in the Swiss Alps were long familiar with the glaciers
that perched high atop their mountains, and well understood that as
these giant tongues of ice slid forward and back, they left telltale
evidence of their movement. After all, they were living at the tail end
of the Little Ice Age, a several-centuries-long (ca. AD 1550-1850)
return to cooler conditions that activated many of the Alps glaciers (in
a grim and indirect way, humans may be responsible for this episode of
global cooling⁵ as Chapter 10 explains). In the 1830s, Swiss geologist
Jean de Charpentier began to record those signs: the smoothed and
striated bedrock that ice had overridden, the piles of gravelly debris
that had been pushed along and piled up (tills and moraines, we now call
them), and the boulders that the ice had plucked from high peaks and
transported dozens of kilometers down valley (erratics).

De Charpentier read from these signs that alpine glaciers had once
extended over a much larger area, and in the summer of 1836, he showed
those features to a fellow scientist there on holiday. Louis Agassiz was
quite taken by what he saw, and though he'd won his scientific
reputation as a fossil fish expert, he possessed a creative mind and
realized what de Charpentier had not: many of these same features—albeit
on a vastly larger scale—were present at lower altitudes in Europe's
high latitudes.⁶

That included immense gravel deposits previously identified as
water-laid diluvium by Oxford geologist William Buckland, which he
attributed to “a transient deluge, affecting universally,
simultaneously, and at no very distant period, the entire surface of our
planet.” When? Five or six thousand years ago by his estimate. The
diluvium was not just from any old flood: it was from Noah's.⁷ Granted,
this deposit lacked the remains of humans who had perished in the flood,
and in retrospect Buckland's Cambridge counterpart Adam Sedgwick
admitted that should have given pause. Even so, Buckland found their
absence not so hard to explain: in Noah's time, humans lived only in the
“Asiatic” region. Their remains did not belong in floodwater deposits of
northern latitudes.

Yet, in a classic argument by analogy, Agassiz reasoned otherwise. Since
the diluvium on the low-lying plains of northern Europe was the same,
albeit far more extensive, than the tills and moraines produced by
glaciers at high altitude, then the tills and moraines across Great
Britain and northern Europe surely had a glacial origin as well. Those
glaciers, however, had long since vanished. Yet, they must have been,
from the size and extent of their traces, of almost unfathomable size,
and existed during a time of global cold. “Since I saw the glaciers,”
Agassiz crowed, “I am quite of a snowy humor, and will have the whole
surface of the earth covered with ice.”⁸

A rhetorical flourish, to be sure: the earth's surface was not entirely
buried in ice back then. Still, in the main, Agassiz got it right. It
was a bold, inferential leap that surprised de Charpentier and launched
Agassiz, who was ambitious and charismatic (as de Charpentier was not),
into the scientific limelight.

Agassiz's Ice Age was soon linked with Lyell's Pleistocene, a geological
period defined independently by percentages of fossil shells of extinct
species, but which seemed to coincide perfectly with glaciation.
Buckland proved a willing convert, happily abandoning a Noachian flood
for ice. Darwin too “gave up the ghost” of his marine subsidence theory
once he was shown the traces of the glacier that had blocked Glen Roy
and dammed the lake that cut those Parallel Roads.

The Ice Age soon jumped the Atlantic, when traces of continental ice
sheets were spotted by paleontologist Timothy Abbott Conrad in 1839 in
western New York. By the 1870s, American geologists realized that fossil
plant layers sandwiched between sheets of glacial till, and the
differential weathering of moraines, were clues there had been multiple
episodes of ice advance and retreat. The Glacial Division of the United
States Geological Survey (USGS), under the aegis of Thomas Chamberlin,
spent the last decades of the nineteenth and first decades of the
twentieth centuries mapping those separate episodes. By 1915, four
distinct glacial stages, separated by long interglacials (warm,
relatively ice-free periods), were recognized: from oldest to youngest,
Nebraskan (followed by the Aftonian interglacial), Kansan (Yarmouth
interglacial), Illinoian, (Sangamon interglacial), and Wisconsin
(Holocene interglacial), the stages named for the states where their
traces were especially well expressed.

Although Chamberlin believed he knew how many glacial episodes there
were, he was certain he didn't know what caused them. He suspected the
amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere played a role. Decades
earlier James Croll had supposed it had something to do with changes in
the shape of the earth's orbit and the wobble of its axis affecting the
amount of heat received on earth. Chamberlin saw fatal flaws in both
hypotheses, though perhaps their main flaw was being too far ahead of
their time. But even as he wrote, Milutin Milankovitch, a Serbian
mathematician and one-time concrete engineer, was laying the groundwork
for resolving the cause of the Ice Ages and, in so doing, rendering the
four-stage model of Pleistocene glaciation obsolete.

A NEWTONIAN COTILLION

Milankovitch had initially set himself the ambitious goal of creating a
mathematical model of the world's climates. Well-meaning colleagues
tried to dissuade him: who needs a model, when weather stations around
the globe provide actual data? Milankovitch paid them no mind. With a
model, he could predict—even retrodict—variation in climate across
space, and perhaps even through time.

Driving the earth's climates, Milankovitch reasoned, was incoming solar
radiation or insolation. Insolation varies by latitude and season, as
the relative position of the earth and the sun shift over the annual
cycle. It also varies over much longer time spans since, as Croll
surmised, the earth's orbit is jostled by the gravitational tug of the
sun and the other planets in a complex Newtonian cotillion. That alters
the eccentricity, or departure, of our orbit from a near-perfect circle
to more of an ellipse; it changes the tilt, or obliquity, of the earth
relative to its plane of travel; and, it triggers the precession of the
equinox, shifting the time of the year when the earth is closest to
(perihelion) or most distant from (aphelion) the sun. All these changes
occur in predictable cycles. Eccentricity varies over a 100,000-year
period; the earth's tilt swings in 41,000-year cycles between 21.8° and
24.4° (during the most recent glacial episode it was 22.95°; it is
23.45° at present); the full precession circuit takes approximately
23,000 years (at the moment, perihelion occurs during Northern
Hemisphere winters; 10,000 years ago, it was opposite).

These predictable cycles have, at least in principle, predictable
results: they determine the total amount of insolation received in
different seasons at different latitudes. So, for example, tilt the
Northern Hemisphere just 1° away from the sun, and it reduces insolation
by 3% to 4%, thereby cooling winters and summers. Similar effects come
with changes in precession and eccentricity, though in the latter the
climatic consequences are subtle indeed: reshaping the earth's orbit
accounts for, at most, a 0.3% variation in insolation. Still, combined
and compounded, these three orbital-forcing functions (as climatologists
call them), can cause dramatic swings in insolation—upwards of 20%.

Long before computers made such calculations easier, Milankovitch
calculated orbitally driven insolation changes by season and by latitude
over long periods of earth history. The effort took years, though he
worked steadily at it—even while a prisoner of war in Hungary during
World War I (nowadays, one can instantly download the last 5 million
years of orbital insolation changes from the Internet). When
Milankovitch's work appeared after the war, it caught the eye of
Wladimir Koppen, who saw that changing insolation might be the key to
understanding glaciation. The link, he realized, lay in insolation
received at high latitudes in summer since that determined how much of
the previous winter's snow melted away. If it all vanished, it would be
difficult to build an ice sheet, for glaciers are created and fed by
snow that, by slightly melting, condensing, and recrystallizing, becomes
ice. When summer insolation is reduced and temperatures cool, snow from
the previous winter stays frozen on the ground (firn, it's called). The
next winter, more snow falls, and if it does not melt away the following
summer, the firn/snowbank grows larger. As it grows, the underlying
layers of firn become steadily denser until ultimately they turn into
ice as the mass above thickens.

Once the ice reaches a critical thickness, it begins to move a few
centimeters to a few meters a day, either by internally deforming, or by
sliding along on a slurry of water, gravel, and mud. Assuming
temperatures remain cool, the ice can advance considerable distances
from its zone of accumulation close to the poles or high in the
mountains (see Plate 2). Massive, continental-scale ice sheets are
primarily a Northern Hemisphere phenomenon since glaciers need land on
which to grow—80% of the Southern Hemisphere is under water.
Accordingly, the only ice sheet of consequence in the Southern
Hemisphere is and was atop Antarctica, though there were relatively
small glaciers high in the Andes and in Patagonia.

When the ice front reaches a latitude or elevation where temperatures
are warmer, melting (ablation) overcomes the accumulation of ice, and
the glacier stops in its tracks. Warm up the climate even more, and the
glacier is forced to retreat. Where the glacier pauses for a time, it
deposits a gravelly end moraine, marking a moment of geological time
when climate was relatively stable and accumulation and ablation
temporarily balanced one another.

For the most part, glaciers advance and retreat slowly: gravity and the
sheer mass of the ice see to that. And it is often an uneven,
stutter-step process of moving and pausing. However, in times of rapid
climate change—especially global warming—glaciers can move quickly, even
visibly, over the course of a few months or years. Not surprisingly,
given the recent warming of the planet, most of the world's glaciers are
currently in rapid and headlong retreat (which is not good news for many
reasons, though with one very thin silver lining: melting glaciers have
exposed a wondrous array of animals, plants, and people and their
artifacts, preserved long frozen beneath the ice⁹).

ANSWERS FROM THE OOZE

At the behest of Koppen, Milankovitch ultimately pushed his insolation
calculations back hundreds of thousands of years, and identified dozens
of periods in the past when Northern Hemisphere summer insolation should
have favored glacial advance. Yet, geologists had found evidence for
only four such episodes. Either his model or the geologists’ data were
flawed. But which? An answer to this terrestrial puzzle first emerged in
an unlikely place: the deep ocean floor.

Two different forms (isotopes) of oxygen bond with hydrogen to form
water—one is the garden variety ^(l6)O, and the other is the heavier
isotope ^(l8)O. (An isotope is a variant of a specific element
possessing the same number of protons but differing in the number of
neutrons, and hence has a different mass and slightly different physical
properties). When water vapor from the ocean reaches the clouds, it
contains a greater proportion of ^(l6)O because these lighter water
molecules evaporate more readily; the heavier ^(l8)O is left behind.
During nonglacial periods, rain or snow over land is returned to the
ocean, and thus there is a relatively constant ^(l8)O to ^(l6)O ratio in
ocean water. However, reduce insolation, cool summer temperatures, and
freeze that precipitation in glaciers and prevent its return to the sea,
and the ocean becomes progressively depleted in the lighter ^(l6)O
molecules. Thus, the ratio of ^(l8)O to ^(l6)O in the ocean reveals how
much ^(l6)O is locked up on land, and so provides a proxy for times of
glaciation.

So how do we know ^(l8)O:^(l6)O ratios at different times in the past?
Tiny planktonic animals, foraminifera such as Globigerina bulloides,
precipitate calcareous shells that record the proportion of
^(l8)O:^(l6)O in the seawater at the time they formed.¹⁰ After the
foraminifera die, their shells drift to the sea floor and become part of
the millions of years of mud that has accumulated on the ocean bottom.
Over the past half century, geologists have extracted these shells from
the mud and analyzed their isotopic composition (8^(l8)O, measured in
parts per million [%o] relative to a standard). The result is a lengthy
record of changing ocean oxygen isotope ratios, and hence a history of
ice on land. The details of that record have since been greatly enhanced
by cores drilled through the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets (and in
thousands of smaller mountain glaciers), which yield a remarkably
precise record that reaches back hundreds of thousands and even millions
of years of oxygen isotopic composition (δ^(l8)O); greenhouse gases such
as methane (CH₄) and carbon dioxide (CO₂); and even traces of
terrestrial dust, volcanic ash, pollen, and sea salt wafting about the
atmosphere.^(ll)

The cores from sea and ice reveal there were at least ten major
glacial-interglacial episodes (of varying intensity) over the last
million years, and perhaps twenty over the entire Ice Age, the start of
which is now fairly firmly dated to about 2.6 million years ago.
Agassiz's Ice Age and Lyell's Pleistocene, tightly bound since the
1840s, have had to go their separate ways since the Pleistocene—as
formally defined by the International Commission on Stratigraphy using
criteria other than glaciation—began only l.8l million years ago and
thus, strictly speaking, covers only the later part of the Ice Age. And
therein are the distant drums of battle brewing, for those of us who
work in this time period are determined to reunite the two for reasons
historical and otherwise. In the fall of 2006, the International Union
for Quaternary Research demanded the International Commission on
Stratigraphy reconnect the Pleistocene and the Ice Age, warning that
their failure to do so would be considered a “unilateral and hostile”
action. We demanded “nothing less than control over our period of
geological time.”¹² We Pleistocene types are a feisty lot.

Yet, if there were approximately twenty glacial episodes over the
Pleistocene, why had geologists found evidence of only four? Lay the
blame squarely on the geological record. The bulldozing action of later
glacial advances removed nearly all vestiges of earlier ones. Even
today, knowing there were more advances has not made finding them any
easier: only traces of two more have been spotted (geologists have now
also realized that glaciation isn't solely a function of Milankovitch
forcing^(l3)).

Our present landscape was shaped primarily by the most recent of those,
the Wisconsin—we can still use that name—which is subdivided as follows:

1.  Early Wisconsin, a cooler period marking the onset of this last
    major glacial episode (80,000-65,000 BP; designated as Marine
    Isotope Stage 4 [MIS 4]);
2.  Middle Wisconsin, a relatively warmer period, with glaciers present
    on the land but much reduced (65,000-35,000 BP [MIS 3]);
3.  Late Wisconsin, a period of expanded glaciers (35,000-10,000 BP [MIS
    2]), with ice volume reaching its maximum, and sea levels—though not
    necessarily temperatures—falling to their minimum at l8,000 BP,
    referred to as the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). By virtue of this
    being the last episode of Pleistocene glaciation, it is by far the
    best known.
4.  Holocene, the present interglacial (l0,000 BP-present [MIS l]),
    which we are in today.

The landscape, climate, and environment of the Pleistocene was very
different than that of the Holocene. The details follow, but here are
some broad themes to bear in mind. For one, the Pleistocene was not
merely the modern world plus a few giant glaciers here and there. Its
massive ice sheets changed the geography of land and seas (opening and
closing routes to America in the process), as well as altered climates
and environments in profound ways.

But it wasn't simply a matter of being colder and wetter (or drier) for
long stretches of time. The Pleistocene was marked by cycles of climate
change taking place on varying time scales, some at a stately hundred
thousand-year rhythm, others running their course in millennia,
centuries, or even decades (Figure 5). Transitions between those shorter
cycles could be jumpy, with large and often-abrupt climate changes
occurring in centuries or less. As a result, even though many
Pleistocene plants and animals are familiar to our modern eyes, because
they had to cope with a more-or-less constantly changing world, they
were often joined in biotic communities that looked very different—not
only from those of the present, but also over the millennia of the
Pleistocene. Change, not stability, was their norm, save for those times
when climates were at their coldest (as during the LGM) or warmest—which
is why the climate and environment of the last few thousand years is
quite tame by Pleistocene standards.¹⁴

[images]

FIGURE 5.
Patterns and trends in Pleistocene climate and environment, 450,000
years ago to present and 50,000 years ago to present (all dates are in
calibrated years BP).

The upper graph shows the period from 450,000 years ago to the present,
and the trends over time—from top to bottom—of insolation, sea level,
and atmospheric carbon dioxide. Insolation, as calculated for summers at
60^(o)N latitude (in Watts/meter²), is a significant—but not the
sole—driver behind glaciation, with peaks roughly corresponding to
glacial episodes. Global sea level presents something of a mirror image
of the amount of glacial ice on land, varying from high stands that
approximate the present to periods when global oceans were 120 ± 10 m
below the present level, the latter depths reached during the Last
Glacial Maximum (LGM). Atmospheric carbon dioxide, as measured in air
bubbles trapped in the Antarctic ice sheet, ranged over that span
between a low of 185 parts per million (ppm) to a pre-Industrial
Revolution high of 290 ppm. The current figure of 385 ppm is well off
the scale of this graph. (Adapted from Labeyrie et al. 2003:37;
Overpeck, Whitlock, and Huntley 2003:83.)

The lower graph provides a close-up look at the last 50,000 years.
Visible over that time in average annual air temperature (as inferred
from 8¹⁸O measured in the Greenland ice sheet) are the temperature lows
during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) and Younger Dryas (YD), and the
substantial warming that followed both periods. Also apparent are the
wide swings of global temperatures throughout the Pleistocene, which
narrowed significantly during the Holocene. The curves for dust and
methane, also measured from the Greenland ice sheet, show the
unmistakable signal of the Younger Dryas, when newly emerging
peatlands—a significant source of methane—froze over, and the cold, dry,
and windy conditions blew dust across Greenland. Likewise, the sea level
curve (derived from the western Pacific) shows the two pulses of rapid
sea level rise on either side of the Younger Dryas, as well as the
flattening of the curve—that is, no significant change in global
seas—during that period. Finally, atmospheric carbon dioxide began to
increase after the LGM, and continued to do so through the YD, after
which it stabilized for much of the Holocene, until more recent times.
(Adapted from Liu et. al 2004; Oldfield and Alverson 2003:2; and Raynaud
et al. 2003:22.)

How much of a challenge Pleistocene climate change would have posed for
people depends on when they arrived, and how such changes affected
resources vital to them. That the first Americans were adaptively light
on their feet (they must have been: they made it here) was a very good
thing as they moved out across this diverse and dynamic continent. This
was especially true as the Pleistocene came to an end, for it went out
with a bang (as we'll see, some take this literally), at a time when the
first Americans were stretching their legs across the country. It was a
challenging stage on which this human play was performed.

AN ICY STAGE

The first Americans arrived during the latter part of the Pleistocene,
almost assuredly within the Wisconsin period. When in the Wisconsin is
another matter. Most archaeologists put it in Late Wisconsin time;
others push for a Middle or even Early Wisconsin appearance; a very few
lobby for a pre-Wisconsin arrival. Unless radically new evidence is
forthcoming, this last possibility seems remote. Playing the odds, our
attention here focuses on the glacial geology, climate, and environment
of the Late Wisconsin.

Late Wisconsin North America would be virtually unrecognizable today.
Much of Canada and the northernmost United States were buried beneath an
ice sheet comprised of three separate ice masses, the Laurentide,
Cordilleran, and Innuitian. Little need be said of the small Innuitian
ice sheet, save that it covered the islands of northernmost Canada
(above 75°N) and spanned the gap between North America and Greenland.
The other two were much larger, combining to cover about 15.8 million
km² (the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets today extend over
approximately 15.4 million km²), and accounting for more than a third of
the approximately 42.5 million km² of glacial ice covering the LGM
earth.¹⁵ The Laurentide and Cordilleran played prominent roles in North
America's Pleistocene climate, environment, and peopling.

The Laurentide, the larger by far, formed from the coalescence of
glaciers flowing out from eastern Baffin Island, the Keewatin Uplands
west of Hudson Bay, and Labrador. As the Laurentide expanded, it buried
much of eastern and central North America, from above the Arctic Circle
down to mid-Ohio (75°N to 40°N), and from the Atlantic coast to the
eastern flank of the Rocky Mountains (64°W to 120°W). At the LGM, the
Laurentide covered approximately 13.4 million km² and in places reached
3-4 kilometers in height (for comparison, the combined Antarctic ice
sheets cover about 13.6 million km² and at their highest point in East
Antarctica top out at just over 4.2 kilometers).

The Cordilleran ice sheet in the west was similarly a glacial composite,
but of glaciers that originated in high elevation ranges of northwestern
North America: ice expanded from the Alaska, Chugach, and St. Elias
mountains in southeast Alaska, down the Coast Range of Canada, but also
from the Rocky Mountains. When these fully coalesced, the Cordilleran
covered an area of approximately 2.4 million km² and stretched from
north of Anchorage, Alaska, to south of Seattle, Washington, blanketing
much of the Yukon Territory and nearly all of British Columbia. The ice
reached a thickness of 2.5 kilometers, overwhelming all but the highest
summits, and flowed out into the Pacific Ocean.

South of the Laurentide and Cordilleran, isolated alpine glaciers formed
on the Cascade, Sierra Nevada, and Rocky Mountain ranges, and on smaller
ranges in places such as the Great Basin. The extent of these glaciers
depended on topography, temperature, and moisture: northerly areas
closer to the coast had more and more extensive alpine glaciation, while
areas to the south and farther inland had glaciers only at the highest
elevations. Thus, in the northern Cascades, glaciers descended to about
1,600 meters above sea level, whereas in the southern Sierra Nevada and
Rocky Mountain ranges, glaciers formed only above approximately 3,000
meters in elevation. The impact of these relatively small and
topographically restricted glaciers was insignificant—trivial, even—when
measured against their continental-scale brethren.

COMINGS AND GOINGS

The Late Wisconsin Laurentide ice sheet began expanding some
30,000-27,000 years ago, according to Arthur Dyke,¹⁶ reaching the
northern United States by about 26,000 BP. It reached its maximum
southern extent at different times in different places: east of the
Great Lakes region, the ice made it as far south as it would get very
early—by roughly 21,000 BP—weaving a line from Georges Bank off Cape
Cod, along southern Long Island, across northern New Jersey and
Pennsylvania, and traversing Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, whence it then
turned sharply to the north up into Wisconsin. It toed that line for
several thousand years. West of there, the Laurentide did not reach its
maximum until about 14,000 BP.

Cordilleran ice probably began advancing no earlier than about 27,000
BP, with the expansion of ice in the high valleys of the Coast Range,
and some 2,000-3,000 years later in the mountain ranges of southeast
Alaska and interior northwest Canada.¹⁷ As these glaciers spread out of
their high valleys and coalesced, they initially moved west to the
Pacific, approaching Vancouver Island by about 24,000 years ago. By
20,000 BP, the Cordilleran ice sheet had filled the lower-lying Fraser
Plateau of south-central British Columbia, and by about 17,000 years ago
had flowed south of Canada. It continued to expand in all directions,
and by about 16,000 BP had reached its maximum extent along much of the
Canadian coast, though it did not reach its southern extent in Montana,
Idaho, and Washington until approximately 14,000 years ago.

Not surprisingly, these ice sheets had a profound influence on the
topography of North America. Their advance disrupted and rerouted
drainages, even reversing the flow of the Mississippi River, which in
pre-glacial times exited North America via what's now Hudson's Bay. In
retreat, they left behind moraines and other glacial landforms and
lake-dotted landscapes (10,000 just by Minnesota's count), and in
meltwater floods carried sediment that, when dry, was airlifted and
deposited across large regions of interior North America (loess).
Naturally, they had a significant impact on climate, which of course
influenced the distribution of plant and animal species. Finally, this
massive ice buildup helped set the stage for crossing over to the New
World.

OCEANS AND SHELVES

Let's look first at what it meant for crossings: ice sheets the size of
the Laurentide, Cordilleran, and their LGM counterparts require water.
Nearly all of it must come from the oceans, where 97% of the planet's
approximately 1.5 x 10⁹ km³ of water is stored. It's a zero-sum game.
Building glaciers on land lowers sea level; melt the ice, and the seas
rise again. That process is known as glacial eustasy, and it's ongoing:
sea levels are currently rising, though at the subtle rate of 1-2
millimeters per year. (Of course, if the current melting of the
Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets accelerates, so, too, will the rate
of sea level rise, with potentially catastrophic consequences: between
them, these two ice sheets hold the equivalent of a whopping 60 meters
of global seas. Low-lying island nations in the Pacific have good reason
to be deeply concerned about global warming).¹⁸

During the LGM, roughly 5.2% of the world's water was frozen on land
(about half in the Laurentide alone). That was enough to draw down
global seas 120 ± 10 meters below their present level.¹⁹ Shallow
continental shelf became dry land, resulting in about 8% more land
during the LGM than today. Small wonder the bones and teeth of mammals
such as mammoth and mastodon are found in dredging the Atlantic floor:
it's not because they swam out there. Since the Atlantic coastline was
shifted hundreds of kilometers east of its present position, rivers had
to extend further and cut deeper to reach distant Pleistocene oceans
(today, their now-drowned channels are visible in bathymetric charts of
coastal waters). The continental shelf on the Pacific side is much
narrower, but in LGM times was still almost 50 kilometers beyond its
present position. But it is to the far northern Pacific where our
attention is drawn.

Today, Siberia and Alaska are separated by the Bering Strait, which even
at its narrowest is still about 100 kilometers across. Seas only had to
fall just over 50 meters for the continental shelf beneath the Bering
and Chukchi Seas to become dry land. When sea levels were at their LGM
minimum, a land bridge roughly 1,000 kilometers wide connected Asia and
America. The Bering Land Bridge—or Beringia, which includes the portions
of Siberia and Alaska it links—emerged in late Wisconsin times
approximately 27,000 years ago, and was passable until severed by rising
postglacial seas about 11,000 years ago. But from then until 10,000 BP,
the breach was still narrow enough to readily freeze (and allow walking
across) in winter. Soon thereafter, Pacific mollusks reappeared in the
Chukchi Sea, an unmistakable sign the west-east Bering Land Bridge had
once again become the south-north Bering Strait.²⁰

Beringia was a vast, flat, ice-free, almost featureless highway
trafficked by plants, animals, and people for millennia. That the same
mammals inhabited Siberia and Alaska testifies to the ease of travel
back and forth: only Siberia's woolly rhinoceros and a few Alaskan
species (including the giant short-faced bear), failed to make the
cross-Beringia commute. Traversable though Beringia was, hospitable it
may not have been. From the absence of evidence for trees or lakes, and
the presence of extensive sand dunes, loess, tracts of permafrost, and
ice-wedge casts, it appears that the LGM climate was significantly drier
and colder than at present (with precipitation estimated to have been
40%-75% lower, and average air temperatures lower by 7°F-11°F).

Still, the rich record of animal bones recovered from Alaska—sluicing
for gold produces fossil wealth, too—bespeaks an abundant animal
community. It was dominated, Dale Guthrie shows, by large grazers such
as mammoth, horse, bison, saiga (an antelope), and musk ox, and their
predators, the Pleistocene lion, saber-toothed cat, and giant
short-faced bear. So many animals were present that Guthrie envisions
LGM Beringia looking much like the African savanna with its vast game
herds, though obviously one that was a great deal colder and drier. The
Mammoth Steppe, he calls it.²¹

Once raised, the Mammoth Steppe notion was instantly criticized. Not by
Guthrie's fellow paleontologists, but by palynologists studying the
vegetation of Pleistocene Beringia. Their evidence, recorded in
pollen-bearing sediments, pointed to a landscape shrouded in sparse,
tundra-like vegetation. It was, they supposed, more polar desert than
rich grassland, more polar Sahara than savanna. This contradictory
testimony—lots of animals, which apparently thrived on no visible means
of support—came to be known as the “Productivity Paradox.” Yet, the
burden of proof, Guthrie insisted, must be on the palynologists:
Beringia had too many grazers for too long to have been as barren as
they said.²²

They're still arguing, for Guthrie has never demonstrated how abundant
animals were (it's not an easy task), while palynologists have never
resolved how much they can generalize about the Beringian landscape
vegetation from their pollen cores. But reconciliation may be on the
horizon. Sophisticated analyses of pollen records by Patricia Anderson
and colleagues have shown that while LGM Beringia was indeed more tundra
than steppe, it was a tundra unlike that in the Arctic today. Its
productivity was much higher, and it included plenty of grasses for
grazers.²³ Humans on this landscape may not have found many plants to
eat, but there would have been animals to hunt as they made their way
across from Siberia.

PLEISTOCENE PROMENADES

If migrating from Siberia to Alaska was relatively easy, traveling south
to the Lower Forty-eight may not have been. The Laurentide and
Cordilleran ice sheets grew toward each other, and for thousands of
years around the time of the LGM, they coalesced along a nearly 2,000
kilometer stretch of western Canada (roughly today's British
Columbia-Alberta border). Just how thoroughgoing a barrier the ice
sheets formed is apparent in studies of ancient DNA from fossil bison
and brown bears, which reveal an absence of gene flow between
populations in Alaska and those south of the ice for much of the time
between 25,000 and 13,000 years ago. Out along the coast during the LGM,
Cordilleran ice flowed onto the Pacific Ocean's continental shelf, and
along much of its length reached the Pleistocene sea, potentially
blocking any coastal end runs.

People coming to America thus could have had an uninterrupted stroll
from Siberia to Texas, if they arrived after Beringia emerged but before
glacial ice had completely buried the landscape, or if they came after
ice retreat but before Beringia was drowned. At times in between, it
would have been a two-step shuffle: first to Alaska and later—after ice
retreat—from Alaska to midlatitude North America. In either case, there
was a choice of routes: through the continental interior along the
eastern edge of the Rocky Mountains, or down along the Pacific coast
(Figure 6). Timing, however, was everything.

[images]

FIGURE 6.
Maps showing the position of retreating Cordilleran and Laurentide
glacial ice at 13,000 BP, 12,000 BP, 11,500 BP, and 10,500 BP; the
opening of the ice-free corridor; and the filling and draining of
proglacial lakes. (Adapted from Dyke 2004 by David Willers.)

The interior route was effectively blocked by glacial expansion as early
as about 28,000 years ago, and remained so until late glacial times.
Yet, even after the Laurentide and Cordilleran glaciers retreated and an
ice-free corridor began to open between them—which it did, zipperlike,
from its northern and southern ends—the newly deglaciated terrain must
have been an impenetrable mess. Low-lying areas would have been
inundated by meltwater lakes and mud flats. The higher, drier terrain
may have been traversable, but was likely inhospitable, at least while
cold katabatic winds drained off nearby ice sheets. It was centuries or
more—perhaps not until approximately 12,000 BP—that the land was fully
restocked with plants and animals, and became a habitable passageway for
human colonizers.²⁴

A coastal route was open before about 23,000 years ago but was
impassable during the LGM, as glaciers in the northern Gulf of Alaska
blocked the route south. Were it possible to get around that
barrier—either on foot or afloat—a trip down the LGM coast would still
have challenged the hardiest Pleistocene pioneers. Travel would have
been impeded by icebergs, sea ice, and glacier fronts hundreds of
kilometers across, deeply crevassed, and with edges that calved into the
ocean (see Plate 3). There were irregularly spaced segments of coast
unburdened by Cordilleran ice even during the LGM, and though these may
have provided safe refuge for plants and animals,²⁵ such areas would
have been walled by ice and assuredly cold and harsh. It would have been
risky for LGM travelers coming down the coast to count on finding such
unpredictable landings. Better to travel once the ice had begun to
retreat. But when was that?

Deglaciation of the coast was complex and took place at different times.
Still, long reaches of the outer coast were ice free between 16,000 and
14,500 BP. Glacial ice blocked portions of the coast after that, but by
13,400 years ago those glaciers had retreated, and the coast was clear
from Alaska to Washington State. The plants and animals necessary to
human survival soon took root on land.²⁶

But a caveat: our dates for the timing and availability of the different
routes can change. Forty years ago, for example, the interior route was
said to be closed from 27,000 to 12,000 BP; but then thirty and twenty
years ago, the ice-free corridor was thought to have been open for much
of Wisconsin time; ten years ago the pendulum of opinion swung back in
the other direction, and once again the interior route was thought
closed or otherwise impassable for much of the late Pleistocene (where
matters now stand). This swinging to and fro was because of the
continued radiocarbon and other chronological dating of glacial features
and new interpretations that followed. It's a useful caution, suggesting
as it does that although our current dates for the opening of interior
and coastal routes might seem secure (and supported by DNA evidence),
additional evidence on the timing of glacial advance and retreat and the
environments along each route can change all that.

Regardless, once the first Americans got south of the North American ice
sheets, glacial ice would not impact their movements until they reached
the high Andes or the high latitudes of South America.

FORECASTING BACKWARD: A LOOK AT PLEISTOCENE CLIMATES

The climate that greeted the first Americans depends on when they got
here, for climates were changing into, through, and out of the LGM.²⁷
Helping drive those changes were the ice sheets themselves, for these
were mountain-sized weathermakers capable of diverting jet streams and
air masses, influencing local climates as well as more distant land and
sea surface temperatures (indirectly further altering air mass movement
and behavior), and producing large anomalies in the earth's radiation
balance and albedo (glaciers reflect more of the sun's energy back into
space, compounding cooling).²⁸

Overall, average annual air temperatures across the LGM globe were
9°F-12°F cooler than today. No surprise there: this was the Ice Age.
However, the degree of cooling depended on location: it was only 5°F-9°F
cooler in the tropics, 18°F-22°F cooler in areas closer to the ice
sheets, and 37°F-41°F colder directly atop an ice sheet, were any human
foragers hardy enough to venture atop one.²⁹

In North America, an anticyclone (winds that rotate clockwise about a
center of high pressure) developed over the Laurentide and Cordilleran
ice sheets, and cold, katabatic winds flowed off the ice. Along their
front, these produced a dry, periglacial band up to 200 kilometers wide,
which left behind traces of permafrost such as ice-wedge casts, relict
pingos (ice-mounded earth, since collapsed), and the scars of patterned
ground. This would not have been a particularly hospitable place for
people: annual air temperatures in permafrost regions average a chilly
21°F.

Yet, further south, temperatures might not have been so cold, nor were
seasonal swings as pronounced as today. Winters, in fact, may have been
relatively warmer. Here's why: today in North America, especially across
its broad interior, we experience a continental climate marked by
bitterly cold winters. These are a consequence of frigid Arctic air
masses that sweep down from northern Canada and reach deep into the
southern United States, plunging temperatures all the way. But cold air
is low-lying air, and during glacial times would have been trapped in
the Arctic behind the looming 3-4 kilometer-high Laurentide ice sheet,
largely unable to penetrate midlatitude North America. Excluding that
air mass dampened seasonal temperature swings, with the result that LGM
climates were more equable than today, with cooler summers but
relatively warmer winters.

Precipitation patterns during LGM times were likewise very different: it
was wetter in some places, drier in others, and varied in different ways
seasonally. Credit the ice sheet once more: it split the westerly jet
stream into branches that flowed along its northern and southern edges.
The northern, weaker branch brought relatively dry air across Alaska,
where LGM climates were only a few degrees cooler than present. By the
time the jet stream bent around to reach New England and the North
Atlantic, it was feeding in cold arctic air, producing climatic
conditions that were wetter than present, as storms formed along the
border of glacial ice and ocean.

Further south it was not as cold or as wet. The presence of the ice
sheet, coupled with the influx of Caribbean air (extending northward to
a latitude of 40°N), strengthened westerly flow and pumped Pacific air
into the Upper Midwest in summer, the air drying as it traveled eastward
over the Rocky Mountains. Drier conditions also marked much of the
southeast. Polar waters expanded south, cooling sea surface temperatures
in the Atlantic 3°F-6°F (temperatures off coastal New England were as
much as 25°F cooler than today). Cooler oceans give up less water to
evaporation, reducing moisture available for precipitation on land.
Florida was especially hard hit, suffering a steep decline in LGM
rainfall.³⁰

On the opposite side of the continent, the southern-shifted branch of
the jet stream deflected moist Pacific air on a more southeasterly
track, which brought onshore a strong flow of cool, moist air and rain
to what is now the arid/semiarid Great Basin and American Southwest.
Rain, of course, meant cloud cover, and that coupled with cooler
temperatures lowered evaporation. By one estimate LGM precipitation was
twice what it is at present, and evaporation about 25% less. Regardless
of the exact figures, the result was lakes on the land: 25,000 dotted
the Southern High Plains of Texas alone. Pluvial lakes, we call these to
signify their formation under climate conditions wetter than today.

The largest of the LGM's pluvial lakes were in the Great Basin, and the
greatest of them all was Lake Bonneville, which covered nearly 52,000
km² of northeastern Utah; it was about the size of present-day Lake
Michigan. Today we see only its remnants: the Bonneville “salt flats”
(the floor of the ancient lake); prominent wave-cut beaches (more
parallel roads) etched into places such as the Wasatch Mountains east of
Salt Lake City (Figure 7); and the Great Salt, Utah, and Sevier lakes,
the puddles Bonneville left behind after it evaporated (which together
represent no more than 6% of their ancestral lake). This vast inland sea
hit its high water mark—a depth of about 372 meters—around 15,000 BP,³¹
but the lake would have stayed higher longer had it not catastrophically
drained following a breach in its sidewall. Ultimately it stabilized,
and its later Pleistocene history is similar to that of other Great
Basin pluvial lakes, such as Lake Lahontan and Mono Lake. All together,
the Pleistocene Great Basin had about eleven times more water on its
floor, and would have provided habitats for a wide variety of plants,
animals, and people—were they in the neighborhood.

While the desert bloomed during the LGM, the rainy Pacific Northwest was
much drier, owing to prevailing easterlies. Nevertheless, this was a
time of catastrophic flooding in the Northwest, though for reasons that
had nothing to do with precipitation. Instead, blame glacial ice. When
Cordilleran ice reached its maximum extent, it dammed the Clark Fork of
the Columbia River, forming proglacial Lake Missoula. With a volume of
about 2,500 km³ (the size of lakes Erie and Ontario combined) and as
much as 650 meters deep, Lake Missoula drowned the valleys of northwest
Montana and etched a series of Glen Roy-like terraces into its mountains
(travelers tip: when visiting Missoula, Montana, be sure to look up at
the hillsides).

[images]

FIGURE 7.
The power of water: a wave-cut notch on the side of Fort Rock Cave in
the northern Great Basin, Oregon. The pluvial lake that once filled this
now desert area and eroded that notch was relatively small by Great
Basin standards. (Photograph by George T. Jones, courtesy of Charlotte
Beck.)

Lake Missoula existed from 15,700 to 13,500 BP. But the water was held
in check by glacial ice, a massive but notoriously unstable dam that was
no match for the tremendous pressure exerted by the lake water rising up
behind it. Repeatedly, the water bored a tunnel through the base of the
dam, burst through, and reached full flood within a few hours (helped by
the relatively warmer water rushing through and enlarging the tunnel),
then stopped flowing when pressure from the overlying ice squeezed the
tunnel shut. Overall, the Lake Missoula ‘spigot’ was opened some 90
times over the lake's existence, though at progressively shallower lake
levels as the ice dam thinned.³² At its flooding peak, Lake Missoula
waters burst out across Idaho and into Washington (Figure 8),
discharging at -30 million meters³/second—the Amazon River, in
comparison, can barely muster 200,000 meters³/second—reaching the
Pacific Ocean within a few days.

The floods carved islands in the loess, rafted 100-ton boulders like
corks, and tore deep gashes in the bedrock, one of which—the tandem of
Lower and Upper Grand Coulee, is nearly 80 kilometers long, as much as 7
kilometers wide, and nearly 300 meters deep. When Lake Missoula's waters
plunged back into the Columbia River in central Washington, they created
waterfalls that in places were twice the height and width of Niagara
Falls. The sight and sound of one of the Missoula floods must have been
awesome, were anyone on the ground to see it, hear it—and survive it.³³

[images]

FIGURE 8.
Map of glacial Lake Missoula and the Channeled Scablands of the Pacific
Northwest (arrows between these areas denote the exit path of the lake
water). The digital elevation model (DEM) on the lower right shows the
topographic scars left on the landscape of central Washington (just west
of George, WA) as the floodwaters of Lake Missoula reached the Columbia
and tore gashes into weak areas of bedrock, creating brief but
spectacular waterfalls, which are now Potholes and Frenchman Springs
coulees. The photograph on the lower left was taken from what would have
been the lip of the waterfall at Frenchman Springs Coulee (near the dot
on the DEM), looking toward the Columbia River. For scale, there is a
full-sized white pickup truck (circled) on the floor of the coulee more
than 100 m below where the photograph was taken. (Photograph by David J.
Meltzer; map and DEM by Judith R. Cooper.)

ENVIRONMENTS WITHOUT ANALOGUE

Late Wisconsin plant and animal communities are well known from some
areas, less so in others. But in all cases, they were arranged very
differently than they are today: it's because of the effects of the ice
sheets once again. Nowadays, plant and animal distributions in eastern
North America are largely determined by factors such as seasonal
temperature and growing season. The northern and southern boundaries of
the boreal forest across Canada, for instance, roughly mark the average
positions of summer and winter Arctic air (respectively). Beyond the
one-hundredth meridian, in semiarid and arid western North America,
moisture plays the more dominant role in shaping ecological communities
(though at high elevations, temperature reasserts its importance). But
bring on continental glaciers and change the climate ground rules, and
plant and animal communities change dramatically.

Importantly, they did not merely shift south en masse in response to
advancing ice, but instead these communities came apart: individual
species set off on their own and at their own pace, moving (or not)
depending on their specific climatic and ecological tolerances. Some
went far: during the LGM, spruce trees grew in Louisiana and Florida,
while arctic caribou grazed in northern Alabama.

The northern species that migrated south did not run roughshod over
temperate species already present, but instead were integrated with them
in diverse communities often far richer than those of today. Living in
Peccary Cave (Arkansas) and Cheek Bend Cave (Tennessee) during the
Pleistocene, for example, were several species that now live far apart:
among them, Microtus xanthognathus (the taiga or Yellow-cheeked vole),
which today never strays south of the Canada-United States border;
Geomys bursarius (the Plains pocket gopher), which today inhabits
western prairie and plains; and Dasypus bellus (the beautiful
armadillo), an extinct animal that, like its modern counterpart,
inhabited subtropical regions. These species could co-exist because LGM
climates were equable: summers south of the ice were cool enough to
support northern species, while winters were not so very cold that they
drove southern species away.

In the mountain west, much of the shifting of species’ ranges was
according to altitude rather than latitude. Plants and animals that are
today confined by heat and aridity to higher elevations, during glacial
times were able to migrate downslope in response to cooler temperatures
and greater moisture at lower elevations. The consequences of that shift
are dramatically illustrated in the Great Basin, with its long, high,
spiny mountain ranges separated by low valleys. The elevation difference
between valley floor and mountaintop can be as much as several thousand
meters. Today, it's a difficult trick for many animals adapted to the
cool climate and alpine vegetation of the high peaks to scramble down
and across the harsh desert lowland—think Death Valley—and scamper up
into an adjacent mountain range, even in the cool of winter. And, yet,
many of the same species (small mammals mostly) occupy adjacent
mountains, suggesting to ecologist James Brown these isolated “islands”
were connected during the cooler and wetter Pleistocene when intervening
lowlands were more habitable and enabled easier passage. Subsequent work
by Brown, zooarchaeologist Donald Grayson, and others showed—by
documenting species common to separate mountaintops—that was mostly the
case, though the details vary by species.³⁴

All this shifting and integration of plants and animals made for
Pleistocene biotic communities that lacked modern analogues. Although
that's partly because those communities also contained many now-extinct
animals, even those species still present today occurred during the
Pleistocene in numbers and distributions that differed from the present.
Complicated as it was, painting a picture of the LGM landscape is best
done with broad brush strokes.

Along the southern edge of the ice sheet, from New England to Montana,
and south along the summit of the Appalachians, there was a
discontinuous treeless zone of tundra plants and animals—arctic and
alpine beetles included—intermingled with southern and prairie forms.
South of the treeless zone over much of eastern and central North
America was a diverse forest, dominated by spruce in the northern
Midwest and pine in the northeast.

Still further south in North America, forests increasingly included oak,
ash, and hickory, and other temperate and deciduous elements. In these,
cold-loving shrews, lemmings, and voles lived alongside warm-loving
armadillos and tapirs, chipmunks and ground squirrels. Naturally, the
ratio of cold-to warm-loving species decreased as annual temperatures
increased from north to south. These forests were also the domain of a
variety of now-extinct large mammals, such as mastodon, sloth, and
mammoth, whose browsing and grazing were in part responsible for these
Pleistocene forests being much more open than the dense and closed
forests of the historic period.³⁵

In the Pacific Northwest, areas along the ice margin were dry and
largely treeless, while further south, an open parkland of spruce and
lodgepole pine grew in the unglaciated portions of the Puget lowland.
This setting supported a mix of animals, in this instance denizens of
alpine tundra, subalpine coniferous forest, and grassland species.

In the far west and southwest, snow lines and tree lines dipped—nearly
1,000 meters in places—below their present altitude. In the Great Basin,
bristlecone and limber pine grew in places where in today's hotter and
drier climates only desert scrub (e.g., creosote) can survive. On the
Colorado Plateau, complex forests developed as species of pine, spruce,
hemlock, and fir shifted downslope. In the deserts of the Southwest,
pinon-juniper forests shrouded much of the landscape, intermingled with
sagebrush, with jackrabbits and pocket gophers scrambling about in the
open woodland.

On the plains and prairie of the midcontinent, a mixed spruce/pine
forest pushed west from the Great Lakes into the eastern plains. How far
it extended, and at what times (its front moved) is unknown, partly for
want of sites of the proper age. Likely, however, the grassland/forest
boundary was further west than it is today: greater LGM precipitation on
the plains would have enabled trees to grow in areas now too dry for
their survival. Still, the plains then—as the plains now—was largely
open grassland.

It's no easy task to get excited about what kinds of grasses were
present on that landscape, but it is worth brief notice, because not all
grasses are alike. There are the warm-season types that grow in the
summer, and cool-season forms that undergo their growth in the fall,
winter, and spring. Which type is in an area is driven primarily by
summer temperature and precipitation, but also by atmospheric CO₂:
warm-season forms are more common in southerly areas, cool-season in
higher elevation and northerly areas. During glacial times, cool-season
forms should have been more widespread, yet may not have been. Knowing
their distribution over the last few millennia of the Pleistocene is
potentially quite important because warm-season grasses contain potent
anti-herbivory toxins, possibly bad news for Pleistocene mammals that
may have grazed on those, especially since some of those mammals soon
went extinct.

MEGAFAUNAL MENAGERIE

Thirty-five genera of mammals ultimately vanished from the North
American Pleistocene landscape (see Table 2). It's a stunning loss, made
all the more so because the roster of the disappeared is a spectacular
zoo of mostly (though not entirely) very large animals—megafauna—of
highly diverse adaptations and habitats, and for which humans are a
prime suspect in their demise.³⁶

The tally includes four species of mammoth, animals that stood upwards
of 4 meters at the shoulder, weighed nearly 4,500 kilograms (5 tons),
and carried massive ivory tusks (overgrown incisors, really) that
sometimes reached lengths of 4.5 meters. Mammoth herds grazed the vast
grasslands of Pleistocene North America, Europe, and Asia, and some of
their freeze-dried carcasses have been unearthed in Siberia and Alaska
(Figure 9), where in the last century, their flesh was fed to dog teams
(none of the dogs were reportedly worse off for the experience). More
food, this time for thought: bits of ancient DNA have been successfully
recovered from tissue and bones of the woolly mammoth (Mammuthus
primigenius).³⁷ Although fragmentary, these reveal that the mammoth
genome is virtually identical to that of African elephants. It's too
early to bet the ranch on the chances of cloning a mammoth inside an
elephant.

In the same taxonomic order (Proboscidea), but a different family than
the mammoth and elephant, was the American mastodon (Mammut americanum).
These were shorter (up to 3 meters at the shoulder) and stockier than
the mammoth, and were likely relatively solitary animals that dined on
twigs and cones of conifers and other browse in forests, where their
bones have been unearthed for centuries. One very early find was
presented to Cotton Mather who, evidently worse at human anatomy than he
was at identifying witches in seventeenth-century Salem (Massachusetts),
mistook mastodon bones as proof of the Biblical passage, “There were
giants in the earth in those days.” Right size, wrong animal.

Also on the list: four genera of giant ground sloths (see Plate 4). The
smallest of these was about the size of a modern black bear; the
largest, Eremotherium, reached a length of 5.5 meters (tall giraffes top
out at under 5 meters), and probably weighed 2,700 kilograms (3 tons).
Then there was Megalonyx jeffersonii, named for Thomas Jefferson, who
first mistook this “animal of the clawed kind” as a giant carnivore
three times larger than the modern lion (the Latinized term Megalonyx
comes from the Greek as “great claw”). It was, in fact, the smallest of
the ground sloths but still about the size of a modern black bear (the
sloths’ modern, distant relatives, the tree sloths of South America,
might weigh 9 kilograms soaking wet).

[images]

FIGURE 9.
Dima, the freeze-dried baby woolly mammoth—note the hair around the
ankles—shortly after emerging from the permafrost in 1977 on a terrace
of the Kirgiliakh River, a tributary of the Kolyma River in Siberia.
Dima was perhaps just 4 months old when he walked into and was entrapped
in a muddy pit. Ultimately, he sank deep into the mud, slowly starved
(preserved in his stomach were bits of plant detritus and sediment),
then died from inhaling sediment into his lungs. (Photograph courtesy of
David M. Hopkins.)

Then there was the glyptodont, a mammal encased in a turtle-like shell
with massive limbs and an armored tail and skull. Stretching nearly 3
meters in length, 1.5 meters in height, and weighing upwards of a ton,
this cumbersome animal appears to have lived along lakes, streams, and
marshes, and may have been semi-aquatic. Rounding out the mammalian
herbivore list were horses and three genera of camel (one of which
looked like a large version of a dromedary; the other two were more like
present-day llamas); pronghorn; musk ox (the latter including a genus
longer limbed and able to live in warmer climes than the modern musk
ox); multiple genera of peccaries, deer, and tapir; and assorted bit
players such as Harrington's mountain goat, the Aztlan rabbit, and the
giant beaver (Castoroides ohioensis), which weighed over 90 kilograms
and packed incisors 20 centimeters long (judging by its teeth, this was
no dam builder, but nonetheless frequented lakes and ponds).

TABLE 2 Extinct mammalian genera and species of North America

[images]

[images]

NOTE: Animals listed in bold type are ones for which there is secure
archaeological evidence they were preyed upon by human hunters.
Taxonomic data from E. Anderson 1984; Grayson 2007; Kurten and Anderson
1980. Information on archaeological occurrences from Frison 1991;
Grayson and Meltzer 2002.

^(a)Other members of the genus survived outside of North America

Preying on these herbivores were some formidable carnivores, including
the giant short-faced bear (Arctodus), long limbed and 33% larger than
the largest living carnivore, the Alaskan brown bear. Arctodus was
likely omnivorous, but may have fed on bison and other large grazers.
Also on the carnivore list was a large dog (the dhole), the short-faced
skunk (larger and more carnivorous than its modern relative), and
several species of big cats, including the most spectacular carnivore of
all, the saber-toothed cat.

The saber-toothed cat, aptly named Smilodon fatalis (who says
taxonomists have no sense of humor?), had 15-centimenter (6 in)-long
upper canines, which were saw-toothed front to back and dagger thick
side to side. This lion-sized predator probably fed on young mammoth or
other slow-footed herbivores, its sword-like teeth used to slash the
throat or abdomen of its prey to produce suffocation, heavy bleeding,
and death. The saber-toothed cat had short, powerful legs: it was not
built to run fast or far, but was probably an ambush hunter. Thousands
of its remains have been found in Los Angeles's La Brea tar pits,
suggesting .Smilodon haunted the area, waiting for prey to become mired
in the tar pits. Studies of .Smilodon teeth indicate they rarely gnawed
on or cracked open the bones of their prey, which explains why their
abandoned kills attracted scavengers such as the dire wolf (Canis
dirus), which seemingly made a career out of cleaning up saber-toothed
cat leftovers.

A common feature of most of these extinct animals was their large size:
virtually all, with the exception of the rabbit Aztlanolagus and the
diminutive pronghorn, had an adult body weight of at least 50 kilograms
(100 lbs), and in the elephant-sized animals, of many tons. There were
by some estimates over 100 million of these aircraft carriers of the
animal kingdom inhabiting the diverse landscape of Pleistocene North
America. Some of those genera were evolutionarily homegrown (such as the
horse and camel), many had been in the Americas hundreds of thousands if
not millions of years, and all had weathered multiple
glacial-interglacial cycles. Yet, by 10,800 BP, all were extinct—which
is not to say that all went extinct at that moment, for current evidence
indicates only half of the thirty-five genera had survived until then.

Even so, because their disappearance appears to coincide roughly with
two very distinctive events—people coming in and the Pleistocene going
out—disentangling what caused these extinctions has proven no easy task,
and is a matter hotly debated. Whether humans were to blame is taken up
in Chapter 8 when the archaeological record of Clovis hunters is
examined; here, let's stay with the climatic and ecological changes
wrought by the end of the Pleistocene.

A WARMING WORLD

We officially mark that end at 10,000 BP. That particular date is
arbitrary and was mostly chosen, as geologist David Hopkins cheerfully
admitted, because it's a nice, round number. In fact, the changes that
signaled the beginning of the end of the Ice Age began earlier, and the
end—at least in northerly areas—came later.

Around 16,000 years ago, the first hints global climates were changing
appeared. Higher summer insolation (those orbital cycles never stop)
began steadily warming the Northern Hemisphere. Winter snow and ice were
no longer staying frozen through the summer, and glaciers slowly started
to melt. It was the Antarctic glaciers and those in the midlatitudes
that began retreating earliest (around 14,500 years ago). Deglaciation
did not begin in earnest in the Northern Hemisphere for another
millennium or so, and it would take some 10,000 years: it's not easy to
melt 54,000,000 km³ of ice.³⁸

Sometime after 14,500 BP, the Laurentide and Cordilleran ice sheets
began to pull back, though with occasional, brief re-advances of ice
lobes and even-briefer surges (the latter are triggered by the slippery
internal mechanics of glaciers³⁹). By 13,000 years ago the Laurentide
had decreased in area by about 25%, and in volume by about 50%: it
thinned more rapidly than it shrank. By 11,000 BP, glacial ice had
abandoned New England for Quebec, opening the St. Lawrence Seaway, an
event that may have had profound climatic consequences (of which, much
more below). By 10,000 BP, the Laurentide was half its former self, and
had vanished from western Canada and the upper Midwest. By 7700 BP, it
made its last stand over Hudson Bay, then split in two (an event also
with climatic consequences). By 5,000 years ago, its surviving remnants
huddled over northern Quebec and on Baffin Island.⁴⁰

On the other side of the continent, Cordilleran ice lingered for a brief
time at its maximum position after 14,000 BP, then departed Seattle and
the Puget lowland. It melted more rapidly than the Laurentide, and by
10,000 BP had nearly vanished, save in the mountains of southeast Alaska
and at high spots on the Coast Range. Robert Fulton and colleagues
suspect its fast-disappearing act was the result of geography: the bulk
of the ice sheet rested in the low-lying region between the Coast Range
and Rocky Mountains. Once post-LGM warming slowed and then stopped the
replenishing flow of ice down from those mountains, the low-lying ice
sheet was doomed. The interior portion, isolated and starved, was unable
to retreat gracefully and wasted in place. On the Pacific side, coastal
ice rapidly calved into the sea.

As ice sheets withered, meltwater returned to the oceans. Much of the
Laurentide drained down the Mississippi River into the Gulf of Mexico,
swelling the river far wider and deeper than any historically known
flood and presenting a formidable challenge for crossings. And it was
choked with sediment and flanked by extensive mud flats, which when
dried and scoured by winds fanned aloft chokingly thick clouds of
fine-grained sediment (silt) that fell onto the surrounding uplands. In
places, these loess deposits are 40-50 meters thick.⁴¹

Of course, once those waters returned to the ocean, sea levels began to
rise, flooding river valleys and trenches carved by glaciers that once
had extended to Pleistocene shores, and creating large estuaries (such
as the Chesapeake Bay) and deep fjords (such as the port of Seattle). By
one estimate, some 110 meters’ worth of sea level was returned to the
oceans from 16,000 to 6,000 years ago (modern sea levels were reached
around 4000 BP, the timing varying by area). That's an average of 1.1
meters per century, fast by modern standards—the seas are rising today
at the rate of 10-20 centimeters per century. But rates and averages
mean little here, at least in terms of glacial and climatic history, for
they mask the fact that this overall, upward trend was mostly slow and
steady, but occasionally punctuated by pulses of very rapid sea level
rise (two major pulses occurred at 16,000 and 12,500 BP).⁴²

Had human colonizers come down the coast sometime after 16,000 BP, they
likely would not have noticed the rising seas—water levels weren't
coming up that fast. Surely, however, they would have encountered the
milky deltas formed at the mouths of sediment-choked rivers draining
interior ice fields. It likely took several centuries before these
rivers ceased muddying tide pools and choking off near-shore
environments.

Rising sea levels, of course, must have drowned many early sites that
were once located close to the coast—but it did not necessarily drown
all of them. For as sea levels were rising, so, too, were portions of
the newly deglaciated coast of Alaska and British Columbia: when freed
from beneath their weighty ice burden, they rose upward (a phenomenon
geologists call isostatic rebound⁴³). What goes down, must come up. And
because this is also a tectonically active area, occasionally the land
comes up very quickly indeed. All that's good news for archaeology
because along the Pacific northwest coast, where we might hope to find
evidence of early colonizers making their way south, segments of the
Pleistocene shoreline on which they may have walked are now well above
sea level. Finding the sites that might be on them in an area now
covered in lush temperate rain forest is a challenge, but not an
impossible one (Chapter 4).⁴⁴

COLD WATER AND HOT AIR

Rising seas did more than just swallow coastline; they also drove
climate on land by toying with one of the principal controls on the
earth's thermostat: carbon dioxide. As Wallace Broecker explains,⁴⁵ the
world's oceans—particularly the Atlantic—contain a grand system of
watery “conveyor belts” that distribute and equilibrate global heat
between the equator and poles. Lurking less than 1 kilometer below the
waves of the Atlantic, a current of warm, salty water (the Gulf Stream)
flows north from the tropics along the North American east coast. As it
approaches the vicinity of Iceland and Greenland, strong winds sweep the
surface water aside, and the newly arrived and now-exposed warm
equatorial waters rise and cool (by about 8°C), and in so doing release
water vapor and heat that presently bring wet, mild winters to western
Europe. Those erstwhile tropical waters are now colder, saltier, and
denser than when they arrived, and so they slowly sink back into the
abyss. There, the deep water rides a southbound belt of the conveyor:
its next destination, the southern ocean. Meridional overturning
circulation is its official name, but the process is known more
colloquially as thermohaline circulation, and it moves with astonishing
power: below the relative calm of the Atlantic surface are currents with
a flow equal to 100 Amazon Rivers.⁴⁶

Thermohaline circulation operates very efficiently nowadays because of
the large temperature difference between the equator and poles that
provides its energy, and because of the relative salinity of the North
Atlantic, which is critical to the density-driven sinking that drives
deep water formation.⁴⁷ But if there were a large injection of
freshwater into the northern gears of the conveyor from, say, a melting
ice sheet (an experiment nature has performed multiple times), the seas
can freeze in winter (saltwater has a lower freezing point). And if
frozen, the surface water will fail to sink, and when that happens
thermohaline circulation slows to a halt or simply collapses.⁴⁸

When that happened in the late Pleistocene—the Younger Dryas, it's
called, for a tundra flower (Dryas octopetala) that flourished in Europe
during this time—there were direct and geologically instantaneous
climatic consequences. Across the northern hemisphere, especially
downwind of the now-frozen North Atlantic, temperatures plummeted: the
Greenland ice cores record an average annual air temperature during the
Younger Dryas of about -52T. But the effects of the Younger Dryas were
felt elsewhere as they rippled through Earth's climate system, and at a
moment when the first Americans were dispersing across the continent
(more on this below, and in Chapter 9).⁴⁹

Switching thermohaline circulation on and off also influences global
climates in a less obvious but no less consequential way, for the oceans
harbor vast amounts of carbon dioxide, CO₂, a greenhouse gas that looms
large in our story of past climate (and, not inconsequentially, future
climate). Although CO₂ resides in both atmosphere and ocean, it's not
shared in equal measure: the oceans contain sixty times more CO₂. Much
of that CO₂ is stored deep in the abyss, where it can be sequestered for
thousands of years (and so effectively the U.S. Department of Energy is
pursuing the possibility of injecting excess anthropogenic CO₂ into the
deep ocean—a sort of CO₂ government witness protection program). Thus,
the amount of CO₂ in the atmosphere at a given time is strongly
influenced by how much is absorbed into the ocean and/or
photosynthesized by phytoplankton, and then sent to the deep. That, in
turn, depends on a host of factors, the most relevant to our purposes
being changes in deep water formation, which of course are tied to
changing thermohaline circulation.⁵⁰

Why does that matter to climate, or even to archaeology? Because
atmospheric CO₂ falls when thermohaline circulation stalls, and rises
when the conveyor re-starts. And with each increase of approximately 70
parts per million (ppm) of atmospheric CO₂, global temperatures rise
about 1°C(1.8°F). Over the last million years or so, CO₂ levels overall
have moved only within a narrow range: between 180 and 290 ppm. The
lower end marks cooler, glacial periods, the higher end the warmer,
interglacial periods. The efficiency with which the earth's climate
system has locked down that range is in no small measure why the very
recent, rapid rise in atmospheric CO₂ to its current level of about 385
ppm is cause for great concern.⁵¹

Not surprisingly, turning the thermohaline circulation switch off and on
also wreaks havoc on radiocarbon dating, since doing so also scrambles
the ratio of atmospheric:ocean radiocarbon, making the radiocarbon clock
sometimes run too slow (because of a decline in atmosphere's ¹⁴C:¹²C
ratio), or too fast (because of a rise in the atmosphere's ¹⁴C:¹²C
ratio).⁵² It's little wonder that radiocarbon dating sites of the first
Americans that were occupied during the Younger Dryas is complicated
(Chapter 1).

Thermohaline circulation remained weak (and atmospheric CO₂ levels flat)
following the initial pulse of meltwater (16,000 BP), perhaps because
waters of the North Atlantic stayed cool, and the overall temperature
difference between equator and pole remained relatively small. But as
the planet warmed, and especially following the second major pulse of
meltwater pulse (at 12,500 BP), thermohaline circulation strengthened
(oceanographer Peter Clark and colleagues suggest that was the result of
the melting of the Antarctic ice cap, which sent freshwater flooding
north from the Southern Hemisphere, thereby jump-starting North Atlantic
deep water formation).⁵³

Stronger thermohaline circulation sped widespread warming—the
Bølling-Allerød warm period, it's called—and an increase in atmospheric
CO₂.⁵⁴ This further hastened the demise of North American ice sheets,
and as their climate-modifying effects steadily diminished, the southern
branch of the jet stream and the winter storm track shifted north, and
the glacial anticyclone began to weaken. Swamps and peatlands formed on
newly deglaciated landscapes, which helped cause a spike in another
greenhouse gas—methane (prior to the modern era, swamp gas was the major
source of methane).⁵⁵

Correspondingly, there was on land a “major reorganization” of biota in
response to such changes.⁵⁶ Northern areas once in tundra were replaced
by spruce forest, while spruce-dominated woodlands in turn became
hardwood-dominated forest (in the Midwest), or pine and birch forest
(the Northeast and New England). Further south, deciduous trees (maple,
oak, and beech) expanded their numbers. Throughout, the amount of tree
cover generally increased, and yet was still marked by species
associations that lack modern analogues.

This process played out in complicated ways across space and through
time because plants and animals left their Pleistocene communities the
same way they had entered: it was every species for itself, finding
their own ways to new ranges and habitats (or, in some cases, to
extinction), their speed and direction tied to their individual
tolerance limits, dispersal abilities, interspecies competition,
location during the LGM (oak trees were already lurking in low numbers
in protected settings in North Dakota, for example, ready to spring
forth—metaphorically speaking—when climates improved), the availability
of suitable habitats, and a variety of other factors. Had the process
been recorded in time-lapse photography and then viewed at high speed,
it would have resembled a “Keystone Kops” routine, a free-for-all of
species shuffling in different directions at different rates at
different times to colonize new habitats.

Estimates vary, but some shuffled faster than others. Most tree species
moved 100-500 meters per year, but some pines virtually sprinted across
the landscape at upwards of 3,000 meters per year.⁵⁷ In some cases
vegetation was almost able to keep pace with climate change, lagging
behind by only a century or so. But then, Sitka spruce in the Pacific
Northwest is still expanding west in response to deglaciation. Animal
species, also moving at their own individual paces, presumably kept up
with climate and vegetation change, but again depending on the species:
some small mammals are still adjusting to postglacial climatic
conditions. The central point stands, however: conditions were, as
Daniel Mann describes them, a “biogeographic free-for-all.”⁵⁸

What of humans? Were these changes happening fast enough they would have
been detectable to them? The Pleistocene came to a screeching halt on a
geological time scale, but would grandparents have noticed a difference
they could tell their grandchildren? Knowing just how fast climate and
environment changed could help us better understand the challenges faced
by newly arrived colonists on this unfamiliar landscape (Chapter 7)

THE PLEISTOCENE'S LAST STAND

Not all glacial meltwater returned to the sea. Some from the Laurentide
filled bedrock depressions left exposed by the retreating ice, creating
in the Upper Midwest a land of lakes. All together, there are hundreds
of thousands, including the five Great Lakes, the earliest versions of
which appear about 14,000 years ago. The waters of these lakes would
initially have been lifeless, turbid, and very cold, perhaps hovering
just above freezing. If humans were in the area, it would have been to
hunt game; fishing had to wait on the natural post-glacial stocking.⁵⁹

Great as the Great Lakes are—and combined, they contain 22,700 km³ of
water—they are little more than kiddy pools compared to the now-vanished
glacial Lake Agassiz. This vast freshwater lake formed in the wake of
the Laurentide ice retreat, first appearing around 11,700 years ago (its
basin was ice-filled before then). At its maximum the lake covered
840,000 km² (which included much of western and central Canada, and a
prong that reached down to the far northeastern corner of South Dakota),
contained some 163,000 km³ of water, and drowned low-lying regions
beneath more than 770 meters of icy water. Over its 4,000-year life
span, Lake Agassiz rose and fell, but overall it was a downward trend as
water made its way back to the sea. The water exited via different
routes, as ice retreated and opened different outlet channels. Early on,
the water went south down the Mississippi River into the Gulf of Mexico.
Later it flowed east into the Lake Superior basin and out through the
St. Lawrence Valley into the North Atlantic. After that, water moved
northwest into the Arctic Ocean via the Athabasca and Mackenzie valleys,
then east again down the St. Lawrence; finally, a dying pulse went north
into Hudson's Bay and out into the North Atlantic.⁶⁰

Ultimately, most of Lake Agassiz drained into the sea, though it left
behind an arc of remnant lakes in western Canada, including Great Bear
Lake, Great Slave Lake, Lake Athabasca, and Lake Winnipeg. Few humans
would have paddled Lake Agassiz or fished its shores, but Lake Agassiz
looms large in our story since for a couple of geologically brief
moments, it played a singularly important role in Late Glacial climate,
and possibly in Paleoindian adaptations.

When Lake Agassiz's water drained south, down the Mississippi River into
the Gulf of Mexico, the earth's climate paid it no mind. But by 11,000
BP, the Laurentide ice sheet had retreated just far enough that a
drainage outlet opened across what is now the northern Great Lakes and
Upper Midwest. Lake Agassiz's waters suddenly flowed east rather than
south, down to the newly opened St. Lawrence lowlands and out into the
North Atlantic (the Mississippi continued to flow, though much
diminished).

At that moment, Lake Agassiz's drainage was rerouted and some 9,500 km³
of very cold, very fresh water was flushed into the North Atlantic,
shutting down thermohaline circulation and plunging the Northern
Hemisphere back into near glacial conditions for the next thousand
years.

Although there is considerable evidence that a shutdown in thermohaline
circulation caused the Younger Dryas, there is also considerable
controversy over what caused that shutdown. The problem? There ought to
be geological evidence of Lake Agassiz's eastward drainage—an outlet
channel, perhaps, or flood debris dating to 11,000 BP. But it hasn't
been found. Without it, several alternative ideas have been proposed to
account for why thermohaline circulation suddenly stopped—most
controversially, that it was caused by an extra-terrestrial impact.⁶¹

Leaving aside matters of cause, let's consider the Younger Dryas
consequences. Most important, this was no mere LGM rerun, for by then
the climatic influence of the North American ice sheet was much reduced,
atmospheric CO₂ had climbed to nearly interglacial levels (approaching
265 ppm compared to -190 ppm at the LGM), and summer and winter
insolation was higher and lower (respectively) than at any time in the
preceding 70,000 years. To be sure, it grew chilly in the higher
latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, with temperatures in Greenland
falling 27T in only decades. That's cold, but hardly the 41T plunge that
marked the LGM. Younger Dryas climates were different in another
important respect: because of the seasonal difference in insolation,
this was a time of strong annual arcs between cold, harsh winters, and
summers not nearly as cold as in LGM times.⁷⁵

THE YOUNGER DRYAS: IT CAME FROM OUTER SPACE?

In 2001 the Mammoth Trumpet, a newsletter for a lay audience on
happenings in Paleoindian studies, carried an unusually long, highly
technical article declaring there'd been a Pleistocene doomsday. A
supernova-caused neutron bombardment centered over the Great Lakes had
fried the earth 12,500 years ago, Richard Firestone and William Topping
announced.⁶² That nuclear catastrophe heated the atmosphere to over
1,800°F, and radiated plants and animals at the equivalent dose of “a
5-megawatt reactor for more than 100 seconds.” Megafauna died en masse
because they were—as the authors reported on the good authority of the
Saturday Evening Post—especially susceptible to radiation. The explosion
purportedly rearranged maize genes, readying the plant for human
domestication; gouged out the Carolina Bays (oval depressions in the
coastal southeastern states); and so spiked atmospheric radiocarbon
concentrations that ages on Paleoindian sites were thrown off by up to
40,000 years.

The claim was so far out literally and figuratively—we'd been using
radiocarbon dating since 1950 and no one had noticed a 40,000 year
error?—it was met with bemusement, or simply ignored. Only two
scientists—experts in radiocarbon dating—bothered to reply. They
concluded Firestone and Topping's claims were “at best, highly
problematical and, at worst, difficult to take seriously.”⁶³ Few did.

Later, when Firestone and others published The Cycle of Cosmic
Catastrophes: How a Stone-Age Comet Changed the Course of World
Culture,⁶⁴ the supernova had become multiple comets that had struck the
earth repeatedly, with apocalyptic results. Maybe so, but the book was
long on anecdote, short on evidence, weak on fact, and jumped to more
than a few bizarre conclusions (extraterrestrial events caused variation
in human skin color and blood types?). The scientific community's
response: cold. But the book got a warm reception among (as Amazon.com
reported) those who also purchased The End of Days: Armageddon and
Prophecies of the Return and Forbidden History: Prehistoric
Technologies, Extraterrestrial Intervention, and the Suppressed Origins
of Civilization.

Usually when an idea slips into the pseudoscientific netherworld, it
rarely returns. But this one did. E-mails started flying in the spring
of 2007, with word of a symposium at the annual meeting of the properly
scientific American Geophysical Union (AGU). There, oceanographer James
Kennett—who has sterling scientific credentials—joined with Firestone
and others to present evidence that a comet had struck the earth 11,000
years ago, and to outline its consequences—not least, that it was now
blamed for triggering the Younger Dryas. In announcing the symposium,
Kennett admitted there had been missteps in the past. This time, he
said, it would be a different ball game.

Perhaps, but it began familiarly enough. The newly constituted team held
a press conference at the AGU meeting, and over the following weeks, the
supposed Pleistocene extraterrestrial catastrophe was hyped as fact from
FOX News to the Economist. You can even watch their press conference on
YouTube. The staid National Science Foundation, which that spring
awarded Kennett and Luann Becker $53,000 to test the ET impact idea,
issued a press release on the team's conclusions before the team had
even completed their research, let alone presented their hypothesis and
evidence in enough detail for evaluation and testing by others (turning
the usual procedure of releasing scientific results upside down).⁶⁵

It's unfair to blame scientists for how their words, however carefully
crafted, are hijacked and sensationalized: caution doesn't make
headlines or sell magazines. Still, when phrases such as “the entire
continent was on fire” are spoken,⁶⁶ the fault is not entirely with the
journalists. It's important to admit, as well, that scientists are not
immune from the lure of public acclaim, or fail to recognize it's the
public that ultimately supports our endeavors, and as such is entitled
to know what we're up to. Yet, extraordinary claims require
extraordinary proof, especially when the extraordinary is
extraterrestrial.

To be sure, invoking ET impacts to explain earthly events is not
unprecedented. In the 1980s, it was announced dinosaurs were destroyed
by an asteroid that hit earth 65 million years ago. But skeptics became
convinced only after there was independent confirmation of an impact's
telltale signs: the finding of high levels of iridium (an element rare
on earth) and quartz grains scarred by impact shock in rocks of that
age, and the discovery of the “smoking gun”—the impact crater
(Chicxulub, off the tip of Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula).⁶⁷ That an
asteroid had collided with earth was beyond dispute. Even so, how the
asteroid killed off the dinosaurs—or if it did—is still contested. The
lesson: we must keep a firewall between two distinct questions: Is there
indisputable geological evidence of an impact? If there is, then what
were its consequences?

The first scientific publication on a late Pleistocene ET impact
appeared in the fall of 2007. Much of the argument and evidence were
familiar to readers of The Cycle of Cosmic Catastrophes, though some of
that book's more colorful claims had been quietly locked away. Firestone
and his twenty-five co-authors drew attention to a Younger Dryas-age
“carbon-rich black layer” (the Black Mat) found at Clovis sites in North
America,⁶⁸ which reportedly contains high levels of iridium (though in
far lower amounts than in 65-million-year-old rock), metallic grains
high in titanium, glass-like carbon studded with nanodiamonds,
fullerenes high in extraterrestrial helium, and soot and charcoal—the
last from the intense wildfires ostensibly ignited by the blast.
Evidently, Europe caught fire, too: the authors report a charcoal-rich
layer at Lommel, Belgium, and imply such are widespread on the Continent
(for the record, Europe did not experience the kind of
Pleistocene-ending extinctions seen in North America).⁶⁹

Firestone and colleagues could not identify an impact crater, though by
their reckoning, the comet must have been more than 4 kilometers in
diameter, large enough to make a substantial dent in the earth's surface
(about 50 km wide, by one estimate). Perhaps, they say, it hit the
Laurentide ice sheet, which cushioned the blow and prevented cratering,
or maybe it disintegrated in the atmosphere before hitting the surface.
Perhaps its exploding debris caused the “enigmatic” depressions reported
beneath Hudson Bay or even the Carolina Bays. Of course, Hudson Bay was
still buried beneath ice at that time, which by their logic should have
prevented cratering, and no meteoritic material has ever been recovered
from the Carolina Bays, nor are all the bays the same age or date to the
geological moment of the supposed impact.⁷⁰

There's not been enough time for geologists and impact scientists to
assess the merits of the case, but early reviews have been harsh. Impact
specialist Christian Koeberl finds the whole scenario “contrived,” since
“their data don't agree with anything we know about impacts.” But what
of the iridium and other ET indicators? Geochemist Paolo Gabrielli,
whose analysis of the Greenland ice core was cited as evidence of a
large increase in iridium during the Younger Dryas, reported his data
showed no such thing, while impact geologist David Kring is likewise
skeptical, since iridium can be concentrated by algae (which happens to
be a principal constituent of the Black Mat), and the reported levels of
titanium and nanodiamonds embedded in melted carbon “make no sense to
him.”⁷¹ They don't make sense to Nicholas Pintar and Scott Ishman
either, since the identified ET elements cannot all come from the same
type of extraterrestrial body: some (magnetic grains) require iron-rich
meteorites, for example, others a stony meteorite, while still others
(carbon spherules) suggest a carbon-rich source. If something did hit
the earth, they say, it must have been a “Frankenstein” of an ET.

And could an explosion over North America set Europe afire? Thermal
radiation, Pintar and Ishman point out, is zero below the horizon. But
even leaving Europe out of it, there are tens of thousands of lakes in
the Upper Midwest near the proposed ground zero. Since the impact
ostensibly caused horrific wildfires, these lakes—where charcoal, soot,
pollen, and other airborne particles settle and preserve—ought to have
recorded the debris of a soot-filled atmosphere. Odd, then, that
palynologists examining late Pleistocene-age sediments from thousands of
lakes have not noticed traces of the inferno. Could it be they didn't
look for it, or didn't know what to look for? That's unlikely: they
often examine charcoal in sediments cores to help understand fire
history. No matter. Several teams are returning to their field sites and
stored sediment cores to look for a soot/charcoal spike at the time of
the purported impact.

Until these and other studies are completed, it's best not to get ahead
of ourselves exploring the consequences of an impact that may never have
happened. But Firestone and colleagues cannot resist the urge. This
impact, they proclaim, “explains three of the highest-debated
controversies of recent decades”: the cause of the Younger Dryas, the
extinction of the Pleistocene fauna, and the precipitous decline of
post-Clovis human populations.⁷²

It's hard to see the last of these as controversial, since there's no
evidence there was a population collapse immediately following Clovis
times.⁷³ On the Great Plains, where the archaeological record is well
documented and dated, Folsom groups follow Clovis, and their populations
seem to have boomed (Chapter 9). So, too, invoking an ET impact to
explain extinctions is another case of a solution in search of a
problem. It's not been shown that Pleistocene extinctions were
simultaneous, or even coincided with the supposed impact (Chapter 8). If
they were and did, then why didn't this apparently global conflagration
burn out far more of life on earth, compounded as the fires were by
“increased deadly UV radiation,” greater “chemical toxicity,” and
“diminished photosynthesis”?⁷⁴ This is not a rhetorical question.

As for the Younger Dryas, Firestone and colleagues believe that when the
comet hit (or exploded above) the Laurentide ice sheet, it instantly
melted or broke off large portions of glacial ice, releasing freshwater
and icebergs into the North Atlantic, thereby—as in the currently
accepted explanation—weakening thermohaline circulation and causing
abrupt cooling. Once again, they're asking a great deal of what they
must admit is geologically invisible.

There's no doubt that the past sometimes requires creative leaps to
comprehend, and this certainly is a creative idea. But there needs to be
much more evidence in order to make the Younger Dryas extraterrestrial
impact a leap of science, and not a leap of faith.

During the Younger Dryas, northern hemisphere glaciers stopped
retreating and in places even began to re-advance. There was a sharp
decline (from 680 to 460 parts per billion) in atmospheric methane as
peatlands froze over, and increases in the amount of dust and salt from
higher winds and greater storminess over Northern Hemisphere lands and
seas occurred. It was a time of fi erce nor'easters in the North
Atlantic.⁷⁶

But such changes were not true of the rest of the hemisphere (and
possibly not of the southern hemisphere, including Antarctica which
apparently warmed at this time). Across North America, Younger Dryas
climates varied. In the northernmost United States Younger Dryas
temperatures were cooler than present, with a drop of about 9°F being
about the maximum. It was drier as well—in places. Yet, in the
southeastern United States, the Younger Dryas was relatively warmer and
wetter also, a result of thermohaline circulation shutdown, which left
warm, tropical waters stalled off the Atlantic coast. Further west, much
of the interior of midlatitude North America stayed relatively warm and
temperate, since cold, arctic air was still mostly trapped north of the
remnant ice sheet, and warm, Caribbean air was able to penetrate
northward and amplify the insolation-driven highs of summer. Younger
Dryas climatic conditions had “no modern equivalent in North America.”⁷⁷

Plants and animals that had been busy responding to Bølling-Allerød
warming scrambled to adjust to Younger Dryas reversal. Cold- and
dry-adapted sedges abruptly returned to prominence in northern areas;
spruce trees that had migrated north now turned south, while pine trees
expanded west from New England into the southern Great Lakes region, and
with astonishing speed for something rooted to the ground: nearly 300
kilometers in little more than a century. In high elevations of the
Rockies, tundra and timberline shifted downslope, along with cold-loving
trees such as Engelmann spruce and bristlecone pine.⁷⁸

The most dramatic vegetation changes occurred in the more northern and
higher-elevation areas. Yet, across North America, distinctive, albeit
short-lived vegetation communities emerged during the Younger Dryas.
That was presumably true of Younger Dryas mammalian communities as well,
though their fossil record is not as precisely known.

However distinctive, these communities would not last more than a
millennium, and would dissolve when the Younger Dryas came to an abrupt
end.⁷⁹ Ironically, the Younger Dryas may have been the instrument of its
own demise. The colder temperatures it brought to the Upper Midwest,
coupled with lake-effect snows from nearby Lake Agassiz (think Buffalo,
New York, in winter), triggered the re-advance of a glacial lobe that by
10,000 BP had pushed far enough south that Lake Agassiz's eastern outlet
once again was blocked. Lake Agassiz's meltwater once more drained down
the Mississippi to the Gulf of Mexico, or north into the Arctic Ocean.
With that, thermohaline circulation was re-established, this time for
good, and the Younger Dryas came to an end: above the Greenland ice
sheet, temperatures shot up 15°F in a matter of a decade, while global
methane amounts rose by 50% in a century as the world's wetlands
expanded.⁸⁰

Live by the ice, die by the ice. It's hard not to agree with Broecker
that the Younger Dryas—if indeed caused by a freshwater flood that
sucker punched thermohaline circulation—was a “freak event.”⁸¹ That,
coupled with its occurrence amid an unusual combination of solar
insolation, ice sheet extent, and greenhouse gas concentrations,
triggered complex climatic and biotic responses, and lead inescapably to
this next conclusion: the Younger Dryas was unique in the annals of
glacial history. It has traditionally been thought the events ending
this last glacial cycle were no different than those ending previous
glacial cycles. That's now doubtful, but that's good news: it might help
explain why many of the Pleistocene mammals, which so successfully had
survived previous glacial-interglacial cycles, succumbed to this one.

The climatic and ecological changes of the Younger Dryas were the most
dramatic millennial-scale changes recorded since the LGM.⁸² Yet, viewed
over a longer time frame, the Younger Dryas was merely a detour en route
to the much more profound changes that occurred as the earth switched
from glacial (Pleistocene) to interglacial (Holocene) mode. That switch
was marked most obviously by the virtual disappearance of the great ice
sheets, which unleashed the polar air masses and repositioned the jet
stream; by substantially higher sea levels; and of course, by a much
warmer world as air temperature and its fellow travelers, atmospheric
CO₂ and methane, rose quickly after the Younger Dryas.

Such changes triggered the wholesale rearrangement of biotic
communities, which included mass extinctions (which were complete by
about 10,800 BP). At the close of the Younger Dryas, eastern North
America supported a complex mosaic of boreal and deciduous forest: think
plaid. Yet, the modern environment is one of latitudinal stripes: a
Canada-to-Florida road trip passes through tundra, boreal, mixed
conifer/ hardwood, temperate deciduous, and southern pine forests, a
pattern that reflects increasing temperature as well as the seasonal
positions of the arctic air mass that had been effectively excluded from
North America during the Pleistocene. Changing from Pleistocene plaids
to Holocene stripes took several thousand years, but was largely
finished by 5,000 years ago.

On the plains, as precipitation went the way of the northward-shifting
jet stream, lake levels fell, forests contracted, and grasslands
expanded in all directions, even into the Upper Midwest. By early
Holocene times, it came to resemble the plains of Hollywood stereotype:
a sea of grass, on which vast herds of bison grazed. Bison had been on
the plains all along, but had to share the grasslands with mammoths,
horses, camels, and other large grazers. Once those were extinct, bison
had the plains to themselves, and as a result, their numbers skyrocketed
(competitive release, it's called), an explosion fueled in part by the
increasing expanse of warm-season C₄ grasses, which bison love (there's
a reason one of the most widespread of these grasses is named buffalo
grass).

Further west in Early Holocene times, alpine and boreal species began
their march upslope, replaced down below by species better able to
tolerate increasingly warmer and drier conditions (in the Southwest),
and warmer and wetter conditions (in the Northwest). The process was
relatively drawn out, and of course involved a reshuffling of the
vegetation deck: the vertical zones characteristic of modern times would
not form up for several thousand years, depending on the area. But soon
enough, harsh desert filled in the low-lying, intermountain valleys of
the southwest and Great Basin, forever stranding on mountaintops those
mammals that in cooler and wetter times had been able to scurry from
peak to peak.

The Pleistocene would not end, however, without one final death rattle.
As the Laurentide ice sheet steadily shrank, Lake Agassiz followed it
north. By 7700 BP, it had ballooned to enormous size, having joined Lake
Ojibway, and was held in check by a horseshoe-shaped dam of remnant
Laurentide ice hovering just south of Hudson Bay. As all ice dams do,
this one eventually failed, and what was left of the world's largest
freshwater lake flooded into Hudson Bay, out Hudson Strait, and into the
North Atlantic via the Labrador Current. An estimated 163,000 km³ of
freshwater was flushed into the North Atlantic. That's seven times the
volume of all five Great Lakes put together, and seventeen times more
water than the trifling 9,500 km³ that triggered the Younger Dryas. This
was a flood worthy of Noah's; the Reverend Buckland would have been
thrilled.

Yet, the climatic cooling that followed this last flood—termed the 8200
BP event (for its calibrated calendar age)—was a mere blip compared to
the Younger Dryas, dropping temperatures in Greenland only about 10°F
for about a century or so.⁸³ Why was it so climatically inconsequential?
Perhaps, as Dyke suggests, such is the difference between releasing
freshwater directly into the North Atlantic, where it could T-bone the
thermohaline conveyor (the Younger Dryas scenario), compared to sending
it through more northerly, already-cold and less-saline waters, thereby
diminishing its impact on arrival. The very largest of the large
post-glacial superfloods, Richard Alley observes, is one that didn't
stick.⁸⁴

People living in North America at the time may scarcely have noticed the
8200 BP event. Besides, their ancestors had experienced climatic and
environmental diversity and change of much greater magnitude, such as
the Younger Dryas and perhaps even the Last Glacial Maximum. But that
depends on just when those ancestors first arrived, and how fast they
moved through this new land.

