8

CLOVIS ADAPTATIONS AND
PLEISTOCENE EXTINCTIONS

Edgar B. Howard, of the University of Pennsylvania's museum, had been
ambushed before, so this time he moved fast. He caught a westbound train
on November 12, 1932, alerted to the news a road crew mining gravel from
an old pond on the high plains of eastern New Mexico had struck bones.
Lots of them apparently, and big ones, too: mammoth and bison. That
summer, Howard had seen scraps of the bones and Folsom-like fluted
points ranchers had been finding in wind-scoured “blowouts” in these old
ponds. The road crew had hit the mother lode.

Howard knew the stakes. Earlier, his cordial relationship with
paleontologist Barnum Brown had soured when Brown stole credit for a
fluted point found in Pleistocene bone-bearing sediments in Burnet Cave
near Carlsbad, New Mexico. Howard, who had made the find while Brown was
far away in Montana, had not been happy. Nor was Howard pleased to learn
his idea for a national committee to investigate potential late
Pleistocene archaeological sites had been scooped, and the committee
formed without him. In the years after the Folsom discovery, everyone
wanted in on the action at early sites, Howard most of all. He was, a
disapproving Loren Eiseley observed, “addicted to the pursuit of
terminal ice-age man.”¹

Four days later, from the small town of Clovis, New Mexico, Howard
flashed a telegram back east: “Extensive bone deposit at new site.
Mostly bison, also horse & mammoth. Some evidence of hearths along
edges. Will tie up permissions for future work & spend a few more days
investigating.” But only a few more days. Back in Philadelphia the next
week, he announced in the journal Science the finding of evidence of
humans “at a very remote period,” and staked his claim to the Clovis
site.²

The following spring, Howard and his crew began excavating at Clovis.
They had to work quickly. That summer the world's preeminent geologists
would descend on Washington, D.C., for the International Geological
Congress. There would be field trips out west afterward. Howard wanted
Clovis to be one of the stops, but that meant having something to show:
a fluted point in undisputed association with mammoth bones would do
nicely. Finally, by late July, he had several, “scattered around like a
dog buries bones,” just what was needed to give his visitors “something
substantial to think about.”³

On August 3, in a scene that harkened back to the landmark visit to
Folsom six years earlier, American and European scientists descended on
Clovis, including the eminent Sir Arthur Smith Woodward of the British
Museum (whose keynote address to the congress triumphantly reviewed the
proof “Piltdown Man” was an early Pleistocene human). When they arrived,
the visitors saw spear points, fluted but larger and less refined than
those at Folsom, amid mammoth skeletons (Figure 45). That evening a E.
B. Howard removed some of the more significant finds from the Clovis
site as large blocks, in order to bring them back to Philadelphia for
more careful excavation and cleaning. In the midst of that work, he
posed, pointing to a beveled mammoth bone rod next to the ulna (lower
forelimb) of a mammoth. (Photograph courtesy of The Academy of Natural
Sciences, Ewell Sale Stewart Library, Philadelphia.) jubilant Howard
telegraphed the museum to say “Drs Merriam Stock Woodward and
Vanstraelen have examined excavations here today [and] they agree
evidence obtained indicates association of artifacts with extinct
elephant and bison.”⁴ Howard couldn't sleep that night, happily playing
over the events of the day.

[images]

FIGURE 45.
E. B. Howard removed some of the more significant finds from the Clovis
site as large blocks, in order to bring them back to Philadelphia for
more careful excavation and cleaning. In the midst of that work, he
posed, pointing to a beveled mammoth bone rod next to the ulna (lower
forelimb) of a mammoth. (Photograph courtesy of The Academy of Natural
Sciences, Ewell Sale Stewart Library, Philadelphia.)

Back in Philadelphia the next week, Howard issued another statement in
Science: Clovis, with its artifacts and “matted masses of bones of
mammoth,”⁵ showed America was inhabited some 15,000 years ago. Not to be
outdone, two weeks later Jesse Figgins (of Folsom fame) announced in
Science he, too, could report on a recently completed excavation of
mammoth bones near Dent, Colorado, which had also yielded two large,
fluted spear points like those at Clovis. But he was too late to snag
the naming rights that came with priority of discovery. We speak of
Clovis points and the Clovis culture—not Dent points and the Dent
culture.

Coincidentally, that same summer delegates to the Fifth Pacific Science
Congress in Vancouver, Canada, were presented a volume of essays on the
origin and antiquity of American Indians. The lead chapter, by W. A.
Johnston of the Canadian Geological Survey, for the first time suggested
that during the Wisconsin glacial period, lower sea levels meant a “land
bridge probably existed” between Siberia and Alaska, and that a
migration route south from Alaska through the Mackenzie River Valley had
opened in the wake of ice retreat.⁶

Within just a few months, Howard and geologist Ernst Antevs put all the
pieces together: 20,000 to 15,000 years ago, the Bering Strait was dry
land, and a corridor was open along the east side of the Rockies,
removing all obstacles to migrations from Central Asia to the Great
Plains. Given how neatly this corresponded to their estimated age of the
Clovis site, it seemed a route and a timeline for the peopling of the
Americas was emerging. The precise ages on that timeline, of course,
would not be nailed down until the advent of radiocarbon dating, still
several decades off (Chapter 3).

No matter. The geological evidence of a Pleistocene human antiquity was
secure, and Howard, pleased by what he'd accomplished at Clovis but
anxious to follow the first Americans’ trail back to Asia, soon handed
over the reins of the Clovis site to a graduate student and began
planning an ambitious field program. He would search for sites along an
arc from New Mexico, up along the flanks of the Rocky Mountains, through
the ice-free corridor region, and he hoped, ultimately back to Lake
Baikal in Siberia.

Howard's grandiose plans flopped. But at Clovis, his successor began to
fill in the details of a culture that, within a decade, others would
trace across the continent. Unlike Folsom Paleo-indians, who mostly kept
to the plains, Clovis groups were seemingly everywhere. Their sites have
since been found across the continent and in a variety of environments,
from the coniferous forests of the Pacific Northwest to the desert
Southwest, through the rich grasslands of the western plains to the
complex mixed forests of the American Southeast and near tundra of the
Northeast. No subsequent North American occupation, Paleo-indian or
otherwise, was so widespread or occupied such diverse habitats, let
alone amid the kind of climatic, ecological, and geological upheaval
that was happening in the wake of continental deglaciation. And it
wasn't long before Clovis peoples’ sudden and widespread appearance was
attributed to fast-moving big-game hunters—and blamed for the extinction
of the mammoth, mastodon, and nearly three dozen other genera of
Pleistocene mammals (Chapter 2). It would take another fifty years to
realize matters were not as simple as they appeared. But that's getting
ahead of the story.

MADE IN AMERICA

In 1935 Howard traveled to the Soviet Union via Europe, but got nowhere
near Siberia. Soviet authorities forbid it. Forced to cool his heels in
Leningrad, Howard visited museums, where he examined archaeological
collections from across the country amassed since the time of Czar Peter
the Great. None yielded any Clovis fluted points. That told Howard
something. Fluting may just be an American invention—the first American
invention. Knowing fluting's place of origin and how it spread would be
vital to tracking Clovis movement. But where was that, and when?

The obvious place to start searching was between Alaska and the northern
plains, and many archaeologists have done just that in the decades since
Howard. All together, about fifty fluted points have been found in
Alaska, but mostly in the state's far northern reaches (at or north of
about 66°N latitude, about the latitude of the Arctic Circle), and only
on the surface or in deposits with younger artifacts. About 60 fluted
points also have been found in the one-time ice-free corridor.⁷ Yet, few
of these have secure radio-carbon dates, and those that do are fewer
than 10,500 years old, as they ought not to be if they were left behind
by Clovis colonizers moving south. Stylistically, the Alaskan and
Canadian fluted points don't look much like Clovis points from the Lower
Forty-eight either, but appear more akin to later fluted points. This
gives reason to suspect fluting was invented south of the Laurentide and
Cordilleran ice sheets, and spread from there—including to the north (a
migratory backwash, as it were, which may have carried other types north
as well, as discussed in Chapter 9).

The Great Plains and Southwest are likely places of origin; the oldest
known fluted points occur there. Another possibility is eastern North
America. Since more and more varied fluted points occur there than
anywhere else, Ronald Mason long ago argued they were invented here, on
the principle that diversity reflects age. (Sound familiar? It's the
principle Greenberg invoked to fix the relative antiquity of his three
language families.) Finding eastern fluted points that clearly predate
those to the west would settle the issue, but so far none have been. In
the meantime, Adovasio reminds us the unfluted Miller lanceolate from
Stratum IIa at Meadowcroft would make a fine fluted point precursor.

Once invented, fluting spread over North America, and persisted through
Clovis and subsequent Paleo-indian cultures (Folsom points are fluted,
as are a variety of eastern North American points). But it's hard to
understand why. Fluting is a tricky technology to master, in many ways
one of the most difficult steps in the sequence of making a point. It is
estimated Clovis points broke while being fluted 10%-20% of the time
(failure may have occurred nearly 40% of the time when fluting Folsom
points⁸). Mistakes were costly, especially when stone supplies were
scarce. And for what? Fluting thins and potentially weakens the point,
and served no purpose…that we know of.

Early on, it was thought fluting enhanced bloodletting of the speared
prey, not surprising since in the 1920s, when fluted points were first
found, the memory of World War I bayonets was still fresh. But that idea
fell from favor when archaeologists realized the flutes were sandwiched
between bone (or wood or ivory) foreshafts, or embedded in a socket and
hafted (attached) to the spear. Flutes on hafted points, wrapped with
sinew and possibly coated in tree resin or tar to firmly anchor them,
were too deeply buried to enhance bleeding. Others suggested fluting
helped strengthen the bond of point to haft, or perhaps by thinning
allowed the points to penetrate deeper and become more lethal. Yet, over
the next 10,000 years of post-paleoindian time, hunters managed to
muddle through using unfluted points that were hafted and presumably
just as firmly anchored to a spear or arrow shaft, and equally effective
as penetrating weapons. Maybe, George Frison and Bruce Bradley argue,
the reason we cannot show that fluting directly enhanced the performance
of the point is because it didn't.

If that's so, why did the technique endure for at least half a
millennium? Part of the answer may be inertia: tradition is a potent
force to dislodge. But for a process so risky, so costly, and by
consensus so useless, there must be more to it. Perhaps fluting was
style or art, a symbolic representation of hunting prowess (showing
off!), or part of a pre-hunt ritual: could it be mere coincidence some
fluted points preserve traces of staining by red ocher, a blood-red
mineral paint? In the ritual realm, as we know, costs don't matter.
Admittedly, these possibilities are not easily put to the test, but are
more the sort of explanations we fall back on when we cannot see purpose
in prehistory. As Stanley Ahler and Phillip Geib say, we “sometimes
characterize the unknown as unknowable, just to put our busy minds at
ease.”⁹

Art or ritual it may have been, but whatever fluting was, a great many
paleoindians employed it. Still, not all fluted points are alike, save
in a most general sense: all share a lanceolate shape, are ground smooth
along the base and partway up the sides (which ensured the edges did not
cut the sinew binding or socket haft), and have flutes that extend from
the base partially up one or (more commonly) both faces of the point
(Figure 46). On a “classic” Clovis point, the sides are parallel, the
flutes travel usually less than one-half the length of the face, and the
points are relatively long and thick, though deliberately made Clovis
miniatures are known (children's toys, some suspect). A freshly minted
Clovis point, based on a sample from Texas (and, no, the points are not
necessarily bigger in Texas), would be slightly over 10 centimeters
long, 3 centimeters wide, and 7.5 millimeters thick.¹⁰

[images]

FIGURE 46.
Clovis point from the Clovis type site in New Mexico, displaying the
type's diagnostic features, including fluting and outre passe (overshot)
flaking. This particular specimen is made of Edwards Formation chert,
likely from an outcrop source near Big Springs, Texas, approximately 300
km southeast of the site. It was found near the vertebra and ribs of a
mammoth. (Photograph by David J. Meltzer; line drawing by Frederic
Sellet;
arranged by Judith Cooper.)

There is often surprising uniformity in the size and shape of the lower
portion or base of a Clovis point, where it would have been inserted
into a haft. It appears the aim was to fit the points to a haft, and not
vice versa. That implies the hafts were more difficult or time-consuming
to make, or perhaps the haft material was harder to come by. Regardless,
broken points had to be unwrapped and ejected when they broke, as they
inevitably did, and the haft reloaded.

Beyond that, fluted points vary considerably in their size and shape,
and in the length and depth of the flutes, the number of flutes (though
three flutes per face is about the limit), the kind of chipping used to
fashion the point, the finishing of the edges, and a host of other
minutiae that delight archaeologists. This is true with Clovis, and
especially between Clovis and immediately post-Clovis fluted points, of
which there are many styles (especially in eastern North America
[Chapter 9]). That sometimes makes it difficult to decide what's Clovis
and what's not, particularly in the absence of accompanying radiocarbon
ages. Much of the variation results from the effects of use and
resharpening of the points, but also from the divergence of people,
knapping styles, and techniques over time and space. Think of it as a
kind of “cultural drift,” as kin and descendants experimented with and
introduced their own variations on the Clovis theme.

PACKING THE TOOLBOX

Fluted points are certainly the most recognizable artifact in the Clovis
toolkit, but assuredly not the only important one. It's a generalized
toolkit: suitable for many tasks, not built specifically for any one
(see Plate 8). It includes large bifaces, which could be readily
transported and from which flakes could be struck for use, or from which
points could be obtained. There were also end and side scrapers for
cleaning hides; gravers or flakes with carefully formed small
projections or spurs, possibly used to engrave bone or wood;
spokeshaves, or notched pieces, which may have been used to shave wooden
or bone shafts; and a variety of knives or flake-cutting tools. There is
a certain monotony to the Clovis toolkit, with variation expressed more
in the presence or frequency of certain tools (end scrapers, for
example), or the kind of stone used, than in the types of tools. That
sort of pattern tells us more about what was done than who did what.

However, a few distinctive stone-tool types are known to occur primarily
in some regions but not others. Long, curving stone blades (their length
twice their width) and the multifaceted (polyhedral) cores from which
they were struck, were fashioned by stone workers on the southern
plains, and perhaps into the Southeast: a particularly rich haul comes
from the Gault site in central Texas. Christopher Ellis and his Great
Lakes colleagues show that backed bifaces (perhaps themselves hafted)
were common, and fluted drills absent, in the eastern Great Lakes, while
the reverse seems true in New England.

Where preservation permits, bone and ivory artifacts are occasionally
found. These include ivory hammers or billets, and a mammoth bone shaft
“socket” wrench, possibly used for straightening ivory or bone rods,
from the Murray Springs site (Arizona). No bone or ivory rods
accompanied this particular specimen, but examples have been recovered
in a dozen other sites scattered across the West, and from underwater
sites in Florida.

These bone and ivory rods are usually about 30 centimeters long but
fewer than 2 centimeters wide, and are often beveled at one or both
ends. A glimpse at how these were made comes from the Clovis site, which
yielded a section of mammoth tusk, V-notched at one end as though felled
by a beaver, which at the time it was lost or abandoned was on its way
to being further reduced and fashioned into one of those ivory rods.
These rods have been variously interpreted as spear points, foreshafts
for joining stone points to a spear, tools for fine flaking of stone,
pry bars for dismembering carcasses, sled shoes, or wedges for
tightening up loose haft bindings.¹¹ There's no reason to limit their
function to just one of these possibilities.

Unfortunately, their scarcity reveals little about how bone and ivory
were used by paleoindians, since these were almost certainly used more
frequently and in more ways than we can infer. The spotty distribution,
however, does say a great deal about how poorly bone and ivory are
preserved in the archaeological record.

Which also explains the virtual absence of what may have been their
“perishable” artifacts, those made of plant fibers, or animal hide and
fur. Such items vanish quickly, save in unusual circumstances, such as
where it's extremely dry or perennially wet (recall the string tied
around the tent stakes at boggy Monte Verde). James Adovasio reports
Clovis-age twined bags, mats, burden baskets, and trays, mostly from
Great Basin dry caves (such as Danger Cave, Utah). No Clovis nets have
been found. Yet. Adovasio expects they will, since net hunting has deep
roots in prehistory, as well we might expect: it requires relatively
little expertise, it's effective and nonconfrontational, and animals
trapped in nets (even ones as large as elk) can be killed safely at
close range by stabbing or clubbing by individuals without great
physical strength. Consequently, it's a method that routinely involved
“females, juveniles, and the old.”¹²

Not all Clovis tools and artifacts appear in all Clovis sites, and more
differences in their toolkits and technology will likely emerge as we
learn more of the archaeological record. At present, we lack sites and
assemblages from many geographic areas, and have found relatively few of
their habitation sites where, by virtue of longer periods of occupation
and greater number of activities that took place, a wider range of tool
classes would be expected.

BUT IS IT ART?

A number of Clovis bone and ivory rods are scored with zigzags; parallel
lines; small, curved incisions; and in one instance, zipper-like
markings. The markings are far too systematic to be merely accidental.
They could be art for art's sake, some other symbolic decoration, or
more prosaically, ownership or use marks.

Engraved stones, too, though no more than a few dozen, have also been
found in Clovis-age sites. These are incised with cross-hatched,
parallel, intersecting, or converging lines. All but two were recovered
at the Gault site, and had been made on the locally occurring limestone
(Figure 47). That's not the best artistic canvas to be sure, and what
those scratches represent is anyone's guess. But if one applies a bit of
imagination, some of the Gault engravings appear to represent
stick-figure plants or, letting the imagination go full throttle, maps
depicting rivers and their tributaries.

[images]

FIGURE 47.
Clovis art: two faces of a piece of engraved limestone from the Gault
site, Texas. The meaning of the lines is unknown. Among the
interpretations: they represent plants, or perhaps a map of rivers and
tributaries. (Photograph courtesy of Michael Collins and the Gault
Project, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of
Texas-Austin, of a cast made by Pete Bostrom of Lithics Casting Lab,
Troy, IL.)

Clovis-age cave or rockshelter art is rarest of all, if indeed we've
ever seen any. We're never sure we are looking at what we think we're
looking at, as it is often difficult to determine the age of an image on
a rock wall. Even so, Larry Agenbroad and colleagues have recorded half
a dozen rock panels on the Colorado Plateau in eastern Utah that display
paintings and engravings of what appear to be mammoths. Agenbroad
worries some of these are modern fakes (shades of Hilborne Cresson!),
and none are dated to late Pleistocene times.¹³ As noted earlier, the
extraordinarily rich and expressive art routinely found in Paleolithic
Europe—cave paintings and sculpted figurines of extinct animals and
humans appearing in both natural and abstract forms—is absent from late
Pleistocene North America. Perhaps by then the animals were already
extinct, or possibly people had other things on their minds (or their
walls).

STONE FOR THE TAKING

Which is not to say Clovis people lacked appreciation for the finer
things. In making their stone tools, they relied almost exclusively on
very-high-quality chert, jasper, chalcedony, and obsidian (volcanic
glass) (see Plate 9). All are fine grained and lack cleavage planes or
other natural fault lines, making them easy to chip into a desired form,
and capable of holding razor-sharp edges. Other kinds of stone can be
service able, but Clovis (and, for that matter, later paleoindian)
knappers only went for the best. Why? Higher-quality stone is less
failure prone, which would have been of no small concern to hunters
going after large game at a time when hunting was very much an up-close
and personal activity: no safe firing from long range here. If a point
broke at the wrong moment because of a flaw that weakened the stone's
tensile strength, it was not just a bad day at the office. As Frison
says, it could mean injury or death.¹⁴ Further, a point made of
higher-quality stone lasts longer and can be readily resharpened,
thereby prolonging its use. That would be important to wide-ranging
hunter-gatherers, who could not predict when they would next be able to
resupply at a stone source.

We benefit, too: because these high-quality stone types are often
distinctive in color, fossils, chemistry, or composition, we can
frequently pinpoint where they were obtained and how. It appears Clovis
peoples mostly acquired their stone directly from bedrock outcrops
(Figure 48), where it could be quarried in large blocks, rather than
from picking through the gravels of a river bed or a glacial moraine in
hopes of finding cobbles of suitable size or material. Size was critical
to Clovis knappers since some of the bifaces they made were upwards of
20 centimeters in length and width, and more than 600 grams in mass,
requiring the starting blocks of raw material—cores, they're called—to
be of even greater size.¹⁵

[images]

FIGURE 48.
Map of Canada and the United States showing the location of pre-Clovis,
Clovis, Late paleoindian, and more recent sites discussed in the text.
Only some of the stone sources used by paleoindian groups are located on
the map; the symbol for the outcrops should not be taken as indicative
of their size or shape, but only as indicating an approximate location.

The Clovis knappers’ preference for specific stone outcrops reveals the
depth of their geological knowledge: they found sources we never have.
And they went directly to those sources themselves. No trading was
apparently involved, but then what self-respecting hunter-gatherer wants
to rely on others to supply a material so essential to survival, or
needed in bulk? As open as territories were on this landscape, stone
sources were accessible to all, leaving little incentive for a Clovis
entrepreneur to schlep double the usual amount of stone, one-half for
personal use and the other half for exchange, across great distances on
the off chance of finding a trading partner. That said, their sporadic
encounters on the landscape likely resulted in an exchange of gifts to
mark the occasion and the bonds forged, which may explain why sites
occasionally yield a Clovis point or two made with an unusual style or
material.

Because stone can often be identified to the outcrop from which it was
obtained, the distances between where it was quarried and where it was
abandoned serve as an odometer of paleoindian travels. Sometimes those
distances were great. Alibates agatized dolomite from the Texas
Panhandle, just outside of Amarillo, was used to fashion Clovis points
left in the Drake cache in northeastern Colorado, 585 kilometers away.
Although we routinely use the straight-line distance from quarry to site
as a measure of paleoindian mobility, that takes no account of side
excursions, return trips, or any other archaeologically invisible
travel. Actual mileage may vary.

It certainly did in Clovis times across the continent, the scale
depending on the nature and density of resources being exploited.
Distances of 300-400 kilometers are common on the treeless western
plains, and on the open parkland and tundra of northeastern North
America, where resources were locally clumped but widely separated. In
the closed, ecologically richer forests of northeastern North
America—where, we suspect, groups did not have to be as wide-ranging
(see below)—the sites are dominated by locally acquired stone (picked up
within 50 kilometers of the site, say), though occasionally contain
specimens of more distant or exotic material.

In most sites, exotic material occurs as finished artifacts, or at most,
as prepared bifaces or cores, rather than as raw blocks of stone (at the
Gainey site in Michigan, for example, cores were hauled in from
east-central Ohio's Upper Mercer chert outcrops, some 380 kilometers
away). Mobile hunter-gatherers without benefit of beasts of burden
(save, perhaps, for dogs) would have had their hands full carrying food,
hides, tools, children, and the like. Stone artifacts were heavy enough
on belts or slings without the extra weight of blocks of stone, much of
which was destined only for discard when later flaked into a point or
tool.

How they fashioned their points and tools is captured in the
manufacturing debris left behind, particularly at sites situated close
to stone outcrops, including Gault, Thunderbird (Virginia), and West
Athens Hill (New York). These sites are dominated by the vast numbers of
flakes (debitage) that fly off as a stone tool is chipped. At
Thunderbird, a single, three-inch excavation level of a 10 x 10 foot
square excavation unit (this was the 1970s; we were slow to go metric)
often yielded more than 10,000 pieces of debitage, along with tools that
broke in the process of manufacture, and even glimpses of discrete
moments in time: among them, flakes piled up as though they had rained
down on the sides of a knapper's crossed legs, and the tip of a nearly
finished Clovis point found dozens of feet from its broken base (Figure
49). That point had been just a few flakes away from being perfect, and
one can only empathize with the knapper's frustration when it broke (why
did I have to hit it that one last time?)—and readily imagine seeing the
broken pieces flying across the site.

Occasionally, if the stone wasn't of the highest quality, it might be
slowly heated in sand beneath a hearth to enhance its “flakeability.”
Experimental studies by Philip Wilke and colleagues show that the
optimal method for heat-treating stone is to slowly raise it to a
temperature of 165°C-300°C for several hours, then bring it back down
slowly (heat or cool it too quickly, and the stone will craze or
shatter). Heat-treated stone gains a waxy luster, and depending on its
chemistry, can change color: specimens of the yellow green jasper at
Thunderbird turned pink and red from heating.¹⁶

[images]

FIGURE 49.
Two fluted points from the Thunderbird site, Virginia, which failed en
route to manufacture. The specimen on the left was nearly complete when
it broke during final thinning. Its two parts were found some distance
from one another, hinting that a healthy pitch followed the fatal break.
(Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

After groups departed the quarry, they looped around the landscape, and
over time, artifacts were used or broken, and the stone supply dwindled.
When far from a quarry, the groups conserved their resources: fluted
points that dulled or broke were carefully resharpened, but if broken
beyond repair or whittled to a useless nubbin (say, 4-5 centimeters in
length, barely long enough to peek out from beyond the binding of their
haft), the point might see new life by being recycled into other tools
like scrapers, drills, or wedges.

Just so, groups venturing far into unknown terrain surely kept a
watchful eye for new outcrop sources to replenish their toolkits. And
perhaps, hedging their landscape learning bets, they also had the
foresight to lay in resupply depots along the way.

CACHING ACROSS THE LANDSCAPE

The Clovis-age archaeological record includes a number of stone artifact
caches containing bifaces and blades (see Plate 10). Although these
could have been used “as is,” more likely they were chipped into those
forms for easier transport, and with the idea that from these forms,
they could readily be made into one of a variety of useable tools. These
caches rarely occur at Clovis camps or kills (though there are
exceptions), but instead often turn up in otherwise isolated spots,
giving the appearance of having been stashed, presumably with the intent
of being retrieved later. The cache pieces are generally fashioned of
stone from outcrops several hundred kilometers distant.

We now know of at least twenty Clovis caches scattered throughout North
America, but mostly in the West. A prime example is the Richey-Roberts
site, discovered in the late 1980s by workers installing a sprinkler
system in an apple orchard near East Wenatchee, Washington.¹⁷ Full
excavations revealed some forty Clovis artifacts, including projectile
points, preforms (unfinished points fashioned into a broadly lanceolate
shape), bifaces, scrapers, other stone tools, and a dozen or more bone
and antler rods. The Richey-Roberts Clovis points, some of which are 21
centimeters long and 6 centimeters wide, are among the largest ever
found. Here, as in other Clovis caches, some artifacts were sprinkled
with red ocher. Were they being symbolically infused with life-giving
blood, or was this a blood-colored warning: but to whom—or what? Or was
it something else? No one can say.

At the Anzick cache in Montana, over 100 Clovis stone artifacts, and
bone and ivory rods, accompanied the uncremated, ocher-covered remains
of a child (Chapter 5).¹⁸ Here, the term cache is surely inappropriate,
since the collection of artifacts is likely grave goods, not intended
for later use, at least not in the corporeal world. But for those caches
that are not obviously burial offerings, a more utilitarian explanation
may be sought.

On its face, an artifact cache represents a handy solution to the
logistical problem faced by highly mobile peoples: the gap between where
a stone could be acquired (which is predictable), and where it was to be
used (which is not always predictable, and in any case may be very far
away). Annual moves might bring mobile peoples past quarries
occasionally, but they can only haul away a limited amount of stone. And
yet that stone is “spent” all over the territory, sometimes exhausting
supplies far from the source. One solution to that logistical dilemma
would be to cache supplies of stone in convenient places around the
landscape. When tools broke, wore down through resharpening, or were
lost, as all tools inevitably were, resupply at a cache could save a
long trip back to the quarry. Seems self-evident.

Later paleoindian groups were just as mobile as Clovis groups and just
as reliant on high-quality, distant stone sources. By that reasoning, we
should also see their caches as well, but we don't. Late paleoindian
caches are extremely rare.¹⁹ There are now enough Clovis caches and few
enough from the millennium that followed to suggest this pattern is real
and not an accident of sampling. How, then, can we explain the
preponderance of Clovis caches, and the scarcity (if not absence) of
later ones?

Michael Collins sees an explanation in the predictability of Clovis
movement: he suggests they knew in advance where they were headed, knew
they would be returning to particular spots with perilously exhausted
tools in need of replenishment, and in anticipation, left stone behind
for future use. Later Paleoindians, he argues, could not predict their
future movements with enough confidence to benefit from caching stone.
Perhaps. Yet, the stone used by Folsom groups (Clovis successors on the
plains) comes from a greater diversity of sources, sometimes from even
greater distances. The more complex pattern of Folsom stone acquisition
suggests that however unpredictable their movements, they certainly knew
where sources were, and were highly adept at scheduling their visits.
Moreover, if Clovis groups knew they were returning to a spot and would
need and use the stone, then why were the caches still there 11,000
years later?

I suspect a different strategy might have been in play: Clovis groups
were so new to the landscape they didn't know and couldn't predict where
or when they were next going to find a suitable stone outcrop. By
depositing caches about the landscape as they moved away from known
sources, they created artificial resupply depots, and thus anticipated
and compensated for that lack of knowledge. If they found no stone in
the area where they were headed, they at least would not have to double
back completely to the original outcrop to refurbish their current tools
when those were used up. And if they did find a new stone source, the
cache could be ignored and abandoned.

Is it then a mere accident of sampling that most of the Clovis caches
found so far are on the Great Plains and in the Northwest, far from
stone outcrops? Or could this be telling us that the challenges of
exploring those areas were different? Time and more caches will tell.

Stone is especially suitable for caching, since unlike meat or other
food, it won't spoil, won't be attractive to scavengers, and barring
massive tectonic activity, won't move before you return. A stone cache
has a fixed and predictable location. As such, it serves a useful role
in wayfinding (Chapter 7), for now one's “map” of a landscape includes
not just the natural resources, but some artificially placed ones as
well. This helps make it possible to venture further across otherwise
unknown terrain. Over time, as new sources of suitable stone are
located, and as groups are better able to predict where and when they
will be able to replenish their supplies (presumably in the post-Clovis
period), then caches become less critical to movement, and ultimately
unnecessary.

The obvious flaws to this theory are the occasional caches found close
to a raw material source—like the deGraffenreid cache (see Plate 11),
apparently stashed in the vicinity of the stone-rich Gault site²⁰—and
the likelihood there were multiple purposes for caching stone. And, of
course, one cannot use the absence of caches in later paleoindian
periods as proof landscape learning was complete by then, at least not
without getting dizzy spinning in a logical circle. That said, I think
there is independent evidence—albeit circumstantial—to indicate that
might have been the case, though that's for the next chapter, when other
clues to the process become apparent.

MOBILE HOMES

Befitting their mobile lifestyle, the dwellings Clovis people built were
temporary shelters made of wood or materials that quickly degraded and
disappeared (none were made of stone). Their traces are often little
more than hard-to-spot circular stains in the soil marking where wooden
posts were once planted (postmolds). William Gardner reports one such
structure at Thunderbird, a line of postmolds forming a rough oval 9 ×
12 meters in size.²¹ Other evidence of structures can be as subtle as
slightly hardened earth, or artifacts concentrated around darkened soil
or burned areas.

Although such clues reveal little of the habitations once standing
there, they do hint at site use and the scale of the occupation. In the
Upper Midwest and northeastern North America, for example, a dozen or so
paleoindian sites include discrete artifact concentrations, perhaps 4-6
meters in diameter, yielding a like range of tools. These are thought to
be individual family households and the remains of their domestic
activities. Occasionally, broken artifacts from different concentrations
can be fit together, a strong hint that the households were occupied at
the same moment in time. At Nobles Pond (Ohio), the concentrations were
even neatly arranged in a semicircle.²²A Pleistocene mobile home park,
as it were, but again with the emphasis on mobile. In other sites, the
concentrations are less well defined and overlap, which bespeak
successive occupations in the same spot.

Evidently, these groups did not stay for long in any one place, nor
always return to it: most of their sites were used but once. With a
continent to themselves, the only incentive to revisit a spot was if it
offered a prized resource, whether permanent (the quarry-related sites
of Gault, Thunderbird, and West Athens Hill) or temporary (the Vail site
in Maine seems to have been established alongside a migratory game
trail). Such is the advantage to colonists on a landscape with few other
people and no territorial borders. But as discussed in the previous
chapter, there was also strong incentive for separate families to gather
and socialize, exchange items and information, maintain old kin ties,
and establish new connections through marriage. So far, however, no
Clovis “rendezvous” has been found.

POINTS ON LAND

But Clovis people left behind more than sites; they also scattered their
distinctive points across North America. There has long been something
of a cottage industry among archaeologists devoted to tallying Clovis
points by state (we're approaching 550 in Texas). David Anderson and
colleagues have compiled those into a continent-wide total: it's
currently at over 13,000 points from some 1,500 locations.²³ The great
majority of these are isolates, unaccompanied by other Clovis tools,
bones, or trappings of a site. As David Brose remarked
(tongue-in-cheek), from the looks of it, these groups ate nothing and
lived alone. Yet, where these isolates are found might just tell us
something interesting.

A map of their distribution and density reveals isolates are
particularly thick on the ground across much of the eastern United
States, especially around the Tennessee, Ohio, and Cumberland river
valleys. In contrast, many areas have only sparse and widely isolated
occurrences, including much of the Great Basin, the Columbia and
Colorado plateaus, the northern Great Plains and northern Rockies, and
the uppermost and lowermost reaches of the Mississippi Valley.

Anderson interprets the high concentrations of isolates in the Midwest
and Southeast as “staging areas,” spots on the landscape where groups
slowed down and settled in for a time, before pushing still deeper into
the continent.²⁴ Possibly so. However, these are also regions rich in
high-quality stone outcrops. Is the density of Clovis points there
merely a reflection of the unusually large amounts of archaeological
debris that routinely surround such sources, or were such areas indeed
magnets for longer-term human occupations by virtue of their being
resource-rich and predicable spots on the landscape? It could be both.
And what of the scarcity of Clovis points in places like the lower
Mississippi Valley? Does that mean there were few Clovis inhabitants, or
is it merely a reflection of the last 10,000 years of the river's floods
deeply burying any Pleistocene-age remains?

The distribution of Clovis points is not a map of Clovis people on the
landscape (as Anderson well appreciates), but a complicated result of
many things, including modern land-use patterns (point densities often
correlate with the amount of plowed acreage); deposition, erosion, and
surface age; archaeological activity (not all states have had systematic
surveys for Clovis points); and the presence of high-quality stone
outcrops.²⁵ Few Clovis points does not necessarily mean few Clovis
people.

A more representative sample will surely change the geographic details
of the Clovis distribution, but probably not the essential fact that the
Clovis presence on the landscape was broad and not deep. It's the
archaeological footprint of highly mobile people at low population
densities, further testimony that movement was tied to topography and
terrain, and likely involved leapfrogging across the landscape, rather
than proceeding as a wave of human settlement washing across the land.

IT'S ABOUT TIME

The chronology of the Clovis occupation shifts through time and across
the continent. The oldest sites are those on the Great Plains and in the
Southwest, which range in age from 11,570 BP (the Aubrey site, Texas) to
about 10,800 BP. Significantly, the earliest appearance of Clovis
follows the opening of a viable ice-free corridor (Chapter 2).

There are reliable radiocarbon dates on only a dozen or so Clovis and
Clovis-like (Gainey type) points in the eastern United States, but
despite the long-held suspicion Clovis and fluting originated in this
area, the oldest of these (Shawnee-Minisink, Pennsylvania) is only
10,940 years old. Most of the others fall between 10,600 and 10,200 BP,
a period contemporaneous with Folsom on the Great Plains. Clovis-like
materials occur in the Great Basin and far West, although their ages are
even less certain, and the cultural chronology is confused by the
contemporaneous occurrence of the large, unfluted Western Stemmed
points.

A recent radiocarbon study by Michael Waters and Thomas Stafford shows
that nearly a dozen Clovis sites from Montana (Anzick) to Arizona
(Lehner) to Pennsylvania (Shawnee-Minisink) date to 10,900 BP, give or
take a century. That makes them essentially contemporaneous, at least
within the bounds of radiocarbon dating.²⁶ The styles of Clovis points
at these sites are quite different (though all are still recognizably
Clovis). When the ages of more sites are pinned down as tightly, we'll
finally be able to get a precise gauge of the timing of the stylistic
change and, by extension, the cultural drift (Chapter 7) that occurred
as Clovis people spread across the continent.

In the meantime, the radiocarbon record supports the long-held suspicion
Clovis people radiated rapidly across North America, the process taking
perhaps no more than 500 radiocarbon years. It may have taken longer in
real time. The Clovis period overlaps the early portion of the Younger
Dryas, with its radiocarbon plateaus that defy easy calibration (Chapter
2). Although more and tighter-calibrated radiocarbon ages may ultimately
change the apparent speed of the Clovis dispersal, perhaps “slowing” it
to, say, 1,000 calendar years, it nonetheless will remain one of the
fastest expansions of any culture known in prehistory (Chapter 7).

MURDER IN THE PLEISTOCENE?

The traditional explanation (Chapter 7) for how or why they moved so far
so fast has been that Clovis people were specialized hunters who pursued
wide-ranging big game, including the now-extinct Pleistocene megafauna.
Latching on to prey that paid little mind to ecological boundaries
ostensibly enabled Clovis groups to do likewise, and thereby speed
across the continent without having to learn new adaptive tricks to

survive in different environments. After all, a mammoth was a mammoth,
no matter where it lived, but if the mammoth happened to be a mastodon,
horse, or camel instead, that only required minor adjustments to the
hunting strategy. Or so the argument went.

Gary Haynes (no relation to Vance Haynes) proclaims that nowadays “very
few if any rational archaeologists want to argue that Clovis people
exclusively specialized in megafauna everywhere and at all times.”²⁷ I
wholeheartedly agree (and consider myself rational). Besides,
specialized hunting was rare enough among known foraging groups. A
specialized hunting adaptation that transcended a continent as large and
diverse as Late Glacial North America in less than a thousand years
would be unique. And yet continent-wide hunting is said to have driven
thirty-five genera of mammals to extinction. Specialized, or not, that
certainly makes pressing demands on human hunters. Are Clovis people
guilty as charged?

There is no doubt they co-existed with some of these now-extinct
mammals. Their overlapping distributions place people at the late
Pleistocene crime scene, and at least in some instances, Clovis points
have been found embedded in large mammal skeletons. We have motive,
method, even the occasional smoking gun. Best of all, if Clovis groups
were big-time big-game hunters, that accounts for how they moved so far
and so fast, and why all these animals went extinct.

The idea humans caused late Pleistocene extinctions is not new, but goes
back more than a century. The modern version is due to ecologist Paul
Martin, who attributes extinction solely to human hunting: Pleistocene
overkill, he calls it. That the animals lost were mostly megafauna (with
an adult weight of at least 45 kilograms [about 100 pounds]) he thinks
no coincidence: “Large mammals disappeared not because they lost their
food supply but because they became one.” Their massive size was their
death sentence. Yet, what of the small Aztlan rabbit and the diminutive
pronghorn? Martin supposes these were “large enough” to have been
attractive to Clovis hunters.²⁸ Otherwise, he believes smaller prey were
of no interest to Clovis hunters and were tossed back (Clovis
catch-and-release?).

As Martin envisions the overkill process,²⁹ animal fates were sealed
when a band of 100 highly skilled Clovis hunters emerged out the
southern exit of the ice-free corridor just over 11,500 years ago.
Before them was a vast expanse of territory empty of people but teeming
with immense game. All that meat on the hoof, Martin says, was
irresistible to Clovis hunters, who liked megafauna so much they ate
them to extinction.

Martin crafted an elaborate and imaginative scenario to show how this
could have been accomplished (whether it actually happened that way is
another matter, of course). The way he figures it, overkill was
inevitable: these animals had never before peered down the shaft of a
spear, and would have been fatally ignorant of the danger posed by
humans. Killing such naive and vulnerable prey in this target-rich
environment was easy, he figures, and if just one hunter in four bagged
a trophy a week, it would decimate local animal populations. Slow
breeders, as most of the Pleistocene megafauna likely were, would not
have been able to reproduce fast enough to replace the animals killed,
even if only a third of them were slaughtered by hunters. The hunters
would make short work of the animals in an area, then turn their
attention to the targets in front of them, and ignore the growing pile
of meat and carcasses behind. Martin supposes this gluttonous human
population doubled in size every twenty years, an annual growth rate of
3.4%, and made fast time, fanning outward in a killing wave from which
no animal could escape, and which washed across the continent at a rate
of 16 kilometers a year.

At that rate, within 350 years, Clovis people would have numbered
600,000 and would have reached the Gulf of Mexico. Just 1,200 years
after entering North America, they got to Tierra del Fuego. In their
hemisphere-long wake were tens of thousands of fluted points (smoking
guns?), the rotting carcasses of more than 100 million herbivores, and
carnivore populations that would have boomed with the sudden fortune in
freshly killed meat on the landscape—and then the wave went bust when
the supply ran out (Martin doesn't think the Clovis hunters targeted
carnivores, or needed to in order to cause their extinction: killing off
their prey would do the trick).

A chilling scenario, Pleistocene overkill, and one that has achieved a
celebrity few academic theories enjoy, perhaps not least because this
grim homily of wanton slaughter can be (and often is) preached as a
sermon of our species’ sins. Granted, the human drap sheet is a long
one, but this may be one crime against nature we didn't commit. Overkill
seems unlikely for many reasons, among them:

 

•  It took modern humans over 100,000 years to reach Alaska. Could it
have taken only 1,000 more years to get to Tierra del Fuego? There were
vast stretches of unexplored and highly variable environments to be
traversed, each of which posed radically different adaptive challenges
to groups that were there to make a living and raise families; lacked
maps, convenience stores, and transportation; and had to find water,
other food, shelter, stone, and other resources critical to their
survival. That takes time.

•  Essential pieces of the overkill scenario ring hollow: most
hunter-gatherers reproduce at relatively low rates, generally less than
about 1.5% per year. Is it reasonable to suppose Clovis groups
multiplied at 3.4% in order to reach a population size of 600,000 in
just a few centuries? That's an unusually high rate that Martin plucked
from the Bounty mutineers on Pitcairn Island, who apparently shed their
inhibitions along with Captain Bligh.

•  Likewise, it's doubtful Clovis spread in a wave across the continent,
ignoring environment and topography. Armies, not hunter-gatherers, come
in waves. And indiscriminate hunting of nearly three dozen genera of
megafauna continent-wide demands a comprehensive knowledge of places and
animal behavior few hunters—especially hunters new to a landscape—could
possess. Besides, as Frison explained, no one hunting strategy would
work on all mammoths, let alone all megafauna (Chapter 7).

•  For that matter, when a foraging group's return rate begins to
decline, they move, doing so long before they've burned through all the
available resources in their original habitat (Chapter 7). They stay put
only under unusual circumstances, notably, being hemmed in on all sides.
That was hardly a problem on a late Pleistocene landscape devoid of
other people, with a choice of productive habitats in which to hunt and
gather, and where one could leave a habitat long before its animals were
gone. Its highly unlikely Clovis hunters behaved like Sherman's army in
its scorched-earth march across Georgia.

•  The Pleistocene fauna may have been naive, but studies have shown
that even naive prey populations “process information about predators
swiftly,” and their populations quickly rebound from an onslaught of
predators.³⁰ The Clovis hunters’ advantage would not have lasted long.
Besides, even if unfamiliar with humans, the Pleistocene fauna were
already well familiar with the likes of saber-toothed cats, short-faced
bears, and dire wolves, and could shift their defensive behaviors to
respond to their new threat (humans) just as did African elephants.

•  Finally, overkill requires there were no humans in North America
prior to Clovis times, for then the megafauna surely would have become
accustomed to and developed defensive behaviors to respond to human
hunters, or perhaps would have gone extinct before Clovis times. And as
we now know, there is evidence for a human presence in the Americas
(Monte Verde) that predates 11,500 BP.

 

Reasonable points all, but by themselves they are not sufficient to
reject overkill. After all, it is possible people could have moved that
fast through the hemisphere. They could have reproduced at near
rabbit-high rates and spread in an expanding, earth-scorching wave. And,
they might have chosen to hunt animals well beyond the point foraging
theory suggests they should have abandoned the patch and prey.³¹
America's colonizers may simply have been unlike any hunter-gatherers we
know (admittedly, I'm skeptical, but it's not completely outside the
realm of possibility). And perhaps the Pleistocene fauna were asleep at
the evolutionary switch, and failed to learn how to cope with predation.
That's highly unlikely too, as any zoologist will tell you, but let's
grant the point for the sake of discussion. Nor can we reject overkill
on the grounds people were here in pre-Clovis times. Martin observes
that Clovis “is the time of unmistakable appearance of paleoindian
hunters using distinctive projectile points,”³² and he's right. It is
only then that we have evidence people did, in fact, prey upon
now-extinct large mammals.

For that matter, there is ample evidence that the arrival of humans can
signal the death knell for native animals. David Steadman and others
have shown that the grim reaper of extinctions followed the landings of
the peoples who colonized the islands of the Pacific. The most famous
(or infamous) case comes from New Zealand, where eleven species of moas,
large, flightless birds that ranged in weight up to 500 pounds, went
extinct soon after humans arrived. In fact, at least twenty-five other
species—lizards, frogs, birds, and bats—were also lost. Yet, these
losses are not the result of hunting alone, as Donald Grayson argues,
because in this and in all other island extinctions, multiple causes
were in play. The first New Zealanders hunted, but also set
forest-destroying fires, introduced competitors and predators (rats and
dogs), and even brought in diseases (such as European bird viruses). It
was some combination of these that caused extinctions.³³

Besides, island life is highly susceptible to extinction. Most Pacific
islands are tiny (often no larger than Manhattan), their ecosystems are
easily destroyed (forests can be felled in a matter of years or decades
by humans needing fuel or construction material), and their native
animal populations are small, vulnerable, and cannot be replenished from
distant continents because they had evolved into new species since their
arrival. This was especially true of birds, which on remote,
predator-free islands commonly lost their ability to fly, an
evolutionary change that proved fatal when predators arrived.³⁴

Stuart Fiedel and Gary Haynes proclaim that a continent is “ultimately
just a gigantic island,” but that's true only in the narrow sense that
it's also surrounded by water.³⁵ None of the factors that make island
life vulnerable to extinction apply to North America, which supported
vast animal populations (100 million animals by Martin's own estimate)
and a formidable array of predators (no species could afford to let down
its evolutionary guard), and for which there is absolutely no evidence
Clovis people caused massive (or even minimal) environmental
destruction. No New Zealand moa had to contend with a Smilodon; no North
American mastodon ever had its forest habitat defoliated. If humans
drove North American animals to extinction, it had to have been by their
spears, as Martin said. Is there evidence of that?

CROSS-EXAMINING THE FACTS

For many years, those of us who worked with the archaeology of late
Pleistocene North America confidently asserted there was no widespread
evidence of Clovis megafaunal hunting. Yet, none of us ever demonstrated
that was so. There was no systematic scrutiny of the archaeological and
fossil records to see which—if any—of the thirty-five genera of
now-extinct mammals had been found in Clovis-age sites in such a way as
to suggest they were killed by hunters. Recognizing it was time to stop
arm waving and start analyzing, Grayson and I did just that.³⁶ The
results surprised us.

We began by amassing as comprehensive a list as possible of all alleged
Clovis kills, even ones that offered little more than a fluted point
found in the same vicinity as some fossil bone. There were seventy-six
such sites. However, the mere occurrence of artifacts and animal bones
in the same site or even on the same surface is not by itself testimony
of a predator-prey relationship. Therefore, we evaluated each case to
see if the fluted points or other tools were found in such a way as to
suggest they caused the death of the animal, or if there was compelling
evidence of butchery (cutmarks or pry marks on bone) (Figure 50), or if
the remains were stacked or otherwise arranged in ways that could not be
explained by natural causes. That's the sort of evidence we routinely
find in kill and butchery sites from other times and places in the past.

[images]

FIGURE 50.
A telltale sign of human butchering: cutmarks (the two roughly parallel
lines just left of center, and the nearly straight line above and to
their right; the irregular lines to their right are from root etching of
the bone) on a portion of a bison jaw from the Folsom site, presumably
made while removing the tongue. Not all butchering activities result in
cutmarks, but when present, they provide secure evidence of human
activity. (Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

Vetted in this manner, humans proved to be the agents of death or
dismemberment in only fourteen of those seventy-six sites. And several
of those were unsuccessful kills (animals that were speared, but which
managed to escape), while others appeared to be the result of
opportunistic scavenging of animals perhaps already near death at a
water hole (more on these sites below). Humans undeniably hunted big
game on occasion, but they didn't make a habit of it. In fact, a single
band of hunters may have disproportionate influence on what we see
archaeologically: four of those fourteen sites (Escapule, Lehner, Murray
Springs, and Naco) are within 30 kilometers of one another in Arizona's
San Pedro Valley, and the artifacts found in them are so similar as to
appear to be the work of the same group.

Measure it any way you like, fourteen sites is a tiny number, especially
set against the wanton slaughter of 100 million animals envisioned under
Pleistocene overkill.

But it's not just that it's a pitiful number. In those fourteen sites,
only mammoth and mastodon remains occur. What of the other thirty-three
genera of extinct Pleistocene mammals? There are no Clovis horse kills,
no camel kills, no sloth kills, no Hemiauchinia kills, no tapir kills,
no giant beaver kills, no kills of any of the other genera of megafauna
that went extinct. And it's not because their bones are rare: horses are
the most abundant late Pleistocene fossil we have. That a few horse and
camel bones, or dermal ossicles of the ground sloth Paramylodon,
occasionally end up in archaeological sites is intriguing, but does
little more than show they co-existed with Clovis people.³⁷ If there was
a continent-wide slaughter, someone did a superb job of hiding the
evidence.

WHEN ABSENCE OF EVIDENCE BECOMES EVIDENCE OF ABSENCE

In a brazen bit of rope-a-dope reasoning, Martin insists the scarcity of
Clovis big-game kills proves overkill. This is so, he claims, because
overkill ostensibly occurred in just a few centuries in any one area,
and hence the odds are against a kill site being preserved in the
geological record. And, secondly, because he believes Clovis people were
tidy: after they made a kill, they cleaned up after themselves,
carefully retrieving any stone points buried in the mass of flesh and
gore of the carcasses (having excavated several large animal kills and
the artifacts found in them, I can attest that paleoindian hunters were
not that tidy, but grant the point for the moment).

It is a rare hypothesis that predicts a lack of evidence, but as Grayson
and I observed, we have one here, and we have it only because evidence
for this hypothesis is, well, lacking.³⁸ But perhaps there is reason to
accept Martin's point that kill sites might be rare. After all, in areas
such as eastern North America, where high rainfall and heavy vegetation
conspire to increase soil acidity, bone is quickly destroyed. Maybe poor
preservation accounts for the lack of kills. Or it might be for want of
looking in the right places: Pleistocene-age surfaces are buried now,
deeply in some places—eight meters deep, as Reid Ferring discovered at
the Aubrey site. Large mammal carcasses shot full of Clovis points lying
on those surfaces are often beyond notice or reach, and are usually
encountered only by chance. Gary Haynes would add that African elephants
have been hunted for centuries, yet their kill sites are rare.

But remember New Zealand's moas? They were slaughtered in far greater
numbers than African elephants, and in an even narrower time slice than
attributed to Pleistocene overkill. With no hint of hypocrisy, Martin
points to the abundance of moa kill sites as proof human hunting played
a role in the extinction of these birds.

And consider this: bison were hunted on the Great Plains of North
America for the last 11,000 years, starting in Clovis times. There is
abundant archaeological evidence of planned hunts, bone beds containing
hundreds of slaughtered animals, impact-fractured projectile points, and
skinning and butchering tools. Bison hunting was often highly wasteful.
At Olsen-Chubbuck, 190 animals were stampeded into an arroyo and died,
and fully 25% of the animals on the bottom of the carcass pile were only
slightly butchered or simply untouched, the meat left to rot in the
ground (Chapter 9).³⁹

Yet after 11,000 years of this archaeologically well-documented,
intense, and often wasteful hunting, culminating in the merciless
slaughter of bison by commercial Euroamerican hide hunters in the late
nineteenth century armed with deadly, large-bore Sharps rifles (“buffalo
guns”), bison are still very much alive today—and even on the bill of
fare at many restaurants.

So an animal relentlessly hunted for millennia failed to go extinct,
while thirty-five genera of mammals that were never or only rarely
hunted did. Perhaps, Martin suggests, bison were not as vulnerable to
extinction, because they became “wilier at avoiding hunters.”⁴⁰ Alas,
bison are not that wily: an estimated 10,000-20,000 were trapped and
killed over several centuries in Late Prehistoric times by hunters who
repeatedly stampeded them (at intervals as close as four years) into the
very same 30 meter diameter, 15 meter deep sinkhole on the plains of
northeastern Wyoming (the Vore site).

The widespread slaughter envisioned by Pleistocene overkill should have
left equally unmistakable traces. With 100 million megafaunal victims,
kill sites should be more the rule than the exception. And there's no
hiding behind poor preservation, even in eastern North America. There
and elsewhere thousands of megafauna fossils have been found, yet only
two have associated artifacts. Nor, as noted, could Clovis groups
possibly be that tidy; after all, they must have had teenagers.⁴¹ Kill
sites are genuinely scarce, and not just in North America but in South
America as well (where Clovis, strictly speaking, does not occur).

There is no small irony in this. Martin cheerily dismissed pre-Clovis
for want of multiple sites; Monte Verde alone wasn't enough. “It is
true,” he said of pre-Clovis, that “the absence of evidence is not
evidence of absence—but there are limits to how long and how strongly
one can keep believing when supporting evidence is lacking.”⁴² Agreed.
But doesn't it seem only fair Martin should apply that same standard to
finding evidence of Pleistocene overkill?

IS OVERKILL DEAD?

In the early 1980s, at the annual national gathering of the archaeology
clan, Jim Mead and I organized a symposium devoted to late Pleistocene
environments and extinctions in North America. We invited many of the
aficionados of extinction, including, naturally, Paul Martin. It was a
well-attended session, and so Martin began his talk by taking a poll of
the couple hundred archaeologists in the audience. How many, he asked,
thought climate change was to blame for Pleistocene extinctions? About a
third raised their hands. He then asked how many believed climate change
combined with human hunting was the cause: another two-thirds did. Then
he asked how many thought overkill alone was to blame. His own hand shot
up. Out in the audience a single hand was partly raised, fluttered
briefly, then disappeared—despite Martin's pleading to keep it up. We
never figured out whose hand that was.

Science is not a matter of counting votes, of course; it's a matter of
evidence. Still, there's nothing wrong with polling a room of
individuals at least somewhat familiar with the evidence (though not all
in the audience were paleoindian specialists). Martin was surprised by
the results. I was too: overkill almost got one more vote than I
expected (I knew Martin would vote for it). I would have guessed more
would see climate as the sole cause, and fewer climate plus humans.
There's a curious element in this debate: archaeologists and vertebrate
paleontologists familiar with the archaeological and fossil record tend
to pin extinctions on climate change, while ecologists and zoologists
familiar with climate's impact on animals tend to suspect and blame
humans. The grass is greener on the other side.

But that's not always the case. Recently, on the heels of our
examination of supposed megafaunal kills, Donald Grayson and I published
a follow-up paper, “Requiem for North American Overkill,” which declared
overkill dead. Apparently our report of its death was premature. Stuart
Fiedel and Gary Haynes, both archaeologists, shot back with a vigorous
defense of overkill.⁴³ Although they applauded our “scrupulous” vetting
of the list of megafaunal kill sites, they snarled we had “grossly
misrepresented] the overkill debate,” and provided “outmoded data and
interpretations and ignore[d] or deliberately omit[ted] the most recent
chronological, archaeological and climatic data.” In a later paper
Haynes went on to denounce our “attack” on overkill as “doubletalk.”
Lest there be any confusion, here's a dictionary definition of what
we're accused of: \’dgb-bsl,-tok\ n. deliberately unintelligible
gibberish.

Misrepresentation and doubletalk. Harsh words, these. Leaving aside the
rhetorical posturing (who isn't guilty of that?), the essential issues
at hand are uncomplicated. This dispute is not about speculations about
who might have killed what, when, how fast, and how quickly they
reloaded, but about kill sites and chronology.

Like Martin, Fiedel and Haynes believe an absence of kill sites is to be
expected, and consider fourteen kill sites a “phenomenally rich record”
of human predation in view of the length of time they think it
accumulated—the 300 years Clovis and megafauna ostensibly overlapped on
the landscape. In fact, fourteen is indeed a large number, but not for
the reasons they suppose: given how many of these sites were found bones
first (Chapter 3), fourteen probably inflates their actual importance!
That aside, our point was not just that there were only fourteen sites,
but that there were only two genera in those fourteen sites, and no
horse kills, camel kills, sloth kills, musk ox kills, glyptodont kills,
and so on down the list of the other thirty-three extinct genera.

Haynes immodestly proclaimed he could “speak with authority on this
matter, having devoted 25 years to neotaphonomic studies⁴⁴ of
large-mammal skeletons in Africa, Australia, and North America.” On his
self-appointed authority, he declared that “kill sites of any animal
smaller than a mammoth are never well preserved.” He even tacked a
number to his pronouncement: “kill sites of animals that weigh less than
250 kg will not be preserved and fossilized except in special
depositional ‘traps.’” Ignoring the many kill sites of, say, pronghorn
antelope or mountain sheep that are found on the northern plains
(animals that tip the scales at 70 kilograms maximum),⁴⁵ and not just in
the special traps Haynes lays for them, it is still fair to ask again,
where are all the horse kills, camel kills, sloth kills, musk ox kills,
glyptodont kills, and on down the hefty-animal list? All of them surpass
Haynes’ minimum body mass requirement.

Fiedel and Haynes shift the ground toward smaller animals. Look at
eastern North America, they suggest. There is not a single site with
“the remains of any butchered carcasses of elk, deer, bear, or woodland
bison of Holocene age.” In fact, the remains of deer are extremely
abundant in those sites, as has long been recognized. Unless their
already-dead carcasses were scraped off the landscape and dragged into
archaeological sites (possible, one supposes), they must have been
killed by hunters. If only the bones of the peccary, tapir, Aztlan
rabbit, and other lighter-than-250 kilogram Pleistocene animals were as
widely represented in Clovis-age sites, Fiedel and Haynes's point would
be well taken.

And consider this: North America once had its own flightless bird—the
sea duck, Chedytes lawi—which inhabited the islands and mainland of
coastal California and Oregon. It was hunted by people, even in
paleoindian times (by the inhabitants of Daisy Cave), and ultimately
went extinct. But the sea duck's extinction is a problem for overkill:
it took 7,000 years of human predation before this vulnerable prey
succumbed—hardly the near-instantaneous demise overkill assumes. As
important, human predation of this animal produced an unmistakable
archaeological record: its bones are well preserved in sites along the
coast.⁴⁶ In case there is any question, the sea duck was much smaller
than a mammoth.

Haynes complains it is unfair for critics of overkill to call for “more
and more kill sites.” No one is calling for more and more exactly;
rather, the request is for more of the genera (of the thirty-five) to
have secure evidence of human predation. It's that glaring gap that
needs to be closed, and again one cannot entirely blame the fossil
record here. Horses, camels, and musk ox (all big beasts) are extremely
well represented in the fossil record of North America, far more so than
either mammoth or mastodon, and yet there are no secure kill sites of
these animals.

As for the chronology, Fiedel and Haynes rightly note there have been
great strides in our radiocarbon dating of the extinct animals. Some
fifteen years ago, only seven genera were known to have lasted until
Clovis time. Nowadays, there's more than twice that number (here's where
we stood accused of “deliberately omitting” evidence, ostensibly
ignoring radiocarbon ages produced by Russell Graham and colleagues.
Since we discussed Graham's chronology in detail and explicitly
acknowledged his help, we could only be perplexed by their accusation).
More terminal Pleistocene dates may yet come for other genera. Or they
may not. The point we were making was straightforward: the chronology of
extinctions is yet unsettled. We still don't know whether all animals
disappeared simultaneously or not.

Haynes and Fiedel then accuse us of ignoring the Signor-Lipps effect,
which is the proposition that rare animals tend to disappear from the
fossil record before they go extinct. Thus, the rarer the animal on the
late Pleistocene landscape, the harder it will be to find a latest
Pleistocene age for it. Haynes draws from Signor-Lipps the message that
“the youngest radiocarbon dates on species do not come from the very
last members of those species.” But of course; we're well aware of that
(I use the mirror image of Signor-Lipps in the argument made earlier
about why the earliest dated site in the Americas is not likely to be
the earliest site in the Americas, though it could be, if we get very
lucky [Chapter 4]).

We are also aware, though Fiedel and Haynes are not, that if radiocarbon
dates are indeed scarce on Pleistocene fauna from the 300 years they
shared North America with humans, then that also suggests these animals
were already in decline before or by the time Clovis arrived. To test
this, we need to more fully understand the extinction process. We need
to know when the process began, how long it lasted, and the rate of
population decline over that time.

More to think about: if all 100 million animals of those thirty-five
extinct genera lasted until the very end of the Pleistocene, only to be
suddenly dispatched by human hunters, then why would Signor-Lipps come
into play at all? There ought to be plenty of terminal Pleistocene ages
to go around. There are not.

Haynes portrays critics of overkill as engaging in postmodern
meta-narratives, a “constructed reality.” In some circles, those are
fighting words. Not here. I agree with his point that all the arguments
in this dispute need to be read carefully and critically, and I would
add another: although it's terribly old-fashioned to say, I also think
evidence matters.

Paul Martin in his Twilight of the Mammoths, a long look back at his and
overkill's career, and the vigorous debate over the cause of Pleistocene
extinctions he and it engendered, breathed a sigh of relief that at
least there is agreement about what was not a cause of those
extinctions. Perhaps the one thing most specialists can agree upon, he
explained, “is that the near-time [Pleistocene] extinctions had nothing
to do with a space rock” or asteroid impact, unlike in the case of the
dinosaurs’ demise 65 million years ago. That was too bad, he mused,
since “one would find a highly receptive audience among astronomers and
their public had mammoth extinction shared similarities with dinosaur
extinction.”⁴⁷

As they say, watch what you wish for. (Chapter 2, Sidebar).

TIMING WAS EVERYTHING

Overkill helped Martin solve a vexing problem: what could cause
thirty-five very different animal genera living in very different
habitats to go extinct simultaneously? Let's briefly turn to the
radiocarbon record since the timing of extinctions is often a point of
departure in talking about their cause. Without putting too fine a point
on it, the reasoning here is that if all the megafauna disappeared at
the same time, that suggests a cause that could strike down animals of
very different physiology and adaptation across diverse habitats and do
so instantaneously. Changes in climate and environment, Martin supposed,
varied too much in timing, by area, and in severity to kill off so many
animals at once—but he thought voracious, fast-moving hunters could. But
if humans were not the cause of extinction, then why did all these
animals go extinct at the same time? Or did they?

We often assume as much, but after years of radiocarbon dating fossils
of Pleistocene fauna, we cannot say these animals went extinct
simultaneously. All were certainly gone by 10,800 BP, but Russell Graham
and Thomas Stafford have shown that only sixteen of the thirty-five
genera were alive as recently as 12,000 years ago—that is, up to the
doorstep of Clovis times. The other nineteen genera lack radiocarbon
dates showing they survived until then. In some cases (the Aztlan
rabbit, for example), the latest occurrence predates the Last Glacial
Maximum. Whether that means these animals were already extinct by then
is not clear, since many of those genera are relatively rare in the
fossil record, and we know that the number of radiocarbon dates
available for a particular animal is strongly determined by how many of
its fossils have been found.

Additional radiocarbon dates might bring their terminal dates closer to
12,000 years ago, but then they might not. Until we possess more
radiocarbon dates, we cannot assume all genera disappeared
simultaneously or gradually, or let assumptions about the timing of
extinctions be used to support arguments about its cause.

Perhaps more important, it's not enough to know when the extinctions
process ended; we also need to know when it began, and what was
occurring on the landscape at that time to cause populations to
decline.⁴⁸ That's no easy task with radiocarbon dating. But here, too,
ancient DNA—this time from mammoths, horses, camels, and other
fossils—can potentially yield valuable insight: changes in genetic
diversity over time can reveal population histories. This work is in its
infancy, but it is already yielding results: genetic evidence compiled
by Beth Shapiro and colleagues has shown that Alaskan bison populations
underwent a significant decline starting about 37,000 BP, neatly
coinciding with a warm stretch prior to the LGM, when tree cover peaked,
reducing grazing land and serving as a barrier to movement.⁴⁹

If North American extinctions were, in fact, smeared over many
millennia, this would be no different than the timing of Pleistocene
extinctions elsewhere in the world, and in other New World regions.
North of the ice sheets in Alaska, Dale Guthrie has shown that one
species of horse disappeared by 31,000 BP, another survived until 12,500
BP, and mammoths lasted until 11,500 BP. For the record: there is no
evidence of human hunting of horse or mammoth in Alaska. In fact, and as
noted in the previous chapter, everything else seems to have been on the
menu at Alaska's Broken Mammoth site except mammoth.⁵⁰

CONSIDERING CLIMATE

If different genera disappeared at different times, that opens the
possibility extinctions resulted from a more complicated cause: perhaps
the complex climate changes taking place at the end of the Pleistocene,
which played out across North America over thousands of years in
different ways with different consequences for different species in
different environments.

Indeed, often unspoken in discussions of Pleistocene overkill is the
fact that extinctions were not limited to the very largest,
mouth-watering mammals, though those dominated this particular
extinction episode, but also included storks, vultures, eagles, jays,
and blackbirds, as well as a snake, several genera and species of
turtles, and a spruce tree.⁵¹ Likewise ignored is the fact that
extinctions were merely one element of much larger, sweeping,
end-of-the-Pleistocene changes that, extinctions aside, dramatically
altered the ranges of plants and animals.

Against this backdrop of other ecological changes, megafaunal extinction
seems less an aberration for which a human cause is necessary, and more
a part oflarger, natural changes in climate and environment.
Paleoecologists are busy exploring how these changes may have impacted
habitats, forage, and animal physiology and/or reproduction.

Already, there are several hypotheses, though at the moment (and here
Martin is exactly right), these are not well developed. The reason, as
Grayson and others have emphasized, is that far more needs to be known
about the responses of individual genera and species to the changes that
came with the end of the Pleistocene.⁵² That's not easy, given the
limits of the fossil record and the fact these animals are extinct: our
knowledge of what climatic and environmental changes they could (or
could not) tolerate is limited. We do not know how changes from equable
to seasonal climates, changes in grassland composition, increasing
temperature and decreasing rainfall (especially in western regions), or
changes in growing-season length (it got much shorter in the far north)
would affect each.

We suspect many of the very large mammals had long gestation periods
(comparable to the approximately 22 months in modern elephants), as well
as low and slow reproductive rates (births came late and infrequently,
and rarely produced more than one offspring).⁵³ If successive offspring
died when a long-established birth season suddenly became harsh and
inhospitable, the limited reproductive capacity might leave the animals
unable to respond (indeed, this is one reason large animals have a high
risk of extinction). And it would make them vulnerable to a coup de
grace by hunters who, if they targeted breeding females or young animals
(as they did at the Colby mammoth kill in Wyoming), would have sped an
already-diminished local herd toward extinction.

Further, biotic communities in place for tens of thousands of years
dissolved, and plants dispersed in different directions at different
speeds (Chapter 2). How did that upset the delicate balance of animal
and plant life, and how did each animal respond to the new forage hand
it was dealt? What effect did this have on competition for resources?
All of this has to be understood for each animal genus as it changed in
numbers, range, and distribution across space and through time.⁵⁴

After the LGM, for example, Guthrie shows that Alaskan horses diminished
markedly in body size, shrinking steadily until their extinction around
12,500 BP. Horses are obligate grazers, and as cold, arid, and treeless
northern grasslands gave way to a wetter landscape, with more lakes,
bogs, and tundra vegetation, the horse suffered from lack of food, and
faced increased competition from other large animals such as woolly
mammoth. Mammoth was less of an obligate grazer and outlasted the horse
by a millennium, but ultimately it, too, succumbed to the disappearance
of the northern grassland.

The Alaskan cases are among the few for which we have evidence of animal
populations under stress, and good evidence of possible environmental
causes for their demise. Even though overkill is wrong, there is still
much work to be done to show climate-based explanations are right.

But if Clovis hunters weren't overkilling megafauna, what role did these
animals play in their adaptations? And what was the nature of Clovis
adaptations? A closer look is in order.

BACK TO CLOVIS

At the time of its initial occupation by people 11,300 years ago, the
Clovis site in New Mexico was a spring-fed pond feeding into nearby
Blackwater Draw. The springs attracted plants, animals, and people for
many thousands of years, even into the twentieth century, when the
springs were finally tapped out by irrigation. But just about the time
the site's archaeological riches caught the eye of E. B. Howard, a
quarry company moved in to mine the site's deeper, commercial-grade
gravels. As giant bulldozers dug for the gravel, they ravaged the
overlying layers of artifact and bone. In an awkward dance that
satisfied neither party, bulldozer operators would temporarily suspend
work if they happened to spot bone-rich deposits, and archaeologists
would rush in to salvage what they could. Much was saved, but more was
lost.⁵⁵

Yet, what was found is remarkable, for the late Pleistocene springs
watered frogs, turtles, snakes, mammoth, bison, horse, camel, peccary,
deer, and antelope, as well as saber-toothed cat, bear, and dire wolf.
Not all of these were food. Ironically, bison, and not mammoth, were one
of the most abundant species in the Clovis-age deposits; seven were
found, and at least one had been speared, a Clovis point found lodged
against its scapula (shoulder blade).

Even so, mammoth remains attracted the greatest attention. Over the
years, nearly a dozen were excavated by archaeologists called to the
scene; more probably passed unnoticed through the quarry machinery (it
was very large machinery; one can scarcely imagine how many rabbit or
roasted small-animal skeletons were overlooked).

There is no compelling evidence humans killed all or even most of the
mammoths found here; we know only that the animals died at this spot.
That said, at least three mammoths were found with projectile points and
the tools used to butcher them. They died at different times, some on
the pond's margins, others in its center. Their skeletons were nearly
complete and articulated (the bones lay in proper anatomical position),
suggesting the carcasses were carved where they fell, but only partially
so. Flesh was stripped from the upper skeleton (forelimbs, shoulders,
and ribs) and skulls were smashed to obtain brains, but the remainder of
the carcasses were left to rot.

This pattern of partially butchered mammoth bones in marshy, pond, or
stream settings recurs in many Clovis sites, from Lange-Ferguson on the
northern plains of South Dakota, to Lehner in the San Pedro Valley.⁵⁶
The pattern is so persistent it looks purposeful, as though Clovis
hunters lurked in such places, looking to drive the mammoths into
shallow water, or waiting in ambush for the animal to get stuck in the
mud and become an easier target. But appearances may be deceiving. As
Frison observed, mired animals that large are difficult to butcher and
nearly impossible to extract, as the articulated skeletons at Clovis
clearly attest. For that matter, healthy animals (especially full-grown
adults) are not easily mired. Skilled hunters, Frison argues, would take
mammoth elsewhere and on their terms, perhaps by quietly isolating a
juvenile away from the herd's protection, wounding it, then patiently
waiting for it to become disabled or die—all the while preventing the
animal from staggering to a waterhole to die.

OPPORTUNITIES FOUND

If that's so, why are many Clovis-stabbed mammoths at water holes? In
studying African elephants, Gary Haynes saw that a disproportionate
number of younger animals frequented water holes when ill (as their body
temperature rose) or during drought, often dying there without human
help. Such conditions force animals, especially ones with large,
water-cooled engines like elephants, to gravitate to water, even if they
have to dig to reach it (humans are not the only species that digs water
wells; elephants can, too).

Vance Haynes, in fact, sees hints of a brief but severe drought in
Clovis times across the American West. His evidence is strongly disputed
by others, including Vance Holliday, and at the Clovis site itself: many
artifacts, including three Clovis points, were found in spring conduits
at Clovis. They were placed there, Haynes believes, as offerings. Were
that so, presumably the springs were active at the time or had flowed in
recent memory. Regardless, if there had been a drought, it was nowhere
as severe as the one that for nearly 2,000 years of the Middle Holocene
laid waste to much of the American West. That was a time when humans
were forced to dig deep wells for water, and shift their diet to more
drought-resistant animals and plants. A pit at the Clovis site resembles
such a well, but it was excavated in the 1960s, and observations made at
the time (and when it was reopened in 1993) cannot demonstrate its
purpose.⁵⁷

Drought or no, sick and enfeebled animals of a species teetering on
extinction that wandered into ponds may have become mired, and thereby
became risk-free targets for passing (or patiently waiting)
hunter-gatherers, who took what meat they could, then moved on. Less
danger was involved since the animals could be patiently monitored from
a distance. Killing might even be unnecessary if death was inevitable
and predictable.

James Judge calls this opportunistic scavenging, and thinks it, more so
than deliberate big-game hunting, characterizes Clovis.⁵⁸ That would
explain all those partially butchered animals mired in the mud, and why
so many Clovis mammoth “kills” look like animals that died of natural
causes, but with a few foreign objects (Clovis points) stuck in their
carcasses.

Opportunistic or not, Clovis groups were occasionally quite adept at
snaring big game. In the San Pedro Valley, bones of thirteen mammoths,
mostly calves or young adults, were excavated on the Lehner Ranch by
Emil Haury (Figure 51) and (later) Vance Haynes.⁵⁹ Scattered among
mammoth ribs, hindquarters, and jaws were thirteen Clovis points made of
locally available chert, chalcedony, and quartz crystal, along with
stone scrapers, knives, and a chopper. The wide scatter of mammoth
bones, their unequal preservation, their vertical distribution over
about 1 meter of deposits, suggest the serial killing of animals
isolated from their herds, then dispatched, butchered, and consumed in
the centuries around 10,950 BP.

[images]

FIGURE 51.
Excavations at the Lehner mammoth kill site, Arizona, ca. 1959. Lehner
is one of a dozen sites for which we have secure evidence of human
hunting of mammoth. (Photograph courtesy of Fred Wendorf.) # #

The San Pedro Valley was a ripe field. At Murray Springs, 16 kilometers
north of Lehner and at virtually the same moment in time (around 10,900
BP), at least one mammoth and, nearby, eleven bison were killed. The
Clovis groups camped close by, hauling in a mammoth drumstick (one of
the leg bones) and bison filets, and overhauling broken weaponry. Vance
Haynes recovered Clovis points, a variety of tools (including the
afore-mentioned mammoth bone shaft wrench), and nearly 15,000 flakes
from tool manufacturing and resharpening. Many flakes littered the
kills, evidence of the constant resharpening of tools that dull easily
when carving animal flesh. As was the case at Clovis, the mammoth
carcass was only partially disarticulated (and only the bison bone was
burned). The dead mammoth may have had other visitors, too: Haynes found
mammoth tracks leading up to the skeleton. Perhaps, as elephants do
today, curious mammoths came over to take a look at their dead kin.⁶⁰

The Clovis points used against the bison at Murray Springs were far the
worse for wear. Two of them had flakes driven backward off the point tip
(impact fractures). One point was found in the kill, and its impact
flake in the camp (carried there in the meat, presumably), while the
reverse was true of another. Impact fractures occur when stone hits bone
at high velocity. Such fractures are rare on Clovis points from
mammoth-bearing sites (only one of thirteen points at Lehner was impact
fractured, for example), yet common on points in bison kills of all
ages. The scarcity of impact damage on Clovis points suggests at the
very least that those aimed at mammoths were not penetrating deep enough
to hit bone, and those found as isolates may not have been used as
points (a possibility for which there is some evidence).

At Clovis, Lehner, and Murray Springs, and localities like Colby and
Lange-Fer-guson, there were mammoth opportunities found.⁶¹ At Colby,
hunters took full advantage: eight mammoths, mostly immature animals
(one a fetus), were killed at intervals by hunters some 10,900 years
ago, who then carefully stacked their leftovers into two piles, set
roughly 33 meters apart. The first pile had remains of three immature
mammoths and a few tools. The second yielded the remains of four
mammoths, mostly articulated ribs and shoulder bones, along with an
innominate (pelvic bone), all topped by a skull. Directly underneath the
innominate was a fluted point (an offering, perhaps?). Frison, who
excavated Colby, believes these were meat caches, with the one reopened
and the meat used, but not the other. Stone caches had been placed on
the landscape for use after the hard work; in northern latitudes, meat
was cached for the hard times.

THE BIG ONES THAT GOT AWAY

There were mammoth opportunities lost, too. Just down the San Pedro from
Lehner and Murray Springs was the Naco mammoth, found eroding out of the
sidewalls of Greenbush Creek. Most of the skeleton was there, save the
hindquarters, which had eroded and disappeared. Eight Clovis projectile
points, variable in size, were found with this one animal (a mammoth
pincushion): one lay at the base of the skull, another near the left
scapula, two were wedged between ribs, and one against the surface of
the atlas vertebra. Yet, no butchering tools were found, nor did any
bones show signs of filleting. The Naco mammoth evidently escaped its
killers and died quietly of its wounds with hide intact. But escaped
from whom? The stone by which the Naco points were fashioned was the
same as that used by the hunters who stabbed the Lehner and Murray
Springs mammoths.

Nor is Naco alone. Relatively close by (and still in the San Pedro
Valley) was the Escapule mammoth, a single animal found with two
projectile points. Judging by the stylistic and stone similarities to
the points at the other Clovis sites in the valley, it appears to be
another escapee of the Lehner and/or Murray Springs carnage.

Out on the Great Plains, there's further evidence of
less-than-successful predation. Dent, which sits at the base of a
terrace of Colorado's South Platte River, yielded two fluted points, a
knife, and a dozen mammoths. Found with them were a great many boulders
(some half a meter in circumference), prompting the engaging scenario
that a group of hunters came upon the herd and, for want of adequate
weaponry, grabbed the closest weapons at hand—cobbles from the
terrace—and stoned the animals to death. An engaging scenario, but
probably wrong. More recent work at the site revealed that bones,
boulders, and fluted points all came washing 10-15 meters downslope from
the terrace top about 200 years ago, though the bones themselves date to
10,990 BP.⁶² The boulders were probably not late Pleistocene missiles,
but cobbles that fortuitously came to rest with the mammoth remains. If
there had been a hunt, it was at best unsuccessful, the two points
perhaps coming from the carcass of an animal that had carried them
around for some time, a thorn in its elephant-thick hide.

So, too, the case of Domebo (pronounced like the name of Disney's
big-eared elephant), a mammoth found in south-central Oklahoma. With the
bones (dated to 10,960 BP) were two fluted points, and three small
flakes. The points, though found near the skeleton, did not cause its
death, and there were no signs of butchering. The coroner ruled the
cause of death unknown.⁶³

And then there's the Miami site in the northern panhandle of Texas,
discovered in the 1930s when Dust Bowl drought forced farmers to plow
deeper than usual, thereby exposing an ancient pond bed containing
remains of five mammoths, three of which were mature or nearly mature
individuals. Oddly, there were no bones of other animals in the pond,
but there were several projectile points and a scraper. Yet, there's no
evidence of butchering, so it may be the Miami mammoths were enfeebled
by natural causes or were already dead when a Clovis group came upon the
carcasses and began salvaging what they could, losing a few artifacts in
the process. Or perhaps it was an unsuccessful kill. Two of the points
were found with one of the mature mammoths: could she have staggered to
the basin to die and been followed by her young, who lingered there
after her death until their own?⁶⁴

EAST MEETS WEST

Mammoth altogether eluded the fluted spear points of eastern paleoindian
groups, but then these open-ground, gregarious herd animals were
relatively rare in heavily wooded Pleistocene eastern North America.
Their distantly related, forest-dwelling kin, the mastodon, was far more
abundant in this region, and yet it was even more successful at avoiding
being on the Clovis menu. Except at Kimmswick.

Since 1839, many mastodon skeletons have been mined from this spot, now
the Mastodon State Historic Site along the Mississippi River, south of
St. Louis, Missouri. There was talk early on that ancient artifacts were
there, too. William Henry Holmes himself excavated here in 1901-2, to
lay that dangerous talk to rest. It didn't work. In the 1980s, a team
directed by Russell Graham reopened Kimmswick, and in ancient pond
settings reminiscent of Clovis sites further west, found the remains of
two mastodon, a cow and calf, along with a few fluted points, butchering
tools, and several thousand tiny flakes. The site is undated, but is
assuredly within the paleoindian age range.

There are hints of mastodon being taken at other eastern paleoindian
sites,⁶⁵ but those are strong only at Michigan's Pleasant Lake, where
mastodon bones show cut marks, striations, and polishing suggestive of
human knife work. Curiously, not a single stone artifact has come from
the site (there's that Clovis tidiness again!).

It has not escaped notice that most megafauna kills are found on the
Great Plains and in the Southwest. That most of them are of mammoth
partly explains the pattern: that's where this animal was especially
abundant. Yet, it fails to explain why their forest relatives (the
mastodon) were not taken in comparable numbers. It's not because we
haven't look for mastodon kills in the east. The search has been ongoing
since the 1930s. Nor is it for want of mastodon remains of the proper
age. George Quimby and Ronald Mason long ago pointed to the overlap in
the distribution of fluted points and mastodons in the Upper Midwest
(the Mason-Quimby line, Paul Martin called it).

Rather, the answer lies in the ecological stage on which these
adaptations played out. Late Pleistocene environments in the East were
more complex and changing more rapidly than those in the West (Chapter
2). In turn, plant and animal species and communities were
correspondingly richer in the East, and that made a difference in
Clovis-age foraging. As Michael Cannon and I found, the diets of early
Americans in eastern North America were broader and less dominated by
large mammals than were those of their western contemporaries.⁶⁶

JUST SHOWING OFF

Armed with stone-tipped spears, Clovis hunters could take big game.
Occasionally they were successful, other times not. And sometimes they
got lucky and took advantage of a bad situation—bad for the prey, at
least. That Clovis hunters did not pursue mammoth or mastodon more
regularly or ruthlessly comes as no particular surprise.

Hunting big game has more than its share of risks. Like coming home
empty handed. Or not coming home at all. And if elephants, their modern,
highly intelligent, unpredictable, and vengeful relatives, are any
indication, hunting mammoth or mastodon was especially risky. Elephants,
as Hadza hunters told James O'Connell, do not behave like animals; they
behave like enemies. Yet the Hadza, O'Connell adds, hunt rhinoceros and
sometimes even lions. As George Silberbauer observed, it is “admirable
common sense not to shoot a flimsy arrow into dangerous prey like
elephant and [water] buffalo unless you know exactly what the prey will
do next; both species take their annual toll of hunters [even when]
armed with high-powered rifles and give rise to innumerable tales of
narrow escapes.”⁶⁷

Indeed, when elephants are hunted nowadays, it is at a distance with
high-powered rifles or up close with metal broad swords, both far
superior weapons to Clovis-pointed spears. Spear-toting archaeologists
experimenting on recently deceased zoo and circus elephants have shown
that bone and stone points can penetrate elephant hide (Frison reports
that Siberian freeze-dried woolly mammoth hide was equally thick, if not
thicker, and of course there was hair to contend with, too). A spear
thrust would be most lethal in those spots where the hide thins or, say,
if plunged deep into a lung. Those are easy to target when the animal
lies dead before you, but not so easy after you miss your first shot at
a live and suddenly very angry elephant. As Frison learned during a cull
in Africa, no Clovis point could drop a charging elephant in its tracks.
Teddy Roosevelt, after his own frighteningly close encounter with a
raging bull elephant while on a post-presidential romp through Africa
bagging animals large and small, well understood why smaller prey made
up the majority of the diet for African hunter-gatherers.⁶⁸

In fact, big-game hunting can be a very inefficient means of feeding a
family. Bird and O'Connell record that despite substantial effort, Hadza
men “manage to acquire large carcasses on average only about once every
30 hunter-days,”⁶⁹ a daily failure rate of 97%. When big game is bagged,
most of the meat is shared, producing more for the group than for the
hunter's family. So what's in it for the hunter and his kin? Why would
one specialize in the risky and inefficient pursuit of large animal
prey?

Kristen Hawkes and Rebecca Bliege Bird suspect big-game hunting and the
finely fashioned weaponry that goes with it may be a form of costly
signaling, or showing off, by which hunters gain prestige among peers
and competitors. Hunting success confers status, and marks a hunter as a
powerful ally, a dangerous adversary, or an attractive mate. One key
piece of evidence in favor of their hypothesis: the children of skilled
Hadza hunters do not have better survival odds than other children
(indicating they were not eating any better, despite their father's
success), but they had more siblings, revealing that skilled hunters had
much higher fertility.⁷⁰ (It's hard to ignore the coincidence that
excavating a big-game kill site confers considerable archaeological
status; I'll leave to others to judge its rewards.)

It was long ago suggested, tongue-in-cheek, that each Clovis hunter
probably killed one mammoth, then spent the rest of his life talking
about it.⁷¹ An exaggeration, perhaps. Still, there's a nugget of truth
to it. Humans talk. And as Hawkes and Bliege Bird observe, reputations
are crafted through storytelling. Roosevelt saw the kernel of one such
story emerging just hours after the bull that sideswiped him was killed.
“The gun-bearers, as they walked ahead of us camp ward…began to
improvise a song, reciting the success of the hunt, the death of the
elephant, and the power of the rifles,” one that was soon added to the
stories already told. The elephant, like “no other animal, not the lion
himself, is so constant a theme of talk, and a subject of such
unflagging interest round the campfire…” Yet, at the core of each story
there had to be a kill, for “as in other domains of male contest,”
Hawkes and Bliege Bird add, “‘trash talk’ may have its uses, but
reputations for delivering the goods cannot be built upon it.”⁷²

ROUNDING OUT THE CLOVIS DIET

Smaller game and plants likely do nothing for bragging rights, but they
certainly help fill in the bulk of the diet. That is true among modern
hunter-gatherers, and was likely true in Clovis times as well. But what
else may have been part of the paleoindian diet has only recently come
into view, albeit slowly, as one might expect given how few sites there
are, the traditional attention given to large animal kills, and the
problems of preservation of smaller animal and plant remains—and perhaps
even of the artifacts used to harvest those. A study by Christopher
Ellis revealed that when pursuing small prey, hunters the world over
commonly used throwing sticks; snares; or bone, wood, or antler points,
since those readily stun the animal, do no damage to its skin, nor cause
it to sink (if hunting waterfowl or fish).⁷³ These would leave little
archaeological trace (save under circumstances like those at Monte
Verde, where wooden lances were preserved).

In the far West for all appearances, Clovis-age groups ate nothing, or
at least nothing that's been left behind. There are hints (a few bones
here and there) that mountain sheep were taken at higher elevations in
the Great Basin. These are animals that can be captured and subdued
readily with drop nets, which were available by this time in prehistory.
Another hint of their adaptations comes from mapping the distribution of
early fluted and stemmed points in the Great Basin: they cluster along
the edges of now-dry Pleistocene pluvial lakes, marshes, and springs.
Whatever these Clovis and other paleoindians were doing, Grayson points
out, they were doing near shallow water. If later sites in the same area
bear witness, what they were doing was exploiting small mammals, birds,
fish, and mollusks.

Confirmation that fish were part of a Clovis-age diet in the far West
comes from a study of the bone isotopes from the Buhl skeleton, found in
Idaho and dated to 10,700 BP. The isotope chemistry of bone can reveal
the type and relative proportion of plants and animals in the diet. As
the old saying goes, you are what you eat (to which those who study
prehistoric coprolites are wont to add, “except what you excrete”). In
the Buhl case, her diet consisted of meat and fish—probably salmon, the
isotope signature being that of marine rather than freshwater fish.
There must have been long, lean periods in her life, too, judging by
episodes of arrested bone growth evident in her x-rays.⁷⁴

Moving onto the Great Plains, George Agogino reported finding a turtle
roasting pit at the Clovis site: six or seven Pleistocene terrapins
stacked one atop another and apparently cooked in their shells. Turtles
appear frequently in other Great Plains Clovis-age sites, including
Lubbock Lake in far west Texas, and at Aubrey and Lewisville in
north-central Texas, where turtles were among the most common vertebrate
fossils recovered (at Lewisville they comprised about 90% of the animal
remains). So frequent were turtle bones at Lewisville that many “were
donated to visitors and to Boy Scout groups as mementos”⁷⁵ (“guest
goodie bags” are hardly the norm at archaeological sites, but then
Lewisville was excavated in the late 1950s by amateurs, innocent of
archaeological protocol).

Often larger than their modern relatives and always slow moving,
Pleistocene turtles, many now extinct, were the best kind of game. One
genus, Geochelone (Figure 52), was nearly a meter long, 75 centimeters
wide, and 60 centimeters tall. That's a lot of meat under the hood of a
prey species that could be pursued (leisurely, of course) without threat
to human life or limb. Ultimately, we may discover turtles were a
paleoindian staple, a menu item rivaling faster and bigger game, which
may explain their occurrence even at big-game kill sites like Clovis and
Kimmswick.

A staple, perhaps, but these were not turtle-hunting specialists. At
Aubrey and Lewisville, hunter-gatherers foraged up and down the food
chain: bison and deer are present, as well as a variety of small
animals, including snakes and lizards, frogs and birds. Some of these
smaller remains could be mere background noise, animals that wandered
into the site and died of their own accord. It happens. Yet, many of
their bones were also burned, a sign they were consumed by humans. But
why would hunters on such a rich landscape stoop so low for forage? Were
they that “unfocused,” as Gary Haynes put it?⁷⁶ To be sure, resource
ranking matters to hunter-gatherers, but food is food, and the
lower-ranked items could be collected readily while out on the hunt, or
gathered by other members of the group.

[images]

FIGURE 52.
An intact shell of the extinct North American tortoise, Geochelone,
excavated from the sediments of a Pleistocene pluvial lake bed in west
Texas. The putty knife is 18 cm long. (Photograph courtesy of Richard
Rose.)

Archaeologists have long supposed deer or elk were targeted by groups in
the complex forests of southeastern North America, as they were by
virtually all subsequent hunter-gatherers of that region. The evidence
is meager, though deer bones are abundant just across the academic
border separating the paleoindian and subsequent Archaic period (Chapter
9).

Caribou (a member of the deer family) were apparently prey at several
northeastern sites, although their bones have only been found at Bull
Brook (Massachusetts), Udora (Ontario), and Whipple (New Hampshire);
also apparently consumed at Udora were hare and arctic fox. These
confirmed and suspected caribou kills date to the centuries around
10,600 BP, and are located in what would have been a swath of more open
terrain stretching from Nova Scotia to the Great Lakes. Why caribou in
this setting?

These animals historically moved in great herds, wintering in the forest
and summering on the tundra. In immediate post-glacial times, tundra was
not so extensive (Chapter 2), and caribou ranges and numbers were
probably smaller. Even so, however, their migratory habits and herd
instincts made them a prime resource in northern forests and parklands.

At Maine's Vail site on the Magalloway River, Michael Gramly found a
killing ground, a sandy patch littered with twelve fluted points, some
complete and others with shattered tips, but no other tools.⁷⁷ Some 250
meters away and across the river (Figure 53) was a camp marked by more
projectile points (bases this time), scrapers, knives, gravers, drills,
and wedges, the latter for splitting bone and retrieving marrow. Kill
and camp literally can be joined: seven point tips from the former
re-fit onto bases at the latter, reuniting what had come apart in a
split second of impact 10,500 years earlier (see Plate 12).

No bone is preserved in the acidic soils of this site, but Gramly
observes the Vail killing ground is at a topographic pinch point in the
valley, an ideal spot for waiting hunters to intercept caribou on their
seasonal migrations between tundra and forest. He thinks hunters
positioned themselves here for several years running, since the camp
contained multiple artifact concentrations, possibly from different
stints on-site. And they may have cached their leftovers, both in
shallow pits on the site and at the Adkins site, just a kilometer away,
where Gramly spotted half a dozen boulders, each weighing 100 kilograms
(220 pounds) or more. These were arranged around a pit, creating a
storage chamber about twice the size of an average household
refrigerator (and in Maine at the end of the Pleistocene, easily as
cold). Having a food cache is handy when waiting on the unpredictable
arrival of a migratory herd, especially given how far the hunters had
come.

Their points were made of stone acquired 300 kilometers away in the
Hudson River valley. Not surprisingly, the points were intensively used,
resharpened, and recycled. The hunters must not have found, or had the
time to visit, the outcrop of high-quality Ledget Ridge chert just 30
kilometers distant, where they might have refurbished their weaponry.
But then, hunter-gatherer mobility is not just a matter of the distance
from outcrop to site; it's also about time: the time elapsed since the
last visit to the quarry, say, or perhaps the time it might take one
away from an ambush spot and chance missing the herd as it passed
through. Ultimately, however, they did miss it when, Gramly believes,
the caribou chose another valley for their seasonal trek. Caribou can be
fickle. With that, Vail was abandoned (though not the valley, as Gramly
and his team's subsequent discoveries have shown).

[images]

FIGURE 53.
Aerial view of the Vail camp and kill sites, Magalloway Valley, Maine,
ca. 1980. The clusters of artifacts marking the camp were found on the
sandy beach of what is now (artificial) Lake Aziscohos, just along the
central portion of the tree line; the killing ground was on the prong of
land in the approximate center of the image 90 m away from the camp.
(Photograph courtesy of R. Michael Gramly.)

WHEN HUNTERS GATHER

It has been proclaimed plant foods were “neither a provable nor logical
part” of paleoindian diets.⁷⁸ That's a bit excessive. It is fair to say
the degree of plant use among paleoindians remains unproven. It is both
provable and, as Lewis Binford and others have shown, eminently logical.
Finding that proof requires good recovery techniques since seeds,
berries, and other traces of plants (or even small animals) are not
easily detected, even if they are preserved. A little luck helps, too.

Luck and technique came together at Shawnee-Minisink, Pennsylvania.
During the excavations (Figure 54), 10% of all excavated sediment was
poured into large, water-filled washtubs; minute organic remains (bits
of bone, wood, charcoal, seeds) floated to the surface and were
collected with a tea-strainer, while the remainder of the sediment was
passed through fine mesh screens. Flotation captured acalypha,
hackberry, blackberry, chenopod, hawthorn plum, and grape seeds, as well
as tiny fish bones, from meals 10,900 years ago. Shawnee-Minisink,
however, is an exception. Most other paleoindian sites were excavated
before flotation became customary, and even today, flotation or some
form of water screening is not always incorporated in fieldwork.

[images]

FIGURE 54.
Excavations in the main block of the Shawnee-Minisink site,
Pennsylvania. The three individuals in the deepest part of the
excavation are just above the Paleoindian-age stratum. (Photograph
courtesy of Richard J. Dent and the Department of Anthropology, American
University.)

Indirect evidence of plant consumption comes from paleoindian teeth
(what few there are), some of which, Gentry Steele reports, are heavily
worn—a sign of the grit that gets chewed along with the greens.
Wandering into more circumstantial territory, there are possible
seed-grinding stones at Clovis, and cutting tools with polished edges at
several other sites (including Gault). The polish appears to be “sickle
sheen,” which develops when tools are repeatedly used to harvest
grasses, which are suffused with tiny silica bodies (opal phytoliths)
that abrade and burnish the stone.

Although this is a meager record of recognizable plant-processing tools,
a bit of context is helpful. First, many plant-processing implements
recorded historically (for example, among the Iroquois) are
biodegradable. Second, the scarcity of tools might reflect the intensity
or, better, the lack of intensity of plant use. Plant foods are
routinely lower-ranked resources, since harvesting and processing them
is time consuming and difficult (Chapter 7). Consequently, they are
added to the diet mostly in times of stress (such as during drought),
and become a staple only later in prehistory, when human populations
increase and opportunities to move to new territories decrease. At those
times, plant use becomes more intensive, and with it comes the
heavy-duty tools for large scale plant processing: earth and rock ovens,
bedrock mortars, and grinding stones (manos and metates). The absence of
these tools from Clovis sites may only indicate plant use was not
intensive, not that plants were unused. Collecting nuts, berries,
fruits, and green vegetables requires little more than a basket or skin
pouch. The chances of building up a visible archaeological record from
exploiting such resources is vanishingly small.⁷⁹

Finally, it may be the evidence is right in front of us. Gary Haynes
believes Clovis sites show “no attraction to nut-tree-wooded areas or
seed rich grasslands.”⁸⁰ Of course, we cannot say exactly where nut-rich
woods or seed-rich grasslands were over 10,000 years after the fact, but
we can say that a vast number of Clovis isolates do occur in what were
the complex forests of Late Glacial eastern North America, which
included nut-bearing trees such as walnut and hickory. Like prehistoric
Swiss Army knives, Clovis points were useable for various tasks, whether
skinning rabbits, prying open turtle shells, or even digging out
stubborn, edible roots. Many isolates examined in eastern North America
show wear patterns indicative of use as multipurpose, hafted knives,
while very few display impact fractures from hunting damage.

Haynes, in fact, inadvertently (and probably unintentionally)
underscores the importance of plant collecting, suggesting it was the
trigger to Clovis settlement mobility. He reasons that since the men
were off hunting while the women stayed close to camp to gather, the
women must have had a strong voice in making the “executive decisions”
about when camp should be moved. This was so, he surmises, “because they
were the most sensitive to the exhaustion of resources that were within
reasonable walking distance of camp.”⁸¹ As plant gatherers, they would
be.

And move they did. Within a few centuries, Clovis groups were scattered
throughout North America. So why did Clovis groups radiate so far and so
fast? It's surely not because they were chasing mammoths (or being
chased by mammoths!), or because the extinction of those animals left
Clovis people with so little to eat they had to constantly press on.
More likely, it was because they found themselves on a vast and empty
landscape that was unknown and unpredictable, yet rich and untapped, in
which there was a great adaptive incentive and benefit to ranging
widely.

As they dispersed cross-country, and their knowledge of the landscape
and its resources became ever-more detailed, their foraging systems
became more stable, their populations increased, and their odds of
vanishing diminished. And with that, broad changes were in the offing.

