6

AMERICAN ORIGINS

The Search for Consensus

In March of 1774, on its second circumnavigation of the globe, Captain
James Cook's Resolution anchored off Easter Island (Rapa Nui), a tiny
island and one of the most isolated on the planet. Some of the islanders
canoed out to greet his ship, and the moment they hove into view, Cook
was astonished by the natives’ tattoos, tapa (bark-based) clothing,
weapons, and especially—when they began speaking—their language.He
instantly recognized unmistakable variants of words he'd heard spoken by
Tahitians and Maoris (of New Zealand), who lived thousands of miles away
across vast stretches of open ocean. That the inhabitants on remote Rapa
Nui shared bits of distant languages was testimony, he realized, the
“same nation” must have spread themselves across the South Pacific.
Their descendants may have adopted different “custom and habits,” but
“the Affinity each has to the other” was still obvious.

Fast forward to the summer of 1778, during Cook's third (and ill-fated)
voyage. The Resolution had sailed north to chart the coast of Alaska,
explore the Bering Strait, and probe the possibility of a sea passage to
the North Atlantic. Optimistic he just might be able to sail across the
top of the world, Cook was packing a History of Greenland: the
descriptions of its Natives’ manners and customs would prove a handy
guide when they met. Alas, Cook found no passage to Greenland. But once
again, he found connections. The dress, tattooing, and fishing and
hunting gear of the “Esquemaux” in Alaska matched what a History of
Greenland described of its Natives. So too, did many of their words.
Even with the limited Greenlander and “Esquemaux” vocabularies he
possessed, it seemed to Cook there was “great reason to believe that all
these nations are of the same extraction.”¹

Could the similarities between the Natives of New Zealand and Rapa Nui,
or between the inhabitants of Alaska and Greenland, be mere
coincidences? Cook didn't think so. He appreciated the possibility
unrelated peoples might “accidentally” produce similar clothes or tools
in similar environments. We call that convergence nowadays, and it would
explain why fishhooks, say, were alike on remote islands of the South
Pacific (or even like those used in coastal Alaska). But could
convergence explain a similarity in words across such vast distances?
Cook doubted it: those languages must have had a common origin, however
much they had changed since. Divergence, we call that. Cook concluded
that the peoples who were scattered across thousands of miles of Pacific
Ocean must be related; likewise, those who inhabited the top of America,
from Alaska to Greenland (he did not think, nor do we, that Pacific and
Arctic peoples were related, though we, of course, recognize they must
share a common ancestor at some point in the distant past).

In the two centuries since Cook connected those distant dots, his
insight has been proven correct. Analyses of their respective genes,
languages, and material cultures have amplified the links among these
peoples, and archaeologists, geneticists, and linguists have come to
broad agreement on the central questions of the origin, antiquity, and
timing of the colonization of the Arctic and the Pacific.

Might the same be said of the peopling of the Americas? At the outset of
Chapter 5, I postponed discussion of how or whether archaeological,
dental, genetic, linguistic, and osteological evidence agreed or
disagreed about who the first Americans were and where they came from,
when, how they got here, and how many migrations there were.It's now
time to pay that note.

FINDING THE HOMELAND

On one point, as few others, there is broad consensus: the first
Americans came from Asia. There is nothing to suggest otherwise in the
artifacts, teeth, languages, or genes (that includes autosomal DNA, as
well as mtDNA and NRY). It's true even in regard to skeletal
remains—Kennewick and other like-headed crania having now been rescued
from their dubious assignment as “Caucasoids” and all that wrongly
implied of their ancestry.² The near-universal consensus that America's
first peoples were bygone Asians occurs no matter the differences of
evidence and opinion regarding exactly where in Asia they originated.

Pinning down a more specific place of origin(s) is no easy task, least
of all for archaeology. Sites in northeast Asia are sparse, and there
are few that can be unequivocally linked to the first Americans. But
then we don't expect too close a correspondence in the Pleistocene
archaeology of Asia and America. The migration from one continent to the
other, adapting and settling along the way, assuredly took centuries,
possibly even millennia. By the time the first Americans arrived in
southern South America, their toolkits had changed in significant and
subtle ways. These were not colonists who clambered aboard a ship in Old
England and disembarked in New England just a few months later with
material culture and ideas intact.

LOOKING FOR CLOVIS IN ALL THE WRONG PLACES

Archaeologist Frank Hibben was charming, gregarious, a gifted lecturer
and writer, and though born to modest means, had married extremely well
(running off with the wife of his patron). With degrees from Princeton
and Harvard, he was destined for the good life, even in Depression-era
America. But he aspired to much more, and got it. As a graduate student,
he excavated in Sandia Cave, New Mexico, where—as Loren Eiseley
described it (straining hard to conceal his envy)—Hibben had the “rare
and longed-for good fortune, to be the discoverer of a new and early
cultural manifestation in the New World.”³

The Sandia culture, Hibben proclaimed in 1941, was North America's
oldest, and more intriguing, its projectile points bore an uncanny
resemblance to Solutrean artifacts of Paleolithic Europe. When
radiocarbon dating was invented, Hibben got into the queue to obtain an
age on a mammoth tusk from Sandia Cave: the result was announced in no
less prominent a place than Time magazine. The Sandia culture was 20,000
years old—the same age as Solutrean. The possibility the Americas had
been peopled directly from Europe, suspected since Charles Abbott's
time, now seemed close to proof.

But the archaeological community had grown suspicious. No matter how
good a story Hibben told, and he told them awfully well, Sandia was
suspect. The fieldwork was scarcely complete when Wesley Bliss, a fellow
graduate student who'd excavated there, reported the cave deposits were
badly mixed, and hence any results utterly unreliable. Worse, he
announced that very publicly in American Antiquity. The chairman of the
Department of Anthropology at the University of New Mexico, who'd just
hired Hibben to his faculty, reacted furiously. Hibben did, too.⁴
Bliss's association with the university was terminated.

That hardly stopped the sniping. Hibben's student who had shipped the
mammoth tusk to the radiocarbon lab noticed it had suddenly and
mysteriously acquired a coating of the yellow ocher typical of Sandia
Cave's deposits. Was this a ham-handed effort to make remains found
elsewhere look as though they'd come from Sandia? He wasn't sure, but he
quietly washed off the ocher before boxing up the piece. Even the
radiocarbon laboratory director was skeptical, taking the unusual step
of publicly questioning whether the 20,000 BP age was actually
associated with the human occupation of the cave.⁵

And what of Sandia points? Archaeologist Bruce Bradley later examined
them and, seeing how much they varied in technology and raw material,
and realizing some had been shaped on a grinding wheel to more closely
approximate European forms, could only conclude Sandia was a hoax. But
why? Bradley supposed the hoaxer “needed an assemblage of artifacts that
looked as Solutrean as you can get, and I think the motivation was to
try to bolster the theory that Clovis originated as Solutrean, and the
thing that's most distinctive about Solutrean is the shouldered point.
If you could prove that Clovis originated in southwestern Europe and
came across the Atlantic—my goodness!”⁶

“My goodness,” indeed. By the 1990s, Sandia had slipped into
archaeological oblivion (though not before Hibben's shenanigans inspired
a murder mystery).⁷ But the effort to link Paleolithic Europe and
Paleoindian America had not, and it was revived once more by none other
than Bruce Bradley, along with archaeologist Dennis Stanford. Their
claim, not surprisingly, emerged in the wake of the apparent discoveries
of “Caucasoids” (Kennewick) and supposed European mtDNA (haplogroup X)
in America, and gained traction in the post-Monte Verde ferment, when it
seemed all bets were off about the peopling of the Americas. Why not
shake up the archaeological establishment with a radical new idea?
(Never mind the idea was hardly new or radical). Kennewick and
haplogroup X have since been declared inadmissible evidence of Europeans
in America.⁸ Bradley and Stanford shrug off the losses: they see plenty
of archaeological proof. They even have a catchy jingle: “Iberia, not
Siberia.”⁹

As they envision it, a band of Solutreans rafted to America in skin
boats across an Eden-like Pleistocene North Atlantic, thereby
successfully completing a several-thousand-mile voyage that routed the
Titanic tens of thousands of years later. Only now, instead of heading
to Sandia, Solutreans became Clovis. To be sure, Clovis and Solutrean
groups were both Ice Age hunters, who occasionally took down big game
with large, bifacial, lanceolate spear points. But if they are related,
we face a significant problem: Solutreans vanished from Europe at least
17,000 years ago, 6,000 radiocarbon years before Clovis ever appeared in
North America (it must have been an awfully long journey).

To the dilemma posed by the great gaps in time and space between
Solutrean and Clovis, Bradley and Stanford offer the half-hearted
assertion that Solutrean and pre-Clovis look alike. Given how little we
know of pre-Clovis, and that what's known looks even less Solutrean-like
than Clovis, the assertion rings hollow. But then, so does the link
between Solutrean and Clovis.

Nowadays, our knowledge of Pleistocene prehistory is far richer than in
Hibben's—or Abbott's. It's no longer enough to daisy-pick superficial
similarities between American and European artifacts to show a
hypothesis could be right (indeed, the usual scientific procedure is to
try to prove a hypothesis wrong). Yet, Bradley and Stanford offer little
more than that. The shared Clovis and Solutrean attributes they identify
are the use of red ocher (an iron-rich mineral paint), the production of
bifacial stone tools, a reliance on exotic stone (sometimes, not
always), and especially the presence of a specific technique of thinning
stone bifaces. Outre passé (overshot) flaking, aficionados call it, and
Bradley and Stanford insist only Clovis and Solutrean knappers did this
“intentionally” and so must be related (others might strike overshot
flakes, but only by accident).

Bradley and Stanford are undisputed experts in stone tool technology and
accomplished flintknappers. If they say outre passé flaking proves
historical divergence, we cannot dismiss the claim lightly. But we need
not take it on their say-so either. The burden of proof is on them to
demonstrate outre passé flaking cannot result from convergence. And they
haven't. As for the other similarities cited, even Captain Cook would
recognize them as a result of convergence: it would only be slightly
exaggerating to say it is difficult to find a people in prehistory that
didn't use red ocher. Its blood-red color has universal (and obvious)
symbolism, starting back in Neanderthal times. It's no coincidence that
ocher's formal name, hematite, derives from the Greek haimatites, or
blood-like.¹⁰

Yet, what ultimately sinks the Paleolithic French connection are not the
few similarities, but the large number of Solutrean items missing from
the Clovis inventory. As Lawrence Straus, Ted Goebel, and I argued in a
published rebuttal (Straus is an expert in Solutrean archaeology, Goebel
in the archaeology of Siberia), consider what we ought to see if a group
of Solutreans somehow had been able to successfully negotiate the cold,
harsh, sea-ice choked Pleistocene North Atlantic and beach in North
America (and just what were non-seafaring Solutreans doing in boats in
the ocean anyway?). Those splashing ashore would have transplanted their
unmistakably Solutrean lifeways and toolmaking practices here, traces of
which would have been visible in the archaeological record for centuries
and, possibly, millennia afterward.

Even so, we have looked in vain in Clovis (or pre-Clovis) assemblages
for typically Solutrean cave or portable art (such as engraved stone,
bone, or ivory figurines); beveled antler points; spearthrowers
(atlatls); bone needles; perforated animal teeth and shells; backed
bladelets and true burins; their many hafting designs (bipointed,
shouldered, tanged, stemmed); and most obviously, the distinctive and
diagnostic Solutrean point (Figure 34). None have ever been found in
America North or South, either in Clovis or pre-Clovis assemblages. If
Solutrean boat people made landfall in America, they must have suffered
instant and almost total cultural amnesia—and, for that matter, genetic,
dental, linguistic, and skeletal amnesia as well. Perhaps it was the
stress of the voyage?

More likely, Solutrean groups never made landfall in America, in which
case the Norse retain their title as the first Europeans to reach
America. And they left behind unequivocal proof of what was a very brief
visit around AD 1000: the settlement of L'Anse aux Meadows,
Newfoundland.¹¹ It's also telling that Viking Erik the Red lost nearly
half his fleet of twenty-five ships just sailing from Iceland to
Greenland. That's a good indication of the dangers involved in crossing
the turbulent and ice-filled North Atlantic, and the Vikings didn't have
to contend with the Pleistocene North Atlantic, when sea ice was more
abundant and treacherous, water temperatures much colder, and
thermohaline circulation had stalled.¹²

[images]

FIGURE 34.
Shouldered Solutrean point from La Reira Cave, Asturias, Spain (left),
and a Solutrean laurel leaf point from the site of Laugerie Haute,
Dordogne region of France (right). (Photograph copyright by and courtesy
of Lawrence G. Straus.)

Problems aplenty. But Bradley and Stanford are sticking to their guns.
Bradley insists, “If the French Solutrean were found in northeastern
Asia, there would be nobody asking…whether Clovis was related.”¹³
Actually, we would be: changing location does not mean abandoning
principle. The same rules and expectations apply, whether land or ocean
intervenes. Want proof? When Maureen King and Sergei Slobodin announced
a fluted biface had been found in Siberia and raised the possibility it
was an Asian precursor to North American fluting,¹⁴ questions were
immediately asked—by them and others—whether its age was secure, whether
it truly was fluted, if this could be ancestral Clovis, and so on.
Ultimately, the piece was not accepted as a precursor, but instead as a
bit of fortuitous flaking that mimicked fluting.

Nowadays, few if any archaeologists—or, for that matter, geneticists,
linguists, or physical anthropologists—take seriously the idea of a
Solutrean colonization of America. However, it has achieved Internet
immortality among believers in the Lost Continent of Atlantis.

Recall from Chapter 1 that Homo sapiens first reached central Siberia
about 35,000 BP, but only after about 27,000 BP, and over the next
15,000 years, expanded north and east. But that expansion stalled, and
possibly went into full retreat during the LGM, as testified by a
scarcity of sites in northeast Asia. Humans may not have arrived in
significant numbers in western Beringia until well past 14,000 BP.

The artifact assemblages in Siberian Upper Paleolithic sites include, as
Ted Goebel shows, the same broad classes of tools and technologies one
sees in early American assemblages, whether Clovis or (granting what
little we know) pre-Clovis. In those Siberian assemblages, one can spot
bifaces and points, blades (cutting tools), end and side scrapers (handy
for hide-preparation work), gravers (tools for incising bone and wood),
a variety of bone and ivory implements, tools made on biface flakes and
blades, and even the occasional outre passé flake. It's not an identical
toolkit by any means, but it shows a degree of similarity we expect
given the time and space separating the last Siberians from the first
Americans.¹⁵

Which is not to say we haven't sought (and still seek) tighter links.
From the moment E. B. Howard found fluted points embedded in mammoth
skeletons at Clovis in the 1930s, archaeologists have been trying to
track this distinctive projectile point form back to Asia. For decades
little was found. Hopes were raised when Maureen King and Sergei
Slobodin spotted a stone biface fluted on one face in a museum drawer of
artifacts from the Uptar site near Magadan, Siberia (Figure 35).¹⁶ But
the Uptar excavations had taken place years earlier, and the potential
significance of the biface had gone unrecognized. Its age and context
could not be pinned down precisely. Was this ancestral Clovis in
Siberia, or a biface accidentally flaked in a way reminiscent of
fluting? In the absence of any other fluted bifaces in Siberia, the
betting money was put on accidental fluting.

And then there is the Yana RHS site, found on an ancient terrace of the
Yana River at 70°N, some 100 kilometers from where it empties into the
Laptev Sea. The site has yielded stone bifaces reminiscent of Clovis, as
well as bone foreshafts made of woolly rhinoceros horn and mammoth ivory
that look startling like specimens found in Clovis assemblages (see
Plate 7).¹⁷ Yet, Yana is 27,000 years old, making it 16,000 years older
and tens of thousands of kilometers from the nearest Clovis site, with a
full-blown episode of Pleistocene glaciation in between. The demands of
a Solutrean-Clovis connection equally apply here: great gaps in time and
space must be filled before solid links can be forged.

[images]

FIGURE 35.
The “fluted” biface from the Uptar site, Siberia. Its flute is more
likely a fortuitous technological coincidence than evidence of ancestral
fluting in Siberia. (Photograph courtesy of Maureen King.)

On the American side of Beringia, a possible Clovis precursor is the
Nenana Complex, found in the Nenana and Tanana river valleys of interior
Alaska. Its artifacts include distinctive Chindadn points (Figure 36),
which are small, straight based, and triangular or tear-dropped in
shape, as well as large bifaces, scrapers, gravers, and large planes—the
latter evidently used for woodworking. The initial radiocarbon ages for
the Nenana sites of Moose Creek and Walker Road clustered around 11,800
BP, putting them in Alaska at the right time to be a Clovis precursor.
On the supposition its toolkit resembled Clovis in types and technology,
it was hypothesized to “represent the same population.”¹⁸

The timing is right, though recent re-dating of several of the Nenana
Complex sites showed them to be 500 years younger than previously
thought, clustering around 11,300 BP. That makes them roughly
contemporaneous with Clovis. Yet, Nenana assemblages lack fluted points.
That absence has been downplayed since the small, non-fluted Chindadn
points are reminiscent of miniature points from Clovis sites. But that
similarity is more apparent than real. Small points only rarely occur in
Clovis assemblages, and they are usually fluted—quite unlike the thin,
fine, marginally retouched Chindadn points. And (as in the Solutrean
case) Nenana sites also contain tool classes not found in Clovis.

[images]

FIGURE 36. Chindadn points from the Walker Road site, Alaska, diagnostic
of the Nenana archaeological complex. (Photograph courtesy of Richard
Reanier.)

But taking a step back from the tool forms, it is apparent that Nenana
and Clovis technologies are broadly similar: both contain elements of
biface and blade technologies, unifacial tools made on biface thinning
flakes, and bone and ivory rods fashioned in a similar manner. Again,
the fit is hardly perfect, but the discrepancies could well reflect
different adaptations or disparities in access to useable stone (which
likely explains the lack of large, elegant bifaces and blade cores in
Nenana sites). In any case, there are more similarities and fewer
differences between Nenana and Clovis than between Clovis and Solutrean.
Best of all, there are no Ice Age oceans to cross or yawning gaps in
time to close.

Archaeological affinities to Beringia and northeast Asia match where
Turner's dental evidence places the ancestral Americans. Recall he
identified them as descendants of Sinodonts, and not the Sundadonts of
Southeast Asia, whom he expressly barred from the New World (Chapter 5).
But recall, too, that some studies of early American craniofacial
patterns point to affinities with populations from Southeast Asia (the
Ainu, Polynesian groups, and others) and western Eurasia. It's dangerous
(and frivolous) to jump to the conclusion the first Americans’ heads
came from one place and their teeth from another, nor do evolutionary
principles allow that leap, especially given the analytical baggage
these studies tote: few, fragmentary, and unrepresentative samples of
crania, and questionable groupings of teeth. When there are
representative samples, and a better understanding of the evolutionary
processes in play among small and widely scattered populations, that
will be the time for jumping to conclusions—if necessary.

The genetic evidence (and that includes autosomal DNA) also points
unerringly to Asia as the homeland for the first Americans. American
Indian mtDNA shows affinities to Asians who occupy a broad swath from
the Altai Mountains to Japan and Korea. Like the situation in the
Americas, haplogroup frequencies there vary by region: almost all
Siberian and East Asian populations, for example, lack haplogroups B and
X. The two major NRY haplogroups have an even wider distribution outside
America, haplogroup Q occurring at varying frequencies throughout the
world. Even so, Zegura and colleagues found haplogroups C and Q
intersecting in the Altai region, where (as noted) there are also
populations harboring various of the mtDNA haplogroups. What's not seen
in the Altai region, however, is a distinctive autosomal marker—D9S1120
in the DNA nomenclature—that occurs throughout the Americas, but only in
a couple of Asian populations (Koryaks and Chukchi), indicating it was
part of the ancestral founding population, but one that is evidently no
longer represented across Asia—if it ever was (its presence there today
might be from a more recent back-movement of people from America to
Asia).¹⁹

Of course, and as earlier emphasized, Asian populations have hardly
stood still since the Pleistocene. The rich diversity of genetic
lineages in the Altai region could result from post-Pleistocene gene
flow of multiple Eurasian populations forming, as Connie Mulligan and
colleagues describe it, “a genetic melting pot [that] could easily
contain all the elements common in Native Americans and falsely give the
impression of being the ancestor.”²⁰ Again, merely because the closest
living mtDNA or NRY relatives of American Indian groups live in those
parts of Asia today does not mean they were living there in Pleistocene
times. We await proof on this point from aDNA.

DEPARTURES AND ARRIVALS

On the matter of timing there is agreement, but again mostly in general
terms: all lines of evidence point to a late Pleistocene departure for
the New World. Turner's dentochronology puts the split between Amerind
and Northeast Asian populations at roughly 14,000 years ago, in time for
a late Pleistocene Clovis arrival. Not a bad number, but dentochronology
gives discrepant results in other cases, and cannot be wholly trusted in
this one.

Greenberg, though well aware of the limits of glottochronology, but with
an abiding faith his language families correlated precisely with
Turner's dental groups, likewise put the arrival of ancestral Amerinds
in Clovis times, though expressed a willingness to extend the date if
needed. Others saw a need. Based on presumed rates of linguistic change
and the diversity of languages, Johanna Nichols argued a Clovis
antiquity was not even in the right ballpark, and instead proposed there
had been a single entry 50,000 years ago, or multiple entries beginning
at least 30,000 years ago. When asked why archeologists hadn't found
such old sites, Nichols replied, “As a linguist, that's not my
problem.”²¹

Estimates based on molecular clocks vary, and in many cases have large
error bars attached to them (recall Tables 8 and 9), depending on which
source is consulted, which method was used, and a variety of other
contingencies. This is especially true of mtDNA; age estimates are
tighter over on the Y chromosome (ranging from 14,000 to 18,000 years),
but it's not irrelevant to add there have been far fewer studies
calculating ages from Y chromosome DNA. In any case, none of these
estimates directly dates the migration, only the emergence of particular
molecular lineages, which may or may not coincide with divergence.

There is abundant evidence of Clovis in North America soon after 11,500
BP. A single site, Monte Verde, gives secure evidence of a still-earlier
human presence. Many more are reportedly earlier, but are on less secure
grounds. Given the location of Monte Verde, and its distance from the
presumed Beringian entryway, we assume people arrived in the New World
much earlier than the 12,500 BP age at MVII implies. How much earlier we
cannot say, although from what we know of the timing of the opening of
the coastal route, it was possibly a couple thousand years earlier. If
they came down an interior route before the ice-free corridor closed,
then it might have been earlier still. Importantly, there's no reason
why both routes could not have been used by early colonizers coming at
different times—if there had been more than one early migratory pulse
(more on that shortly).

PLEISTOCENE PATHWAYS

Ironically, the archaeological record does provide one well-defined,
easily followed trail of a Pleistocene population migrating south from
Alaska. The Paleoarctic Complex is marked by stone microblades (Figure
37): these are 2-3 centimeters long and barely 4-8 millimeters wide;
pressure flaked off small, wedge-shaped microcores; and presumably
slotted into wooden, antler, or bone handles to form composite tools.
Microblade/microcore assemblages arrived in southern Siberia about
22,000 years ago, and from there were carried rapidly north and east.
They were in far northeastern Asia and western Beringia by 10,800 BP,
and within a couple of centuries were being used in interior Alaska and
the western Yukon Territory. From there the trail moves south down the
coast and interior boreal forests. Microblade/microcore assemblages
arrived in Juneau, Alaska, around 10,000 BP, and then at successively
younger sites in central British Columbia (about 9700 BP), Prince of
Wales Island (about 9200 BP), and the Queen Charlotte Islands (about
7000 BP), finally reaching the vicinity of the Strait of Georgia and the
Columbia River in Washington around 5000 BP.²²

This time-transgressive expansion of the Paleoarctic looks exactly like
what an archaeological migration ought to look like. Unfortunately, it's
not the migration we're looking for. The bearers of the
microblade/microcore technology could not have been the first Americans,
for this technology does not occur in either pre-Clovis or Clovis sites,
and arrived in North America too late to have been carried by the first
Americans. Indeed, the southward advance of the bearers of this
technology may have been checked when they reached areas already
occupied.²³

[images]

FIGURE 37.
Microblades from the Panguingue Creek site, Alaska. These would have
been set into bone or antler handles, to be used as composite tools.
(Photograph courtesy of Richard Reanier.)

What of the tracks of the first Americans? Those have yet to be found,
and may never be, given the processes that conspire against us, and the
fact that we seek what may have been a fleeting movement on now-vanished
coastline. For if the first Americans came down the Pacific coast,
hugging the seashore, rising sea levels may have since drowned their
footsteps (or boat landings); even where isostatic rebound and tectonic
activity have uplifted the Pleistocene coastline, dense forest and
underbrush hinder archaeological survey (Chapter 4). Nonetheless, there
is plenty of reason to go look, for it has already been shown that
humans occupied Prince of Wales and the Queen Charlotte islands along
the British Columbia coast as early as 10,300 BP, and more importantly,
it has been shown these places could have been occupied a great deal
earlier.²⁴

If colonists came via an interior route in pre-LGM times, all traces
would have been obscured by later glacial action. Had they moved through
the ice-free corridor soon after it opened, they likely moved quickly:
hunter-gatherers tend not to dawdle in harsh and marginal environments,
as the corridor was in the immediate wake of deglaciation.²⁵ At the
moment, the earliest sites in the corridor region—Charlie Lake Cave in
British Columbia, and the Vermillion Lakes site in Alberta—are dated at
10,500 and 10,800 years old, respectively. Although Charlie Lake Cave
has yielded a broken and beat-up fluted point, it's not quite a Clovis
point.²⁶ In fact, neither site is old enough to mark the southbound
trail of Clovis people, let alone ancestors of Monte Verdeans.

In the absence of actual archaeological evidence of the path of the
first Americans, evidence from languages and genes has been pushed into
the breach. It's not a very satisfactory solution.

The argument from languages, ironically, is made by archaeologists
rather than linguists, and is based on the simple observation there are
more Native American languages along the Northwest and California coasts
than in any other area of North America. That's said to imply a great
time depth for human occupation, and thereby “strongly supports” a
coastal entry.

To be sure, the greatest numbers of languages (nearly 40% of North
America's total) were spoken along the West Coast.²⁷ Yet, as linguists
well appreciate, the abundance and distribution of American languages is
hardly a function of time alone (if at all), and owes more to geography,
climate, population density, economy, and other factors. Thus, areas
rich in resources (coasts, lower-latitude areas) allow large populations
to congregate in small areas, which can produce great language diversity
(the best example: Papua New Guinea harbors 862 languages, fully 13.2%
of the world's total, on just 0.4% of the world's land area). In the
cold and dry North American Arctic, with far fewer people inhabiting
much larger regions, there are fewer languages spoken per unit area.
Likewise, regions overrun by expanding empires have lower linguistic
diversity because empires impose languages—think the Roman Empire and
Latin—thereby reducing the number of indigenous ones.²⁸

Consequently, the modern diversity or distribution of languages may say
little about the prehistory of colonization, since these patterns may
have little to do with when people arrived in a region, or where or how
they moved over time.

And something more: Native Americans were hard hit by infectious
epidemic diseases (smallpox, the most deadly among them) introduced by
Europeans in the decades and centuries after AD 1492. Regions that at
the time of European arrival were home to dense populations, such as the
Mississippi and Missouri river valleys, were especially devastated since
their populations were thick on the ground. The Spaniard Hernando de
Soto wandered through what is now the southeastern United States between
1539 and 1542, and described a region teeming with people. When the
Frenchman Rene-Robert de la Salle returned a century later, he was
astonished to find virtually no one home. The very few languages
recorded in that region serve as a grim illustration of population
devastation. In contrast, a large number of languages are known from the
Pacific Northwest and California because intensive linguistic fieldwork
took place here before diseases took their full measure (particularly
among remote inland groups).

All this makes it doubtful whether the number and distribution of
languages bears any relationship to the length of time a region was
inhabited, let alone to fleeting migration routes, particularly those
taken tens of thousands of years earlier across a radically different,
partly ice-shrouded landscape by people who may have been historically
and linguistically unrelated (save in the most general sense that all
were ultimately Asian in origin). It is probably no more realistic to
infer Pleistocene migration routes to North America by the number and
distribution of modern language groups, than it would be to infer de
Soto's route in the sixteenth century by looking at the number and
distribution of Spanish speakers in the Southeast today. And at least we
know de Soto spoke Spanish.

Be wary, too, of the claim that patterns of mtDNA haplogroups along the
west coast of North America “appear to support the hypothesis of a
population expansion out of Beringia associated with gene flow along the
west coast.”²⁹ We cannot assume that migrating groups, like Hansel and
Gretel, left behind a trail of genetic breadcrumbs—that is, people
permanently settled on the trail of their Pleistocene ancestors. The
presence of a haplogroup in a particular region does not mean its
bearers or their ancestors have always been there, just as its absence
does not mean their ancestors never passed through. Haplogroup B is
proof of that: it is scarce among Bering Strait populations, yet present
across the rest of the Americas. Unless its bearers sailed directly
across the Pacific in Pleistocene times (and that's very doubtful),
individuals possessing haplogroup B must have traversed Beringia without
settling down.

VIRTUAL COLONIZATION

Having failed to catch the first Americans in the act of colonizing,
archaeologists and others have attempted to simulate the process by
which the Americas were colonized, to gain a sense of where and how the
first Americans may have entered the continent and dispersed once here.
It's colonization by computer, and is done by building an equation with
variables such as the number of individuals in the colonizing group,
their rate of population increase, the distances they moved annually,
what triggered the movement (usually, population growth filling up the
home territory), what kinds of foods and other resources were available
in different environments, what might guide movement (a path of least
resistance, major drainages, or even fanning out across the landscape),
how fast colonizers could or would move along different routes, and so
on. Then, with the aid of the computer, one starts the algorithm
iterating: a population arrives at time x, for example, and within y
years has increased to the point of straining the local resources, and
so moves z kilometers in the direction of the closest available
resource-rich territory. That process is then repeated in the virtual
world many times over, and after n years, the descendants of the initial
group have filled the New World. It's not SimCity™ exactly, but close to
it (SimColonization?).

David Anderson and Christopher Gillam simulate the process of expansion
into the New World under the premise that humans, like water, flow
downhill.³⁰ Or, more properly, that people will take the easier rather
than the more strenuous route when moving across a landscape. From the
point of view of colonizers arriving in western Alaska, Anderson and
Gillam ask what would have been the easiest route of entry, bearing in
mind they did not know they were supposed to be headed to Monte Verde,
but were simply moving ever outward along a path of least resistance? To
find the answer, they compiled high-resolution digital elevation maps of
the New World, and analyzed them using Geographic Information Systems,
which enabled them to calculate the relative ease of different routes
through the continent. In doing so, they found that the least-cost
pathway from Alaska to all land south of the ice was via the interior
route—if the colonizers were walking. A coastal entry was never a
least-cost solution, owing to its highly dissected terrain. Of course,
if colonizers had boats, then the coast becomes a viable option (why
walk when you can paddle?).

Todd Surovell likewise concluded a coastal colonization was implausible,
based on a model driven by return rates (how much food can be acquired
from a habitat in a given amount of time?).³¹ Colonizers increase in
number (at the rate of 3% per year, he assumes) and move when the
population reaches the point where return rates diminish, and the group
as a whole would be better off if some moved on to the next available
unoccupied habitat to make their living. By the terms of Surovell's
model, people can move down the coast, but if they did so all the way to
Monte Verde, then they also should have “backfilled” interior North
America with substantial pre-Clovis populations. Since in his view no
such population exists, he reasons they must not have come via the coast
(of course, there's no evidence such a population came via an interior
route either, but leave that aside).

Weighing in on the genetics side, Alan Fix begins with the observation
that mtDNA haplogroups A-D and X are widespread on the North American
continent, but in varying frequencies. He then asks whether a single
migration down the coast could account for that continent-wide
distribution (granting changes in gene frequencies over the millennia
since that pattern was established). By his model, and assuming the
colonizers had boats, the answer is yes. A starting population of 25
females harboring all five mtDNA haplogroups and increasing at 0.7% per
year, moving south each time the number of females reached about 175,
would spread down the coast at the rate of 4 kilometers/year. Within
3,000 years, they could travel from Anchorage to Panama, jump the
isthmus, and then make their way up the Gulf and Atlantic coasts, and
deep into the Mississippi Valley. The end result would be a North
American population with haplogroup frequencies that vary much as they
do at present.³²

All these are elegant models, but do they answer the question of whether
the first Americans came via the coast or not? Not really. The merit of
any simulation rests on whether the model incorporates relevant
variables, and realistic values for those variables. Unfortunately,
there's little hard data for many of the variables—that's why the
process is being simulated—so the models instead assume a value or range
of values to approximate an on-the-ground reality. Surovell pegs
population growth at 3% per year; Fix, a population geneticist,
dismisses that as too high and uses 0.7%. Both their results would
change significantly were they to trade numbers. But then others have
argued colonization was not driven by population growth at all. For that
matter, because of computational complications, there are limits to how
many variables can be incorporated in a model, and it would be conceit
on our part to believe we have included (or even understood) all the
variables relevant to the colonization process.

But most important of all, a simulation model, however elegant, should
never be confused with actual evidence.³³ Relying as they must on a
series of assumptions (even plausible ones), a model cannot prove a
route taken: it can only show whether a hypothesis seems reasonable
given its ground rules. Can it prove a hypothesis wrong? No, though it
can show it unlikely or implausible. As always, the proof must be found
in the ground. A few early, well-dated archaeological sites along either
route would do the trick.

COLONIZATION'S TEMPO AND MODE

Joseph Greenberg was bemused by fellow linguists who insisted it was
impossible to group American Indian languages into fewer than 150 or 200
families. If there were that many, each representing a separate
migration, he joked it would have required “a traffic controller at the
Bering Strait”³⁴ to keep them from bumping into one another enroute to
the Americas. Better, he thought, to reduce the number to a more
manageable three: no stoplights needed. Turner's teeth go along with
that, but not the craniofacial evidence, which at the moment sees just
two migrations, though not always the same two migrations. Geneticists
variously estimate there were anywhere from one to four separate
migrations to the Americas.

In the absence of an answer about the number of migrations, perhaps it's
time to rethink the question. Rather than try to gauge how many
migratory waves are necessary to account for known patterns of
diversity, whether genetic, linguistic, or anatomical, let's instead
look from a Pleistocene perspective.

We know humans reached northeast Asia before the LGM, and were poised to
depart far eastern Siberia by about 14,000 years ago—or possibly earlier
(given what we don't know of the archaeology of Siberia). We also know
(Chapter 2) that throughout the late Pleistocene, there were no
significant barriers to cross-Beringian traffic: no glaciers, no looming
mountains. And although it was cold, dry, and virtually treeless from
before the LGM until at least 13,500 BP, that would not have stopped
hunter-gatherers who'd spent their lives in the frozen north. Like their
brethren on the treeless central Russian plain, they could have used
animal dung, fat, and bones to fuel their fires. Would-be colonizers
were free to move across the land bridge and back over tens of thousands
of years.³⁵

Getting south from Beringia may have posed a more formidable challenge,
at least given our current understanding of the timing of availability
of coastal and interior corridor routes: the interior route apparently
was closed between about 28,000 and 12,000 BP. Long reaches of the outer
coast were evidently ice free between 16,000 and 14,500 BP, and
permanently open to the traveling Pleistocene public only after 13,400
BP. We are entitled to hedge a bit on the dates, given how they have
changed over the last several decades.

Regardless, one point is clear: during the Pleistocene, there were
several wide-open windows of opportunity and routes of travel by which
to migrate from Asia to America (Figure 38). So instead of conceiving of
early migration as a single pulse by a small group made but once, is it
possible to think of it as Hrdlicka did, as a “dribbling over from
northeastern Asia, extending probably over a long stretch of time”?³⁶
Perhaps. But that depends on when people reached Siberia and western
Beringia, on the size of the parent population(s), on the environmental,
climatic, and social catalysts that might have spurred migration, and so
on. These matters are currently poorly known.

Linguists have not precluded the possibility of multiple migrations, for
most are unwilling to assume—as Greenberg does—that the vast majority of
American languages can be telescoped back into a single ancestral
dispersal. Multiple migrations from unrelated source populations would
better account for the diversity most linguists see in the languages of
the Americas.

On the other hand, geneticists at the moment are less inclined to accept
the idea of multiple migratory pulses, and for seemingly good reason:
given the finite number but widespread distribution of founding
haplogroups and haplotypes in the Americas, it seems unlikely that
separate migrations from Asia would introduce the same set (Chapter 5).
Nor should these haplogroups, as Jason Eshleman and colleagues indicate,
show the same level of sequence diversity—as they apparently do.³⁷
Strong rebuttals both, but perhaps not entirely fatal to the idea of
multiple migratory dribbles.

[images]

FIGURE 38.
Time chart for the peopling of the Americas, based on chronologies of
dental, linguistic, and genetic lineage divergence (from text and Tables
7-9); the age of archaeological sites in Siberia; the timing of Beringia
and of the coastal and interior routes south from Alaska; and the ages
of archaeological sites and complexes in Alaska, North America south of
the ice sheets, and South America, including a number of unconfirmed
pre-Clovis claims. Ages are in radiocarbon years BP. The arrows and
figures are not intended to convey actual migrations, but instead to
show possible times and routes of travel, and how the timing of the
migration could have constrained which routes were available (arrows
that span either the coastal or the interior route indicate that route
was not taken at that time). Running figures convey faster migrations—as
supposed for Clovis. The scenarios currently favored are the top two
sets of arrows and figures: an earlier entry down the recently
deglaciated coast in time to reach Monte Verde by 12,500 BP, and/or a
later entry down the newly opened and passable ice-free corridor at the
outset of Clovis time. Obviously, as chronologies are refined and older
sites are discovered and accepted, the favored scenario(s) will change.
(Adapted from Meltzer 1993b.)

Certainly, the recent findings from aDNA confirm suspicions that we have
yet to record the full diversity of haplogroup and haplotype sequences
in America past and present. Consider the Siberian source population: it
is assumed that because modern Asian populations possess a large number
of haplogroups in addition to A-D, then so, too, did ancient
populations. Of course, there is no aDNA evidence on that score.
Moreover, Eshleman and colleagues point out that “a random selection of
even a small group of emigrants from Eastern Siberia today would have a
high probability of including members of haplogroups A, C and D.”³⁸
Those common haplogroups would likely show up in a random Pleistocene
selection as well, perhaps even if these occurred repeatedly over tens,
hundreds, or possibly even thousands of years, as successive groups
departed for America.

So, too, there is the interesting but evolutionarily complicating
possibility of earlier migrants returning to Siberia from Alaska:
geneticists are now seeing evidence of just such back-migrations in the
occasional occurrence of American Indian markers in Asian populations.³⁹
Those back-mixes appear to have occurred recently. Had any occurred when
Beringia was open for pedestrian traffic, groups may have mixed with
distant and possibly unrelated populations that by then had arrived in
Siberia, becoming yet another source populations for migration(s) to
America.

Geneticist Theodore Schurr observes, and rightly so, that “if multiple
expansions of human groups occurred within a limited period of time, the
demographic signals of these events may not be detectable.” Twelve
thousand years or more after the fact, over which populations mixed and
moved, and experienced gene flow and genetic drift, the lines originally
separating a stream of small and related (or even unrelated) groups are
easily blurred. It might prove impossible using modern DNA to
distinguish a single migration with multiple, contributing sources from
repeated splitting from the same ancestral population, or from multiple,
closely spaced dispersals from multiple source populations in Asia
(Chapter 5). Studies of aDNA might help bring those original lines back
into focus.⁴⁰

Kari Schroeder and colleagues likewise admit “the number of migrations
cannot be inferred from genetic data,” but then turn the question on its
head to ask, instead, are all Native Americans descended from the same
founding population? There are certainly strong hints that was the case:
there's D9S1120, that ubiquitous and almost uniquely American autosomal
marker; there are within haplogroup C several founding haplotypes (C1b,
C1c and C1d) so widespread as to indicate common ancestry; and there are
sure signs in mtDNA, NRY, and autosomal DNA of a population bottleneck
(Chapter 5). All of these point to a shared genetic prehistory and
descent from a common founding population, but as Schroeder and
colleagues add, by itself that does not reveal the number of source
populations contributing to the founding population—the streams flowing
into a Beringian funnel—nor exclude the possibility of small genetic
contributions from other populations, which about 400 generations later
hardly appear visible.⁴¹

The archaeological record provides some insight into the number of
migrations, though it is a fairly blunt instrument. There are, for
example, no obvious historical or technological links between the
pre-Clovis-age complexes of South and North America: they form no
coherent patterns, share no specific technologies, and are marked by no
common artifacts. On the other hand, perhaps there is no reason to
expect similarities among artifacts so widely separated in time and
place, especially since it is not yet apparent whether all these sites
are credible.

As for Monte Verde (which is credible), its toolkit seems very different
from Clovis in North America, and from Clovis-age South American
archaeological complexes (again, there is no Clovis, strictly speaking,
in South America). Perhaps Monte Verde and Clovis represent two distinct
archaeological traditions and separate migratory pulses, as opposed to
an outgrowth of the same historically related colonization. At the
moment, the call could go either way.

Filling in the gaps in space and time between Monte Verde and
Clovis—more pre-Clovis sites in North America will surely help—may make
the differences between the two disappear (or, perhaps, grow larger).
Then it will become possible to determine whether they represent the
same or separate migrations. For the moment, the best we can say is that
there are at least two Pleistocene-age migrations into the Americas:
Paleoindian and (later) Paleoarctic (this does not include later
Holocene migrations by, say, ancestral Eskimo groups). It is possible
there were even more migrations, major or minor, including some that may
not have been successful. But to show that, we will need to learn a
great deal more about the earliest archaeology of the Americas.

Given the timing of the opening of the ice-free corridor, and the sudden
and widespread appearance of Clovis soon thereafter, the early peoples
they represent could have come down the newly opened corridor, then
radiated out across North America and even into South America in a
matter of centuries (in actual calendar years, the radiation may have
taken longer since radiocarbon calibration during this period is still
imprecise). That's far faster than the current American record for
prehistoric migration in an empty niche by hunter-gatherers, now held by
the Thule Eskimo, who, starting around AD 1000 (or possibly later⁴²),
flashed from Alaska across the northern maritime region to Greenland, a
distance of more than 5,000 kilometers in a few centuries (there's more
on the Thule below and in Chapter 7 since they represent in many ways
the closest and most interesting comparative case).

But then, Clovis might not represent a separate migration. As previously
noted, there is no well-marked trail of Clovis and Clovis-like fluted
projectile points leading from Alaska down to the Lower Forty-eight,
which one might hope to see from the movement of a people, even one
moving quickly. And if Clovis does represent a separate and later
migration of people, the fact that they moved through North America so
quickly suggests they did not encounter many (or any) other people along
the way. If so, what had become of earlier, pre-Clovis colonizers? It's
a fair question, but one at the moment without a fair answer.

But perhaps the sudden appearance of Clovis and the opening of the
ice-free corridor are mere coincidence, and Clovis represents instead a
new technology that developed in America and spread widely and rapidly
among a preexisting, pre-Clovis population. Given that Clovis sites from
west to east are nearly contemporaneous, the spread must have been
lightning fast, on a scale that would not be seen again until the
invention and spread of the hula hoop, and of a technique (fluting)
that—like the hula hoop—“was not all that revolutionary in the first
place and that died out relatively soon thereafter”⁴³ (fluting, however,
enjoyed a much longer popular run than the hula hoop).

At the moment, the evidence leans against the idea of Clovis as the
diffusion of a preexisting technology. Diffusion demands a faithfulness
in copying the Clovis technology by many widely scattered groups, which
seems unlikely across so large a span of space and time. Further, we
ought to see not just a substantial pre-Clovis presence in North
America, but also evidence of Clovis technologies being grafted onto
(and replacing) “fluteless,” pre-Clovis assemblages. We see neither.
Diffusion seems less likely than an on-the-ground, rapid movement of
people.⁴⁴

On the matter of speed, very recent mtDNA evidence points to a long
pause in Beringia, followed by a rapid expansion across the Americas,
notably in the three founding haplotypes (Qb-Qd) within haplogroup C.
That all three apparently arose in Asia, show similar molecular ages,
and yet are widely and uniformly distributed across this hemisphere—as
opposed to exhibiting a “nested” structure that would imply they had
derived from one another in a serial fashion—points to a “swift
pioneering process, not a gradual diffusion.” In haplogroup C, it would
appear, the lineages took a long time to evolve in Beringia (the
10,000-20,000-year standstill mentioned in Chapter 5), but a very short
time to expand.⁴⁵ In contrast, autosomal DNA displays a north-south
gradient of genetic diversity, but whether that indicates a more gradual
and progressive splitting as the ancestral group moved deeper into the
Americas—or even says anything about the speed of expansion—is
unclear.⁴⁶

CAN WE ALL GET ALONG?

There is only the broadest agreement among the different disciplines on
the central questions related to the peopling of the Americas. But
perhaps that's to be expected, given their very different approaches.
Linguists and geneticists view the process through the present, relying
on known languages and DNA of living Native Americans (aDNA has so far
played a limited role in this investigation). From this they infer
population histories, assuming that modern American Indians are
descendants of the first Americans (we have no evidence, of course, to
indicate otherwise).

Archaeologists and physical anthropologists, working with sites and
skeletal remains, approach from the opposite direction. But we see only
what the Pleistocene left behind, often little more than isolated
snapshots of sites and skeletal remains, which do not occur in
sufficient numbers to allow many conclusions about the populations from
which those samples were drawn.

Accordingly, there are significant differences in data and method, and
advantages and disadvantages to each. That's obvious.

What is often less obvious, especially from the outside looking in, is
whether those discipline-specific results stand on their own merit.
Science in the twenty-first century is a highly insular affair, and it
takes time for knowledge from one field to fully penetrate another. Even
with all the linguists’ ear-piercing criticism of Greenberg's method of
mass comparison, it was more than a decade before geneticists examined
whether mtDNA and NRY haplogroups actually coincided with Amerind,
Na-Dene, and Eskimo-Aleut, as opposed to merely assuming they did. And,
of course, they didn't.

What this means is that although each discipline has a place at the
table, no one gets a free pass: the results of research in one area are
not inherently superior to another (notwithstanding Jantz and Owsley's
claim that cranial morphology will be “more informative” than genetics),
nor can we simply pick results we like. Equally important, we have to
clarify just what different disciplines can and cannot reveal. Take the
matter of chronology. Geneticist Antonio Torroni can say that “genetics
confirms the first Americans were pre-Clovis,”⁴⁷ but can we really know
that? A genetic haplogroup cannot be directly dated; only archaeological
remains can. And at the moment, archaeologists are in the best position
to know when the first Americans have arrived, but we're not yet able to
say. Yet, by joining forces, we can perhaps bracket an answer.

Consider what archaeological ages represent. At the beginning of
American prehistory, there were so few people spread across such a vast
area they could not have left much of an archaeological imprint. The
odds of our finding their sites are correspondingly slim, and people
likely got here much earlier than we see them archaeologically (Chapter
4). Unless we are lucky enough to find the very first site in the
Americas and to know we have found it, the oldest site we do find will
at best provide a minimum age for the peopling of the Americas.

On the other hand, molecular clocks provide a maximum age estimate for
the peopling of the Americas. This is so because—leaving aside all the
technical concerns about the ticking of these clocks (Chapter 5)—if a
haplogroup occurs in both Asia and America, it must have arisen within
the ancestral Asian population prior to the departure of ancestral
Native Americans. That being the case, and using the oldest ages
currently provided by genetics, the first Americans must have arrived
sometime after, say, 40,000 years ago, but before 12,500 years ago
(Monte Verde MVII). A broad window, to be sure, but we may soon close it
considerably if very recent molecular estimates converging on a time
range for both mtDNA and NRY of 18,000-14,000 years ago hold up.⁴⁸

CONTINUITY AND DISCONTINUITY

Whether they do depends in large part on whether we have an accurate
count of the founding lineages on which the molecular clock runs, and
that in turn depends on whether there has been lineage loss over time.
There is strong reason to suspect there has been. Ancestral Americans
were particularly susceptible to mtDNA and NRY lineage loss at two
points in time: the first was immediately after their Pleistocene
arrival. Small, isolated, rapidly moving bands, with attenuated ties to
distant homelands or kin, and without nearby populations with which to
seek mates, could easily disappear in a few tens or hundreds of years
for want of sufficient numbers, or an ability to cope with events in
their environment. Likewise, relatively rare haplogroups can easily
disappear (haplogroup X, for example, very nearly did). There is
evidence from mtDNA among North and South American Indians for at least
a ‘moderate-intensity’ bottleneck and the potential loss of some genetic
diversity.⁴⁹ But that's not surprising: almost certainly over the grand
sweep of world prehistory, groups vanished without descendants. Recall
that the Norse reached Newfoundland 1,000 years ago, only to soon beat a
hasty retreat in the face of extreme circumstances, not least hostile
Native “Skraelings” (likely, ancestral Beothuk Indians). One would
assuredly look in vain for genetic evidence of the Norse presence in
Newfoundland. The first Americans did not have to contend with hostile
Natives (no one else was home), but as newcomers, they faced significant
adaptive challenges (Chapter 7).

The second time American Indian mtDNA and NRY lineages were likely to
have vanished was in the centuries after European contact, which caused
a massive, centuries-long population decline as a consequence of
introduced infectious diseases (more on this in Chapter 10). Although
these terrible scourges devastated Native American numbers, the major
mtDNA and NRY haplogroups (A-D, and C and Q) survived, though
potentially in very different frequencies than prior to 1492.⁵⁰ It is
apparent from aDNA that other minor DNA haplogroups and haplotypes did
not. Languages were assuredly lost, too, as the blank areas on the map
of American languages attests (Figure 30).

Before proceeding any further, let me be clear on a couple of points:
first, lineage loss detected in aDNA is not evidence American Indians
are not descendants of the first Americans. Nor, in fact, does it
preclude genetic continuity in autosomal DNA (again, one has many more
autosomal ancestors than mtDNA or NRY ancestors). What it does mean is
that these single locus markers—the five mtDNA and two Y-chromosome
founding haplogroups of modern American Indians—may not be fully
representative of Pleistocene or even pre-European contact mtDNA and
NRY.

Second, it is only in Pleistocene archaeological sites or skeletal
remains that evidence can emerge of an early but ultimately unsuccessful
migration to the Americas in the form of artifacts or skeletal forms
different from those that followed. Although there are assertions early
American crania are morphologically distinct from those of modern Native
Americans, we cannot put stock in these claims, plagued as they are by
severe sampling and analytical problems (even the dental evidence,
problematic though it is, testifies to continuity between early and late
Americans⁵¹).

Which brings up once more a matter of terminology. It used to be that
the first Americans were referred to as Paleoindians (from the Greek
palaios [naXaio q or old + Indian). In the last decade in some circles,
there has been a none-too-subtle change in language: Paleoindian is now
insistently referred to as Paleoamerican. The terms may be synonymous in
a very general sense. If the ancestors of American Indians are the first
Americans, Paleoindians by definition are Paleoamericans. But the
explicit effort to substitute one for the other is not just a matter of
synonymy. The change corresponded with the Kennewick discovery and
ensuing legal battle, and was made most visibly in the publications of
the Center for the Study of the First Americans, whose director (the
late Robson Bonnichsen), led the lawsuit against the federal government
to gain access to the Kennewick remains. As David Hurst Thomas writes,
naming something is not always a neutral act, and it's not in this
instance.⁵² Calling the first peoples Paleoamerican rather than
Paleoindian is not just a statement about the genuine uncertainty of
identifying ancient remains with modern tribes; it subtly implies the
first people to the New World were not ancestors of the American
Indians.

Although we may not yet know the population history of the peoples of
the New World, and there remains debate about the precise number and
timing of migrations, at the moment all indications are that today's
American Indians are descended from the first Americans. Paleoindians
they were and should be until reliable scientific evidence indicates
otherwise. Using the term Paleoindian helps us not only appropriately
recognize that ancestry, but it also serves as a reminder that the past
is different, and that we are speaking of peoples who—though related to
American Indians—lived at a very different time and in a very different
kind of place. There is reason aplenty to expect their lives to have
been lived in very different ways (Chapter 7).

SEEKING CONVERGENCE

All of which raises a final, much larger question: should we necessarily
expect convergence between archaeological and non-archaeological
approaches? Perhaps, but again only if we see something akin to what
Goldilocks saw: that each group had its own, and only its own,
artifacts, anatomy, language, genes, and teeth, which co-evolved over
time. Sometimes we do.

Take the case of the Eskimo: their languages, as even warring linguists
agree, form a continuum of dialects that stretches from the Seward
Peninsula in Alaska across arctic Canada to the coast of Greenland.
Mutual intelligibility between contiguous dialects is high, though
speakers at the extremes of the range might have difficulty
understanding each other.⁵³ Similarly, biological and genetic evidence
(including mtDNA, Y chromosome, and autosomal DNA) indicates Eskimo
peoples, regardless of geographic location, are quite similar
genetically. That similarity points to a recent and rapid expansion of
their ancestral population.⁵⁴

How recently and rapidly can be tracked on the ground. The ancestors of
Eskimo peoples—known archaeologically as the Thule—are first spotted on
islands in the Bering Sea and around Seward Peninsula about AD 600. They
were skilled bowhead whale hunters (among other things). As the climate
warmed around AD 1000 and reduced summer pack ice across the high
Arctic, they set off in pursuit of western bowhead whales migrating east
into feeding grounds of the Beaufort Sea. Over the next several
warmer-than-average centuries (the Medieval Warm Period), as whale
populations expanded still farther east (ultimately linking up with
North Atlantic pods), the Thule went right along with them, eventually
reaching northwestern Greenland. Their language, genes, and material
culture converge on a common population prehistory, and explain the
biological, linguistic, and cultural similarities of Eskimo peoples
between the Bering Strait and Greenland.⁵⁵

About the same time the Thule were expanding across far North America,
ancestral Polynesians were sailing double-hulled canoes eastward across
vast stretches of the remote Pacific, and settling distant and isolated
islands like New Zealand, Hawaii, and Rapa Nui. One thousand years
later, as Patrick Kirch and others have shown, the linked linguistic,
genetic, and material culture imprint of that expansion from a common
ancestor is still visible.⁵⁶

Among the colonizers of the high Arctic and the remote Pacific islands,
artifacts, language, and genes co-evolved as descendant populations
dispersed over time and space. That's why Captain Cook so readily
spotted the similarities between Alaskan and Greenland Eskimo, and among
the residents of Tahiti, New Zealand, and Rapa Nui. That these two cases
meet the Goldilocks standard is not mere happenstance: the high Arctic
and the Pacific were both peopled in just the last few thousand years,
with populations expanding into remote and largely uninhabited regions
(entirely uninhabited, in the case of the far Pacific), leaving the
archaeological tracks of their dispersals still relatively fresh and
untrampled on the landscape. And they remained largely isolated by
virtue of their remoteness, which also explains why it wasn't until the
late eighteenth century that Europeans made lasting contact, and why the
echoes of their dispersals are still within reach of historical
linguistics, genetics, and even of memory and folklore.⁵⁷

It may be there was comparable convergence early in the peopling of the
Americas, when there were still few of them, and they were maintaining
contact even as they radiated out across their new landscape. Yet, as
time went by, and populations grew, split, reached the far corners of
both continents, and along the way developed new dialects and languages,
artifacts, and their own distinctive genetic lineages, the situation
inevitably became more complex. Matters would hardly get simpler over
the next 400 or so generations as populations encountered one another
and exchanged artifacts, words, and genes, and as culture, language, and
genetic lineages evolved (or were lost).

Once isolation breaks down and interaction re-commences, there is no
longer a reliable correlation between artifacts, language, teeth, and
genes. People can quickly learn a new language or adopt new artifacts;
they cannot quickly “learn” new genes or teeth. And that is why Hunley
and Long found that striking mismatch between language families and
haplogroups on both the mtDNA and NRY sides of the aisle. There's no
reason to assume the genetic ancestry of a group will yield the same
result as a reconstruction based on its linguistic history.

And what of linking modern languages or genes with archaeological or
skeletal remains from the Pleistocene? Strictly speaking, the
archaeological record—artifacts, dental and skeletal remains, sites—only
speaks to the appearance of a colonizing group. At the risk of stating
the obvious, artifacts, bones, and teeth speak no language and have no
genes (unless we recover aDNA). Archaeologists have trouble enough
deciding which stone tool assemblages belong together; we are even
harder pressed to link archaeologically detectable patterns with those
identified among modern languages or genes.

Here, again, is the great potential of aDNA. If we can recover aDNA from
Pleistocene dental or skeletal remains, and see those same haplogroups
in modern populations, we have the potential to firmly link the most
ancient and most modern Native Americans, determine the number of
migrations, from whence and where they came, or even the route(s)
traveled—assuming aDNA is recovered from remains found along the way. As
more ancient and autosomal DNA work is conducted—and it's important to
emphasize that it's going to take many large-scale genetic analyses to
produce a consensus picture of the peopling of the Americas based on
genetic data—the picture of genetic diversity will likely become more
rather than less complicated, but at least our molecular clocks will run
on time.⁵⁸

Until then, questions about how far into the past we can follow the
trail of modern languages or biological populations, or what we can we
say about the biology or language spoken by Clovis or pre-Clovis
peoples, or more broadly, whether American Indians are descended from
groups we see archaeologically as Clovis or pre-Clovis, will remain
loaded questions and strike at the heart of the highly contentious
legal, political, and emotional issues related to the identity and
“ownership” of ancient skeletal material. But that's an issue for later
(Chapter 10). Now that the first Americans have arrived, it's time to
investigate their exploration of what was a truly New World.

7

WHAT DO YOU DO WHEN NO
ONE'S BEEN THERE BEFORE?

The helicopter pilot pointed to the Arctic tundra below, where a pair of
grizzlies were ambling in the distance. His voice came over my headset:
“Did you want to go down for a closer look?”

“Sure.”

We dove for the deck and were soon skimming along fifteen feet above the
surface, headed for the grizzlies. The wind was against us, but the
bears soon enough heard the thumping rotors and raised up on their hind
legs to look around. The instant they spotted us, the female started
galloping away. The big male took off running, too—straight for us.

Right. I'd seen enough. At the last minute, the pilot shoved the
collective, and up we soared in a stomach-churning climb. Though we
passed over the grizzly with room to spare, I looked down in amazement
as he leaped and swatted at the helicopter as we flew past. The snarling
maw of an angry grizzly bear is terrifyingly large when it fills the
Plexiglas window right below your feet.

Up to that moment, as a rookie to archaeological fieldwork in remote
Alaska, I'd not taken very seriously the fact that when surveying for
sites, we always went out in pairs, or that one person always carried a
twelve-gauge shotgun primed with lead slugs in case of a grizzly
encounter. And I'd laughed at the ghoulish jokes: you don't have to
outrun the bear—just your hiking partner. And the gun wasn't to shoot
the grizzly—it was to kneecap your buddy to guarantee you could outrun
him.

But seeing that this grizzly bear—weighing more than 1,000 pounds,
moving at top speed, and capable of giving us a good rattling had he
gotten his paw on the helicopter's skids—thought nothing of charging a
roaring, jet-engine helicopter made it all too clear that when on foot,
humans are not necessarily at the top of the food chain on this
landscape.

Which got me to wondering: what must it have been like more than 12,000
years ago for those Ice Age peoples who first colonized the Americas?
Although adept and well adapted to hunter-gatherer life, they were armed
with little more than wooden or bone spears tipped with stone projectile
points. They were assuredly predators; occasionally, they could be prey.
More challenging still, they were colonizing a landscape far different
and in many ways far more complex, diverse, and dynamic than at present.
Although they were seasoned veterans of life in Siberia, as these
wide-ranging peoples made their way across to Alaska and turned south
into what was truly a New World, the land and its resources became
increasingly unfamiliar. More than that, they were facing those adaptive
challenges alone. It must have been a strange sensation to look around
and realize it had been months, years, decades, or even longer since
they had last encountered people outside their band, or seen telltale
human signs like smoke on the distant horizon, or evidence of a freshly
killed and butchered animal.

Those of us who spend time in wilderness today are afforded only the
tiniest glimpse of what life might have been like for humans on a
continent empty, unfamiliar, diverse, and rapidly changing. Yet, no
matter how remote an area we might find ourselves, we are never truly
alone nor, for that matter, in unknown terrain. Virtuall every inch of
our planet has been charted if not trod upon. We can carry survival gear
and food, guides to plants and animals, maps to water and trails, and
instruments that can tell us precisely where we are, or enable us to
talk to others in distant cities or flying 30,000 feet overhead. In most
any emergency, we can have vital supplies brought in, or people carried
out. We rarely have the sense of being completely out of reach, or
having to survive on our wits and by our hands—except, of course, when
things go badly wrong.

The Pleistocene colonizers of the Americas had no such advantages.

PEOPLE WITHOUT NEIGHBORS

We're about to venture farther into unknown territory and explore
questions about why people may have left Asia for America, what kinds of
adaptive challenges they faced, and how they may have met those
challenges and colonized a continent, possibly at record speeds. We
won't have much help: although there is a rich body of anthropological
knowledge about modern hunter-gatherer adaptations and processes of
migration and colonization, much of it is irrelevant.

The reason? Our world filled up long ago. Nowadays, migration mostly
involves moving relatively short distances over brief periods of time
into already-occupied landscapes—hardly the scale or circumstances of
the colonization of America, which played out much longer and over a
much larger area. Moreover, all anthropologically known hunter-gatherers
have neighbors, near or distant, on whom they can rely for information,
resources, and potential mates (the latter are especially important,
since one can always gain information and resources on one's own), or
against whom they may compete. Either way, having neighbors
fundamentally changes the decision-making calculus of landscape use.
Finally, our anthropologically known hunter-gatherers possess deep
knowledge of their landscape: not complete knowledge (no group ever has
that), but knowledge sufficient that it has reduced much of the
uncertainty in their lives. The process of hunter-gatherers learning a
wholly new landscape has rarely, if ever, been recorded.¹ By the time
anthropologists arrived on a scene, most indigenous peoples were already
long resident on their landscape, had mapped its major features, knew
what resources were available and where to find them, and were efficient
foragers.

All that said, we can still use anthropological knowledge of the
processes of human migration and adaptation observable in the present as
a key to explaining the past: it's the uniformitarian principle,
borrowed from geology and applied to archaeology. That doesn't mean the
present and past are identical, but rather that ideas and explanations
about the past should begin with (and must not violate) what we know of,
say, general principles of human adaptation, or the limits of mobility
or demography. The discussion below aims to do that. And, of course, we
can supplement the anthropological record with what has been learned
archaeologically of other cases in the near and distant past of
hunter-gatherers colonizing new lands

We will likely never find the very earliest sites in the Americas
(Chapter 4), nor see the traces of the very first people who, say,
encountered an angry rattlesnake (no Siberian ever experienced one of
those), ate a poisonous New World plant, or looked around one day and
realized they were alone or lost. Even so, we can broadly surmise how
they may have responded if and when they did, and put such notions to
the test against the archaeological record of the first Americans—or at
least that of Clovis (there's not enough of a pre-Clovis record to allow
such a test). Clovis was the first large-scale occupation of North
America; possibly represents a separate migration; had access to the
continent that appears to have been essentially unrestricted; and even
if not the first to arrive, was the first to make substantial inroads
(Chapter 6). As such, understanding Clovis can yield insight into the
adaptations of early colonizers on what was at the very least a new and
underutilized landscape.

WHY MOVE?

Let's start with motivation. What would prompt a band of
hunter-gatherers to leave Siberia for the New World, or once here,
expand the length and breadth of the continent? Studies of modern
peoples who migrate find they routinely know something about what the
destination has to offer, and decide to move or not accordingly. Indeed,
it is an anthropological truism that people are unlikely to migrate into
areas about which they have no prior knowledge. Yet, at a certain point
in the peopling of the Americas, there was little choice in the matter.
Someone had to be the first to set foot on this continent.

History records many reasons why groups venture from their homeland, and
these can be divided into two broad categories: negative factors in the
home region that push a people out, and positive attractions in a
distant area that pull them in. The push side of the ledger includes a
decline in resources, environmental or climatic stress (such as
drought), overpopulation, exile, strife, or warfare. Groups might be
pulled from their homeland by the lure of preferred resources (such as
in the example of the Thule whale hunters); by the seeking of new
economic or trade opportunities or adaptive “insurance” (ascertaining
where to go when current circumstances deteriorate); or by motives as
intangible as curiosity, a sense of adventure or wanderlust, the joy of
discovery, or the journey to gain prestige or mates.²

Of the peopling of the Americas, we cannot say which push and/or pull
forces were motives, but perhaps we can identify which were not. First
and foremost, it seems highly unlikely that siphoning off overpopulation
in their Beringian homeland—one of the most common forces pushing
historic population out-migration (think of the post-sixteenth-century
desire to escape crowded Europe and make a new life in America)—was a
factor in the colonization of the Americas. There is no archaeological
evidence of population crowding in Siberia or Alaska: quite the
contrary, in fact. And the first Americans traveled much farther and
much faster than they had to if they were merely looking for uninhabited
land to settle.³

Likewise, we have no reason to believe exile, strife, or warfare played
a role. Conflict that creates refugees is a much-later phenomenon in
prehistory, initially occurring when village-based farmers arc past the
tipping point when populations have expanded to the degree they must
compete against others for food or the arable land to grow it.

Still, there are push factors that might be relevant to the peopling of
the Americas. Northeast Asia and Siberia in the late Pleistocene were
not easy places to live, and harsh glacial climates may have driven
human foragers out of the region. They appear to have fled during the
LGM, but toward the south, and not evidently toward the east and the
Americas. Other climate changes at later times may have played a role.
But caution is in order here: throughout prehistory, major changes in
climate have occurred without flinging colonizers outward, and many
colonization events had no environmental trigger.⁴ We must be mindful of
the fact that people can be agents of their own actions.

Another potentially important impetus was economics, though this is not
to be thought of in modern market terms, such as setting up shop in a
nearby town to make and sell widgets because the home widget market is
saturated. Rather, it is akin to cases where, for example, only the
first-born child inherits family land. Later-born children who receive
nothing must seek new territory where they can found their own house and
lineage, and assure their offspring access to quality resources.
Polynesian oral traditions of ancient exploration of the Pacific abound
with stories of younger brothers who left to colonize new islands.⁵

In terms of pull variables, groups headed toward the New World might
have hoped—but could not have known—they would find prestige or prized
resources or trading partners here. Obviously, for the first Americans,
there were no trading partners to find. But perhaps the unknowing hope
there were such partners might have been motivation enough. People
setting off for new lands did not have to be right about what they might
find in order for it to be a reason to go looking for it.

For that matter, one should never downplay curiosity, wanderlust, the
joy of discovery, and the like, even though such motivations are
impossible to see in the archaeological record. Over the tens and
hundreds of thousands of years modern humans spread around the globe,
surely some were motivated by little more than wanting to see what was
over the next hill.⁶

Curiosity, in fact, has an adaptive underpinning. Hunter-gatherers live
off the land, but conditions change over the course of a year, several
years, and longer. Plant and animal density and distributions fluctuate,
particularly as a consequence of human predation or exploitation.
Knowing this, hunter-gatherers routinely scout out places they can go
when local conditions begin to sour (such as when the firewood supply is
exhausted, the animals are hunted out, or the plants are no longer in
season).

MOTIVE TO METHOD…

So how do groups move across empty and unfamiliar landscapes? Clovis
poses a challenging case, since its spread occurred quickly across a
wide geographic area, possibly in a matter of centuries and certainly no
more than a millennium—or so it appears, judging from its narrow range
of radiocarbon ages and the continent-wide similarity of Clovis and
related toolkits.

As a very rough measure of Clovis movement, dividing their maximum
geographic range (in kilometers) against the duration of the Clovis
period puts their expansion at a net 10-20 kilometers per year.⁷ That's
not much by our measures: many of us have longer daily commutes. But
it's extraordinarily fast by hunter-gatherer standards, and furthers the
suspicion Clovis people encountered few (if any) others along the way.
Yet, the question of how fast they moved is not nearly as interesting as
how or why they moved so far, so fast, in a new (or at least
people-free) landscape.

There are examples of archaeological and ethnographic groups moving that
quickly across landscapes and, for that matter, seascapes, but few of
pedestrian groups moving that fast across an empty landscape, let alone
an empty continent. The closest comparisons are to the colonization of
the high Arctic, and that's no surprise: that's an environment that
lends itself to lightning traverses. Consider the cases of the
Paleo-Eskimo and the Thule.

The Paleo-Eskimo (badly named: there is nothing to indicate they are
ancestral Eskimo or spoke an Eskimo language; today's Eskimo refer to
them as the Tuniit) moved across the high Arctic from Alaska to
Greenland between 5000 and 4500 BP. Their origins are uncertain, but
they carried distinctive stone tool assemblages, found in sites that
resemble those of the Siberian Neolithic, where they seemingly
originated. These were groups that exploited seasonally freezing Arctic
coasts and especially the adjacent interior highlands. They traveled
quickly and left little behind: their sites are few, widely spaced, and
sporadically occupied by what must have been small populations. As with
Clovis, vast stretches of ground were crossed but not occupied.⁸

How the Paleo-Eskimo fueled themselves is puzzling, given their lack of
time to accumulate knowledge of complex environments and resources.
Robert McGhee offers the tantalizing hypothesis they could do so by
targeting musk ox, which had evolved the unfortunate defensive strategy
of responding to predators by bunching together, with rear ends inward
and massive heads and sharp, hooked horns aimed outward. That strategy
may have been effective against wolves, their longtime natural enemy,
but proved ill adapted when a new predator came on the scene. To humans
armed with a new and deadly weapon—the bow and arrow—a circle of musk ox
was a hunter's dream: large, stationary targets that could be shot at
relatively close range, and which provided ample food.⁹

The descendants of the Paleo-Eskimo span the northern portion of the
continent, then ultimately disappear from archaeological sight, their
place on the landscape later taken by the Thule, who were ancestral
Eskimo. The Thule also radiated quickly across the high Arctic, but
later in time (Chapter 6). And like the Paleo-Eskimo, the Thule were
apparently following a prey species: bowhead whales, a relatively
slow-swimming and placid species that could yield upward of 50 tons of
meat and blubber. The Thule had hunted bowheads for millennia, mostly
around the Bering and Beaufort seas. There whales and people may have
stayed, save for the Medieval Warm Period, which enabled the whales to
expand east through now-unfrozen seas. The Thule hunters went along for
the ride, metaphorically speaking, along the way leaving artifacts and
sites that are remarkably similar from Alaska to Greenland.¹⁰

There are obvious differences between the Paleo-Eskimo and Thule cases,
and that of the colonization of the Americas. The later peoples were
radiating outward in a familiar, relatively homogeneous, and (in the
case of the Thule) newly expanding Arctic niche. Clovis groups were
pioneering a vastly larger, trackless, and increasingly exotic and
highly diverse landscape, one that ranged from open northern grassland
to closed southern forest. No matter how varied the Late Holocene Arctic
might seem (and no doubt it seemed varied to those who lived there), it
was nowhere as varied, or as environmentally and climatically unsettled,
as late Pleistocene North America (Chapter 2).

The whale-hunting Thule also had at their disposal watercraft for
long-distance travel, making it easy to move far and fast. Paleoindians
surely had rafts as well. They did, after all, cross the Mississippi
River at a time when it was swollen with glacial melt-water, and they
reached the Channel Islands of California. But boats would hardly have
helped them rapidly colonize the Great Basin, the high plains, or any of
the other areas of the continent where they camped far from any lakes or
navigable rivers. The move from Alaska to Greenland across the northern
maritime region was hardly as complicated as the one from Alaska to
Panama.

But there is one apparent similarity in the three cases: the size of
their prey.

…AND METHOD TO MAMMOTHS

Robert Kelly and Lawrence Todd argued in a very influential paper that
Clovis groups moved quickly into and across the Americas by following
the big-game animals of late Pleistocene North America. It's an argument
since elaborated by others, and it has obvious appeal. Preying on large
animals, and especially targeting the Pleistocene megafauna, would have
made it possible—even obligatory, they say—for the first Americans to
move rapidly across long distances and through the continent, and it
would have enabled them to easily hurdle any ecological boundaries. The
journey from open plains into closed forest would not have required a
change in adaptation. Just take aim at mastodons, now that their distant
elephant cousins (the mammoths) had been left behind.¹¹ This idea, taken
to its extreme, roots Paul Martin's belief Clovis groups hunted the
several dozen genera of Pleistocene megafauna to extinction.

Could the colonization of the Americas have been that straightforward?
Unfortunately for them (and us), probably not. Not all animals, let all
alone all elephants (or mammoth and mastodon, in our North American
Pleistocene case) are alike in their behavior. Wildlife biologists and
skilled hunters alike know that finding animal prey requires knowledge
of how they behave on the landscape, and that varies by the animals’ age
and sex; the size and composition of the herd (and where they fit in the
herd hierarchy); whether animals are breeding, pregnant, or lactating;
the season; the availability of forage and water; the topography;
exposure to predation; and so on.¹² As archaeologist (and lifelong
hunter) George Frison observes: “To successfully match wits with wild
animals with the intent to kill them requires a thorough knowledge of
the hunting territory and the behavioral patterns of the species
residing within it.”¹³

A hunter might be able to bring the same weapons to the hunt. A mammoth
or mastodon could be felled just as easily with the same type of spear
point. But how different species responded to stalking or attack surely
varied. While accompanying G/wi hunters of the Kalahari Desert, George
Silberbauer observed that “the bow and arrow are versatile weapons, but
switching from one prey species to another involves more than aiming at
a different animal. Each species calls for a different approach, target
selection, and because of differences in susceptibility to arrow poison,
a different method of pursuit after the arrow has struck home.”¹⁴
Hunting a lone mastodon browsing in the forests of eastern North America
would have posed a very different challenge from hunting mammoth (a herd
animal) grazing on the open plains, or for that matter, from hunting
bison, deer, moose, or any other large animal, each with its own
idiosyncratic behaviors—which probably explains why megafaunal kills
sites are so rare (Chapter 8).

But let's not stop the pursuit of big game just yet, for mammoth and
mastodon were occasionally taken by Clovis groups, and there's reason to
suppose hunting big game was important, even if it did not serve to
propel Paleoindians across the continent. The reasoning goes like this:
colonizers newly arrived in North America were “pre-adapted to hunting,”
most often large game.¹⁵ But that requires qualification.

[images]

FIGURE 39.
Excavations in the Late Pleistocene levels at the Broken Mammoth site,
Alaska. (Photograph courtesy of David R. Yesner.)

One of the important facts to emerge from David Yesner's excavations at
the Broken Mammoth site (Figure 39) on the Tanana River in central
Alaska, dated to 11,800 BP, is what other game was available and
exploited in the far north. Among the approximately 10,000 bones
recovered at the site were those of bison, elk, caribou, moose, mountain
sheep, ground squirrel (the most numerous of the small mammals), hare,
marmot, river otter, and collared pika. But mammals were not the only
thing on the menu: so were birds (fatty birds, too). Most of the bird
bones (65%) were from tundra swan, but there were also three species of
goose (Canadian, Snow, and White-fronted), five species of ducks, and
willow ptarmigan (not only does this tell us something about the menu,
but it also indicates the North Pacific avian flyway had by then been
reestablished in the wake of deglaciation). And then, too, there were
salmon and grayling pulled from the Tanana. Ironically, there were no
mammoth eaten at the Broken Mammoth site. Its name came from ivory
fragments the inhabitants of the site must have found on the landscape
and collected as keepsakes or raw material for making tools, for this
was old ivory, predating the site occupation by nearly 4,000 years.¹⁶

The picture that emerges of high Arctic subsistence, even in Pleistocene
times, is one of broad-based diets. Meat was a large part of it, and not
by fad or choice but by necessity. In the Arctic, there were not many
other subsistence options available. Edible plants were and are rare,
and only seasonally available. That said, even obligate Arctic hunters
in historic times made use of about 140 species of plants.¹⁷

When the first Americans arrived south of the ice sheets in unglaciated
North America, they would have found an environment teeming with
animals, and a far richer supply of carbohydrate-yielding plants,
allowing a wider range of food choices. Even better, the animals had
never before peered down the shaft of a spear, and initially were surely
naive about the danger humans presented. Faced with a full menu of
possible entrees, the first Americans likely did what hunters the
anthropological world over do: they ranked their targets based on their
expected return rate. High-ranked resources, the ones worth pursuing,
are those that provide the greatest payoff for the effort expended.

As a general rule, resource ranking of animals roughly correlates with
body size: large game tends to be a high-ranked resource, smaller game
lower ranked. There's far more return for the effort of killing a large
animal like a bison, say, than a small one like a prairie dog. It takes
an awful lot of effort and time, not to mention an awful lot of prairie
dogs, to match the food and protein equivalent of a single bison. Yet,
like all general rules, as Douglas Bird and James O'Connell explain,¹⁸
this one has exceptions: the very biggest of the big game (whales, say,
or mammoth) might not be high-ranked prey under all circumstances
because of the cost and risk of pursuing and killing these very large
animals. Is your dinner worth your life? Not on a regular basis, though
there are payoffs to occasionally going after even the biggest game.
After all, showing off one's hunting skills has its benefits, too
(Chapter 8).

At the other end of the body-size scale, lowly grasshoppers can be
high-ranked resources during seasons when they are so abundant a forager
can net in an hour enough insect protein to feed a family.¹⁹ And some
resources change in rank as environments change (as, for example, when
drought sets in, and seeds become a viable option), or for want of other
higher-ranked foods, or with changes in technology (the invention of
toggle harpoons promoted the rankings of many marine mammals).

Given a choice between pursuing a high-ranked resource and a low-ranked
one, hunter-gatherers will pursue the higher-ranked one. They do so even
if the lower-ranked resources are more abundant, simply because the
costs of going after lower-ranked resources—capturing, killing, and
butchering all those prairie dogs—tilt the cost-benefit equation in
favor of the one-stop shopping offered by a bison. The number of
lower-ranked resources in the diet is thus not a consequence of their
abundance, but instead of the abundance and availability of
higher-ranked resources (a good thing, too, else we humans would have
spent an inordinate amount of our evolutionary history eating beetles).

The diet breadth model predicts that hunter-gatherers do not simply eat
whatever they encounter, but instead decide on which food(s) to take
based on the search time that must be spent looking for food, and the
processing time needed to pursue, capture, harvest, and process the food
for eating. The optimal diet is a compromise: as more (and lower-ranked)
prey are added to the menu, search time decreases (more potential
targets), but in a see-saw fashion, processing time increases (adding
prey requires different tactics to track, kill [or harvest], and
prepare, and possibly additional, even specialized gear). The goal,
often sought though not always realized, is to find the mix of resources
that minimizes both search and processing time.

What of our newly arrived American colonizers? The diet breadth model,
as Kelly shows, predicts that hunter-gatherers will decide on which food
to take based on a knowledge of the quality of different foods, and on a
knowledge of resource densities (and hence search costs) and processing
costs (return rates). The hunting of the naive prey was likely good at
first, probably so good that the high-ranked resources in an area would
soon decline in the face of hunting pressure, and once the prey realized
this new predator was something to be avoided (this is called resource
depression).²⁰ Faced with diminishing returns, colonists could choose to
move to unoccupied areas where familiar game animals were present, or
stay in place and expand their diet by working their way down the food
chain.

But when to stay and when to leave? Patch choice models hold that
foragers will stay in a place as long as the expected return rate is
above the average return rate for the environment. Once it appears
better return rates can be had elsewhere—when the grass, it's realized,
really is greener on the other side—and after factoring in the cost in
time and energy of moving, the original place will be left behind. But
whether moving or staying, the forager needs information: What other
resources are available in other patches? What other, possibly
less-familiar and lower-ranked animal and plant resources are available?
Where are they?

LEARNING LANDSCAPES

These models assume a forager knows something about resource
availability across a wide area, and can make informed decisions about
what to pursue, how long to stay, and when to leave. Gaining that
knowledge requires extended periods observing how the animal behaves
over the seasons and in different settings and circumstances: the more
time that's invested, the more reliable the chances of success.²¹
Colonizers new to a landscape haven't had the luxury of long experience
learning their prey, and early on would not have the knowledge to
anticipate when and where their prey would be found. Nor can they ask
the locals for help: there aren't any. Each new habitat colonizers
entered would, for a time, have been unpredictable and perhaps
unreliable.

This is not to say—as some have accused archaeologists of saying—that
the first Americans were “timid, tentative, and diffident foragers [who
were] baffled” by this New World.²² They were surely quite the opposite.
The first Americans made it here and thrived because they were anything
but cultural dopes. Granted, they started with a proverbial blank slate,
but they were not completely naive either. They must have possessed
well-honed hunting strategies, a general knowledge of animal behavior,
abroad familiarity with plants, geological prospecting skills, toolkits
adaptable to various contingencies and, in all likelihood, a long
history—by virtue of the vast and empty northern landscapes they'd
already pioneered—of being opportunistic in their adaptations, and of
maintaining a flexible social organization, long-distance kin relations,
and a tradition of information sharing whenever possible (all vital when
there are few of you on the landscape).

Likewise, though they were entering new habitats as they moved across
the continent, as pedestrian hunter-gatherers, they would have done so
(literally) step by step: they could see in the distance, for example,
periglacial environments give way to northern grasslands, and thus would
have had time to scout what was ahead and anticipate some of its
adaptive challenges. Few colonizers (and the first Americans were not
among them) are suddenly thrust into utterly unfamiliar environments
poles apart from where they've been. The English in the late sixteenth
and early seventeenth centuries in America came close, and nearly
perished as a result (it hardly helped that the Roanoke Island and
Jamestown colonies both had the monumental bad luck of arriving and
trying to establish themselves during the worst years of an
extraordinary drought).²³

What America's first peoples therefore needed to build on their prior
knowledge so as to maximize their chances of success were “maps” of near
and increasingly distant lands to know where to move; an understanding
of the seasons and climate to know when to move; and a familiarity with
a region's animals and plants as well as the location of other
necessities like water and stone to know how to move. To be a successful
colonizer of the Americas meant using the neural hardware and cognitive
software with which all humans come equipped, taking cues from the
environment, and above all, paying attention and learning (see Table
11).

TABLE 11 Components of landscape learning

[images]

FINDING THE WAY

Much of our modern world is covered in networks of roads laid out with
signposts of distance and direction, even entering eastern Beringia
(Figure 40). There's little incentive, as geographer Reginald Golledge
observes, to pay close attention to the environment we pass through, and
most don't. We pick routes that may not be the shortest or most direct,
but are good enough to “get me there anyway.”²⁴ Ineffectiveness and
inefficiency seem to characterize our movements across space, yet the
consequences may be little more than socially awkward moments, like
arriving late at a dinner party.

In times past and on unknown landscapes, the penalty for geographic
inattention may have been more severe, as when hunting parties became
lost and failed to retrace their steps, or ocean-going colonists were
not as prudent as they needed to be. Being lost on land was not always
fatal, of course, nor would it carry the same costs as being lost at
sea. Still, even in places like the lush tropics, becoming lost can be
fatal if one fails to recognize the potential foods in that setting; the
Spanish Conquistador Gonzalo Pizarro nearly met his demise in the upper
Amazon in 1540-42 for just that reason.In the unforgiving desert or high
Arctic, the danger is much greater. Hunter-gatherers there take great
measures to avoid getting lost and rarely do, save when ill or overtaken
by bad weather.²⁵

Hunter-gatherers hedge their survival bets by learning the landscape.
Working among the Nunamuit (Eskimo) of northern Alaska, Lewis Binford
observed that an individual hunter might annually range over about 5,400
km² of territory, while together the members of the band might annually
move over as much as 25,000 km². The knowledge of what was seen and
experienced would be widely shared. Accumulate those movements over a
lifetime of hunting and shifting settlement, and an individual Nunamuit
might ultimately travel over an area of about 300,000 km², and if an
individual listens carefully to stories told by others, he or she can
know about places without ever having seen them.²⁶ It's little wonder
that at the turn of the twentieth century, an Eskimo living in the high
Arctic drew maps for an anthropologist that detailed topography,
landmarks, and places over an area of approximately 650,000 km², parts
of which he knew only by hearsay, but accurately depicted nonetheless.
This is geographic knowledge on a vast scale, but given the sparseness
of the Arctic environment (not much food per kilometer here), it is on
the high side for hunter-gatherers. Even so, G/wi hunters of the
Kalahari have detailed knowledge of areas covering 20,000 km², and
similarly scaled geographic knowledge is possessed by native
Australians.²⁷

[images]

FIGURE 40.
Pointing the way to the New World: a sign in downtown Barrow, Alaska, at
the gateway to the Americas. The first peoples of the New World had no
such wayfinding help, but nonetheless were likely skilled at finding
their way out (and back) across unknown landscapes. (Photograph by David
J. Meltzer.)

Within these respective areas, the landscape was known and named with
remarkable detail, all without benefit of maps or instruments (a
traditional knowledge that is fast disappearing in the high Arctic
because of the introduction of GPS technology²⁸). In their absence and
in the face of utterly unknown terrain, colonizers could use a variety
of topographic markers, environmental cues, generic knowledge, and the
cognitive “software” we humans have developed over evolutionary time: a
sense of direction; the capacity to store information; and the ability
to integrate time, motion, and relative position as one moves.
Wayfinding, our universal ability to “determine a route, learn it, and
retrace or reverse it from memory,” enables us to travel across a
landscape without getting (too) lost, while constantly maintaining an
awareness of a position relative to a starting point, and do so despite
the well-documented tendency of humans in featureless environments to
veer (by an average of about 18°).²⁹

Studies of wayfinding suggest that initial colonizers on an unknown
landscape would likely be guided by features that are large, readily
visible, or otherwise distinctive: prominent landmarks, or major
topographic and geographic features (mountains ranges, rivers,
coastlines). This, of course, varies by landscape. Among the
tundra-dwelling Eskimo, directions are figured by the position of the
sun and stars, and by the prevailing wind direction (marked by snow
drifts or sand dunes); their forest brethren orient by topography,
rivers, lakes, and other such features.³⁰

The less familiar the forager is with an area and the greater its size,
the coarser the resolution of the cognitive “map” of the landscape. Over
time, however, knowledge of the region will come to include highly
specific references to particular places, their characteristics, their
use, and their identity (social, geographic, historic, ritual, and so
on), for the events of a place give it meaning.

Human behavior being what it is, mapping a new landscape was likely a
staged process, initially involving scouts or hunters pursuing game
while probing into unfamiliar terrain. The oldest archaeological site in
an area may not represent the first settler, but instead the first
person to scout around.

Not all landscapes are alike in what Golledge terms their
“legibility,”³¹ their appeal, or the ease with which they can be learned
or traversed. In some instances, wayfinding is easy but travel is not
(e.g., across mountainous terrain); in other cases, travel is easy and
wayfinding not (vast, flat, featureless plains); in still other cases,
both travel and wayfinding can be challenges (heavy forest) (Figure 41).
Had colonizers new to a continent followed paths of less resistance, as
Anderson and Gillam suggest (Chapter 6), they might have threaded their
way across the continent, through areas of relatively low-lying
topography, along major river valleys, skirting glacial and pluvial
lakes, or moving along the coastal margin.

In addition to the many and often highly visible or prominent natural
features humans may have used as landmarks for their emerging cognitive
maps of the landscape, colonizers likely also created artificial markers
to help find their way. These would be especially important on
geographically monotonous landscapes like flat, featureless grasslands.
Francisco Coronado, who in 1541 led a small army onto the high plains of
western North America in search of a rumored City of Gold (Quivira),
nervously described the region as so “bare of landmarks [it was] as if
we were surrounded by the sea.” And though he traveled with a few crude
“sea-compasses,” every morning his men still got a fix on the sunrise,
after which arrows were shot in the direction they were heading in order
to maintain their bearing, and piles of bones or buffalo chips were left
behind to mark their trail. Even so, Coronado's entourage meandered, and
regularly leaked stragglers and lost hunters.³²

[images]

FIGURE 41.
Landscape illustrations of the relative ease or difficulty of travel and
wayfinding. These vary in degree of difficulty depending on the
topography, landscape cover, orientation points, and the like, as shown
in these few examples. (Photographs by David J. Meltzer and Ethan I.
Meltzer.)

COPING WITH CLIMATE

Coronado also had the dubious honor of being the first European to
experience the fierce wrath of a plains hailstorm, which hit his company
in the spring of 1541 and destroyed tents, scattered horses, dented
helmets, and broke most of their water containers (pottery and gourd
canteens). It was the last straw: a food shortage, doubts about whether
Quivira truly existed, and strong misgivings about the Natives who
promised to take him there, prompted Coronado to send most of his army
back to New Mexico. With a small force, he continued north and found
Quivira, but it proved to be only a small, gold-less village on the
plains of central Kansas. And at that moment, he illustrated the
consequences for would-be colonists of climatic ignorance: he stayed in
Quivira only briefly, then beat a hasty retreat, fearing the oncoming
winter would be early and arctic, and trap his force amid Natives
growing increasingly hostile.³³

Coronado was right about the Natives, but he had no idea what winters
were like in central Kansas. All he had was a brief glimpse of its
summer weather, and he knew nothing of its climate. That distinction is
important: weather is the sum total of atmospheric variables
(temperature, humidity, precipitation, wind, and so on) for a brief
period of time. Climate is the cumulative picture of weather over a
longer period of time, and of how it changes seasonally, annually, and
over even longer spans (Chapter 2).Humans adapt to the weather, but to
be successful over the long term, they have to know something about the
climate over the course of the seasons.

Colonists expanding into new ranges will not suddenly find themselves in
radically different climate, but as they shift latitude or altitude,
enter regions dominated by different air masses, or expand into interior
areas from the coast, they can encounter conditions that differ in
subtle and sometimes not-so-subtle ways. Those varying climates are part
of the environmental stage on which adaptation and colonization is
played out.

Climate also varies over time, occasionally in relatively predictable
cycles but mostly not. Some of that variation occurs on a scale
detectable to humans, as for example our recurring El Nino. But no one
lived long enough to notice, for example, the onset of a glacial period
(though it has been said the Younger Dryas came on fast enough to be
noticed by people [Chapter 9]). Colonists brand new to a landscape are
mostly in the dark about the local climate, having not been on the
ground long enough to experience more than seasonal or annual changes.
Knowing what climate will bring requires residence.

All of which means that when climates are highly variable (as they were
in late Pleistocene times), more time must elapse before an environment
can seem less uncertain. Colonists who arrive during climatic extremes
(unusually heavy rainfall or prolonged drought) will lack a sense of
whether the conditions they are experiencing are typical or unusual,
short-or long-lived, and predictable or not.³⁴ The Norse experienced
that: their tenuous toeholds on Greenland and Iceland, established
during the several centuries-long Medieval Warm Period, were shaken
loose when the climate changed for the worse, and their meager
farmsteads failed. We assume, however, more mobile colonizers with more
flexible survival strategies were better able to roll with the punches
that nature threw their way.

WHAT FEEDS AND WHAT CURES, WHAT HURTS AND WHAT KILLS

Having made it this far, the first Americans had already figured out
fire, shelter, and clothing. Once here, they needed to find the
materials (stone, wood, bone) suitable to make or maintain those items,
as well as meet their daily requirements of food and water. Learning
where, what, and how to locate those critical resources could be
relatively fast and easy, or not.

Outcrops of stone suitable for tool manufacture, for example, don't
move, and once found become known and predictable points on an emerging
map of a landscape (Figure 42). And those can be relatively easy to
find: the famous Alibates agatized dolomite outcrop near Amarillo,
Texas, prized for its high-quality stone by hunter-gatherers since
Clovis times, is bisected by the Canadian River, which carries cobbles
of the stone as much as 600 kilometers downstream of the outcrop. Anyone
seeing those cobbles in the river gravels would know it was merely a
matter of following the stone trail back to the outcrop source. It's no
surprise Clovis-age sites often occur near where major rivers and
streams (which we presume were Pleistocene travel corridors) intersect
geological outcrops of high-quality stone.³⁵

Locating water can be relatively easy as well, even in dry environments:
there, one follows game trails or the flights of birds. Finding it in
the same spot again is hardly guaranteed, however, at least not in
semi-arid and arid lands where water is neither permanent nor reliable,
or during drought when springs and lakes disappear from the surface, and
stream flow diminishes. Still, where water might be found beneath the
surface or will return after heavy rains generally does not move, and
that can be predicted, too. Surely the first Americans possessed the
knowledge of geology and hydrology to enable them to find water—there's
even tantalizing but unconfirmed evidence of well digging in Clovis
times (Chapter 8).

Neither water nor stone were resources that required new knowledge to be
exploited. Once found, stone could be flaked into useable tools, and
water collected in skin pouches and transported. There wasn't much to
learn.

[images]

FIGURE 42.
Inspecting outcrops of high-quality, knappable quartzite in the Gunnison
Basin, Colorado. Outcrops like this, where the stone occurs in large
blocks, were excellent places to acquire raw material in sufficient
supply and size, and could be readily located by following the trail of
stone washed downhill or downstream. In this case, the quartzite is more
resistant to erosion than the surrounding rock, and so forms a bench
easily spotted from a distance. (Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

Plants and animals, of course, are far more ephemeral and less
predictable on the landscape: game-rich areas may lack edible plants;
plants may not be edible all times of the year; and animals (especially
larger ones) can wander away from a previously grazed habitat, or change
their range altogether. Some resources might also require considerable
study to ascertain their use(s).

This was particularly true of plants. In North America alone, there are
an estimated 30,000 species and varieties of plants, and those in
temperate and near-tropical areas were surely unfamiliar to bygone
Siberians. The process of learning about specific plants, whether they
had food, medicinal, or other value, or possibly were poisonous, must
have entailed observation (watch to see if other animals eat them), and
possibly considerable experimentation (try it…and see what happens).

Yet, daunting as the overall task surely was, the process of botanical
learning was ultimately accomplished in prehistory with astonishing
success: as Daniel Moermann observes, “No one has ever found a plant
native to North America with any medicinal value not known to and used
by American Indians.”³⁶ In Moermann's view, intense periods of plant
research (“research” being an appropriate term here) would likely occur
under two conditions: when new diseases appeared, and when there was a
substantial environmental transformation. Colonizing the Americas met
the first condition and possibly the second, with medicinal plants
perhaps being needed when the tropics were entered for the first time.³⁷

Which is not to discount the role of plants as food. As already
mentioned, the first Americans were pre-adapted to hunting, coming as
they were from an Arctic environment where being a vegetarian was
impossible in the winter and challenging in the summer. Yet, habitual
carnivory can sometimes lead to various ills and even death: individuals
with protein-dominated diets experience higher metabolism, requiring at
least 9% more calories just to maintain basic physiological functions.
Too much protein strains the liver's ability to function, resulting in
what's called “rabbit starvation” (after the dangers of a diet dependant
on this lean animal).³⁸ Rabbit starvation can be prevented by adding
fatty acids or carbohydrates to the menu. This was accomplished in the
far north by preying on animals with high body fat content—like the
birds and fish consumed at Broken Mammoth—and supplemented by plant
collecting in the brief summers. Once in plant-rich, unglaciated North
America, colonists were likely also snacking on carbohydrate-rich plants
to round out their diet (Chapter 8).

As knowledge of a plant's properties was built through observation and
experimentation, there would have been considerable advantage to
maintaining it. Otherwise, each subsequent generation would have to scan
the plants anew. That seems unlikely, given the vast number of plants to
scan. One supposes, instead, that once broad classes were
identified—recognizing it's an oak, say, and not a pine—and their
general properties learned—oaks produce acorns that can be palatable
when leached of tannic acid—this knowledge was broadly shared. Then it
was merely a matter of correctly spotting different species of oak in
new settings. So it was, for example, that in 1492 Columbus's crew saw
few trees on Hispaniola known to them, but they did recognize some pine
and palm trees; however, they readily noticed “the palms were
extraordinarily high, very hard, slender, and straight [and] Even the
fruits they produce in abundance were unknown.”³⁹

Having knowledge at a more general level would be easier to retain
(there are only about 290 families of plants in North America, as
opposed to its 30,000 species and varieties) and transmit to subsequent
generations, especially if the plant in question was a long-lived
perennial. Knowledge at this level would give colonists an entree into
new habitats in which the species might be novel, but where they would
at least recognize the plant as familiar. Just how effective this
process can be is evident in the rich record of plants and plant parts
used for food, medicine, fuel, and raw material by the inhabitants of
Monte Verde's MVII occupation (Chapter 4).

Learning about the New World's unfamiliar animals was perhaps less of a
challenge (there were far fewer of them), but there was still the task
of understanding each species’ habits and habitats, and seasonal and
longer-term patterns in abundance and distribution. Certainly, clues
about animal movements can abound on a landscape, and surely these
colonizers were adept trackers—otherwise, they would have perished
somewhere in Beringia!

They likely could also count on four-footed help. DNA evidence indicates
dogs were domesticated from wolves some 15,000 years ago. Although the
clues are faint, it appears dogs accompanied the first peoples in their
trek to the New World, since dog remains have been found in several
Paleoindian sites. Dogs have held various jobs for humans in the past,
besides being our best friends: they helped in the hunt to bring animals
to bay, served as beasts of burden, were food sources (regularly in some
places, only as an emergency backup in others), and indeed, may have
been vital in the exploration of new lands. Dogs figure prominently in
many American Indian origin stories, acting as helpmates in ritual
passages.⁴⁰

As hunters and their dogs shifted into novel settings, there were
animals never before seen or encountered (Figure 43), making humans just
as naive as their prey, though not as disadvantaged for being so
(although Lewis and Clark's first encounters with grizzlies provide
glimpses of just how disadvantaged humans can be, even when toting
firearms).⁴¹

A generalized knowledge of animal behavior could be extrapolated from
one area to another, and hunting skills and weaponry were (to varying
degrees) transferable from one target to another. Kelly and Todd rightly
argued it is “easier to locate, procure, and process the faunal as
opposed to floral resources of a region.”⁴² That said, it is also true
the location of animals is fleeting and unpredictable (while groves of
plants, once found, can be readily relocated). Exploiting a new,
high-ranked prey species required (as earlier noted) studying its
behavior, learning where and when it might be found (its preferred
grazing or browsing areas), and how best to approach it.

Animal prey can be highly mobile, moving seasonally as forage conditions
change, especially in response to the arrival of hunters on the scene.
Prey quickly get over any initial naivete they might have once the
spears start flying. They either change their behavior or move out of
reach. Finding fewer targets, the hunters themselves need to range more
widely in search of game.

It's a volatile market for hunter-gatherers, and one they monitor by
moving: insurance for hunter-gatherers is knowing where to go next, when
return rates diminish where they are. Colonists entering a new region,
Bird and O'Connell suggest, “should occupy the highest-ranked patch
first,” all other things being equal (and assuming they can find it).⁴³
Whether, when, and where to move is decided after solving a complicated
equation incorporating knowledge about climate, plants, and animals.
Long-time residents of a landscape have relatively complete information
about resources on which to base decisions about how long to stay and
when to leave.⁴⁴ The G/wi, for example, carefully consider

such factors as the severity of the coming winter and the first months
of summer, the prospects for rain and the anticipated date of the first
rains. A floristic forecast is made for each foreseeable set of
circumstances: Should there be a severe winter with sharp frosts but a
not-too-severe early summer then such-and-such locality would be best….
The band considers not only its next move, but the whole series of
migrations in the foreseeable future. The aim is not to plot the coming
season's itinerary in detail but to work out a series of moves that will
permit the band the widest choice of subsequent sites.⁴⁵

[images]

FIGURE 43.
The first Americans occasionally encountered animals they'd never seen
before, such as this rattlesnake waiting beneath a bush. Fortunately, a
rattlesnake often provides a warning of its intentions. (Photograph by
David J. Meltzer.)

But if that landscape is unknown, or populated with exotic plants and
animals, knowing when and where the chess pieces need to move is even
more challenging.

GENDER NEUTRAL?

It has been argued that aspects of landscape learning are not gender
neutral among hunter-gatherers. There is in our shared past an
evolutionarily derived division of labor, in which males hunted and
females foraged. Although the pattern is by no means universal (more of
a guideline, say, than a rule), the trend is rooted in the fact that
hunting—especially of large game—can be very risky. Women tend to be
risk averse, especially when carrying or tending children (though there
may be other reasons why, in general, women tend not to hunt). Moreover,
as Bird and O'Connell observe, women target resources that daily provide
food for themselves and their offspring, while men favor larger prey
that can provision many in the band (but not necessarily their own
family), and draw attention and higher status to themselves. There are,
of course, situations in which women aid or otherwise participate in the
hunt, which, as Elizabeth Chilton points out, readily shift with
adaptive circumstances.⁴⁶

Regardless, by virtue of this difference, there are or might be gender
correlates or patterns in wayfinding skills, foraging knowledge, and the
scale of foraging. This is so because finding and killing highly mobile,
large animals entails different spatial challenges than does foraging
for edible plants. Tracking animals requires the ability to orient
oneself in relation to distant points on a landscape (either visible or
not), *** and being able to constantly and accurately update position
and location while on the hunt. In contrast, gathering involves locating
food plants within complex vegetation communities, tracking their
seasonal changes, and maintaining memory for objects and their
locations.⁴⁷

From this, we might speculate that landscape learning of routes and
resources was similarly gender linked. Much of the “local” knowledge of
plants and small animals, and their patterns and distributions, was
likely learned, acquired, and accumulated by women (and young children).
Broader-scale landscape knowledge, and this includes both routes and
resources, would result from men's more extensive, long-distance
logistical hunting forays across the area.

Our evolutionary history fails to explain, however, why men won't ask
for directions (and that's a rule, not a guideline).

TRUST ANYONE OVER THIRTY

Richard Nelson, working among the Eskimo in the 1960s, was struck by how
the younger generation believed everything it was told by its elders,
quite unlike many of America's youth in the 1960s. He instantly
understood why: an Eskimo hunter devoted “a lifetime to learning more
and more about the habits of the animals and about the mobile sea ice on
which he hunts,” and about the landscape he traverses. For Eskimo youth,
every bit of information they gleaned from their elders’ experience
would enhance their odds of success, and might even save their lives.⁴⁸

Yet, one individual or group can only cover so much ground. By talking
to others and tapping their knowledge about resources available in other
areas, a person can learn about places they've never been, animals
they've never hunted, and plants they've never tasted, not to mention
draw maps of areas far larger than they had ever seen. Not surprisingly,
as Silberbauer observed, when calculating moves on the landscape, all
adults in the foraging group participated in the decision-making
process.⁴⁹

Colonizers new to a landscape haven't got elders, relatives, or
neighbors who can pass along what they have learned over their lifetimes
(though it perhaps goes without saying, they haven't got written records
either). But they have descendants. As groups moved into the new
landscape, knowledge was gained by observation and experience, and
“recorded” in folklore, storytelling, and ritual. But how quickly would
colonizers learn the routes, climates, and resources of a landscape,
particularly a landscape the size of, say, North America? We have no
answers. Most studies agree detailed landscape learning is a prolonged
process, with estimates ranging from 200-1,000 years. Even the early
English colonists in America, with all the relative technological
advantages they possessed, took more than a century before they had
accurate maps of their region.

Learning is cumulative and ultimately can be sustained over multiple
generations, even among people who rely entirely on memory and oral
transmission of knowledge. Naturally, there is some information decay,
and lessons learned at one time can fail to be passed on to others. That
can be seen even as recently the massive failure of Great Plains farmers
during the 1930s Dust Bowl (Figure 44). They had arrived in great
numbers during a relatively wet period and considered those conditions
normal, unaware that a previous wave of settlers had been driven off by
severe drought in the early 1890s. They had no knowledge of that
previous experience, nor appreciation of the inevitability of drought
and the risks of farming in that semi-arid climate. And they could have
read about it.

Knowledge grows exponentially, since it can be transmitted by the
telling (genetic adaptations take longer to pass along) and thus shared
widely within and between generations, thereby rapidly spreading
information about areas, events, and conditions otherwise experienced by
only a few. To be sure, lessons learned in one area may be irrelevant in
different settings, but one never knows.

Landscape learning likely begins at the broadest geographic scale, in
what John Beaton calls megapatches, which are ecological features on the
order of coasts, plains, mountains, deserts, or forests.⁵⁰ The first
occupants of the Great Plains (a possible megapatch), would have seen
large-game animals on a vast grassland. It likely all looked the same to
them, for they would not have known and would have to learn there was
surprising variability in the grasses on which those animals grazed, and
thus differences in their abundance and distribution across the region.
Over time, those came into better focus as colonists saw more of the
details within the plains.

[images]

FIGURE 44.
Arthur Rothstein's iconic Dust Bowl photograph of a farmer and sons
walking in the face of a dust storm in western Oklahoma in 1936. Drought
and other changes in climate can have a significant impact on human
groups, and knowing that such changes occur, even if they are not
predictable, is an important element of landscape learning—which was
neglected or forgotten in this case. This photograph is apt in another
way: the dust storm captured by Rothstein that spring helped expose the
nearby Nall Paleoindian site. (Photograph by Arthur Rothstein, Library
of Congress LC-USF34-4052-E.)

In effect, landscape learning of routes and resources probably took
place from the general to the specific in terms of space, but from the
specific to the general in terms of time, particularly in the case of
climate (which is initially observed as the daily weather).

Landscape learning has costs in terms of time and energy. But those
costs are offset by the benefits of acquiring information that reduces
uncertainty and increases one's odds of surviving and thriving.⁵¹ People
can still get lost, can still starve, and can still run out of food or
water. But they are less likely to do so the more they know.

It's fair to surmise that the greatest effort in information acquisition
would occur in patchy and unpredictable environments, the very situation
in which the first Americans initially found themselves. Accordingly,
early on in the colonization process, there was a great advantage to
learning the local geography, climate, and resources of these unfamiliar
landscapes. Under the circumstances, there was good reason to see what
was over the next hill…and the hill after that.

SEX AND THE SINGLE COLONIZER

Much of the attention of colonization models, such as the one offered by
Kelly and Todd, have focused on how it was possible for colonizers to
move so rapidly across the New World. Their answer was hunting large
game. Yet, as Christopher Ellis puts it, there's more to being a
successful colonizer than “what to eat”—just as important is “who to
meet.”⁵²

We don't know how many people were in the group that first came to
America. It could have been dozens, it may have been hundreds (as Jody
Hey estimates), and it possibly was in the low thousands—but only the
low thousands. This was a colonization, not a swarming invasion. On a
continent the size of North America, such relatively low numbers would
have translated into an extraordinarily low population density, lower
than at any time in American prehistory.

To make that colonization successful over the long term, the group had
to reproduce, which meant that as its children came of age, they needed
to find mates to have children of their own. The task would have been
more or less challenging depending on the group's size, birth/death
rates, age and sex composition, marriage patterns, and how rapidly it
was moving from its geographic homeland and/or other groups. That, in
turn, raises several questions: is there a minimum group size that had
to be maintained in order to stave off extinction? How does an
individual who is a member of a colonizing band that is steadily moving
away from other people find a spouse? And do these demographic demands
suggest how colonizers might have spread across the landscape?

As anthropologist John Moore has shown, there is no magic number that
guarantees survival. A smaller band (of, say, twenty-five) might seem
more vulnerable to extinction, but it can survive as long as birth rates
are high, death rates are low, and there's a relatively even mix of
males and females of reproductive age (assuming, that is, they can find
mates). Likewise, a larger group (in the hundreds, say) can plummet to
extinction if its birth rates are low, death rates are high (especially
if there is high infant mortality), and there's been a long run of bad
luck in the sex ratios of the children—perhaps a string of too many baby
boys and not enough baby girls.⁵³

But even if the mix of ages and sex ratios is just right (there are
enough marriageable males and females), individuals in smaller bands
that have pushed far ahead into unoccupied lands will either have to
track great distances to find a mate in another group, or else marry
within their own band which, depending on how small the band is, might
mean incest or polygamy. Neither of those options is beneficial if
sustained over the long term: incest can have bleak genetic
consequences, while polygamy slows overall population growth (women in
polygamous marriages tend to have fewer children than they otherwise
might). It's best, then, to participate in the larger effective
population (the metapopulation of geneticists). Maintaining links to
distant bands can be accomplished in several ways, not the least of
which are long-distance mating and/or the occasional aggregation
(rendezvous) of smaller groups.

Demography and landscape learning are tightly linked for several
reasons, not least that the decision to stay in place or move is based
on the suitability of a new patch relative to the current one. Those
foragers who have more knowledge can better calculate those costs and
increase their survival odds. The information thus gained helps increase
population growth and reduce mortality.

CONTINENTAL COLONIZERS

How, then, might a colonizing band move into an unoccupied land,
maintain their demographic viability, and thereby minimize their risk of
extinction? John Beaton envisions two strategies that mark the opposite
ends of a continuum of possibilities: Estate Settlers and Transient
Explorers. We'll call them the Cautious and the Bold.⁵⁴

Cautious is the band that moves slowly and over relatively shorter
distances. They settle into a valley, and explore it and the surrounding
region; over time, their numbers build. As this happens, some of the
younger members see the area becoming crowded, minor spats become more
frequent, and once-plentiful game declines. On their increasingly
more-distant hunting forays, hunters spot rich and unoccupied lands down
the valley and beyond the edge of the home “estate.” A decision is made,
and soon a part of the group splinters off, but they don't venture too
far. Instead, they stay close enough to maintain contact with kin, keep
to an environment with which they are familiar and in which they have
become successful, and a place from which—if things go badly—they can
always retreat and find relatives who will help. It's a low-risk
strategy. Over time, the process of population growth followed by
budding repeats itself, and the descendants of the estate ultimately
expand to cover the continent. This process does not happen at a
terribly fast pace. Beaton envisions groups that “moved only slowly
across the latitudes

and longitudes, each daughter colony being spawned by the overflow of a
saturated estate.” Since colonization is ultimately fueled by population
growth, to speed it along would require higher population growth rates,
sometimes unnaturally high rates.⁵⁵

Bold is the band that moves independent of population size. They come
into the country and occupy a habitat, but the moment return rates begin
to decline, they move on, without waiting until crowding forces their
hand. And so they move often. In rich and unoccupied Pleistocene North
America, when hunting returns declined, there was little incentive or
need to stay put, not when there was a better living to be had several
valleys over, down the coast, or over the mountains. This strategy
favors rapid dispersal over a large area, with much of the continent
ultimately passed over lightly, as colonizers leapfrogged from one
high-ranked patch to another. They can make a good living, these
transient explorers, but it's not without risk: small groups that go too
far too fast soon find themselves geographically isolated, alone on a
vast landscape. That can put a severe strain on their ability to
maintain long-distance contacts and an accessible source of mates for
their children, raising the specter of inbreeding and drift (cultural
and genetic), and making the group as a whole vulnerable to disappearing
altogether in the face of drought, blizzard, disease, or accident.⁵⁶
Calamities happen.

Thus, colonizers on a landscape with few other people—and this applies
to both the Cautious and the Bold, but especially the latter—not only
had to be able to find distantmates and marriage partners (and
incidentally exchange information and resources), but they also had to
be able to get along with any groups they encountered, kin or no. Having
large and open social networks, flexible kin relations, and the ability
to move easily between and integrate new individuals and groups, as well
as maintain long-distance exchange and alliance networks, all combine to
diminish differences among peoples who need to stick together under
geographic circumstances that might otherwise keep them far apart for
years at a time.⁵⁷ Strongly territorial behavior, or hostility toward
strangers, would be decidedly disadvantageous to people at this place
and time.

On a diverse and unfamiliar landscape, the risk of extinctions is
greatest soon after dispersal, when population numbers and growth rates
tend to be low. The Cautious hedge their bets and stay close enough to
readily maintain overall numbers, but the price is slow colonizing
progress. The Bold run greater demographic risks, but the rewards are
higher: “with a generalized tool kit, a naive fauna, an unconstrained
social/political environment, and a bit of luck, a lineage might see the
Northern Lights, note the transit of the Equatorial sun, and feel the
chill winds of the southern oceans in the space of ten or fewer
generations. This is its own form of success.”⁵⁸

Arguably, then, colonization of a new landscape likely involved
trade-offs between a series of competing demands, including

 

1.  maintaining resource returns, or keeping food on the table,
particularly as preferred or high-ranked resources declined, and in the
face of limited knowledge of the landscape;

2.  maximizing mobility, in order to learn as much as possible, as
quickly as possible about the landscape and its resources (in order to
reduce environmental uncertainty in space and time);

3.  maximizing residence time in resource-rich habitats, in order to
enhance knowledge of specific changes in resource abundance and
distribution (you learn more by staying longer);

4.  minimizing group size, in order to buffer environmental uncertainty
or risk on an unknown landscape; and, finally and perhaps most
critically,

5.  maintaining contact between dispersed groups, in order to exchange
information, resources, and especially mates.

 

Colonizers had to balance the equation between moving to explore and
staying to observe. So were the first peoples Cautious or Bold? It's a
trick question, since these are just the extreme possibilities, and
there are many variants in between. But I lean toward the Bold and for a
very simple reason. The archaeological record we have, whether of Clovis
of pre-Clovis, is not dense enough to match what we would expect to see
of Cautious estate settlers (even granting all the caveats expressed in
Chapter 4 about the scarcity of sites of this age). That does not rule
out a role for population growth in the New World colonization; it only
means this was not the apparent driving force. If colonizers were more
Bold than Cautious, what might we expect to see in the archaeological
record they left behind?

For one, their traces on the landscape ought to be broad and not deep.
If they were wide-ranging explorers who were leapfrogging over large
areas, their sites would be few, scattered, smaller, and more ephemeral,
marking the brief time spent in any one place—although particular
localities, including sources of high-quality stone or other spots where
permanent resources were available, should see more repeated
occupations. Their toolkits ought to look generalized and ready to be
pressed into service for a variety of tasks and contingencies (later, as
groups settled in to new habitats and encountered new challenges, we
would expect to see new tool forms invented to meet those challenges).

The scale of movement (those leaps) ought to vary in part based on the
richness and complexity of the megapatches the group occupied. For
example, groups on the open, treeless western plains would be expected
to move farther and faster than those in the complex environment of the
eastern woodlands. In either case, their movements can be tracked by
looking at where they obtained the stone to make their tools. Rock types
can often be “fingerprinted” to particular geological formations, and
this provides a rough measure of the distance and bearing from source to
site (but a rough measure only, because it fails to account for the
meanderings of the group or individuals, as explained in the next
chapter).

The type of stone, and the distance and direction it was moved, also
provides a potential key to unlocking an aspect of landscape learning:
namely, how the first Americans may have staged their wayfinding on the
unknown landscape. Hunter-gatherers aim to minimize the number and
weight of tools they have to carry (only they and possibly their dogs
were available as pack animals). But venturing into unknown terrain
poses a particular challenge since the colonists would not know where
suitable stone might be found when they needed to replace tools that
broke (as they inevitably do), nor could they haul months’ worth of
stone with them. One possible solution would be to scatter “supply
depots” of stone on the landscape on their outbound exploring trips, so
at the very least they need not return all the way to the outcrop to
refurbish their tool kit. These caches of stone would be there if
needed, and could be abandoned if not, but either way become fixed and
predictable points on an otherwise unknown landscape for the individual
who leaves them in place, and for all who are told about them.

Although the movement across the continent might have seemed slow on a
human time scale—double-digit generations, say—it will likely look
astonishingly fast to us in archaeological time, for those generations
are easily encompassed in the “wink of a radiocarbon eye” (to use
Beaton's charmingly mixed metaphor⁵⁹). Of course, coupling their speed
with the late Pleistocene radiocarbon plateaus (Chapter 1) may make it
impossible for us to develop a high-precision chronology of
colonization, or track movement within and between megapatches. But if
we ever do, we might expect to see a stutter-step pattern to the
colonization process as groups spent relatively longer periods of
residence within a megapatch, separated by rapid movements between them.

We also expect, as Bird and O'Connell suggest (above), for sites to be
located initially in the highest-ranked patches, but that, too, will not
always be easy to ascertain, demanding as it does evidence of past
animal and plant availability that is more detailed than we can usually
muster.⁶⁰ Likewise, it might be difficult to see patterns and trends in
the diet, such as resources being added to the diet as their rankings
change by virtue of knowledge gained about them, given the vagaries of
preservation of animal bones and plant remains. Nonetheless,
high-ranked, big-game resources ought to be taken, and there should also
be evidence of the exploitation of other lower-ranked resources that
might be in an area. If the archaeological record is sufficiently
detailed, we should be able to spot resource depression setting in as
prey and predators wised up to one another, as human populations grew,
and as animals became more wary and/or fled an area.

The first peoples, to offset their high settlement mobility and
dispersal across their new landscape, had to maintain contact with
distant groups and keep open social systems to help recognize strangers
as friends. Long-distance contacts can be detected archaeologically in
stone exchanged among groups, or in rendezvous sites that brought
together people widely dispersed, which are not as hard to spot
archaeologically as one might imagine (Chapter 9 points to one such
site).

Open social systems are a bit more difficult to detect, but may be seen
in proxy form in what are known as style zones, the widespread
distribution, use, and exchange of instantly recognizable, and sometimes
highly symbolic, artifacts such as Clovis or other distinctive styles of
projectile points. These forms may have had functions, but could also
serve as a currency (a term not to be taken too literally) for social
and ritual functions, and over long spans and large areas could serve to
maintain recognition and alliances—not unlike, say, the custom of
athletes exchanging country pins at the Olympics. In a similar
colonizing situation but very different setting, Patrick Kirch argues
that the exchange of Lapita-style ceramics and other items between
widely separated Pacific island populations served as a social glue that
helped cement long-distance alliances and a supply of suitable marriage
partners in the face of “unpredictable environmental hazards…[and]
demographically small and unstable groups.” Having friends and relations
(real or fictive) might have meant the difference between survival and
extinction on these remote islands.⁶¹

Early on in the Paleoindian period, Clovis points should be broadly
similar in style and technology across a vast area of North America,
more so than any artifact forms in any later cultural period,
Paleoindian or otherwise. The extent of the Clovis point distribution is
a by-product of the size of the colonizing footprint, but their
similarity across that range could reflect the maintenance of a common
symbol of an extensive social and mating network, which helped offset
the effects of distance.

Still, those effects are inevitable, so we expect over the decades and
centuries, as groups spread ever further from another, that there would
be cultural drift over time and space as the initial, “founder styles”
diverged and diversified. Ultimately, new stylistic forms should appear,
and those continent-wide style zones should shrink. As we will see in
the next two chapters, we can catch glimpses of some of these
hypothesized processes and features. We'll start with Clovis.⁶²

[images]

PLATE 1
Folsom fluted point in situ between the ribs of a Bison antiquus. Found
in September 1927 at the type site in New Mexico, it was the first proof
people had arrived in North America by Pleistocene times. (Photograph
courtesy of the Denver Museum of Nature & Science, Denver, CO. All
rights reserved, Image Archives, Denver Museum of Nature & Science.)

[images]

PLATE 2
The Meander Glacier flowing out of the Borchgrevink Mountains toward the
Ross Sea, northern Victoria Land, Antarctica. Although the glacier is
shrouded in snow, its crevasses appear as a corrugated surface atop the
snow. The prominent peak is Mount Kinel at 2,160 m above sea level.
(Photograph courtesy of Steve Emslie.)

[images]

PLATE 3
Glacial ice calving into the Pacific Ocean off Patagonia, South America.
Such would have been a common scene along the Pacific Coast of North
America during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). (Photograph courtesy of
Anne S. Meltzer.)

[images]

PLATE 4
Skeleton of the now-extinct giant ground sloth, Paramylodon harlani.
(Photograph courtesy of Louis L. Jacobs.)

[images]

PLATE 5
View across the Pedra Furada site, showing the great height of the cliff
face looming above the site. The lone figure in the center distance is
James Adovasio. For scale, he stands just over 6 ft tall. (Photograph by
David J. Meltzer.)

[images]

PLATE 6
Looking east from San Miguel Island at Daisy Cave (middle distance) and
the Arlington Springs site on Santa Rosa Island (far distance). Both
sites are nearly 11,000 years old, and though they indicate early
coastal occupations, they are too far south (near Santa Barbara, CA) to
bear directly on the question of whether the first peoples came from
Alaska via a coastal route. (Photograph courtesy of Torben Rick.)

[images]

PLATE 7
Rhinoceros horn foreshaft (left) and two of the stone tools (right) from
the Yana RHS site, Siberia. In its form and scored, beveled ends, the
foreshaft resembles ones found in Clovis sites, though the Yana specimen
is twice as long (but about the same width) as the average Clovis
example. Although reminiscent of Clovis, the Yana artifacts are more
than 16,000 years older, making any historical links between the two
occupations tenuous. (From Pitulko et al. 2004, copyrighted by and used
with permission of Science.)

[images]

PLATE 8
The Clovis tool kit included unifacial (right) and bifacial (far left)
tools, fluted points (second and third from the left), and the
occasional stone blade (above the points). Rarely found but possibly
common were artifacts of bone and ivory, including a mammoth bone “shaft
wrench” (center), perhaps used to straighten spears, and a bone
“foreshaft” (beside it on the right) like that from Yana RHS.
(Photograph by Tom Wolff.)

[images]

PLATE 9
Clovis point (in the approximate center of the image along with some of
the different types of stone—including chert, jasper, quartzite, and
obsidian—used in Paleoindian times. The Clovis point has been reworked
as evidenced by the “shouldering” of the point about midway up both
sides, and was made of Alibates agatized dolomite, a block of which is
in the lower center of the image. (Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

[images]

PLATE 10
A quartz crystal biface, a rarity in Clovis times, from the Simon cache,
Idaho. (Photograph by J. David Kilby, courtesy of the Herrett Center for
Arts and Science, College of Southern Idaho.)

[images]

PLATE 11
The deGraffenried Clovis biface cache, Texas. Note the broad, thin
overshot flakes that extend across all or most of the face of the four
bifaces. The projectile point preform is just over 17 cm long.
(Photograph courtesy of J. David Kilby, used with permission of Mark
Mullins.)

[images]

PLATE 12
Projectile points from the Vail site kill and campground. In the case of
all the broken points, the tips were found in the kill area, the bases
at the camp. (Photograph courtesy of R. Michael Gramly.)

[images]

PLATE 13
Folsom fluted points from the Mountaineer site, Colorado. From left to
right: (1) A preform that broke in manufacture. The two large pieces
were separated, and one ended up in a fire, hence its dark red color. A
portion of the channel flake removed for the flute was found as well,
and is shown in its place on the flute scar. (2) A complete point, but
one that has been used on more than one occasion, and has been
resharpened while still in the haft, producing a slight “shouldering”
toward the tip. (3) A point that shattered on impact—perhaps when bone
met stone at high velocity. The impact flakes were driven off the tip
toward the base, essentially the reverse of the fluting process.
(Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

[images]

PLATE 14
An assortment of Late Paleoindian stone tools from sites in the central
Rio Grande Valley, New Mexico, including scrapers (left and top), finely
pointed gravers (around the knife), spokeshaves (for trimming wood or
bone, above the knife), and cutting tools. The stone for their
manufacture was brought in from all corners of the compass. The Swiss
Army knife, which fulfills many of these same tool functions today, is
just under 6 cm long. (Photograph courtesy of Tony Baker.)

[images]

PLATE 15
Some of the bison bone discarded at Folsom, New Mexico, including a
string of articulated thoracic and lumbar vertebrae (which form the
bison hump and lower back), as well as a skull, jaws, shoulder, and leg
bones, not all of which came from the same animal—the skull is from a
bison calf, the backbone from an adult cow. (Photograph by David J.
Meltzer.)

[images]

PLATE 16
The Mesa site is located atop this pronounced, isolated landform that
juts out on the North Slope of Alaska alongside Iteriak Creek (note the
individuals and equipment atop the rocky ridge). Take away the
helicopter and the field camp (to the right, below the mesa), and the
landscape would look much the same as at the time of its occupation
10,000 years ago. (Photograph by David J. Meltzer.)

