5

NON-ARCHAEOLOGICAL
ANSWERS TO
ARCHAEOLOGICAL
QUESTIONS

“The hour has at last arrived,” Pliny Earle Goddard crowed the spring of
1927, “for an extensive reorganization of our conception of the peopling
of America.” About time, too. Goddard, a linguist, had just read Harold
Cook's proclamation that the Lone Wolf Creek site (Chapter 3), with its
artifacts and extinct bison, proved beyond “reasonable doubt” humans
were here in the Pleistocene. Goddard had long suspected as much and was
delighted by the news, for it meant Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka, whom he
despised (the feeling was mutual), were finally proven wrong on their
terms. Goddard scolded them for refusing to admit a deep human antiquity
on this continent. People inclined to be critical and conservative, he
sneered, should doubt that humans were recent, not the other way around.
How else could one account for the time required for New World peoples
to domesticate maize, develop the “higher civilizations of Peru, Mexico,
and our own Southwest,” and allow for the divergence of some “fifty
languages [families] so distinct from one another in their vocabularies,
that no relationship can be traced”?¹

Assuming the first Americans came as a single group, they must have
spoken one language “as pure biology would require,” and had to have
arrived “many millenniums”² ago in order for that single language to
evolve into the hundreds now spoken. Goddard guessed 100,000 years or
more was needed. Not a bad number, Cook supposed. He thought Lone Wolf
Creek might be even three times older.

Holmes and Hrdli[images]ka weren't buying: not Cook's Lone Wolf Creek
claims (Chapter 3), nor the idea that the diversity of American Indians,
whether cultural, linguistic, or physical, implied a lengthy period of
divergence from a common ancestor. Not only were Native Americans not as
diverse as they appeared—Hrdli[images]ka had long argued American
Indians and Asians were so similar physically they could not be long
separated—but such diversity as existed could be readily explained by
processes other than divergence over time from a single ancestor. The
many Native American languages, for example, could reflect successive
migrations from Asia of different groups speaking “radically different
tongues.”³

It was a reasonable counterargument, so far as it went: cultural,
linguistic, or physical diversity could result from either cause, so by
itself was no measure of antiquity. That required independent evidence,
such as a well-dated archaeological site. But the archaeological
evidence in those days was equally unsettled. Even when Folsom came
along a few months later, its antiquity was far from what Goddard deemed
necessary. He wasn't alone. The giants of his day—like linguist Edward
Sapir, who thought it “intrinsically highly probable” there had been
multiple migrations, and even anthropologist Franz Boas who did
not—nonetheless supposed that 10,000 years was “a hopelessly inadequate
span of time” to account for American Indian language diversity.⁴

Archaeologists, physical anthropologists, and linguists haven't stopped
bickering over the origin, antiquity, and number of migrations of the
first Americans. Yet, for a brief period in the 1980s, interdisciplinary
peace threatened to break out. It began with a visit by Stanford
University linguist Joseph Greenberg to the University of Arizona, where
he presented his idea that American Indian languages could be grouped
into three families, each a descendant of three independent groups that
had separately migrated to America. In the audience was geneticist
Stephen Zegura, and he was astonished. He'd heard that punch line
before, only not from Greenberg but also from physical anthropologist
Christy Turner, who studies teeth. Zegura wondered if the pattern
evident in languages and teeth was also true of American Indian genes.
He took a look: with a bit of prodding, the genetics might also support
a model of three migrations to America.⁵

In December 1986, Greenberg, Turner, and Zegura jointly announced the
sweeping conclusion that independent linguistic, dental, and genetic
evidence was converging on a single story of the identity, number,
relative order, and antiquity of migrations to the Americas. Yet, with a
speed and ferocity unusual even for the long history of controversy over
the peopling of the Americas, their coalition was attacked. And unlike
in years gone by, where disputes mostly raged between disciplines,
strong opposition also came from behind their own disciplinary lines.
The convergence was short-lived.

So we're back to bickering. Although this debate has an almost
NASCAR-like appeal (watching for the crashes), much is being learned
from the non-archaeological evidence being brought to bear on these
archaeological questions. This chapter explores what language, skeletal
biology, and genetics can say and have said about the origin and
antiquity of the first Americans. We'll postpone for Chapter 6 the more
challenging question of how (or whether) these various lines—along with
archaeology—converge on answers to the central questions of the peopling
of the Americas.

SPEAKING OF THE FIRST AMERICANS

When Europeans arrived, American Indians spoke a bewildering number of
languages. Just how many, no one knows. Linguists recognize over 1,000
languages (out of about 6,000 spoken worldwide), but only about 600
survived as of 1950 (see Table 3). The loss of approximately 40% of
America's native languages resulted from several factors, the most
important being the arrival of infectious epidemic diseases on the heels
of European contact, which wiped out many groups of speakers, or forced
survivors to amalgamate and adopt a common tongue. That cause, coupled
with centuries of acculturation and the steady decline of native
speakers (which has been precipitous since the 1950s—only about
forty-five of North America's languages are still spoken), has meant
that many languages are poorly known, some by no more than a single
phrase or word. South America has suffered the greatest losses, where
only 15% of surviving languages have been adequately documented.⁶ The
losses, linguist Ives Goddard (no relation to Pliny Earle) grimly
observes, are “a cultural tragedy of almost unimaginable dimensions.”⁷

Given the loss of so many American Indian languages, what might we say
about the historical relationships among them? The answer lies in
classifying languages, though the aim is not just to bring order to
Babel. Languages evolve. That process, as Charles Darwin long ago
observed, parallels biological evolution: over time, languages change
and diversify into new forms (try tackling Shakespeare as it was
originally written just 400 years ago). There are, of course, language
rules, but those are not strictly enforced by the community of speakers,
though they might have been by your grade-school English teacher, nor
are they even enforceable. As new words or pronunciations are invented
by an individual (or individuals), new variants of semantics, syntax,
and sound spread through the community. Most members adopt the new
forms: speaking the same as your peers is a way of being part of a
group.⁸

TABLE 3 Counts of languages and language families in the Americas

[images]

NOTE: Data from Goddard 1996, Golla 2000, Greenberg 1987, and Kaufman
and Golla 2000; given language losses, other estimates of American
languages and language families naturally vary, but are within the same
ballpark.

But then, some of the speakers moved away—to America, say. Months pass,
then years since these individuals (or their ancestors) were part of
that original community. They may have maintained sporadic contact over
that time, rendezvousing at intervals to exchange information,
resources, or mates. But because contacts are limited, the inevitable
changes taking place within each group's speech have led to the
emergence of different dialects, or regional varieties of a language.
Although no longer identical, the dialects are to a degree mutually
intelligible. Were the splinter group to return to the ancestral
homeland or meet their now-distant cousins, they would be able to make
themselves understood.

However, if the descendants are separated long enough so as to lose all
contact, their speech will become mutually unintelligible, and their
dialects different languages. At that point, you can't go home again—or
more properly, make yourself understood if you do, for whether you
remember the old language or not, the speech of those who stayed behind
would have since changed as well.

The time it takes for a new language to develop is not known precisely,
largely because rates of language change vary owing to the size of the
group, the degree of geographic and social isolation or contact, and as
Daniel Nettle adds, circumstances such as speakers dispersing across a
new and empty landscape (obviously relevant in this instance), which
often leads to a proliferation of new languages.⁹ But as a very rough
estimate, linguists suggest a new language can emerge after 600-1,000
years.

Repeat this process over time, such that many groups splinter off and
move to distant regions, or otherwise become linguistically isolated,
and a Babel of different tongues emerges. The descendant languages are
considered part ofthe same language family, such as the Romance
languages of Europe (including French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, and
Rumanian, descended from Latin). In turn, the Romance and Germanic
families, along with ancient Greek, Sanskrit, and dozens of others, are
more distantly evolved from Indo-European, a mother tongue spoken
sometime after about 9,000 years ago (since words for wheeled transport
and domesticated animals are common) but before about 6,000 years ago
(since words for metallurgy are not).

Some languages, however, are not easily linked to any family. Euskara,
spoken by the Basque inhabitants of the Pyrenees region between France
and Spain, is an isolate, completely unrelated to its neighbor
languages. Isolates in North America include Tonkawa, Tunica, Zuni, and
(possibly) Haida. Assuming their uniqueness is not a function of
inadequate documentation, any linguistic ancestors these share with
other American languages may be very deep in time.

In principle, then, separate languages sharing an ancestor retain
vestiges of their common inheritance in words (meaning and form), syntax
(grammatical structure), and sound (pronunciation). But how distant are
the ancestral echoes we can hear? Can languages descended from a common
form spoken in, say, Pleistocene times, retain traces of their shared
ancestry? There are two camps on the issue. One argues the rate of
language change is so rapid that within 8,000-10,000 years, all vestiges
of once-common elements will be erased. The other believes they can
detect in the world's languages subtle reverberations of words that were
once spoken by the first modern humans 40,000-60,000 or more years ago.
A few among them think they hear faint sounds of the first words spoken
100,000 years ago (apparently one of those was tik [finger], according
to Merritt Ruhlen).¹⁰ Not surprisingly, the two camps take very
different routes in arriving at such divergent estimates (of which more
below), but in both cases, finding like languages is the vital first
step in recognizing their shared ancestry.

The process of classifying American languages began in earnest in the
late nineteenth century, when the BAE's John Wesley Powell—examining
similarities across word lists—grouped North America's languages into
fifty-eight broad families. Although he believed that these families
could “not have sprung from a common source,” he supposed “future and
more critical study will result in the fusion of some of these
families.”¹¹ He was right. Linguists progressively lumped languages
together until, by the 1920s, Sapir—who considered Powell's idea of
nearly sixty genetically independent families “tantamount to a
historical absurdity”—had whittled that number down to just 6 families,
each presumably sharing elements and a common ancestor.¹² Powell was
long dead by then, but Sapir still faced formidable opposition: his
mentor, Franz Boas, who chided Sapir for assuming like languages had to
be related. After all, Boas reminded him, languages (like other elements
of culture) can be similar for other reasons, borrowing and chance,
chief among them.

Sapir understood that, but he possessed remarkable linguistic intuition
and the cool nerve of a gambler. He was playing a hunch with his
6-family scheme, sensing the similarities among these many languages
meant they were related. As even his critics granted, Sapir's hunches
were often better than most others’ evidence. Still, Sapir expected
amendments to his scheme, friendly or otherwise, and he got them. One
camp, the great majority, splintered his 6 families into 150, believing
no fewer could be justified. The other camp, led by Joseph Greenberg,
out-Sapired Sapir himself, grouping all American languages into just 3
families. It was, Greenberg acknowledged, “a very bold thesis indeed.”¹³
Could it also be right? It depends on the method one uses.

THE TRADITIONAL METHOD

Traditional historical linguists—and Greenberg is not one—identify
language families from the bottom up, comparing two languages side by
side, starting with a search for cognates (words alike in form and
meaning). They recognize that shared words themselves may not indicate
common ancestry. When speakers of different languages come into contact,
words often jump from one language to another: the Norman Conquest in
1066, for example, injected a heavy dose of Norman French (a Romance
language)into Old English (a Germanic language), resulting in Middle
English, which combined elements of both.¹⁴ Likewise, some words are
similar across languages because of deep-rooted patterns in the
evolution of human speech (the reason why certain consonant-vowel
combinations such as “mama” recur), and some are similar just by chance.
How then, to sort the historically meaningful cognates from ones that
are merely accidental?

A key answer for historical linguists lies in finding sound
correspondences. As languages evolve, the words change, but so, too, do
the sounds. And they do so, as Donald Ringe puts it, with “statistically
overwhelming regularity.”¹⁵ Thus, Latin words with the consonant pairing
ct (for example, octo and noctem) consistently shifted in Spanish to a
ch sound pairing (as in ocho and noche), and so on (see Table 4). The
phonetic expression of the sound change, Ringe explains, is irrelevant:
what matters is the regularity of the pattern and the number of those
changes. Where a sound change is broadly consistent, it provides strong
and, importantly, statistically reliable proof the cognates result from
common descent; borrowing, because it is more haphazard, will not be
accompanied by regular, widespread sound correspondences.

Traditional historical linguists take the analysis a step farther. If a
number of different languages are part of the same family, they should
be able to reconstruct the proto-language by identifying the core
elements shared by the related languages, including words and
grammatical forms. The hypothesized proto-language can then be put to
the test, and this was done dramatically in the case of Indo-European,
when archaeologists in the 1920s excavated a stone tablet in Turkey on
which was carved the predicted consonant sets of the now-extinct
Indo-European language of Anatolian.

It took more than a century to work out the details of Indo-European,
despite the fact that the number of languages under study was relatively
few and well attested: approximately 100 Indo-European languages are
still spoken by half the world's population. Understanding the history
of American Indian languages is far more challenging, given the severity
of language loss and the attendant difficulty of fully identifying
cognates, sound correspondences, and the like. Nonetheless, based on the
data at hand, traditional historical linguists sort North American
languages (Figure 30) into about 33 separate families, and about as many
isolates (for a hemisphere-wide total of approximately 170 families and
isolates).

TABLE 4 Cognates and sound correspondences among Romance languages

[images]

NOTE:. Data from Ringe 2000:144.

[images]

FIGURE 30.
Map of Native North American language families and languages, based on
traditional historical linguistics. The northern portions of the
Eskimo-Aleut and Na-Dene regions are not shown (see Figure 31). Areas in
gray are regions where data are inadequate or languages are
unclassified.

The 33 North American language families (keyed to map numbers): (1)
Algic, (2) Alsean, (3) Atakapan, (4) Caddoan, (5) Chimakuan, (6)
Chinookan, (7) Chumashan, (8) Cochimi-Yuman, (9) Comecrudan, (10)
Coosan, (11) Eskimo-Aleut, (12) Iroquoian, (13) Keresan, (14)
Kiowa-Tanoan, (15) Maiduan, (16) Muskogean, (17) Na-Dene, (18)
Palaihnihan, (19) Salishan, (20) Salinan, (21) Pomoan, (22)
Plateau-Penutian, (23) Shastan, (24) Siouan-Catawba, (25) Takelman, (26)
Timucuan, (27) Tsimshianic, (28) Utian, (29) Uto-Aztecan, (30) Wakashan,
(31) Wintuan, (32) Yokutsan, and (33) Yukian.

There are as well some individual languages and language isolates
identified, as follows: (34) Aranama, (35) Beothuk, (36) Calusa, (37)
Coahuilteco, (38) Haida, (39) Karankawa, (40) Kootenai, (41) Natchez,
(42) Seri, (43) Solano, (44) Tonkawa, (45) Tunica, (46) Washoe, (47)
Yuchi, and (48) Zuni. (Adapted from Goddard 1996.)

We are a long way from ascertaining precise historical relationships
among them. Consider the Algic language family. It includes a couple
dozen languages scattered from California (e.g., Yurok and Wiyot) to the
Plains (Arapaho, Cheyenne), around the Great Lakes (Fox, Menominee), and
along the eastern seaboard (Delaware, Micmac).¹⁶ Though demonstrably
related, there are considerable differences among these languages,
bespeaking a common ancestor deep in the distant past. How deep is a
matter of speculation. So too, Lyle Campbell adds, is the question of
where the ancestral language was first spoken, and how or why the
languages became so geographically far-flung.

It is assumed, and reasonably so, that additional and still deeper
historical relationships exist between Algic and other American Indian
languages and families. As Jane Hill says, “We can never prove that two
languages are not related to each other.”¹⁷ However, the approximately
thirty-three families currently identified are as far as traditional
historical linguists care to go with the available data, which in many
cases is the most data we'll ever have, given the continued, relentless
loss of American languages.

Traditional historical linguistics yields robust groupings. Yet, robust
as the method might be, obtaining those groupings is also
extraordinarily labor-intensive and, worse, “discouragingly slow.”¹⁸
Others searched for an easier way.

SEEKING A SHORTCUT

Sapir, the godfather of the radical historical linguists, certainly
thought there was; Joseph Greenberg is convinced he found it. Greenberg
rejects the traditionalists’ approach and results, and thinks North
American language families are not nearly so difficult to group as
traditionalists portray them. He uses a technique he dubs multilateral
or mass comparison, which works not from the bottom up but from the top
down, by simultaneously comparing a relatively few words across as many
different languages as possible.

Doing so sacrifices linguistic details, but Greenberg thinks the cost is
worth it. With so many American languages to examine, comparing only two
or three at a time would make the process impossibly long. Besides, he
argues, two distantly related languages may actually look different when
compared only with each other, but their similarities would emerge when
compared against many others simultaneously. As Greenberg explains,
English and German, though related, have only vaguely similar words for
tooth (zahn in German). Yet, alongside Dutch (also a Germanic language)
the connections become more apparent (tand), as do their
farther-reaching similarities to Italian (dente), Greek (dhondi), and
the even more linguistically distant Lithuanian (dant-is) and Hindi
(da:t).¹⁹ Hindi and English share an Indo-European ancestor, but perch
on distant branches of the tree of its descendants.

Of course, just because many languages have a similar word for tooth
does not a shared ancestor make. Any single match can easily result from
borrowing, onomatopoeia, or chance. To show common origin, Greenberg
argues, play the odds: Compare a list of words. The more that are
shared, the more likely they result from common ancestry and the closer
their historical relationship. Family trees, even linguistic ones, are
like that.

[images]

FIGURE 31.
Map of Joseph Greenberg's three New World language families, based on
his method of mass comparison. The Eskimo-Aleut and Na-Dene families are
relatively uncontroversial; Amerind is not. (Adapted from Greenberg
1987.)

In applying his method of mass comparison to American languages,
Greenberg checked all the languages against a word list of about 300
personal pronouns, body parts, and common natural objects (e.g., I, you,
mouth, tooth, leg, foot, hand, dead, blood, water). He selected these
because they ought to be enduring, non-culture-specific words. From that
investigation, he concluded, as presented in his 1987 book, Language in
the Americas, that all American languages fell into just three families:
Eskimo-Aleut, Na-Dene, and one vast family called Amerind (Figure 31).

Eskimo-Aleut comprises ten languages, including Aleut, spoken on the
Aleutian Islands; Yupik or western Eskimo, spoken on the Siberian and
Alaskan coasts; and eastern Eskimo, Inuit-Inupiaq, spoken in the
northern Arctic from Alaska to Greenland. These languages are striking
in their homogeneity, Inuit-Inupiaq especially so: early European
travelers learning a dialect at one end of the range were able, albeit
with increasing difficulty, to converse with other Inuit-Inupiaq
speakers as they made their way across their territory. The lack of more
pronounced differences suggest all spoke a common language in the
not-too-distant past, and dispersed across the far north from an Alaskan
homeland relatively rapidly. The Eskimo-Aleut languages, Greenberg
believes, show close affinities to Asian Pacific Rim languages such as
Ainu and Chukchi-Kamchatkan.

The thirty-eight Na-Dene or Athabascan languages are today spoken by
three widely separated peoples: the majority, Northern Athabascans
(including Koyukon, Dogrib, Chipewyan, Sarcee) inhabit a large area of
interior subarctic Alaska and Canada; Pacific Coast Athabascans live in
the large river valleys of Oregon and northern California; and Apachean,
including the Navajo and Apache, inhabit the southwestern United States
(the Apachean apparently separated from Northern Athabascan in just the
last millennium). According to Greenberg, Na-Dene languages have distant
links with a few Old World language families, notably Sino-Tibetan and
Yeniseian.²⁰

Greenberg's Amerind family embraces the remaining approximately 900
indigenous languages of the New World, strikingly different tongues
spoken across a vast region from Hudson's Bay to Tierra del Fuego by
peoples surely separated by thousands of years of prehistory. Yet, by
Greenberg's accounting, all share some words and a distinctive first
person/second person pronoun pairing of n/m (in many Indo-European
languages, the pattern is m/t as in me/thee, moi/tu, etc.). He believes
the n/m pronoun pattern is so pervasive it should lead any “historically
minded” linguist to conclude it marks a common ancestry.²¹

Profound differences between Eskimo-Aleut, Na-Dene, and Amerind
convinced Greenberg these were distinct families in Asia before they
migrated to America, each at different times. But in what order? The
greater the differentiation within a language family, and the greater
its geographic extent, Sapir argued, the older the family (the
underlying assumption being that over time, language families become
more heterogeneous). And the older the family, Greenberg added, the
fewer the links to Old World languages and the farther south its
location: they left Siberia earliest, and traveled the farthest.

By this reasoning, Amerind, the most heterogeneous and widespread, which
lacks all but the slightest affinities with Old World languages, is the
oldest. That Amerinds inhabit nearly the entire hemisphere and are far
from Beringia suggests to Greenberg their ancestors arrived when no
other humans were here to impede their travel. They were the first
Americans.

That was apparently not the case with the Na-Dene or Eskimo-Aleut, who
today occupy lands north of Amerind speakers, and whose southward
progress was presumably blocked by them. Ancestral Na-Dene speakers,
whose language family is less internally differentiated (relative to
Amerind), and still has attenuated ties to a few Old World languages,
must have followed the ancestral Amerinds. The ancestral Eskimo-Aleuts
must have come last, since their languages are the least differentiated
and have the most conspicuous links to Siberian and Asian languages.

Languages cannot be directly dated. But Greenberg hazarded a guess based
on presumed rates of language change: the Eskimo-Aleut family was about
4,000 years old, Na-Dene about 9,000 years old, and Amerind greater than
11,000 years old. About as old as, say, Clovis.

HARSH WORDS

In the later decades of the twentieth century, Sapir-inspired lumping
fell from grace in American linguistics, and hard-nosed, traditional
historical linguists busily dismantled language families they believed
had been sloppily pasted together. Languages in the Americas was bucking
that trend, and Greenberg knew it, predicting 80%-90% of American
linguists would receive his ideas with “something akin to outrage.”²² He
was right. His claim that the vast majority of all New World languages
were historically related within Amerind met with scorching criticism.
The attack began even before Languages in the Americas appeared, when
Lyle Campbell, one of the most outraged—and who was aware of Greenberg's
forthcoming work—proclaimed it “should be shouted down.”²³

Campbell and other critics did not dispute Greenberg's goals: they, too,
sought historical relationships among languages. They also believed many
of the current American language families and isolates might be
historically related. And they accepted the Eskimo-Aleut family (but
then this grouping had long been uncontroversial). Beyond that, common
ground vanished. Greenberg's critics absolutely rejected the Amerind
grouping, and were at best lukewarm about Na-Dene. They accused
Greenberg of going too far, too fast, using bad evidence and a method
that Ringe denounced as “antiscientific” and “crap.” Most critics
privately shared this opinion; few were quite so publicly blunt about
it.²⁴

Cynics might dismiss the dispute as no more than an academic border war:
Greenberg had made his reputation studying African languages, and only
later came to work on American ones. Naturally, those who worked in the
Americas would resent his presence. Maybe. But Greenberg's
critics—experts in American languages—had legitimate complaints. They
readily showed he had badly mishandled the American word lists, failing
to recognize borrowed words (including Spanish ones), attributing words
to one language (e.g., Quapaw) that actually came from another unrelated
one (Biloxi), and including so many spurious words that one reviewer
declared Greenberg's word matches were wrong more often than they were
right. Nor were these harmless mistakes, since his criteria for spotting
similarities between languages (never consistent, the critics snarled)
sometimes involved a single consonant, making it all too easy for chance
resemblances “masquerading as historical evidence” to occur.²⁵

In tackling all the languages of America, Greenberg admitted there would
be mistakes: “It would be miraculous,” he said, if there weren't.²⁶ But
he also insisted errors were inconsequential. Comparing a few words
broadly across hundreds of languages, he argued, reduced the statistical
likelihood of having a match by chance alone. Yet, as Ringe and others
quickly countered, the situation is just the opposite: Greenberg's
method compounds the problem by multiplying opportunities for chance
resemblances (since there are a limited number of consonant
possibilities appearing in a vast number of languages).

Errors in the word lists were a serious problem, given how little
attention Greenberg paid to other aspects of language such as grammar,
sound, and meaning. Greenberg insisted he was not neglecting those
elements, pointing to the key role the “enormously widespread” n/m
pattern played in grouping Amerind. That defense gained no traction
either: the frequency of n/m in America, critics groused, was “grossly
overstated” (oddly, neither side actually tallied n/m frequencies, nor
could agree on whether counts at the level of languages or language
families mattered more). More telling, critics argued this supposedly
unique American form occurs elsewhere, while the ostensibly non-American
pronoun pattern (m/t) occurs here.²⁷

The indifference Greenberg showed to testing his language families by
establishing sound correspondences, at times belittling their importance
(even Sapir never did that), made his critics all the more dismissive of
his results and, indeed, of mass comparison itself. In reply, Greenberg
and his supporters played the Africa card: mass comparison worked
there—despite, they added, initial hostility—without sound
correspondences, etymologies, and reconstructions of proto-languages.
Why shouldn't it ultimately triumph in America as well? The “African
Fallacy,” Campbell shot back: not only were Greenberg's African language
families still in dispute, but “posturing for the American Indian
classification on the basis of an African classification is
irrelevant.”²⁸

Greenberg wanted Languages in the Americas judged as a whole. His
critics did, and rejected it wholeheartedly. Realizing he would never
convince his fellow linguists, Greenberg branded them timid souls
unwilling to seek bold, broad patterns, prejudiced against his efforts
to do so, and in the unkindest cut, not even well acquainted with their
own data.

“Megalocomparison,” James Matisoff dubbed Greenberg's method,
contrasting it with the more traditional microcomparison of languages.
Those who practiced micro-comparison Matisoff called “micromaniacs.” He
didn't need to fill in the blank about who he thought practiced
megalocomparison. He was right. Greenberg had no need of linguists’
approval. Not when he saw vindication in an “almost exact match” of his
language families with independently grouped teeth and genes, which he
proclaimed “virtually confirms the validity of the Amerind family” and
his three-migration model.²⁹

TALES FROM TEETH

In the 1920s, just as Sapir was reducing all American languages to six
families, Hrdlicka was identifying physical traits common to all
American Indians. One of the most significant was a distinctive “shovel
shape” to the upper incisor (where extra ridges on the tongue side give
the crown a shovel look). This inherited trait satisfied Hrdlicka that
all Native Americans shared a common ancestor. That was important to him
because their physical unity meant they hadn't been here long enough for
evolutionary divergence to occur, proof that his staunch opposition to
their Pleistocene arrival was correct. Several decades later, Christy
Turner's extensive analysis of teeth both fortified and falsified that
conclusion.

Why study teeth? They are hard, dense parts of the skeleton, more
resistant to weathering, and not an especially attractive target for
carnivores or scavengers, or easily broken down by insects, fungi, or
other agents. As a result, they invariably outlast the body's soft parts
and often bones as well. Although all humans share the same general
dentition (thirty-two adult teeth: incisors, canines, premolars,
molars), we differ in secondary dental traits, such as tooth shape and
size, the number of roots, crown geometry, and the like. Importantly,
Turner notes, tooth anatomy is inherited and little modified by
environment, use, health, or diet. If two groups have the same dental
traits, he argues, they are almost certainly related to one another.
Even better, because tooth structure changes slowly, it is possible to
trace a dental lineage across space and through time. And teeth can be
directly radiocarbon dated. We may never know what language prehistoric
Americans spoke, but we can examine their teeth and group them by their
similarities. Ethnic odontology Turner calls it.

Turner examined over 200,000 teeth from more than 9,000 individuals in
sites throughout the New World, and for comparison across many areas of
the Old World, especially China, Siberia, and other regions of eastern
Asia. He tallied the occurrence of twenty-eight crown and root traits,
such as the occurrence of shoveling or winging of the upper incisors,
the presence of Caribelli's trait or hypocone on the upper molars,
groove and cusp patterns on lower molars, and the number of roots
(either two or three) on some premolars and molars (some examples are
shown in Table 5).

These are traits that generally occur in all peoples, though in varying
frequency in different populations. Incisor shoveling, as Hrdlicka first
realized, is common among American Indians but rare elsewhere. On the
other hand, a Y groove on the lower first molar occurs in nearly the
same percentage (about i0%-20%) in populations around the globe. Hence,
doing ethnic odontology is a statistical exercise in ascertaining how
one sample of teeth differs from another based on a constellation of
traits.

Using such analyses, Turner distinguished Asian teeth from those of
Africa and Europe, then broadly divided the Asian sample into two
groups: Sundadonts and Sinodonts. He separates the two based on the
higher incidence of shoveling and three-rooted molars in Sinodonts, but
the division is not altogether a clean one, since on certain traits
(such as winging on the upper incisors), Sinodonts and Sundadonts are
indistinguishable. One can be hard-pressed to assign jaw fragments or
individual teeth to the correct group if all that remain are teeth with
traits common to many.

Turner suggests the Sundadont pattern, widespread in Southeast Asia, is
the older of the two and the root from which Sinodonty, characteristic
of northern Asian and all American populations, evolved. Sundadonts, he
believes, “had nothing to do with the peopling of the Americas.”³⁰

TABLE 5 Dental morphology of Native Americans and other groups

[images]

NOTE: From Turner 1985: Table 1 and Turner 1986: Table 1. Values are
expressed as percentage within the sample; sample sizes vary.

Turner puts the earliest Asian appearance of Sinodonty in the jaws of
early modern humans from the Upper Cave site at Zhoukoudian, China,
although the ages of these specimens are uncertain (the dates on them
range from 10,000 to 29,000 BP³¹). In America, the Sinodont pattern
appears in teeth from the Cerro Sota and Palli Aike caves of
southernmost Chile, dated to 9000-10,000 BP. As might be expected given
the time elapsed since Northeast Asian and American Sinodonts diverged,
Turner sees dental differences between the two. American Sinodonts have,
for example, greater frequencies of Carabelli's trait, shoveling and
double shoveling, and lower frequencies of three-rooted lower first
molars and Y-groove patterns than their Northeast Asian counterparts
(let's ignore for the moment that many of the trait frequencies for the
populations in Table 5 are at odds with these general statements).

Nor are all American Sinodonts alike. Turner subdivided them into three
groups: Eskimo-Aleut, Greater Northwest Coast (which includes southwest
Athabascan speakers), and all other American Indians. Eskimo-Aleut and
American Indians are least like each other, the first having a lower
incidence of shoveling and Carabelli's trait, but a higher frequency of
three-rooted molars. Between these extremes the Greater Northwest Coast
cluster perches, its dental traits betwixt the other two, yet showing
less internal differentiation than either. Turner interprets that as
evidence the ancestors of this group were present in Siberia, and were
not more recently hybridized between Eskimo-Aleuts and American Indians.

Like Greenberg, Turner explained his three groups as the result of three
separate migrations from the Old World (he even uses Greenberg's group
labels). All three are traceable back to the same northern Chinese late
Pleistocene Sinodonts, but none have distributions that correspond to
“natural areas” of the Americas, and so Turner believed each must have
formed separately in China or Siberia sometime after the first
appearance of Sinodonty, and then gone their separate ways, arriving in
the New World at different times via different routes. He supposes
ancestral Amerinds drifted initially to the west then north, through the
Lena River basin and then along the Arctic shelf across northern
Beringia. The Eskimo-Aleuts went east and north, down the Amur River to
its mouth, then sidled over to Hokkaido, up the Sea of Okhotsk, and then
skipped across the Aleutian Islands. The first Na-Dene traveled the gap
between the two. However, no teeth have been found along these routes.

Turner believes the Amerind dental group was the first to reach the New
World (manifest archaeologically as Clovis). By his dental reckoning,
Eskimo-Aleuts came second, and the Na-Dene were a distant third. That
relative order differs, of course, from the one Greenberg arrived at
based on languages, as they candidly admitted in their 1986 announcement
of the convergence of their views.

Their estimates of an absolute chronology for the migrations naturally
differed as well. For want of sufficient radiocarbon dated teeth, Turner
invented a quasi-absolute dating technique he called dentochronology
(not to be confused with dendrochronology, or tree-ring dating). On the
assumption teeth change at a constant rate, dental differences between
groups—quantified using the mean measure of divergence (MMD)
statistic—become a measure of the time elapsed since the groups split
from one another (see Table 6).

TABLE 6 Mean Measure of Divergence (MMD) between sample groups

[images]

NOTE: Data from Turner 1986: Table 2. Significance values not provided
in original, but assume differences are significant if MMD > -.040.
Smaller values indicate more similar groups.

To calibrate the rate of change, Turner calculated the MMD between
groups whose divergence times were independently dated, then divided the
MMD by the total elapsed time, to derive and average global dental
evolution rate of 0.01003 ± .004 MMD per 1,000 years.³² Multiplying that
rate by the MMD between various Amerind and Northeast Asian populations
suggested to Turner they split about 14,000 years ago, a time he thought
nicely corresponded to when Clovis ancestors may have first emerged in
Siberia.³³ Calculations for Eskimo-Aleut and Northeast Asian populations
yielded an age at divergence of approximately 11,000 years ago. The
numbers for Na-Dene were more elusive, but nearly all postdated the
Eskimo divergence. Altogether, not too bad a fit with the archaeological
evidence, Turner supposed. Given the vagaries of estimating antiquity
from language, Greenberg deemed it not a bad fit with the linguistic
evidence either.

CAVITIES

Indeed, much was made of the “independent” confirmation the teeth
provided of Greenberg's language groups. It was “strong presumption,”
Merritt Ruhlen argued, that Greenberg's groupings and the
three-migration model were correct.³⁴ But as Greenberg, Turner, and
Zegura candidly admitted, when an investigator in one field is aware of
the conclusions proposed in another, “he or she may be influenced by
this knowledge in developing a theory.” Thus, the “ultimate test”—as
they saw it—was whether the data from the field itself could justify the
conclusions drawn.³⁵ Did it in this case? And just how separate were the
two lines of evidence?

Ideally, analysis of the teeth ought to proceed independently of any
preconceptions about the language group to which they might belong.
Turner's analysis certainly began there, but soon thereafter, he spoke
with Greenberg about his linguistic groupings. After that, Turner
explicitly linked his dental clusters with Greenberg's language
families, and the change was in more than name only: for analytical
purposes, he pooled his tooth samples into “regional sets” by dental
similarity and by their “known or presumed linguistic affiliation.”³⁶

Now, teeth may chatter, but they don't talk. Not by themselves, anyway.
How, then, can dental groups be assigned to “common culture and closely
related languages”?³⁷ Turner did so by where the teeth were found: a
sample of teeth from sites in regions now occupied by Eskimos or Aleuts
are assigned to the Eskimo or Aleut group. It can be as simple as that,
and can cause trouble just as easily. For doing so requires seeing what
Goldilocks saw: that each group, like the Three Bears, has its own—and
only its own—language, which co-occurs over time with a particular set
of genes, artifacts, and teeth in a territory that does not change hands
(or teeth).

That might be true at certain times and places. Teeth and artifacts from
a 900-year-old site on the northwestern shore of Hudson Bay, for
example, are likely those of ancestral Eskimo speakers: there is good
archaeological reason to think no one else was there in later
prehistoric times. But 500 years earlier in the same place, the
archaeological record looks very different. Whose teeth are those? What
language did they help voice? The Goldilocks Standard, if it might be
called that, is harder to achieve as one goes deeper into the past, and
also in places that have long trafficked in human beings—like Alaska,
the corridor for all American migrations (however many there were). What
language was associated with 5,000-year-old teeth found there? Can one
presume a linguistic affiliation of undated teeth? Not surprisingly,
teeth from Alaska and the far north often stubbornly resist falling
neatly into corresponding language groups.

The dilemma is obvious: places and times where we might hope to come
onto the dental trail of the first peoples are the very times and places
where we have the least chance of figuring out who those people were or
what language they spoke. Of course, if Turner found three dental groups
in Alaska, one dated to 12,000 years ago, the other never occurring
before 10,000 years ago, and the third always postdating 4,500 years
ago, it would be powerful evidence of three migrations.

But that's not happened. Nearly all the teeth in Turner's sample are
less than a couple thousand years old, and their young age, tied to the
undemonstrated (if not false) hope that inhabitants haven't changed over
that time, makes it hard to do just that. To be sure, Turner's sample
includes all known Paleoindian and Early Archaic specimens, but that
amounts to teeth from no more than twenty sites, few of which are
actually dated to the Pleistocene.

The consequences of this complication are plain enough to see in MMD
values: teeth that ought to cluster together are dissimilar, and those
from unrelated groups overlap. For example, Aleut teeth, which ought to
be most similar to Eskimo teeth by their linguistic affiliation, are
statistically more like the Na-Dene teeth. For that matter, some Amerind
groups are dentally closer to Na-Dene than to other Amerinds. These
complications spill over into the dentochronological estimates, which
have Eskimo-Aleuts departing Northeast Asia 8,000 years ago and Na-Dene
groups 4,000 years ago, and yet by Turner's reckoning, the Na-Dene
arrival is marked by the Paleoarctic archaeological tradition, which is
radiocarbon dated to 10,000 BP (thus predating both the dental
divergence age and the earliest Eskimo-Aleut sites) (see Table 7).

Likewise, the time separating Sinodonts from Sundadonts (a
dentochronological date of about 13,460 years ago) ought to be much
greater than that separating Asian from American Sinodonts (which by
dentochronology occurred about 20,400 years ago, making it curious, too,
that Turner insists there is nothing in the dental evidence to suggest
“entry much before Clovis”). Coincidentally, a recent study of eastern
Asian teeth failed to support the validity of the Sinodont and Sundadont
groups.³⁸

In light of the messy overlap of the dental groups, physical
anthropologist and geneticist Emoke Szathmary wondered whether Turner
was forcing his results and interpretation to fit Greenberg's language
families and three-migration model. A harsh accusation, but one easily
put to the test by seeing how the teeth cluster when examined strictly
by their dental attributes, without presuming what language they once
voiced. Unfortunately, Turner has never done such a test nor published
his raw data, making it impossible for others to do so.

TABLE 7 Elapsed Time from Divergence with Northeast Asian Sinodonts

[images]

NOTE: Based on Mean Measure of Divergence values (from Table 6) and the
global dentochronological rate (.01003 ± 004).

How, then does the genetic evidence fit?

A COMPLEX INHERITANCE

When Zegura joined forces with Greenberg and Turner, he knew the genetic
evidence was not as well developed. The basics were certainly known:
packaged within the nucleus of cells are chromosomes, of which there are
twenty-three pairs per cell. Within each pair are long strands of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) made of a sugar molecule (deoxyribose or D)
attached to one of four chemical bases: guanine (G), cytosine (C),
adenine (A), and thymine (T). These, in turn, are linked to phosphoric
acid (P), the combination forming a nucleotide. A DNA molecule is a very
long sequence of paired nucleotides joining A to T, and C to G in a
double-stranded helical structure. There are approximately 100 million
nucleotide pairs (or base pairs) per chromosome, and some 3 billion base
pairs in the human genome. Segments along either DNA strand with
specific functions (not all have them) are genes, and together these are
responsible for the biology of an individual.

The nucleus at fertilization joins twenty-three chromosomes from the
mother and father: twenty-two of these chromosome pairs make up the
autosomes, and the twenty-third pair are the sex chromosomes (either XX
[female] or XY [male]). The vast majority of the DNA in the genome is
inherited from both parents, joined in a process much like the shuffling
of cards, making the offspring about a 50/50 mix of parental DNA. Since
auto somes undergo recombination each generation, autosomal DNA is a
highly complex skein derived from a geometrically expanding pool of
ancestors (two parents, four grandparents, eight great-grandparents, and
so on). Go back more than a few generations, and it becomes impossible
to tell which specific ancestor contributed a particular piece of DNA to
an individual, at least not without comparing the DNA of all.³⁹

However, one can spot genetic differences between groups by measuring
the frequency with which certain genes and mutations occur in
populations that have been isolated for periods of time. The study of
genetic distance between human populations began with serological
markers—blood group antigens (A, B, and Rh blood groups), serum
proteins, immunoglobulin (antibody molecules), and various enzymes.
These were the classical genetic markers.

Not all New World populations are genetically alike, but at the time
Zegura was working with Greenberg and Turner, he faced a challenge in
showing genetic differences among New World peoples. The classical
markers then available were known to vary on the scale of continents:
useful for separating, say, African, American, Asian, and Europeans.⁴⁰
They were stubbornly irresolute, however, on whether there were
identifiable genetic groups within Native Americans, let alone which
matched Greenberg's Amerind, Na-Dene, and Eskimo-Aleut. The closest
Zegura came were patterns in immunoglobulin Gm allotypes, but only
because their distribution was “analyzed with respect to the
three-migration hypothesis.”⁴¹ Had he not been looking for those three
groups, he might not have seen them.

The genetic evidence simply didn't match up with the languages and
teeth, as Zegura admitted. Mostly, it produced a picture of “discordant
variation,” the result of thousands of years of gene exchange,
recombination, random flutters in gene frequencies, and mutation, all
conspiring with natural selection to obscure what once may have been
discernable genetic genealogies. Unraveling millennia of history from
classical genetic markers was going to be a “challenging and highly
speculative enterprise”—or so it appeared in 1986 (it is still mostly
that way, though recently inroads have been made using genome-wide
autosomal markers to detect signals of the peopling process⁴²). And so
Greenberg, Turner, and Zegura relegated the genetic evidence to
secondary status, unable to confirm their tripartite migration model.

Ironically, within a decade, rapid advances in genetics in two separate
corners of the human genome made it possible to reject that model and
replace it with a very different picture of the peopling of the
Americas. When that happened, Zegura “fully opted out” of the tripartite
model, much to the dismay of his co-authors.⁴³

ANCESTRAL GENES

Those advances occurred when geneticists shifted their attention away
from classical markers and began looking at DNA in mitochondria, the
thousands of small, bean-shaped organelles in the cell responsible for
the cell's energy metabolism (think of them as cell batteries).
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and nuclear DNA fundamentally differ: both
occur in males and females, but through a strange quirk of nature, the
mtDNA from the sperm is discarded when an egg is fertilized, and hence
mtDNA is inherited strictly from mother to child (male or female). The
bane of human genetics—the recombination of genes in mating—does not
occur in the passage of mtDNA down the maternal line. Conveniently
enough, geneticists peering into another corner of the genome soon
realized that uni-parental inheritance also took place down the paternal
line, via the non-recombining portion of the Y chromosome (or NRY),
which is inherited directly from father to son to son (Figure 32).⁴⁴

With mtDNA and NRY, it is possible to identify the female and male
descendants (respectively) of a particular lineage, for they will
directly inherit the markers possessed by their common ancestor. But
what makes these two inheritance pathways even more valuable for tracing
ancestry is the fact that the DNA undergoes mutations, or changes over
time.

At reproduction the nucleotides in DNA are copied almost—but not
entirely—without error, which is quite astonishing, given that about 3
billion must be copied and in the same order in which they are found on
the original chromosomes. Although this takes place with amazing
accuracy each cell generation, mistakes or mutations occasionally
occur.⁴⁵ These might include the replacement of one nucleotide by
another (C→T, called a single nucleotide polymorphism, or SNP), or
perhaps involve the insertion or deletion of a base pair(s) at a
particular site. These become variants (alleles) of those 0 nucleotides.
0

Although we tend to think of mutations as trouble, particularly the ones
that directly impact the function of a particular gene, many are trivial
and indeed neutral with respect to our genes or our phenotype (outward
appearance) and are not subject to the forces of natural selection.
These neutral traits are sometimes uncharitably referred to as “junk
DNA” because they do not encode proteins or regulatory information. Each
of us carries about 100 new neutral mutations our parents did not have.

These mutations in our junk DNA can be remarkably useful for tracing
population history, since similarities among them can help trace common
ancestry. Put simply, individuals or groups that share mtDNA and NRY
markers are related; the more they share, the closer they are related,
and the closer in time their common ancestor. Consider a very simplified
example (Figure 33): the mtDNA molecule has 16,569 nucleotide base
pairs. Let's say a SNP occurs in one of the women of a population at
nucleotide pair (np) 16327 in the control region of the mtDNA molecule.
Her several daughters inherit that marker. In one of them, another SNP
occurs at np 16325. This woman and all her daughters (but neither her
sisters nor their children) now have the same markers at np 16327 and
16325. In a subsequent generation, another mutation occurs, this time in
the coding region at np 493, so all members of this lineage now have
identical markers at np 16327 and 16325 and 493. Through the
generations, the SNP list will grow, including all the mutations that
occurred previously—unless a new one happens to occur at the same site
as a previous one, erasing an ancestral marker. Meanwhile, in the other
branch of the family, the marker at np 16327 is also being passed down,
but in those other lines of descent, mutations are also taking place,
say at np 16356. All branches carry the original mutation at np 16327,
but each will have added its own shared by daughters down those
lineages, but not in other more distantly related lines.⁴⁶

[images]

FIGURE 32.
Schematic illustration of the inheritance of mitochondrial, Y
chromosome, and autosomal DNA through four generations of males (M) and
females (F). The DNA on the twenty-two pairs of autosomes, represented
by the two tall bars, combines each generation, and by the fourth
generation, the son's autosomes are a complex mix of maternal and
paternal DNA from all eight great grandparents (as illustrated by the
different patterns). The Y chromosome (the short bar) and the mtDNA (the
circle) are inherited uni-parentally, so each son carries the Y
chromosome of his father, and each child the mtDNA of his or her
mother—but only the daughter passes along mtDNA to the next generation.
Hence, the son in the fourth generation traces his Y chromosome solely
to his paternal great grandfather, and his mtDNA solely to his maternal
great grandmother. (Adapted from Hammer and Zegura 1996.)

[images]

FIGURE 33.
Schematic (and highly simplified) illustration of the descent with
mutation of mtDNA in two maternal lineages. The mutations are not as
rapid as depicted here, but the schematic is intended merely to convey
the larger point that over time, mutations occur in the separate lines
of maternal descendants, such that subsequent generations along those
separate lines grow increasingly different from one another in their
mtDNA. If both lines are descendants of a common founding lineage, they
will share a set of markers in their mtDNA (unless later mutations have
changed those as well). The analogous process also takes place down the
paternal line.

A brief vocabulary time out: all individuals who share an ancestral
nucleotide signature (np 16327 in the example) are part of the same
haplogroup, or genetic lineage, while the more specific markers within
the branches of the haplogroup (np 16325 and np 16356) are known as
haplotypes. Though one doesn't want to put too fine a point on the
analogy, think of haplogroups as language families and haplotypes as
specific languages.⁴⁷ A haplogroup is considered a founding lineage if
it occurs in both Asian and Siberian populations, but is also widespread
in America and one from which New World-specific haplotypes have
diverged.⁴⁸

As one might surmise, mtDNA and NRY founding lineages may not trace back
to the same actual population, since male and female movements can
differ significantly. In some cultures, males travel long distances to
find geographically far-flung mates; in others, it is females who leave
behind the group into which they were born.⁴⁹ By all indications, the
first Americans were highly mobile, but it remains uncertain whether,
once their descendants began to settle down, differences in male and
female migration patterns emerged. Given the adaptive challenges of
being in a vast new landscape, there's reason to think differences might
emerge (Chapter 7). But whether these, or other gender-specific trends
(higher male mortality, or more widespread polygyny) have confused the
resulting picture of mtDNA and NRY diversity, is yet unknown.

CLOCKING THE FIRST AMERICANS

Changes in mtDNA and NRY accumulate rapidly (though not quite as rapidly
as in the example above); by one estimate, mtDNA mutation rates are 6-17
times faster than those in nuclear DNA. Thus, even after the roughly 400
generations people have been in the Americas, we can expect significant
differences to have accumulated between American Indians and their
Northeast Asian relatives, as well as between American Indian lineages
that went their separate ways once here.

In principle, mutations in mtDNA and the NRY can serve as a molecular
clock timing the splitting of genetic lineages. This is so because
mutations also occur at a relatively steady rate: about 2.81-6.62
mutations per 10,000 years on the mtDNA side (depending on where in the
mtDNA molecule those changes are taking place), and over on the NRY, a
slower 1.45 changes or so per 10,000 years (that's the SNP mutation
rate; other mutations on the NRY, as noted below, are faster). By
measuring the sequence diversity of mtDNA (or NRY) in a population, and
knowing the mutation rate at whithose changes accumulated, we can in
principle convert genetic distance into the time necessary to have
generated that level of diversity (that's one method; another estimates
time in a different manner).⁵⁰

But molecular clocks must be used with caution, for they can run fast or
slow owing to variation in mutation rates (which differ by mutation type
and region in the mtDNA and NRY molecules), depending on whether
mutations occur uniformly over time (for clock purposes, it is assumed
they do), whether the mutations get “fixed” with the population or
disappear (what geneticists refer to as the difference between mutation
and substitution rates), how reliably the mutation rate has been
calibrated,⁵¹ and whether the number of founding haplotypes within a
haplogroup is known. A bit of elaboration on this last point: if all the
diversity within a haplogroup accumulated in a single haplotype, then
mutations must have occurred in a more or less serial fashion one after
another, and that will yield an older age for the haplogroup. But if the
diversity within a haplogroup is the result of mutations within multiple
haplotypes, those could have arisen concurrently, and the molecular age
for the haplogroup will be correspondingly younger. Without knowing the
number of haplotypes in a founding haplogroup, one cannot know whether
the molecular clock is telling the right time. Geneticists are aware of
these problems and are rightly wary of ages based solely on molecular
clocks.⁵² We should be, too.

Those matters aside, what time is told by the ticking of the molecular
clock? Unfortunately, it is not necessarily the moment when a group
split from their Northeast Asian relatives and headed for America—though
it could be. Rather, the clocks measure the time elapsed since two or
more molecular lineages began to diverge. Molecular divergence can occur
(and often does occur) in a population long before a part of them goes
off to discover a new homeland, in which case the molecular age says
nothing about when that divergence occurred. But if those genetic
lineage and population splits coincide, genes become a handy clock
indeed.

MITOCHONDRIAL MEMENTOS

All the nucleotide positions on the mtDNA molecule have been mapped, and
it is known where SNPs are likely to occur. Accordingly, geneticists
seeking clues to mtDNA history pay particular attention to the coding
region, which directs the biochemical processes of the mtDNA (and which
comprises approximately 94% of the mtDNA and contains thirty-seven
genes), and especially to the smaller control region (CR), where mtDNA
is initiated and regulated, and where changes occur at a faster rate
(though mutations here also have the unfortunate tendency to be
recurrent, and thus can partially obscure earlier, founding markers).⁵³

In the mid-1980s, Douglas Wallace began looking at mtDNA in Arizona's
Pima peoples. Their genes bespoke an ancestry of only a few mtDNA
lineages. Later, casting the sampling net wider on the chance that the
small number of haplogroups he identified were Pima specific, Wallace
and his team examined mtDNA from the Yucatan Maya and South American
Ticuna. To his surprise, these geographically separate groups showed
high frequencies, but not the same high frequencies, of the same marker
(which became haplogroup C), again bespeaking common ancestry. That all
three were in Greenberg's Amerind group seemed no coincidence. And
something else: this marker occurred among Native Americans in
frequencies twenty times higher than in Asians. Here was the first
indication that the ancestral population of these widely separate groups
had been very small, likely having passed through a population
bottleneck, as geneticists call it, and left Asia with only a tiny
fraction of the genetic markers present in the parent population (this
is the geneticists’ founder effect, which recognizes that a new
population founded by a small number of individuals necessarily
represents only a fraction of the diversity of the source population).⁵⁴
Once here, those markers naturally came to dominate in the descendant
populations.

Within a few years of Wallace's study, three more haplogroups were
identified among American Indians (haplogroups A, B, and D). Together,
these were found in 98% of all Native Americans.⁵⁵ That's a large
percentage, but the absolute number of individuals who have participated
in such studies was small, and small samples (statistically speaking)
are more likely to encounter the most common haplogroups first, and only
later detect the rarer ones (a complicating factor to which we shall
return).

These four haplogroups vary in their frequency, and coincidentally do so
in alphabetical order: haplogroups A, B, C, and D are present in
(respectively) 40%, 32%, 17%, and 7% of American Indians.⁵⁶ Because they
all occur widely (if unevenly) among Native Americans, they are thought
to be founding lineages. Originally, geneticists sorted their results by
Greenberg's language families (geneticist Antonio Torroni admits it was
hard to avoid using that scheme⁵⁷), and doing so revealed certain
patterns. All four haplogroups occurred in peoples identified by
Greenberg as Amerind. Yet, Na-Dene speakers generally harbored only
haplogroup A; it appeared they shared a deep Siberian ancestor with
Amerinds, but because haplogroup A showed less internal variation in the
Na-Dene, it seemed they split off from their common Siberian ancestor
sometime after the Amerind split. Haplogroup B was virtually absent from
both Na-Dene and Eskimo-Aleuts, and was not as old as haplogroups A, C,
and D, suggesting it, too, was derived from a separate migration, but
one sandwiched between an early (haplogroups A [in Amerinds], C, and D)
and a later migration (dominated by haplogroup A [in Na-Dene]). For a
time, it seemed the three-migration model might just be saved from
scientific purgatory and Greenberg's language families vindicated.⁵⁸

The moment didn't last. Once additional mtDNA samples were analyzed,
Na-Dene and Eskimo-Aleuts proved to have all four haplogroups. Andrew
Merriwether and others then began lobbying for a simpler scenario: a
single migration to the Americas. The rationale was straightforward:
given there were only four founding haplogroups found in all Native
Americans, their ancestors must have arrived as part of the same
migration.It seemed unlikely that different groups of people leaving
Asia at different times from different places would all be members of
the same genetic club.⁵⁹

Most geneticists accepted the idea of a single migration, even after
they realized there weren't just four mtDNA haplogroups. In the late
1990s, a fifth, more-minor haplogroup (X) was spotted in very low
frequencies (about 3%) among Native populations in the northeastern
United States. Because X was known to occur in Europeans, its appearance
among American Indians was initially written off as a case of post-1492
admixture. But then a closer look revealed X was scattered across the
Americas (even in pre-European contact burials from North and perhaps
South America), never appeared alongside other European markers, and was
sufficiently distinct from European X their shared ancestor must be deep
in time. Clearly, X was a founding lineage that came to America. But
from where?⁶⁰

Haplogroup X was rare in Siberia and eastern Asia, and its presence in
western Asia and Europe prompted a team of geneticists to make the
breathtaking speculation that Pleistocene Europeans had crossed the
Atlantic to colonize the Americas. But almost immediately the
geneticists recanted, after X also turned up among the Siberian Altai
and proved to be an extremely old, possibly central Asian lineage on a
different branch of the haplogroup X tree, whose descendants went both
west (to Europe) and east (to America). It was too late: by then several
archaeologists and skeletal biologists had jumped on the bandwagon and
were trumpeting the idea Europeans colonized the Americas (more on that
below, and Chapter 6).⁶¹

Five founding lineages,⁶² all from a single migration. Curiously,
despite denying the three-migration model, geneticists continued to use
Greenberg's three language families to classify their samples—testimony
to the time it takes for knowledge from one discipline to fully
penetrate another. And even though it was noticed by the late 1990s by
Tatiana Karafet and colleagues that the linguistic-genetic fit was
problematic,⁶³ it was not until 2004 that robust statistical tests were
conducted to assess whether genetic haplogroups actually coincided with
Amerind, Na-Dene, and Eskimo-Aleut.⁶⁴ They didn't. In fact, they missed
badly, not just among groups assigned to Amerind, but even with
Eskimo-Aleut, the one language family on which Greenberg and his
linguist critics actually agreed. Aleuts did not cluster genetically
with Eskimos, but instead were closer to several of Greenberg's Amerind
tribes, as well as to the Navajo, a Na-Dene group.

The mismatch between languages and genes testified there had been, as
geneticists Keith Hunley and Jeffrey Long put it, a long “history of
pervasive genetic exchange across linguistic boundaries.”⁶⁵ Or perhaps
language sharing across genetic boundaries. Either way, the last hope
for independent support of Greenberg's language families vanished. Lyle
Campbell and Ives Goddard, Greenberg's longtime adversaries, took a
victory lap: joining a pair of geneticists, they pronounced Amerind,
abandoned in linguistics, could no longer be used in genetic analysis
either.⁶⁶

Although the distribution of the major mtDNA haplogroups did not neatly
align with languages, they were not randomly scattered among tribes
across the hemisphere either (see Table 8)—and that is a good thing, for
it indicates the subsequent millennia of gene flow and genetic drift
have not obscured the molecular signal. Haplogroup A is especially
frequent in Arctic populations, common among Pacific Coast groups but
otherwise rare in western North America, present in eastern North
America and Central America, and infrequent throughout much of South
America (and there are hints the northern groups possess a different,
possibly later haplotype of A). Haplogroup B, on the other hand, is
virtually absent in the far north (Siberia, too), though it, too,
increases in abundance in more southern regions, especially in the
American Southwest and Central America, only to diminish altogether in
far South America. Haplogroup C is particularly abundant in South
American populations, less so in Central and North American groups. The
distribution of haplogroup D is a mix: common in far northern
populations (especially among the Aleut), present but rare in North
American populations, and quite frequent among South American groups
(like C). Finally, haplogroup X is widely scattered but in very low
frequencies across North America.⁶⁷

What might these broad patterns reveal? One possibility: the original
colonizers carried the full complement of founding lineages, but as they
dispersed found themselves isolated for long periods of time. Strongly
affected by genetic drift—random changes in gene frequency, which are
often pronounced in small populations—certain markers diminished in
frequency or were lost altogether. Alternatively, there was more than
one migratory pulse, and groups with especially distinctive haplogroup
and haplotype profiles (like many Eskimo-Aleuts, for example), represent
separate migrations.⁶⁸

Molecular ages may shed light on the matter (if one haplogroup, say, was
much younger than the others). Early molecular ages ranged from 20,000
to 41,000 years for haplogroups A, C, D, and X, and from 6,000 to 12,000
years for haplogroup B.⁶⁹ These provided the first molecular indication
ancestral American Indians left Siberia far earlier than the generally
accepted Paleoindian ages, and hinted that haplogroup B might represent
a later migration.

In subsequent years, the molecular clock seemed to spin wildly around
the dial, with estimated ages growing younger in some haplogroups, older
in others, and in some in both directions simultaneously. The spinning
has since slowed, and in general the molecular ages are younger, but
there is still considerable scatter in them (and in the accompanying
error estimates), the result, Jason Eshelman and colleagues explained,
of varying haplotypes used to estimate diversity, and the methods
employed to calculate molecular divergence.

Change may be on the horizon, however: recent work by Erika Tamm and
colleagues examining whole mtDNA sequences for haplotypes within
haplogroups A through D put their ages generally younger than 20,000 BP,
with haplogroup B now aligning in age with the others (indeed, it's now
estimated to be slighter older).⁷⁰ This makes good sense, since
haplogroup B is present in coprolite samples from Paisley Cave alongside
haplogroup A (Chapter 4). Still, it remains uncertain just when the
mtDNA clock started ticking relative to the population dispersal of the
first Americans, and (naturally) whether that occurred at the same time
for all haplogroups.⁷¹

As to where they originated, haplogroups A, C, and D—or at least
haplotypes within them—are present among eastern Siberians, though
haplogroups B and X are virtually absent. Yet, all five markers occur
elsewhere in Asian populations, from as far west as the Altai Mountains
of Siberia, to as far east as Japan and Korea. If we simply use
present-day occurrence to map Pleistocene distributions, then the
potential home range was extensive.

One region all haplogroups occur is Mongolia, which consequently has
been identified as the source of ancestral American Indians.⁷² Of
course, this claim is based on little more than the observation that
haplogroups present in Native Americas are also present among Native
Mongolians. Yet, people living in Mongolia today may not have been
living there more than 20,000 years ago. They could have arrived there
in recent times, just as their modern Native American counterparts
arrived at their residences relatively recently. The most we can
reliably say is that Native Mongolians and American Indians are
descended from the same population; Mongolia cannot be confirmed as a
molecular homeland until we find Pleistocene-age DNA in Mongolian
skeletal remains that matches those founding lineages.⁷³

TABLE 8 Founding mtDNA lineages in the Americas

[images]

NOTE: 2007 and Smith et al. 2006. Haplotype markers are ones widespread
in the Americas but generally absent in Asia, suggesting a post-arrival
appearance. Molecular ages, as noted in the text, vary widely depending
on method and region; only two sets of estimates are provided here.
Ancient DNA haplogroup assignments are unconfirmed: not all defining
markers for all haplogroups were sequenced.

^(a) Data from Schurr 2004a, ^(b) Data from Tamm et al. 2007, ^(c) Data
from Malhi et al.

AMERICAN ADAM (S)

The Y is one of the smallest of the chromosomes, comprising
approximately 51 mega-bases of DNA (a megabase is 1 million base
pairs).⁷⁴ Although relatively small, most of it is non-recombining,
making it the largest such block of the human genome. NRY mutations can
occur in one of several forms, which include SNPs, insertions/deletions,
and Short Tandem Repeats (STRs). STRs differ from the other mutations in
that instead of being binary (e.g., a C→T change), they are
characterized by multiple repeat states (e.g., CG→CGCGCG change), and
their mutation rate is higher, making them more variable in human
populations and more useful than SNPs for tracking more recent events in
human history. In the NRY, haplogroups and founding lineages are
generally defined by SNPs (the broader groups), and the haplotypes by
STRs.

Investigations of the NRY began in the mid-1990s, and owing to the small
number of samples examined and the large regions to be mapped, there are
fewer studies than of mtDNA. Complicating matters, different
laboratories were not looking at the same segments of the NRY initially,
and when they did, they were not using the same labels. Fortunately,
such confusion has been straightened out, and there is a now
standardized nomenclature for the eighteen NRY worldwide haplogroups
(labeled A through R).⁷⁵

Zegura and others have detected three major NRY lineages in America: C,
Q, R (see Table 9). Together, these comprise over 95% of the Native
American NRYs examined thus far. The remaining 5% are haplogroups E
through G, and I through J, all of which are European markers and are
attributed to recent genetic admixture.⁷⁶ Haplogroup R might also have
arrived on these shores after 1492. Most American Indians who are
members of haplogroup R are in lineage R-P25, one widely shared by
Europeans and Native Americans, but not Asians. Either Europeans and
American Indians have a common ancestor deep in time that left no
descendants in Asia (akin to the situation with mtDNA haplogroup X),
or—more likely given the strong similarity in the STRs between Europeans
and American Indians—that shared ancestor is relatively recent (post
1492).

TABLE 9 NRY lineages in the Americans

[images]

NOTE: Data from Zegura et al. 2004.

We are left then with NRY haplogroups C and Q, both of which appear to
be founding lineages. Haplogroup Q occurs in 65%-75% of all individuals
and in all American Indian tribes. Haplogroup C is less abundant and
patchier in its distribution, being present primarily in Na-Dene groups,
and sporadically in Eskimo and ostensibly Amerind groups. Both of these
haplogroups thus crosscut Greenberg's three linguistic families
(Eskimo-Aleut, Na-Dene, and Amerind), indicating those language families
are once again “a poor predictor of paternal genetic affinities among
Native American populations.”⁷⁷

As was the case with mtDNA, Native American Y chromosome diversity is
much lower than in Asia, showing that here, too, the ancestors left Asia
with only a fraction of the genetic variability of the parent
population. But did they come as one migration or two? Back to the
molecular clock. The age of Q-P36, the marker defining the Q lineage, is
estimated at 17,200-14,300 years ago but with a large margin of error.
The estimated age for the C lineage is 13,900 years ago (± 4,000 years).
These generally put the molecular split between 18,000 and 14,000 years
ago; population expansion must have come later. It hasn't escaped notice
these ages are generally younger than those based on mtDNA.⁷⁸

Given that the molecular ages for haplogroups C and Q broadly overlap,
they could be part of the same, single migration to the Americas. If so,
they ought to have come from the same place and show similarities to the
same Asian populations. Both, in fact, are present in relatively high
frequencies in the Kets and Selkups of western Siberia, though this is
where populations with those particular markers happen to live now. It
is supposed by some historians that the “ancient homeland” of the Kets
and Selkups was farther south in the Altai region (where haplogroups are
also found in modern populations), though it is not clear on what actual
evidence that is based.

As it happens, mtDNA haplogroups A-D and X are also found among some
Altai populations, but not the same populations that yielded the NRY
haplogroups C and Q. Of course, that difference might mean little: mtDNA
and NRY haplogroups could have been present in a single population
living here in late Pleistocene times, and the fact they are scattered
today only means their ancestors dispersed over time. We know that
happens: after all, at least some of them went off to colonize the New
World. Nor will we know, without ancient DNA from Pleistocene skeletal
remains from this area, whether their ancestors lived in the Altai
region at the time of migration to the Americas. It is reasonable to
suppose present-day Altaians are descended from the same population as
Native Americans, and that's why they have complementary mtDNA and NRY.
Assuming, that is, a single population harbored all those haplogroups.

DOES 5 + 2 = 1?

Certainly, that's been the view for much of the last decade: one
relatively small, presumably closely related founding population
harbored five mtDNA and two NRY founding haplogroups. How small? Jody
Hey has shown DNA diversity in the Americas could result from an initial
effective population of around 70 individuals (the effective population
is the number of individuals likely to contribute genes to the next
generation; the actual on-the-ground size of the population is routinely
about three to five times larger). Andrew Kitchen and colleagues have
more recently pegged the initial effective population at about
1,000-5,400 individuals (-5,000-27,500 people altogether). Hey's
estimate seems an especially small number with which to found a New
World (-200-350 individuals), but there's no anthropological or genetic
reason to preclude the possibility. There are signs in all genetic
systems (mtDNA, NRY, autosomal) of a population bottleneck, so whatever
the absolute number, those who made it to the New World were some
fraction of the Pleistocene population of East Asia and Siberia.⁷⁹

But was it a single migration? Much of the support for that idea is the
difficulty of imagining, as Merriwether and colleagues put it, that
“these [founding] lineages were drawn from separate populations…or from
the same population thousands of years apart.”⁸⁰ In part, our inability
to conjure that image is rooted in the idea there are just a handful of
founding lineages in the Americas, and all of them have been accounted
for in studies of American Indian mtDNA and NRY. That may be the case.

Yet, many New World groups have not participated in mtDNA or NRY
studies, and among groups that have, the number of participants is often
relatively small, on average fewer than thirty individuals. Small
samples are the bane of scientific conclusions since (as noted) they
typically detect only the most common haplogroups and haplotypes in a
population. Recall that it took more than a decade before geneticists
came across haplogroup X, which occurs in only about 3% of Native
Americans. Such gaps in sampling, Ripan Malhi and colleagues argue,
“make it likely that significant undocumented genetic structure still
exists in the Americas.”⁸¹

The National Geographic Society and IBM's five-year Genographic Project
aims to rectify that situation by assembling the world's largest
collection of mtDNA and NRY, with the lofty goal of mapping human
genetic diversity and history.⁸² Shifting analytical attention from the
mtDNA control region to the whole mtDNA molecule will help.

So, too, will greater attention to genome-wide autosomal patterns. After
all, mtDNA and NRY markers represent uni-parental descent in small
corners of the human genome. Yet, each of us has two parents, four
grandparents, eight great-grandparents, and so on; go back just twenty
generations, for example, and each of us has more than 1 million
ancestors. All of them were potential contributors of some piece,
however tiny, of our autosomal DNA.⁸³ Thanks to ongoing advances in
genetics and the statistical analysis of the genome, the “discordant
variation” that stymied Zegura in the mid-1980s is being parsed, and as
computational biologist Nick Patterson reports, the study of auto-somal
(nuclear) DNA is likely to lead soon to a much richer genetic
understanding.

All of these efforts will show whether our current picture of Native
American genetic diversity and the conclusions drawn from it about the
number of founding lineages and the timing of their divergence are
correct (I'll return to these issues but from another angle in the next
chapter).

But it still might not be enough. The genetic studies to date are
primarily based on modern populations, which represent only the most
recent time slice of the more than 12,500 years (and about 400
generations) Native Americans have occupied the New World. There's long
been reason to suspect that over that span, there were mtDNA and NRY
lineages that once existed but have since vanished, and thus would never
be detected in modern populations, even if those populations were
adequately sampled. Recently, that suspicion was heightened.

In January 2007, Malhi and colleagues announced that mtDNA haplogroup M,
known from contemporary populations on other continents but heretofore
unreported in the Americas, had been found in ancient DNA recovered from
two skeletons (possibly brothers) from the China Lake site in British
Columbia dating to about 5000 BP.Coincidentally, that same month saw the
announcement by Brian Kemp and others that a bone sample from On Your
Knees Cave, Alaska, dated to 10,300 BP had yielded a new founding
haplotype within haplogroup D.⁸⁴

Neither the discovery of a new haplotype, nor even the discovery of a
previously undetected haplogroup, is surprising. But if these
discoveries are any indication—and they need to be fully sequenced and
confirmed⁸⁵—the recovery of ancient DNA (aDNA) has the potential to
revolutionize our understanding of population history, since genetic
data from contemporary populations may not be fully representative of
the genetics of the earliest populations in the New World. It may not
even fully represent pre-1492 populations. This is not to say, however,
that modern groups are not descended from those early populations, only
that certain specific markers in two corners of the vast human genome
may have disappeared along the way (a matter taken up more fully in
Chapter 6).

Studies of aDNA are in their infancy, and present formidable analytical
challenges.⁸⁶ aDNA recovered from teeth or bones routinely occurs in
badly degraded fragments, and when amplified in the laboratory is highly
prone to contamination, even from a researcher's stifled sneeze or lost
split end. Laboratories working with aDNA must be extraordinarily
vigilant, and maintain a file of the DNA of all who come through the
lab, to ensure an unexpected haplogroup does not belong to anyone other
than the ancient individual whose sample is under study.

In the relatively few studies of aDNA (less than 1,000) to date, most on
archaeological specimens fewer than 4,000 years old, traces of the mtDNA
founding lineages seen in modern American Indians are present in varying
frequency. In some cases, aDNA and modern mtDNA from the same region are
alike, but in others not. Present and past mtDNA signatures tend to
match if the aDNA is not very old: aDNA from the high Arctic that's
fewer than 1,000 years old matches that of Eskimo populations, but aDNA
from Windover, Florida (dated to 7400 BP), is mostly haplogroup X, in a
part of the country where X has not been documented among American
Indians. It is too soon to conclude that DNA continuity occurs only
where there is a relatively shallow time depth, and that the further
back in time, the more likely the DNA signal will flicker and then
disappear. But this possibility has far-reaching implications for
scientific and legal efforts to document the modern identity of ancient
skeletal remains (as explored in Chapter 10).⁸⁷

Of more immediate consequence, the newly discovered haplogroups and
haplotypes in aDNA may imply that the diversity of the founding Native
America population was larger than previously proposed (and will lead to
different estimates of the effective population size of the founding
group); that molecular estimates for the timing of the peopling of the
Americas will have to be recalculated to reflect the greater number of
haplotypes; and that we're still open for business on the possibility of
multiple migrations, or at least the possibility of multiple sources
contributing to a single founding population.⁸⁸ In this regard, it's
better to think of Beringia as a funnel that was open to the west, with
many genetic streams flowing in (from Siberia) but just one coming out
(in Alaska), rather than as a pipeline (a single stream from Siberia to
Alaska).

That funnel might have been open for some time, for there are four
haplotypes now known within haplogroup C. Of those, haplotype C1a is
restricted to Asian populations, while haplotypes C1b, C1c, and C1d are
widespread in the Americas—and only the Americas. Those haplotypes must
have originally arisen in Asia, perhaps in the region of Beringia, apart
from other populations harboring haplogroup C, but before heading to the
New World. A Beringian “standstill” Tamm and colleagues call it,⁸⁹ one
that possibly lasted 10,000-20,000 years (the time necessary to give
rise to the separate haplotypes C1b-C1d). It is an intriguing, though as
yet untested, hypothesis, not to mention one that sees little
archaeological support of a long occupancy of Siberia and Beringia
(though admittedly that might be the fault of the archaeological
record).⁹⁰

There's one more thing aDNA can do: help resolve a particularly
contentious subplot over whether ancient and modern skeletal remains are
related.

TALKING HEADS

Skeletal remains and particularly crania have long figured in this
debate, though they carry a seedy legacy since the size and shape of the
head—where, of course, the brain is housed—was typed and often
stereotyped to fit prevailing notions of race, ethnicity, and
intelligence. A soft-core racism persisted in physical anthropology well
into the twentieth century. Harvard University's Earnest Hooton
distinguished among a sample of the nearly 1,800 crania A. V. Kidder had
excavated from Pecos Pueblo (New Mexico) seven distinct craniofacial
types, including “Pseudo-Negroid,” “Pseudo-Australoid,” “Plains Indian,”
and “Long-faced European.” Although Pecos had been occupied in Spanish
colonial times, Hooton insisted all of his cranial types were found in
prehistoric deposits. Like other “heriditarians” (his term), Hooton
believed these affinities to Africans and Europeans were no coincidence,
but rather physical testimony of a prehistoric melting pot, one that
enabled him to shamelessly credit the American Indians’ development of
agriculture and civilization to their partial European heritage. Hooton
believed cranial form was permanent, and had no use for “fanatical
environmentalists” who refused to accept that a skull could “withstand
the moulding [sic] and modifying influence of physical environment
and…endure through generations as a racial earmark.”⁹¹

One of those so-called fanatics was Franz Boas, who (in addition to
having a low opinion of Hooton) steadfastly challenged claims of cranial
immutability, showing that the cephalic index, the ratio of maximum
width to maximum length of the skull that was often used to sort races,
varied widely among adults of a single group and even within the
lifetime of a single individual. He later argued, based on a massive
study he conducted of immigrants who passed through Ellis Island in the
early twentieth century, that American-born children of immigrants had
significantly different cephalic indices than their parents—a result of
the healthier American environment in which they were raised. Partly as
a result of Boas's efforts, and also of the development of intelligence
testing (which moved the discussion of race onto even more slippery
ground, craniometry had lost much its luster by mid-twentieth century.

Now it's back, having been revived in a far more sophisticated form in
the last decades of the twentieth century by practitioners armed with
complex statistics and powerful computers for analyzing cranial
variation. They take multiple measurements of a skull (as many as 60-75
on a complete cranium, far fewer on fragmentary archaeological
specimens), including the width of the skull at its maximum point, its
distance from front to back, and the width and height of the eye
sockets. The data are then analyzed using a variety of statistical
techniques—principal components and discriminant function analysis are
the tools of choice—that attempt to discern combinations of variables
that best describe skull shape and size, and can reliably cluster like
crania. They then compare specimens from other times and places to see
how they resemble or differ from one another, and how much variation
each group displays.⁹²

The approach is advertised as “exciting and dynamic,” but in reality
much of it is just old wine in new skins. Many steadfastly hold to
Hooton's assumption that cranial form faithfully reveals group identity
(some, in fact, still haven't forgiven Boas for claiming otherwise). In
so doing, they hold to a deeper belief as well: that race is a natural
category, and individuals can be assigned to one or another race on the
basis of their skulls.⁹³ We'll come back to this point.

TABLE 10 Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene (-pre-8ooo BP) skeletal
remains from North America

[images]

[images]

NOTE: Data from Chatters 2001, D. Steele 1998, and other sources. These
are primarily specimens for which a significant portion of the skeleton
has been recovered. A comparable number of far more fragmentary human
fossils have been found, but are not included here since the information
that can be derived from them is limited.

They have set their analytical sights on early New World crania, or at
least the few there are. Highly mobile peoples spread thinly on a vast
landscape, as the first Americans were, rarely used cemeteries, and very
few skeletal remains have survived the passage of time. Skulls are
especially thin walled and easily broken (unnervingly so, given what
they protect), and almost inevitably disintegrate over time,
occasionally leaving behind the hard and dense teeth they once packed.
In the whole of the New World, only a few crania predating 10,000 years
ago survive. To bolster that tiny sample, osteologists often include
Early Holocene remains (ones more than 8,000 years old) in their
analyses (see Table 10). Even then, it's a total sample of just a few
dozen.

We will never know how many people were in America from 12,500 to 8,000
years ago, but it was assuredly more than three dozen. That's a
pitifully small number on which to draw sweeping conclusions about what
these people looked like, how cranial size and shape varied, and why.
Were that not enough of a challenge, the remains are rarely complete,
making it difficult to collect the full suite of measurements. That
complicates analyses since, as Gentry Steele and Joseph Powell explain,
the form of a skull and its similarity to others can vary depending on
how and how many measurements are used in the analysis.⁹⁴

So if the remains are few, fragmentary, and unrepresentative, it's fair
to ask, Why bother? One good reason: with these bones we come face to
face—literally—with what early Americans actually looked like. But
beyond being able to look them in the eye (sockets), what else? It gets
complicated. Like teeth, skulls vary over time, but unlike teeth, skulls
change easily and more readily. Cranial plasticity, it's called, and it
happens (1) in response to changing environments, where natural
selection confers an advantage to a particular facial shape or
structure; (2) by virtue of isolation—genetic drift again, this time
expressed phenotypically; (3) as a result of cultural practices, such as
from diet or cooking methods; or (4) as a consequence of growth and
development (including the

effects of disease). Morphological change happens, and can even be more
pronounced within a group than between groups.⁹⁵

There are fierce debates over just how rapidly craniofacial form changes
on an evolutionary time scale. A century ago Ales Hrdlicka, believing
evolutionary change was gradual and unhappily facing the prospect of
having Pleistocene peoples in America, emphasized the morphological
similarity between the ostensibly ancient crania and those of modern
American Indians. His was not a terribly sophisticated view: if a
cranium was truly ancient, it ought to resemble a Neanderthal. If it was
younger, but still thousands of years old, it should look modern. As far
as he was concerned, all of them did. It was a conclusion for which he,
like Boas, has not been forgiven.⁹⁶ Most specimens Hrdlicka deemed
modern were not very old, so it's no surprise he came to the conclusion
he did. Yet, he failed to appreciate that even at 10,000 years remove,
archaeological crania can differ strikingly from modern ones. That has
only become obvious in the last couple of decades as radiocarbon dated
skeletal remains appeared.

But can a 10,000-year-old cranium look different from one just a few
thousand years younger, and yet both be members of the same historically
related population? Physical anthropologists Charles Roseman and Timothy
Weaver certainly think so, especially where population size was small
and the likelihood of genetic drift was increased, or where populations
migrated into regions that posed different environmental challenges than
the one they left, a circumstance faced, for example, by the first
Americans (this is akin to Nettle's argument for early language
proliferation).⁹⁷

Under such circumstances, would differences (or similarities) in skull
form say anything about who's related to whom? Perhaps, but the
challenge lies in determining whether those differences (or
similarities) are historically significant, and can reliably distinguish
members of different populations who do not share a common ancestor, or
who may have come to America in different migrations (or, if similar,
show they are a part of the same lineage); or result from structural
changes wrought by natural selection, genetic drift, and/or genetic
change over time acting on related groups (or whether their similarity
results from adaptive convergence); or are a complex mix of history and
structure.⁹⁸

Here's what's been found. Loring Brace and colleagues see evidence of
two major craniofacial “types.” The first links recent and
archaeological American Indian specimens from across the hemisphere with
ones from as far away as Europe (and Paleolithic Europe, at that), as
well as from Bronze Age Mongolia and the Japanese archipelago (those of
the Ainu and Jomon). The second group includes Eskimo-Aleut and
Athabascan crania, along with those of East and Southeast Asians. The
first group—of “Eurasian” origin—is thought to represent an earlier
Pleistocene migration, and the second a later, Holocene-age expansion.
By this analysis, East Asians, including recent Mongolians, made only
“partial contributions” to the peopling of the Americas.⁹⁹

Walter Neves likewise detects two broad craniofacial groups, which he
attributes to two migrations, only they are not the same two groups
Brace spotted. Instead, Neves sees in Late Pleistocene and Early
Holocene crania in South America what he calls the “Paleoamerican” type,
one strongly similar to present-day Australians, Melanesians, and
sub-Saharan Africans. That type is very distinct, he says, from recent
American Indians, whose crania are more akin to the “typical Mongoloid
morphology” of northern Asians. The only modern Native American group
that fell into Neves's Paleoamerican type was the Pericu, who live at
the southern tip of California's Baja Peninsula. Neves suspects they are
survivors of the ancient Paleoamerican migration, somehow having avoided
mixing with other groups over their entire history in the New World.¹⁰⁰

Like Neves (but unlike Brace), Richard Jantz and Douglas Owsley agree
that early American crania are distinct from those of recent American
Indians, who are said to be more typically “Mongoloid.” Yet, unlike the
South American specimens Neves studied, the Late Pleistocene and Early
Holocene North American crania Jantz and Owsley examined, ostensibly
Paleoamericans as well, show no particular resemblance to southwest
Pacific or African populations. In fact, they appear highly variable,
half falling within the range of recent American Indians, the other half
“reluctant members of any recent group.”¹⁰¹

Finally, Steele and Powell report that the crania of South American
Paleoindians are, as Neves suggested, closer in their size and shape to
those of Australians and Africans than to those of any other group. Yet,
unlike Jantz and Owsley, they find that some North American Paleoindian
crania are also similar to those of Australians, Ainu, and Polynesians,
while others are more like those of Africans and Southeast Asians. In
general, however, Steele and Powell believe all Late Pleistocene and
Early Holocene skeletal remains are highly variable (as Jantz and
Owsley, but not Neves found), and are consistently more like those of
southern Asians and Pacific Rim populations than northern Asians, and
are like skeletons of Archaic age here in the Americas, but otherwise
quite distinguishable from more recent Native American populations (they
do not, however, automatically assume that the Americas were peopled by
Polynesians, say, or the Ainu, only that these are forms with general,
and perhaps historically meaningless, resemblances).¹⁰²

Overall, it's a very confused picture. Depending on which analysis one
accepts, the first American crania are either alike, or they are not.
They either look like recent American Indian crania, or they do not.
They either resemble African, Ainu, Australian, European, Melanesian, or
Polynesian crania, or not. They originated in eastern Asia, or not.
There's even disagreement about individual specimens: Jantz and Owsley
liken the Wizards Beach cranium to those of modern Native Americans;
Steele and Powell think it more similar to Polynesians and
Australians.¹⁰³ All this is to say nothing of the vast gulf between the
cranial results and the groups derived from teeth, language, and genes
(a thorny problem to be confronted in the next chapter).

What's going on here?

COMPLICATING CRANIA

There are several possibilities. For one, this could all be a prank of
sampling error: with so few cranial remains, it may be impossible to
detect any meaningful patterns, however powerful the statistics we
apply. Steele and Powell—and Neves, too—doubt this, since they see
widespread patterning in their analyses. But since their separate
analyses often are looking at the very same specimens yet seeing very
different patterns, their rebuttal loses much of its potency.

Alternatively, put the craniofacial variability to use, as Jantz and
Owsley do, and argue it testifies to separate and multiple migrations.
Replace (or assimilate) more ancient immigrants with more recent ones,
bring some from southern Asia and the Pacific Rim and others from
Northeast Asia, and perhaps this craniofacial cacophony makes sense.
Only, that assumes the specimens are representative of the populations
from which they were derived (doubtful, given the time and space over
which they are scattered), and that craniofacial morphology is slow to
change, especially given the brief time the Americas were occupied, and
thus is a meaningful indicator of historical (and historically
unrelated) groups. If crania look alike, it is because they are related;
if they look different, it is because they are unrelated, Boas be
damned.

AND THEN THERE WAS KENNEWICK

Human skulls are—as no stone tool can be—a tangible connection of a
people to their past, a connection that has powerful resonance. But
which people, and whose past? And who makes the call?

Traditionally, anthropologists in the United States rarely gave those
questions much thought. Now, they can't afford to ignore them. It's the
law: the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act
(NAGPRA), signed into law by President George Bush in 1990, stipulates
that American Indians are entitled to the return, for burying, of the
remains of their ancestors housed in museums and universities. This
well-intentioned legislation was aimed at righting the wrongs of earlier
generations of anthropologists, who too often indiscriminately collected
the bones of American Indians for study and display. It was often little
more than genteel grave robbing. Although it was not only Native
American remains that received such treatment, theirs were gathered in
lopsided numbers. To American Indians and many others, this was one more
instance of mistreatment at the hands of Euroamericans. NAGPRA required
institutions having Native American skeletons to inventory and
repatriate (return) those remains and any associated artifacts at the
request of a known “lineal descendant” or the tribe with the “closest
cultural affiliation.”

In NAGPRA's wake, thousands of skeletons and associated artifacts have
been (or are being) repatriated. Many of those remains were only a few
hundred years old or younger, and there was rarely much debate over who
the lineal descendants or cultural affiliates were.

Then Kennewick came along. Its story began in July 1996, when two
twenty-somethings were trying to sneak into the annual hydroplane races
on the Columbia River near Kennewick, Washington. They skirted the
perimeter fence and were wading along the edge of the Columbia River
when one of them spotted a skull in the shallow water. Thinking it might
be a murder victim, they called the police, who collected the skull and
turned it over to the county coroner. He, in turn, called James
Chatters, a local archaeologist who'd also done forensic work. With a
police escort, the coroner and Chatters returned to the site and
collected what bones they could in the muddy bottom as it grew dark.
Near the bones were some late nineteenth-century artifacts, which were
also gathered.¹⁰⁴

Chatters's initial diagnosis of Kennewick, based on characteristics of
the skull and the associated artifacts, was that he was a middle-aged
European. But then he noticed what appeared to be a projectile point
embedded in the pelvis and was curious about “a white guy with a stone
point in him,”¹⁰⁵ particularly since it was a point thought to have gone
out of style thousands of years ago. Chatters sent a few bone fragments
off for radiocarbon dating. Over the next few weeks, he revisited the
site and collected more fragments; then in late August, he got the
radiocarbon results: 8410 BP.

A news conference was called a few days later, and the date was
announced. Here is where everything started to go very wrong. Chatters
described the skeleton as a “Caucasoid” similar to a “pre-modern
European.”¹⁰⁶ Whether or not he inadvertently used the term “Caucasian”
is disputed, but no matter. That's what some of the reporters heard, and
that's what went out over the wires: 8,400 years ago a white man was
stabbed on the banks of the Columbia River. That racial impression was
certainly fueled by the reconstruction of Kennewick's face which, by
Chatters’ own admission, took shape after watching Star Trek: The Next
Generation one evening, and reckoning Captain Picard (actor Patrick
Stewart) was a dead ringer—or, more properly, a live one—for
Kennewick¹⁰⁷ (ironically, the fictional Picard was said to have had
academic training in archaeology). After that, one didn't even have to
say ‘Caucasian.” It was there for all to see. Naturally, no one read the
fine print that putting flesh back on a skull is more art than science.

The local tribes were enraged. They called the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (the Columbia River and its shoreline are in their
jurisdiction) and insisted on a meeting with Chatters and the Corps. The
meeting by all accounts was extraordinarily tense. Chatters felt
physically threatened: one of the tribal members accused him of calling
Kennewick European just to dodge the law (NAGPRA). The tribes left to
draft a legal document demanding Chatters immediately turn over all
human remains in his possession, while Chatters hustled home to record
as much as he could of the skeleton, fearful that marshals would arrive
at any moment to collect it. He also began rounding up legal,
scientific, and congressional support to gain more time to study the
remains.¹⁰⁸

It didn't work. On orders from Corps attorneys, the sheriff soon came to
collect the bones. In mid-September the Corps gave thirty days’ notice
of its intent to turn the remains over to a coalition of Northwest
tribes for reburial under NAGPRA (five called Kennewick their own: the
Colville, Nez Perce, Umatilla, Wanapum, and Yakima). They later buried
the site beneath 600 tons of rock and sediment and planted trees. They
called it site protection. Most everyone else called it a destructive
and heavy-handed act to prevent further investigation. The Corps works
on hundreds of projects across the country, many on tribal lands, and it
was not unnoticed that it was in their best interest to get along with
the tribes. If that meant fast-tracking the transfer of the Kennewick
bones and shutting down the site, they would.¹⁰⁹ Unless there was a
challenge to the validity of the tribes’ claim.

Chatters intended there would be. He frantically worked the phones and
e-mail, and found a receptive audience: skeletons of this age and
completeness (about 90% of Kennewick's bones survive) are rare, and the
study opportunity would be lost if the Corps followed through on their
plan to repatriate. The Corps was bombarded with messages insisting
Kennewick's very un-American Indian appearance demanded further
investigation to determine who he was, and maintaining it was impossible
for any tribe to assert biological or cultural affiliation with a
skeleton of that antiquity. Soon, members of Washington's congressional
delegation—some with seats on the Appropriations Committee (powerful
adversaries for any federal agency)—weighed in on behalf of a study of
the remains.

Inevitably the media picked up the scent of battle, and the story hit
the airwaves as nothing less than a conflict between science and the
religious beliefs of Native Americans. Newsweek and the New York Times,
among others, questioned the Corps’ intent to repatriate: after all, if
it was a Caucasoid, how could it be American Indian? Kennewick
catapulted from Early Holocene anonymity to high-profile appearances on
60 Minutes and People magazine.

Fearing that the Corps would hunker down, ignore the media firestorm and
congressional probes, and proceed with the repatriation, eight
archaeologists and physical anthropologists filed suit in federal court
to block the transfer.¹¹⁰ They argued the Corps’ decision was arbitrary
and capricious, that NAGPRA may not apply to remains this old, and that
repatriation denied their First Amendment rights of access to knowledge
and freedom from establishment of religion. Their suit lacerated the
anthropological community (there was hardly unanimity behind the
action), badly damaged relations with Native American groups—even ones
who had historically welcomed the work of archaeologists—and triggered a
divisive, long-running, and expensive legal tug-of-war, complete with
carnival sideshow: members of the Asatru Folk Assembly, who worship Odin
the Norse sky god, filed their own suit asking the remains be turned
over to them since, as a white man, Kennewick must be one of their own.
There's sometimes a fine line between tragedy and farce.

The Department of the Interior took over for the Corps and brought in a
team to examine Kennewick. They confirmed its age, and on the basis of
Joseph Powell and Jerome Rose's analysis, deemed Kennewick no Caucasoid.
Nor was he like any modern American Indian, but instead was similar
morphologically to East Asian and Polynesian populations. Powell was
well aware that “such a finding means very little, unless one presumes
that all skeletal features are fixed and immutable over time.” He, for
one, does not, so was hardly surprised Kennewick's cranium looked
different.¹¹¹ In January 2000, the secretary of the interior ruled
Kennewick was indeed Native American under NAGPRA, and in September of
that year, decided to turn over the remains to the five tribes, based on
their oral traditions of ancient times and on the fact that Kennewick
was found on their ancestral land.

The plaintiffs scrambled to have the federal judge (John Jelderks) stay
any transfer; he did just that, and then followed with an Opinion and
Order (in August 2002) that accused the Corps of Engineers of violating
federal law and judged the Department of the Interior in error for
determining Kennewick belonged to the tribes. He granted the plaintiffs
the right to study the remains. Appeals were quickly filed by both the
federal government and the tribes. But two years later, the Ninth
Circuit Court of Appeals upheld Jelderks's ruling and ordered the study
to proceed (more on this in Chapter 10).

It has, yet in the end the affair proves a nonstarter. Kennewick is no
European. Rare, interesting, and important he may be, but like many of
his skeletal brethren, all we can securely say is that he appears
distinctive. However, that may only be because he is so rare and was a
member of a once-larger population poorly represented in the fossil
record. His apparently unusual cranium could be readily explained by
evolutionary processes of isolation and genetic drift, migration,
population splits, and recurrent episodes of gene flow. Such
evolutionary processes, of course, fail to account for why he would bear
an uncanny resemblance to a Starfleet Commander.

The myth of Kennewick as the “Great White Hope” for Caucasians
colonizing America has died, at least in scientific circles, and a
well-deserved death it was, though news of the specimen can still
command the cover of Time magazine (as it did in March 2006). Yet, the
claim the Americas were colonized by Caucasians has not gone away.
Instead, it has seeped into the only place such foolishness passes as
fact: the poisonous corners of the Internet where white supremacists
continue to claim Kennewick as one of their own, to promote the idea
that members of the Aryan race—whatever that is—were the real
discoverers of America.

Another possibility: there was but a single migration (perhaps from a
fairly heterogeneous source), and the morphological differences are a
result of generations of isolation, mutation, and genetic drift, mixed
in with recurring episodes of gene flow. The variation in the early
crania of the Americas is not beyond what one might expect of
evolutionary change over that span. Indeed, change and variation, as
Roseman and Weaver said, would be especially pronounced during the early
period of colonization when human populations were small and spread
thinly across the vast continent. There is a strong likelihood
colonizers dispersed and were geographically isolated from one another
for long periods of time, and only later, as populations increased and
isolation broke down, was gene flow reestablished: hence the differences
between ancient and modern crania.¹¹²

Underpinning Roseman and Weaver's argument is the principle that we must
understand crania not in terms of differences between individual
specimens, but as part of larger populations that extended and varied
over space and time. Physical anthropology's in-house critic, Jonathan
Marks, makes the point more broadly and bluntly: “Today the
anthropological community en masse rejects as pseudoscientific the
notion of race as a natural category, and as equally bogus the
assignment of individuals to such transcendent categories on the basis
of their skulls. What exist are features and populations; sometimes one
can map them onto one another, and sometimes one cannot.”¹¹³

How, then, might we track whether there was a single or multiple
migration, or whether such were drawn from the same or different
anatomical well(s)? Not from crania, or at least not without a much
larger sample of the populations of interest. That's unlikely to happen
(it's never wise to bet against something turning up in the ground, but
your money's probably safe on this one).

Geneticists are only too happy to jump into the fray, confident their
data provide a far more reliable indication of population histories. If
aDNA is obtained from ancient skeletal remains, it might reveal whether
an individual harbored any of the modern hap-logroups among Native
American populations. That would certainly establish continuity within
that single locus marker. Yet, suppose it's not one of the haplogroups
present in modern populations (think haplogroup M here). That may not
say much either, since it need not represent a separate population (or
migration), but instead just an mtDNA or NRY lineage that went extinct,
or one that simply has yet to be detected among more recent American
Indians. And, of course, autosomal DNA could well give a very different
picture.

Even so, osteologists aren't ceding any ground. Jantz and Owsley have,
instead, announced we may be entering a period when cranial morphology
will emerge “as more informative than genetic data in elucidating the
history of our species.”¹¹⁴ Hooton couldn't have said it better himself.

But it's not going to be an easy battle for them to win. Even some of
their fellow travelers, like Gerrit van Vark, a onetime believer in
using craniofacial morphology to determine ancestor-descendant
relationships, are rethinking their views in light of genetic evidence
(in this case, from Europe) that indicates continuity where on
craniofacial grounds none was previously thought to exist.¹¹⁵ And it is
sure to be an intensely personal battle, for if cranial morphology does
not prove to be a useful indicator of population relationships and
history, it would make much of their work questionable and, far worse,
irrelevant.¹¹⁶

