PART III

Prestige, commemoration, and value





CHAPTER 5

Varna and the emergence of wealth in prehistoric Europe


COLIN RENFREW

A contrast is often drawn between societies with relatively undifferentiated and unspecialized economic systems on the one hand, and those where craft-specialist production and large-scale exchange of commodities take a significant role on the other. In the former, sometimes described as operating under a “domestic mode of production,” activities yielding food for local consumption occupy most participants for most of their working time, and the exchange of goods takes place mainly in order to obtain necessary or desirable items from neighboring territories. In the latter, commercial activities play a significant role, and production and exchange for gain occupy a substantial proportion of the population.

This distinction was emphasized by the “substantivists” among economic anthropologists, notably Polanyi (1957), who stressed the “embeddedness” of the economy within a wider social matrix in most early societies. They criticized the tendency of the “formalists” among their colleagues to apply the analytic techniques of the modern economist, developed primarily for the description of modern industrial economies, to the very much simpler societies under consideration. The substantivists argued that the economic man of the modern economist could not be assumed to have operated in the societies in question. Clearly there is much justice in that critique, but Adams (1974) has pointed out that the market mentality, the desire to make a profit, is certainly not restricted to the modern world or to that of classical antiquity. To claim that the market was an innovation of ancient Greece, as Polanyi effectively did, may have been to oversimplify.

While it is no doubt the case that the distinction between “simple” and “complex” economies has been unduly exaggerated in the past, and such polarizing categories are perhaps best avoided, there are nonetheless valid differences and contrasts underlying these debates. The archeologist cannot fail to be aware that in most hunter-gatherer economies, and in the early days of farming in any area, the emphasis seems to have been primarily upon subsistence and there is thus some equivalence with the first of the two polar categories. Likewise in early state societies, and especially in the early empires, there was often an emphasis upon the intensification of production, with the concentration of several products within the hands of an élite, thus making comparison with the second category appropriate.

The interesting question is how, in what circumstances, and by what processes, did the latter situation come about? How did these more complex economies emerge? To ask this question, let me stress, is not to adopt a prepared theoretical standpoint: it does not, for instance, assume an “evolutionary” or “neo-evolutionary” perspective. It does, however, imply a development through time of the societies in question, and hence a diachronic perspective. This is something that only the archeologist can provide, since almost without exception societies in the first category had not developed their own writing systems, and without written records the techniques of the historian are not appropriate. Nor has the transition to a developed economy, in the absence of significant external factors of acculturation, been studied, so far as I am aware, by any anthropologists over the past century or so. For almost by definition, the presence of anthropologists bespeaks the beginning of the process of absorption of the economy under study into what neo-Marxist writers would term a world system.

The investigation of such processes of economic development is thus in most places a task for the prehistoric archeologist. But the interest of the study goes beyond archeology, for the significant innovations are of several kinds. In the first place, the processes of intensification of production that are involved generally imply technological developments. Some of these lie in the sphere of subsistence production – development of improved crop species or animal breeds, the use of the plow and other features of what Sherratt (1981) has termed “the secondary products revolution,” and perhaps irrigation in some cases. Some technological innovations are of another kind, resulting in the development of new products and sometimes of new materials, such as pottery or metal, often as a result of developments in pyrotechnology. Such developments do not work in the technological sphere alone. They imply, and sometimes arise from, developing social systems. New products, new commodities (such as pottery, or bronze) do not come into the world simply as a direct and inevitable result of their own physical properties. They may, indeed, in some cases be the result of some fortunate invention, but, as I have argued elsewhere (Renfrew 1978), it is the widespread adoption of the new activity or product, not simply the discovery of a new technical process, that constitutes the true innovation. This means, then, and no economist has ever denied this – not even a formalist one – that we cannot discuss commodities or the development of the economy without considering such embedded social concepts as value and demand.

Now the notion of value is not an easy one to analyze, even in a society where rates of exchange can be directly observed. I should at once add here that I see some force in the arguments of Binford (1969, 163) that “psychological preferences” in archeology, using explanations based upon assumed states of mind of prehistoric people for which there is no direct evidence, are best avoided. Binford, I rather think, regards a concept like value as belonging to what Pike (as quoted by Harris 1968, 571) would term an “emic” category: something existing primarily in the thoughts and minds of individual members of a given community. But value can also be an “etic” category: something that acts upon the material world in a manner that can be observed and evaluated cross-culturally, for which the modern observer can therefore gather relevant material evidence.1

Some years ago, in considering the growth of complex society in the prehistoric Aegean and the development of a trade in metal goods, I suggested that a crucial equation was “a symbolic equivalence of social and material values”:

The essential kernel of many of the interactions between activities and between subsystems, interactions which are the mainspring for economic growth, develops from the human inclination to give a social and symbolic significance to material goods. For in this way a whole complex of activities in the material world satisfies aspirations, ambitions, and needs which are, at first sight, entirely without adaptive significance in facilitating the continued existence of the individual of the species (Renfrew 1972, 497).

This observation was made primarily in relation to a single specific instance of the emergence of a state society. But there is no doubt that it can be applied in several other areas. In prehistoric Britain, for instance, around 2000 B.C. we see for the first time the use of various materials, including gold, amber, and bronze, in contexts indicating that they were associated with high prestige. Indeed, what we see emerging is not simply certain new commodities, but in a sense, a new kind of prestige. Or at least an altogether new way of expressing prestige. To assert this, of course, opens up exciting new possibilities in the development of social archeology. For it is generally accepted that high status, associated with prestige, was in general not a feature of small and early human societies, in particular hunter-gatherer societies. Ranking and stratification, in whatever area of the world we may have under study, seem in general to have appeared later. That is, of course, a very broad generalization, but it rests only partly on the archeological evidence. Its main validation comes from the observation of living hunter-gatherer societies by anthropologists.

This is an area ripe for analysis, for even though archeologists have often, quite reasonably, assumed certain assemblages of objects – for instance, rich gravegoods accompanying a burial – to be indicative of the high status of the individual, the precise grounds for such a view have never been analyzed in any very satisfactory manner.2

There is also a further interesting question, recently stressed by Hodder (1982b, 212) concerning the active role of material culture. As he argues, it does not follow that the prestigious objects that we see, whether in a burial or elsewhere, associated with a notable individual, are simply the reflection of his or her high status. That is a reflectionist mode of thought into which many archeologists have too easily fallen (Hodder 1982a, 4). On the contrary, these aspects of material culture may themselves have been responsible in large measure for bringing about that high status, a point very much in harmony with the thinking, years ago, of Veblen (1899) on conspicuous consumption and display. High status can actually be achieved by the manipulation of material goods and by displays of wealth, as many analyses of big man systems have indicated. In studying commodities of high value we may, therefore, be doing more than monitoring the assertion of high status; we may be investigating what brought it about. What is evidently needed here is a framework of inference that allows these issues to be handled lucidly.

In several areas of the world it has been noted, in the case of metallurgical innovation in particular, that the development of bronze and other metals as useful commodities was a much later phenomenon than their first utilization as new and attractive materials, employed in contexts of display, when they were clearly associated with high prestige and evidently regarded as of high value. In the sections that follow I first develop some of these ideas in relation to interesting finds from Varna cemetery in Bulgaria. That gold at Varna was a commodity of high value is argued, not taken as given. The significance of changing notions of value for the development of an economy with more intensive production and more widespread distribution of products is discussed in the final section of this essay.





Varna and early copper metallurgy


Commodity and innovation


The development of metallurgy is one of the clearest cases in which essentially the same innovations were made repeatedly and independently, in different parts of the world at different times. For though it can be argued, for instance, that the domestication of maize is not at all the same thing as the domestication of wheat, and that the notion of the development of food production is thus very much the construct of the archeologist, the domestication of each species being in reality a very different happening, the same can hardly be said for metal working. The smelting of ores to produce copper, or the alloying of copper with tin to produce bronze, are in most cases ultimately the same from the technical point of view wherever they are carried out.

For this reason, perhaps, there have been frequent suggestions that there was only one invention of metallurgy. This view was well expressed and well argued by the late Theodore Wertime (1964) twenty years ago: “One must doubt that the tangled web of discovery, comprehending the art of reducing oxide and sulfide ores, the recognition of silver, lead, iron, tin, and possibly arsenic and antimony, as distinctive new metallic substances, and the technique of alloying tin with bronze, could have been spun twice in human history.” However, this is an argument that need not be replayed here. It has effectively been demonstrated that metallurgy in the New World had separate origins and developments from those in the Old World. It is even likely that metallurgy in China developed independently of that in Western Asia. It has been argued on several occasions that there is a good case for the independent origin of copper metallurgy in southeast Europe. The same is true for Iberia. What interests us here is to understand more clearly how these independent innovations of a new commodity may have occurred.

There are two other old misconceptions that need to be clarified. The first, which goes back to the original Three Age System, and more particularly to Gordon Childe’s Marxist elaboration of “Archaeological Ages as Technological Stages” (Childe 1944), was to regard the inception of copper/bronze metallurgy, and later of iron working, as technologically and productively significant events in their own right. In most cases, however, as noted earlier it was many centuries after the basic techniques were explored and understood that they became of economic and productive significance.3 The same observations hold for iron working. Iron was known and valued in the Near East for centuries before the iron age began. Similarly, there are not-infrequent finds in Mycenaean Greece at least two centuries before iron weapons begin to be seen in appreciable numbers. One might predict that similar circumstances would apply in most areas where there was an indigenous development of metal technology, although clearly the impact of an imported technology upon a less developed native one can be decisive (as was the case, for instance, with the demand for iron nails in eighteenth-century Polynesia). It should be stressed, then, that it is not the new technology itself that is decisive, but the use to which it is put.

The second and related point that deserves emphasis is the misconception that the key to the adoption of important innovations is the diffusion of the essential new knowledge that underlies most of them. This view underlies the work of many geographers, who speak of “the diffusion of innovations” as if they were dealing with the propagation of some new virus, or the dissemination of a gene through successive generations of a population. Such models may be appropriate when there really are major demographic shifts, as in the case of the spread of farming, but what Hagerstand (1967) calls innovation diffusion as a spatial process is only one approach to the subject. Another is to stress factors endogenous to the society in question. In many cases the technology has been readily available for a considerable period of time before it comes into widespread use in a manner that is so productive as to promote efficiency in a way that is adaptively advantageous.





The social context


It is my argument, then, that the decisive innovation in the development of a new commodity is generally social rather than technical. Often the technology is already there.

This point is, I believe, well exemplified by the case of metallurgical development in southeast Europe in the so-called chalcolithic period. Indeed, the explanatory problem there, as perhaps in most cases of early metallurgical development, is not to explain why people did not at once use this great technology. It is, on the contrary, to understand why they bothered at all. For until the technology develops a great deal further, as it can only do through intensive use, early copper metallurgy does not produce anything decisively useful at all. The artifacts that can be produced from native copper by an annealing process have very few properties to recommend them in comparison to well-chosen stones, and many that are lacking.

In most cases early metallurgy appears to have been practiced primarily because the products had novel properties that made them attractive to use as symbols and as personal adornments and ornaments, in a manner that, by focusing attention, could attract or enhance prestige. It is striking that copper had such a key place in the prestige systems of North America, for instance. In the same way in China, evidence for a copper age or for the very early development of bronze metallurgy may largely be lacking precisely because metal was used primarily for the production of prestige objects, notably bronze vessels, and stray finds of inconsequential objects are very rare. In the same way in the Old World we find iron in the early phases always as a material of great worth, whose context in rich burials and in other finds indicates a prestigious status. Only much later was it used to make productive tools, and at the same time it became commonplace.





The case of Varna


Let us now turn to the case of the Varna cemetery. The discovery there, some ten years ago, of a series of burials with rich gravegoods including many objects of gold, aroused great interest when their very early context was appreciated. Although copper metallurgy can be documented earlier in the Near East, the goldwork of Varna is the earliest significant (that is, substantial) occurrence of the use of gold anywhere in the world (Renfrew 1978a). (It should be noted that in addition to the main cemetery near Varna, sometimes termed Varna I, a second cemetery has been found in the area, designated Varna II. It is earlier, and the gravegoods are much less rich. When no distinction is made, the main cemetery – Varna I – is meant.)

But Varna had a second significance for southeast Europe. Hitherto the chalcolithic cultures of the Balkans have always appeared within an economy in most respects egalitarian. The villages so far discovered have houses of about the same size, and the one larger building sometimes observed has quite reasonably been regarded as a communal structure analogous to the “men’s house” in some societies. Special finds such as the earlier figurines of Nea Nikomedeia or the gold amulets from Chotnitsa have given rise to the suggestion that there may have been village shrines. Hitherto neither the village plans nor the artifacts found have suggested any very salient social ranking in the Balkan chalcolithic.

Very few cemeteries have been well documented from this area and period. But what we have known of them has not conflicted with the impression given by the contemporary cemeteries of Hungary. There are disparities in the gravegoods, perhaps comparable to those documented for a slightly later period at Branc in Czechoslovakia by Susan Shennan (1975). She was able to show distinctions between the sexes and some indications of hereditary status, but no very salient ranking.

Varna gives a very different impression. The quantity of the gravegoods in some of the graves is in itself very striking. Moreover, there are special artifacts in some of the rich graves that are likely to be in themselves indicative of very special status. The finds at the cemetery have not yet been published in full, but there is a good preliminary publication by Ivanov (1978), and the same author (Ivanov 1982) has detailed many grave groups in the catalog of the 1982 exhibition of the Isetan Museum of Art. It is not yet feasible to give any quantitative analysis, but some important points of qualitative analysis can be faced. By 1982, 204 graves had been found. Among these are 35 containing no skeletons. These are classed by the excavators as “symbolic graves” (cenotaphs) in the context in question (although the possibility of bone decay must be seriously considered). The “symbolic graves” are subdivided into rich graves (three in number, with numerous gravegoods: Graves 1, 4, and 36); graves containing clay masks of human faces (three in number); simple symbolic graves (21 in number); and graves containing reburied parts of human skeletons (seven in number). The second major category is “graves with skeletons situated in a straight supine position,” of which 59 are reported. The third category is “graves with skeletons placed on one side and flexed”; 41 are reported. These three main categories total 135; presumably some of the total of 204 have not yet been excavated or assigned a category. Five major issues present themselves.

1. Relative value of materials. It cannot be assumed that materials that we esteem highly, such as gold, were necessarily of high value in the context in question. For instance, four of the richest graves contain a total of 2,200 gold objects weighing, 4,921 grams, and it could therefore be argued that gold was not so rare or valuable as other materials. But five arguments serve to stress its value: First, gold is used as a personal adornment in proximity to the body in two key positions that are recognized as particularly important in a cross-cultural perspective: the face (numerous adornments, in position, for instance, on the clay masks, as in Grave 2); and the genitals (gold penis cover, Grave 43). Second, gold is prominent in objects that from their position may be regarded as of prime symbolic value. These are the “maces” or “scepters,” which the position in the grave indicates were buried in the hand of the deceased (Grave 43) or were otherwise prominent in the assemblage (Graves 1, 4, and 36). Third, gold is dissembled; that is to say, objects sometimes are made to look as if they were made of gold when they are not. This is an important general principle, for in cases of deliberate deception it is axiomatic that the device has the purpose of making the object look more rather than less valuable. (A different principle might apply when taking valuables through a customs examination). This point is illustrated by the piece of gold leaf still adhering to the shaft-hole axe of stone that was carried on top of the golden scepter of Grave 4. Clearly the intention was to make the axe look as if it were made of gold.

Fourth, gold is used more economically (in terms of mass) than comparable materials such as copper. It is notable that there appear to be no gold items made by a casting process.4 The melting points of gold and copper are approximately the same, and it would be interesting to learn if there are technical aspects, apart from the abundance or rarity of the material, that make the former more difficult to cast. The copper objects from Grave 4 are solid, and though their weights are not published, must together come close in weight to the five kilograms that the gold from the cemetery totals. The use of sheet gold in effect gives the maximum surface area of the material in terms of its weight: a good criterion of ascribed value. Fifth, gold is inherently attractive. This criterion is listed last because I have not yet presented arguments to make it other than subjective. Two objective points are relevant: it reflects light efficiently; that is, it is bright, indeed dazzling; moreover, it does not tarnish (oxidize); it is unchanging through time, incorruptible. This point is further discussed below.

These arguments warrant the inference, which is thus no longer an intuitive assumption, that gold was a high-value material at Varna. The arguments could be further developed to show that it was probably the highest-value material that is found in several graves.

2. Inherited (ascribed) rather than achieved status. Several children’s or infants’ graves in the cemetery are rich in their gravegoods, although none falls within the wealthiest class (Graves 17 and 110 fall into this class). It is suggested that these children had inherited status. However, the argument could be put that they are children of adults of high achieved status, and that the manner of interment reflects the status of the parents rather than that of the child.

3. Salient ranking. There are massive disparities in the cemetery in terms of (a) the number of gravegoods; (b) the quantity of high-status materials, mainly gold; (c) the presence of symbolic insignia, including gold headdresses, gold pectoral ornaments, and scepters; (d) the presence of unusual categories of artifacts, for instance, the pottery vases decorated with gold paint from Grave 4. Prominent status, reflected in conspicuous burial, raises the possibility that the Varna society should be considered a chiefdom, in the sense employed by Service (1962) and by Sahlins (1972).

4. Sex of high-status individuals. Both women and men were buried with rich gravegoods. Unfortunately, three of the four richest graves, the only ones where gold scepters are buried, are cenotaphs, containing no skeletons. The fourth is Grave 43, where the deceased was male, aged 40 to 45 years. It is possible that the hypothetical office of “chief’ was held exclusively by males, but there is no case at present for assuming that it was not held also by females.

5. Symbolic distinctions between the sexes. Full publication of the archeological findings will be necessary before the gender of the putative chiefs can be satisfactorily settled. It might be possible to determine the likely sex of the deceased honored in the three rich cenotaphs. A preliminary analysis suggests that two artifacts – the shaft-hole axe of stone or copper and the bone (or marble) “Idol” – are of considerable symbolic significance, since they are found singly, although with other objects in many graves. They are found with skeletons of both men and women, and the idol is found with children. The pattern of occurrence needs further study.





The wider social context


It is meaningless to talk of a “chiefdom” on the basis of a single place, especially a single cemetery. For the interest of such a term is that it relates to social organization, and the whole point of a chiefdom society is that the center has an organizing role beyond the domestic or village level. The concept thus has spatial implications. A question that needs to be answered for Varna, then, is what is the larger spatial significance of the Varna finds? Are we to expect other Varnas, other cemeteries with very pronounced disparities in status, consonant with chiefdom society?

Hitherto our picture of the Balkan chalcolithic has been one of a mosaic of essentially independent, autonomous villages – indeed, a segmentary society whose components are cellular and modular. Of course, these societies were linked by exchange networks and no doubt by many ties of kinship. The larger unities, reflected in the geographic distribution of pottery styles, were often considered tribal by earlier generations of scholars, who sought to see behind the Gumelnitsa culture or the Vina culture or the Cucuteni culture corresponding “peoples.” But these ethnic categories are now much less clear. We lack recent work that discusses in sufficient detail the evidence for social or political groups beyond the village level. The means of integration, other than kinship and exchange, are – if they existed – still obscure. We do not have in southeast Europe ceremonial centers of evidently public nature to compare with the Stonehenge monuments of Britain or the Hopewell ceremonial complexes in the United States.

What, then, was the regional organization, if any, during the chalcolithic? Ivanov (1978) has hinted that the different scale of the tell mounds in the chalcolithic may indicate some settlement hierarchy; this is an important issue not yet argued in detail. If we are to regard Varna as the seat of a chiefdom, as the cemetery finds certainly suggest it may have been, it should also be the center of an organizing hierarchy that can be interpreted in spatial terms.

One specific issue that may be helpful here, when more progress has been made, is the question of the source of the gold. Occasional gold finds are quite common in the chalcolithic, although the Chotnitsa find is the only other one that might be termed a treasure. There has already been speculation about far-flung trading links and remote sources for this gold. But I shall be astonished if the gold was procured outside the immediate territory of the Varna polity. Its radius of direct influence cannot have been, I would suggest, more than 100 kilometers at the outside, and that would make a very large territorial unit. The distance from center to periphery in an Early State module is rarely more than 70 kilometers (Renfrew 1975, 19), and chiefdom societies are often of comparable scale. I shall be very surprised if the source of the Varna gold were more than 50 kilometers from Varna itself.

This is not to deny the more extensive nature of the exchange networks then in existence, most graphically illustrated by the distribution of marine shell, much of it originating in the Mediterranean, rather than the Black Sea (as has been securely shown for Spondylus gaederopus). It is possible that the Varna Spondylus was carried thither by sea through the Dardanelles, and it is significant that the largest workshop for Spondylus yet known for the Balkan chalcolithic was at Hirsova, again on the Black Sea coast. But the efficiency of the land-based exchange routes operating up from Aegean coastal settlements and those of the immediate hinterland, such as Sitagroi, should not be underestimated.5





Metallurgy at Varna: the “chrysolithic”


In the foregoing section several problems were raised about the nature of chalcolithic society in the light of the Varna discoveries. It is clear that copper metallurgy developed in the Balkans long before it did in the Aegean, although there are stray finds in the Aegean that indicate, as suggested earlier, that the technology in its rudiments had been invented or acquired during the late neolithic. The essential difference is that in the Balkans the metallurgical products were integrated much more closely into contexts of social use within the contemporary material culture. This created demand or need, and from this demand came increased output, and a steady increase in technical accomplishment.

This stage is splendidly exemplified by the Varna finds, which are of course chrysolithic (that is, gold-stone) as much as they are chalcolithic (copper-stone). Indeed, it is gold that is used, and takes pride of place, for most purposes of display. Copper ornaments are in fact less common at Varna than in copper-age cemeteries farther north and west because they are largely displaced by gold.6

Comparison of the occurrences of gold and copper at the main Varna cemetery (Varna I) makes it clear that copper has already moved from the role of the merely decorative, which it seems to have had in the earlier Varna II cemetery, to the productively useful. The main copper forms found in Varna I are the pin, the flat chisel, the narrow chisel or wedge, the long, narrow chisel, sometimes with curved end, and a range of forms of shaft-hole axes, ranging from the squarish Vidra type to the very elongated. It is, however, particularly interesting that there is still a comparable range of shaft-hole axes of stone – in this form we catch the evolution at the transition from stone to copper. The stone axes are found in some of the poorer graves (for example, Grave 7), but an elegant and slender one, sheathed in gold, was mounted on the scepter to form part of the rich assemblage of Grave 4, where it obviously had a ceremonial role. In Grave 1 the comparable position is taken by a copper axe.

We see here the replacement of stone by copper in what seems to have been initially a ceremonial or prestige role. This lends force to the suggestion that initially the material was appreciated as a new vehicle for display, and that its genuinely novel and productively useful mechanical qualities only later came to govern its use.





Value and commodity in wider perspective


Wessex and the Aegean bronze age


The case of the Varna cemetery suggests a number of interesting problems and questions that deserve further investigation. It raises the issue, seen also very clearly in the early bronze age of the Aegean and of northern Europe, of the relationship of the use of metal objects for display purposes to the development of personal ranking within the societies in question. The recognition by the archeologist of personal ranking within a prehistoric society depends in part on the recovery of artifacts associated with the person, generally accompanying burial of the body. In some cases the very artifacts that suggest early ranking in society simultaneously document the early use of metal. The association is thus not a coincidental one, and there is a risk of circularity in the argument here; but it can be overcome by careful analysis.

One of the most interesting features of the Varna cemetery, as noted above, is that it appears in a context that was previously regarded as more or less egalitarian – that is to say, where evidence for marked disparities in personal possessions was lacking, not only from the gravegoods of the known cemeteries, but also from finds in domestic contexts. There is, of course, again the risk of circularity, since without such archeologically notable indicators of possessions as metal objects, it is inherently more difficult to observe such disparities as may have existed. But our conclusion here does not depend exclusively upon the presence of metal objects. Other materials have a significant place among the gravegoods, which also include significant forms, such as the scepters, that could still be recognized if they were made, for instance, of stone.

In Varna, then, we see striking indications of high personal status occurring at approximately the same time as the development within the society of attractive commodities by which high status may be expressed. Yet it would have been possible for high status to be expressed, albeit less effectively, by the inclusion of very large quantities of high-value objects already in circulation (such as shell bracelets) without the presence of the new metal commodities. It is, moreover, possible that gold was available as a material at an earlier date but was simply not exploited until the Varna period. (This conclusion of course depends upon a local origin for the gold, proposed earlier.)

A similar conjunction between new commodities and the new kind of prestige that is seen in the personal possession of attractive objects is reflected in the Wessex culture of the British early bronze age and in the preceding Beaker period. Here, however, it is accompanied by another very interesting and suggestive feature: the widespread appearance of burial by individual inhumation, often under a prominent burial mound. Although there was a wide variety of burial practices in the preceding neolithic period in Britain, many of these were collective, and involved the placing of the remains (often after a process of excarnation – that is, allowing the bones to become free of flesh) within a collective burial place, sometimes of impressive, indeed monumental, scale. Cemeteries of individual inhumations are not found, in contrast to the position in central Europe, where there are numerous cemeteries of the Linearbandkeramik culture, as well as in some succeeding phases.

In the British case, a distinction was drawn some years ago between the earlier societies, which practiced conspicuous collective burial, entirely without notable gravegoods, and these later ones, where rich gravegoods are found accompanying favored individuals. At one extreme lie societies where personal wealth in terms of valuable possessions is not impressively documented, but where the solidarity of the social unit was expressed most effectively in communal or group activities. At the other are societies where a marked disparity in personal possessions and in other material indications of prestige appears to document a salient prestige ranking, often without evidence of large communal meetings or activities (Renfrew 1974, 74).

The discussion has been taken much further in a number of recent articles by S.J. Shennan (1982), Thorpe and Richards (1982), and Braithwaite (1984). Shennan (1982, 157) draws upon work by Gilman (1976) in southeast Spain, where it is argued that emerging hierarchies need to be sanctioned by appropriate ideologies, and that the ritual of collective burial was not appropriate to such ideologies. Instead there emerged a new ideology, in which hierarchy was legitimated through the consumption of prestige items by individuals. Shennan accepts this perspective, but suggests that the increase in social differentiation had taken place in Britain earlier, during the neolithic, and that we can see the early bronze age changes rather as the catching up of conservative ritual with the social changes that had already occurred. He makes the same point in relation to comparable changes in Brittany: “The monumental nature of the late neolithic tombs, and other megalithic phenomena of Brittany suggest again that here we have a hierarchically differentiated society prior to the early bronze age, and that the early bronze age sees a change in the form of its ritual expression, with a move from collective monumentality to individual consumption of goods” (1982, 157). The important point here is that “the rituals involved in this new ideology were based not on the collective labor of the community but on the consumption in burial of prestige items and symbols obtained by means of contact with members of elites elsewhere and/or through the activities of specialist craftsmen.” This tendency toward the expression of male prestige in burial can be traced back to the preceding Beaker period, but then in the context of only a very limited degree of hierarchical differentiation. And Shennan stresses, as others have noted from Childe onward, that over this period “it is difficult to avoid relating the increase in social dif ferentiation in some way to the growth of the copper and bronze industry and the opportunities it offered for the generation and control of a surplus” (Shennan 1982, 159).

Braithwaite has again discussed this issue within a broader context of ritual discourse and conflicting ideologies, concluding that “there was a gradual move away from the genealogical basis of the earlier system of prestige and towards a system in which material symbols, such as metal artefacts, were used more directly to signify status and accrue prestige” (Braithwaite 1984, 106).

This case has many analogies with the position in the prehistoric Aegean. There we see the appearance around 3300 B.C. of the practice of inhumation in cemeteries in the Cycladic Islands, although in small family graves rather than as individual burials. At the same time, the gravegoods reflect increasing disparities in wealth and prestige. A similar process is seen in Crete (although the burials there in the round tombs remain collective ones, but they are accompanied by rich gravegoods), and it culminates there in the formation of Minoan palace society around 2100 B.C.

The aftermath was very different in each of the three cases under consideration. At Varna, the period of rich burial was followed by, and indeed may in part be contemporary with, the development of a full copper age, when copper axe-adzes were common, along with other useful tools. But this was a short-lived phase, followed by the effective collapse of this flourishing society of Old Europe, and by a period of decline, with reduced metal production and with none of the indicators of hierarchical organization that we glimpse at Varna, nor of the ritual sophistication that we infer from some of the domestic sites of the Varna period.

In the Aegean the early bronze age, which is the period when individual burial and differences in ranking first emerge, is followed by the Minoan and Mycenaean palace civilizations. But we should note that it is not until the later bronze age that bronze tools were of frequent and widespread occurrence, as evidenced by the tool hoards of the Mycenaean period. During the early bronze age, despite the finding of a few tool hoards, bronze was used mainly for objects of high prestige value, notably for weapons.

Likewise during the British later bronze age, metal objects no longer accompany burials to the same extent, after the early phase of florescence, and individual burial with rich gravegoods is no longer seen. This is not difficult to understand within the perspective advanced by Shennan and Braithwaite, from which the rich burials of the early bronze age are viewed as establishing or validating through ritual practice a hierarchy based in part upon new acquisitive principles. There is evidence that in the later bronze age, land tenure was an increasingly important issue, and metal objects are then found in hoards and sometimes in ritual deposits, but not in graves. This was the period of the development of the flourishing bronze industry of the developed European bronze age, as Sherratt (1976) has well described, with its extensive trade networks. In northern Europe by this time bronze was no longer a novelty, nor any longer a commodity prestigious in itself.

There are many differences between the trajectories of social development in the three areas here discussed. This is to be expected, particularly in view of the differences in the sources of metal and in the exchange systems by which metal and metal objects were distributed. It is, however, the similarities that are relevant here. I suggest that there are real structural or processual similarities between the use of prestige goods accompanying individual burials in the Aegean early bronze age, and their comparable use in the early bronze age of Britain nearly a thousand years later. The Varna finds are very different; it is not yet clear how typical the Varna cemetery in fact was among its contemporaries in southeast Europe. But again it raises, and perhaps helps to solve, some of the analytical problems involved.

What we appear to be seeing in each case is the very early use of metal in the area in question in contexts that at the same time are documenting the emergence of personal ranking, reflected in what may have been individually owned goods, buried with the deceased in the grave. Copper and gold clearly afford in each case a new vehicle for the expression of ranking, and thus in this sense a new channel of communication. Indeed, it may be suggested that they are not merely reflecting or documenting a degree of ranking in society that would have existed in any case without them. On the contrary, the ownership and display of these valuable objects may have constituted an essential part of the prominence of their owner and have contributed significantly to his or her prestige. It may be permissible, then, to see these materials as playing a more active role, and rather than simply reflecting a social structure, as taking a significant role in its very formation.





Aspects of value and prestige: the perspective of Marx


In view of the wide influence upon anthropologists of Marx’s discussion of value and of commodities and of the useful categories that he established, it is convenient to relate his views to the cases just examined. As early as 1867 Marx usefully redefined the distinction between use value, “the utility of a thing” (Marx 1970,44), and exchange value, “the proportion in which values in use of one sort are exchanged for those of another sort.” He proceeded in his analysis to stress that what commodities have in common is that they are products of labor. “As values, all commodities are only definite masses of congealed labor time” (ibid., 47). In shorthand it may be convenient to think of this aspect in terms of labor value.

These terms were used lucidly by Marx in his analysis of capitalist economies, but they form part of what may be termed a formalist analysis. They are less satisfactory when applied to those classes of object that Dalton (1977) has described as “primitive valuables.” These are the objects that are especially prized, and have symbolic significance, such as the vaygu’a, the valuable exchanged in the kula ring in the Trobriand Islands. These are to be contrasted with the mere gimwali, the everyday objects circulating in petty market exchange. Here it is possible, so Dalton asserts, to identify different spheres of exchange, and it is simply not appropriate to exchange valuables for common, everyday goods. These valuables, such as shell bracelets – or in the case of the British neolithic, perhaps, the jade axes that are handsome objects but unsuited for the productive functions of an axe – serve to call into question Marx’s dictum (1970:48) that “nothing can have value without being an object of utility.” But it should be noted here that Marx may not have intended his labor theory of value to apply to precapitalist situations.7

Here it is appropriate to turn to another famous passage from Marx, entitled “The fetishism of commodities and the secret thereof,” in which he speaks, with justice, of “the mystical character of commodities”: “A commodity appears at first sight, a very trivial thing, and easily understood. Its analysis shows that it is, in reality, a very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties” (Marx 1970, 76). It is worth quoting a further celebrated and suggestive passage, although it is one that leads to a conclusion seemingly not appropriate to the cases under consideration here, however relevant it may be to capitalist economics:

But it is different with commodities. There the existence of the things qua commodities, and the value relation between the products of labor which stamps them as commodities, have absolutely no connection with their physical properties and with the material relations arising therefrom. There is a definite social relation between men, that assumes, in their eyes, the fantastic form of a relation between things. In order, therefore, to find an analogy, we must have recourse to the mist-enveloped regions of the religious world. In that world the productions of the human brain appear as independent beings endowed with life, and entering into relations both with one another and the human race. So it is in the world of commodities with the products of men’s hands. This I call the fetishism which attaches itself to the products of labor, so soon as they are produced as commodities, and which is therefore inseparable from the production of commodities.

This fetishism of commodities has its origin, as the foregoing analysis has already shown, in the peculiar social character of the labor that produces them (Marx 1970, 77). In the case of primitive valuables, or indeed of valuable materials in our own time, such as gold, this fetishism, as Marx aptly terms it, is easy to recognize. But it is not so easily analyzed in terms of labor value.8

Marx’s useful discussion establishes a number of valid distinctions, but from the standpoint of precapitalist socieities, it is curious that he should attach the term “fetishism,” in relation to commodities, “the products of labor,” rather than to the much less rationally based and less functionally valid prestige value, which is commonly assigned in many societies to objects and commodities that have negligible use value, in a utilitarian or productive sense, and which sometimes represent minimal labor value. It may perhaps be useful to recapitulate, taking Marx’s helpful distinctions as a starting point.

In general, value is a property that is assigned to an object in a manner that arises from the social context in question, and it is to some, usually significant, extent arbitrary. It is never a property inherent within an object or material in the manner of such physical and measurable properties as hardness, density, refractive index, and so on. It cannot be measured outside a social context. We speak of value as if it were inherent within the object or commodity, and in doing so we create a metaphor, or mask a reality. So Marx was right to speak of “the fetishism of commodities,” although labor is not the only crucial consideration.

Value is something assigned by an individual or by a group. This value may be assigned because of the use potential of the commodity (use value) or because of the work involved in its production (labor value). (Exchange value is a different kind of category: it is a measure, a parameter of value, always expressed as a ratio between two materials. Unlike the preceding, it is not a primary quality.)

Often the term “sentimental value” is used to refer to the estimation that a specific person accords an object when the high estimation is not widely shared. It generally depends upon the specific history of that object in relation to the person in question – it may be grandmother’s brooch, or the photo of a close friend. The specific history of an individual object, which is of no particular interest because of its raw material or its workmanship, can also afford it a generally agreed value – for instance, a memento of Queen Elizabeth or of George Washington, or the Stone of Scone. The same is relevant to the reverence accorded objects of religious veneration, whether they be supposed relics of an actual person, or images that command respect, even when the constituent material is not prized – fetishism in the original sense. This may derive in part from the specific history of the object, and in part from an implied use-value, since the image may be believed to have active powers.

So far we have considered two aspects, labor value and use value, that may be considered functionally based. Exchange value is identified as simply a measure, a ratio. Historic or association value (including sentimental value) depends solely upon the unique history or association of the specific object in question.

Turning now to prestige goods, we can see that they generally have value of another kind. Of course, some prestige goods do have unique status: “This was the sword that Prince X used to slay a hundred enemies.” But most prestige goods also have a value that, within the given cultural context, is regarded as intrinsic. Following a suggestion of Arjun Appadurai, it may be useful to introduce the term prime value in relation to those materials that in a given culture are regarded as having intrinsic value. This allows us to avoid the use of the term intrinsic, which is desirable because, as noted earlier, no materials have a universal intrinsic value. Prime value is thus the equivalent of ascribed intrinsic value. It was earlier shown that objects of gold had a position in some of the graves at Varna that seems a particularly privileged one. Although each specific object may itself have had a special status through its history of associations, the fact that it was made of gold does seem (in terms of the pattern established) to have been relevant. In view of our own preconceptions about gold, that is not surprising to us. But these simple objects of gold have no special use value, in the utilitarian sense, and little labor value. The same observations can be made about amber in the Wessex graves, and about shell in many contexts.

It is, in fact, easy for us to compile a list of commodities that are of prime value in many cultural contexts (but not in all), and that tend to function in the exchange sphere. Gold and silver are among these, and with them crystal and jade and a series of other translucent stones, as well as objects of shell. Furs may be included and also various fabrics, but since these are manufactured products, their high value does often relate to a high labor value, as Marx suggested.

Having listed these valuable substances, we can go on to find more general underlying principles. We can seek to ask, in other words, what properties genuinely intrinsic to the materials in question may have led to their being regarded as of prime value in many (but not all) societies. These objects and materials are in general conspicuous: they operate upon the senses in an agreeable and attractive manner. They are also rare; only in special (generally ritual) circumstances can very common materials have a high value. Many of them share the property of durability. But others are consumables, such as perfumes or very fine wines. There is in fact a polarity among primitive valuables, between those that are suitable for conspicuous consumption (and that need to be consumed in order to be used at all), such as frankincense and myrrh, and those that have an enduring or even eternal quality, like gold and jade.

It is goods with this prime value that feature prominently in the Varna cemetery and in the two other cases considered. Many burials contain a few useful objects, such as pots or stone tools, and the remainder of the gravegoods are of shell or metal or of fine stone. There are very few objects that can be recognized as of symbolic value that are not also made of a material we can recognize as of prime value at that time. At Varna the bone figurines or idols are the most prominent objects clearly of symbolic value that are made of a material lacking in prime value.

These points take us beyond the categories established by Marx in his classification, and suggest that in many societies some commodities were accorded prime value, regarded by each society as an inherent, intrinsic value. This prime value we may regard as a symbolic construct, and like all symbolic value, it is ascribed, to some extent, in an arbitrary way.9





Commodity, value, and ranked societies


Halstead and O’Shea (1982) have discussed transactions in which food is exchanged for more durable items of value in terms of “social storage.” They have rightly stressed that such valuable items form a suitable vehicle for the development of institutionalized inequality. Halstead (1981, 177) has countered the view that valuables could never be exchanged for food, whereas Gamble (1981) has recently emphasized the need to consider the system of production, especially of agricultural produce, with as much care as the distribution and circulation of goods.

These various studies, like that of Woodburn (1982), usefully introduce the dimension of time into the discussion, and this may prove crucial to our understanding of prestige expressed by, and achieved by, the ownership of goods, which in consequence have high prime value. Many of these goods, as noted above, are durables, indeed conspicuous durables: gold, like diamonds, is forever.

Analysis of gift exchange has always laid great stress upon the standing or prestige an exchange partner achieves in offering a splendid gift. The gesture is in itself a transitory action, but it sets up obligations for a reciprocal gesture of comparable dimensions in the future. But the acquisitive character of the three societies we have been examining suggests rather that the main emphasis may then have shifted to the ownership of prestige goods, as well, no doubt, as their conspicuous consumption in various ways, including burial. Ownership, carrying with it the direct association that can go with personal property, is a state rather than an action. The possession of rich objects carries with it more than the ability to exchange some of them in return for goods and services. By virtue of the prestige it confers, ownership offers access to social networks and to other resources that are closed to those lacking such prestige. In these two senses the ownership of rich objects reflecting and conferring prestige may be regarded as wealth, rather than as an implied obligation to generosity.

The question we are now approaching is at what point and by what means does the value set upon prestige commodities, such as jade axes or gold ornaments, change? How does the ceremonial nature of the primitive valuables of the simpler, egalitarian societies develop into the more active role of the prestige items in the acquisitive societies of the early bronze age Aegean or Wessex? That is to say, at what point does the ownership and display of important objects of desirable materials such as copper and gold play an important part in the achievement and maintenance of the high status of a high-ranking person? There is no doubt that in earlier times jade axes were valuables, appreciated for their constituent material. But with the inception of metallurgy the material itself – first copper, then bronze, and later iron – came to be used in a number of ways, some of them highly productive, and so took on a more economically significant role. Quite soon we see that the material in question had become a commodity, valued for itself and for the uses to which it could be put, rather than for the actual form it had taken in the specific artifact in question. So it is that we find ingot bars in the late bronze age Mediterranean, and ingot torques in the Central European bronze age, both forms indicating that the metal was valued now as a raw material and was no longer exchanged primarily in the shape of valuable objects reflecting and conferring prestige. By this stage we are talking of a commercial trade, sustained by well-organized production in mines; the process of commoditization is complete.

One aspect to consider here is the manner in which such wealth can be further accumulated. Are ten items ten times as valuable as one item, and one hundred of them ten times more valuable than ten? This rather obvious point does seem significant – the extent to which fungibles are additive in value. It has been usefully discussed by Kopytoff in Chapter 2; this additive quality is one of the attributes that distinguish commodities from “singular” things. In our first case, that of the egalitarian society, we can readily conceive that a person will gain in prestige by giving or by owning a very special axe. The language of prestige could be devalued slightly rather than enhanced, however, if he were to receive or to own ten identical axes. In the acquisitive society of the modern world, this restriction would seem not to hold: wealth here is cumulative, and goods are valued for their exchange potential as well as for their cumulative effects on prestige through display (see Douglas 1967, 126).

What I am grasping at here, of course, is the special factor that distinguishes the role of value and commodity in the simple and undifferentiated societies discussed earlier from their operation in the more complex, ranked ones. For as we saw in the Varna case, such social questions sometimes take precedence over technological ones, even when technological advance is the subject of consideration.

In some cases we seem to see two stages to the process. In the first, which we have looked at in the three cases discussed, high prestige is immediately reflected and perhaps constituted in the ownership of high prime value objects, in their display, and in their consumption.

The second phase, which is seen in the later bronze age of Europe, is accompanied by the production of useful objects in much greater quantities, sometimes with the richer, “primitive” valuables going out of use, or at least declining in significance. In this phase, rich burials may be less common than in the preceding one, and often quantities of mass-produced goods are now seen. The relative lack of exceptionally conspicuous prestige objects (except in a few favorable cases) can give the impression that society is now the poorer, or less prominently hierarchical in structure. But such inferences may be misleading. In the later British bronze age, for instance, there are other indicators of a highly organized, hierarchical society, including the emergence of hill forts, and of extensive territorial boundary systems that are generally interpreted as reflecting more emphasis upon the ownership and control of land. Rathje (1975, 415) has rightly pointed out that mass production does not mean impoverishment. Certainly Henry Ford accumulated more wealth than did competitors who manufactured more prestigious vehicles.

One may suggest that by the later bronze age, commodities were very freely exchanged across the countryside, with less prominent divisions separating the spheres of exchange. Such a situation implies a measure of specialist production, and perhaps the existence of well-defined units of exchange. Such units are generally seen represented by specific objects (such as currency bars in the later British iron age), which can therefore be termed money. As noted earlier, this would to some extent be true both for the aftermath of the early bronze age in northwest Europe and for the later bronze age Aegean.

It is interesting to note here the relationship among three important variables: a developing system of production and exchange; the circulation of goods of prime value (especially in the early stages); and the emergence of prominent social ranking.

The obvious inference is that the three can most readily develop together through a kind of multiplier effect, where each mutually enhances the others. The key in each case may lie in a measure of technical advance, large enough to maintain the novelty and attractiveness of new products. It is the absence of suitable products for this developing process that may explain why fully complex societies did not develop so markedly in some areas of the world (for instance, the Pacific) as in others. From this perspective there had to be a fairly rare commodity, accessible to the society in question but not too readily so, that could serve as a material of prime value. Ideally it should be a commodity whose nature admitted of gradual technological change, so that one year’s manufacturing techniques did not provide quite so useful or high-grade a commodity as the following year’s. Such a view would, of course, hold for many of the complex societies of the Old World, where developing technology, especially metal technology, had a major role to play. It might serve to explain why the processes of change in other areas rarely led to such sustained growth; the Hope-well complex in North America would be a case in point.

In expressing the beneficial role of a potential for technological growth, and in excluding thereby some areas of the world from such potential, one is not developing a determinist, nor even a strictly functionalist, argument. For the possibility of developing new commodities, within the framework of intensification of production, is certainly not a sufficient condition for the processes of change under discussion; and it may well not be a necessary one. Moreover, we have been insisting upon the importance of the concept of prime value for setting the process in motion and for sustaining its impetus. As discussed earlier, the ascription of high prestige or notional intrinsic value to commodities of low use value and sometimes of low labor value is to a large extent arbitrary and certainly nonfunctional. Yet in the societies under discussion, the practice of ascribing prime value seems to lie at the root of further growth in the economy.





Notes


I should like to acknowledge the useful comments made on the first draft of this paper by Arjun Appadurai and Robert C. Hunt, as well as by other members of the symposium.

1.In “exchange value,” for instance, value is a descriptive term, specifying what has been observed to happen in certain exchange transactions. I would argue that the distinction between emic and etic, although useful in some ways, should not be allowed to dominate research. I am in broad agreement with Binford’s view, which boils down to an assertion that what counts is what happens rather than what people think about what happens. Yet clearly the latter does and did influence the former. We use theoretical concepts in many areas of our discipline, and are not debarred from doing so in the field of cognition by any a priori principle. The real danger is, however, of circular reasoning, of the kind so often found to surround the use of such concepts as adaptation and contradiction.

2.The question of whether gravegoods accompanying a deceased person necessarily imply an association while that person was alive has indeed been discussed in recent years. The more interesting issue of the way such an association with special material goods during life may have been indicative of high status has not. If an adequate framework for analysis can be developed (and the contributions in this direction of Winters 1968, S. Shennan 1975, and O’Shea 1978 among others should be noted), then there are good prospects for learning much more of the social behavior of early societies.

3.This is certainly true of the long use of copper in the Aegean late neolithic, when it had a very minimal impact, and of its use, for instance in the Balkans, during the Vinca-Turdas period, when there are not infrequent finds of small objects but no explosive development until much later, during the Vinca-Plocnik phase.

4.The curious gold astragalus of Grave 36, weighing 33 grams, appears to be the heaviest single gold object in the cemetery, although it is only two centimeters long; I predict that metallographic examination will show it to have been shaped from a nugget by hammering rather than by casting.

5.We must refer also to the marble objects at Varna. They include not only simple bowls (for example in Grave 36), known from other Balkan chalcolithic contexts, but a pointed vessel from Grave 41 that has points of resemblance with a find from the Kephala cemetery in the Cycladic Islands. These vessels have been used by some scholars to reopen the question of possible contacts between the chalcolithic Balkans and the Aegean bronze age. But the chronological question is now largely settled, and the only difficulty seems to be the reported presence of Early Helladic II pottery at the Thessalian site of Pevkakia in association with late neolithic/chalcolithic black-on-red painted (“Galepsos”) ware. At Sitagroi such painted pottery was a frequent feature in phase III, and the Pevkakia material is closely similar. It is the status, or rather the stratigraphic context, of the Early Helladic II pottery at Pevkakia that must be questioned.

6.We should, however, note the copper bracelet from Grave 3 of the Varna II necropolis; significantly, this is earlier than the main cemetery, and, also from the Varna II cemetery, the copper needles from Graves 3, 5, 6, 11, 15, 17, 26, and others. In fact, analysis shows that the copper needle has a role comparable to that of the copper shaft-hole axe, as a frequent and useful object. Outside these classes, copper finds of small decorative items are not frequent: there is merely a bracelet and ring from Grave 51, three rings from Grave 60, and no doubt a few other examples from graves still unpublished.

7.Evidently the discussion here would center upon the notion of “utility.” It can certainly be argued that the “usefulness” of such prestige objects is to excite admiration, to indicate prestige, and to function as valuables in prestige exchange. Such usefulness, however, would be difficult to measure or otherwise quantify.

8.In the treatment quoted, Marx (1970, 95) does not develop the distinction between labor value and exchange value. Of course the price of gold is determined not simply by “the labor time required for its production” (Marx 1970, 95), but by what people are prepared to pay for it; in favorable circumstances, gold nuggets could be found on the surface of the ground, and the labor value could be negligible. What interests us here is precisely why gold, rather than some other material, should be considered a commodity of especially high value. Marx was not primarily concerned with this point.

9.We should note that most societies operate with such notions. Certainly among the hunter-gatherer societies of Australia and the segmentary communities of New Guinea, axes of stone valued as prestige items were traded over long distances from the quarry itself, a practice that finds clear parallels in the British neolithic (Clark 1965). The exchange of exotic materials in such a way seems a near-universal of human existence (Mauss 1954). A number of writers, including Rappaport (1967, 106) and Wright and Zeder (1977) have suggested that these ceremonial exchanges of prestigious objects may fulfill a utilitarian, material function. For by keeping alive gift partnerships and long-distance links even in times when little evident purpose is served by the exchange, societies preserve the opportunity to draw upon the obligations of goodwill and reciprocity, in the form of useful goods including foodstuffs, in times of shortage. The notion of this kind of effective time scheduling is an important one, and Woodburn (1982) has shown how the concept of immediate return versus delayed return is important in societies developing some of the facilities and approaches that are used also in farming societies. Prestige goods of high prime value become a kind of banking mechanism against food shortage, although it should be noted that in normal times ordinary foodstuffs are often considered unsuitable as an object of exchange against primitive valuables, which move in a different sphere of conveyance.





References


Adams, R. M. 1974. Anthropological perspectives on ancient trade. Current Anthropology 15, 239-58.

Binford, L. R. 1969. Comment. Current Anthropology 10, 162-3.

Braithwaite, M. 1984. Ritual and prestige in the prehistory of Wessex c. 2200-1400 B.C. In D. Miller and C. Tilly, eds., Ideology, Power, and Prehistory, 93-110. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Childe, V. G. 1944. Archaeological ages as technological stages: Huxley Memorial Lecture 1944. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 7, 7-24.

Clark, J. G. D. 1965. Traffic in stone axe and adze blades. Economic History Review 18, 1-28.

Dalton, G. 1977. Aboriginal economies in stateless societies. In T. K. Earle and J. E. Ericson, eds., Exchange Systems in Prehistory, 191-192. New York: Academic Press.

Douglas, M. 1967. Primitive rationing. In R. Firth, ed., Themes in Economic Anthropology, 119-47. London: Tavistock.

Frankenstein, S., and Rowlands, M. J. 1978. The internal structure and regional context of early iron age society in south-western Germany. Bulletin of the Institute of Archaeology 15, 73-112.

Gamble, C. 1981. Social control and the economy. In A. Sheridan and G. Bailey, eds., Economic Archaeology (B.A.R. International Series 96), 215-30. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.

Gilman, A. 1976. The development of social stratification in bronze age Europe. Current Anthropology 22, 1-8.

Hägerstrand, T. 1967. Innovation Diffusion as a Spatial Process. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Halstead, P. 1981. From determinism to uncertainty: Social storage and the rise of the Minoan palaces. In A. Sheridan and G. Bailey, eds., Economic Anthropology (B.A.R. International Series 96), 187-214. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.

Halstead, P., and J. O’Shea. 1982. A friend in need is a friend indeed: social storage and the origins of social ranking. In C. Renfrew and S. Shennan, ed., Ranking, Resource and Exchange, 92-9. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Harris, M. 1968. The Rise of Anthropological Theory. London: Routledge.

Hodder, I. 1982a. Theoretical archaeology: A reactionary view. In I. Hodder, ed., Symbolic and Structural Archaeology, 1-15. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1982b. The Present Past. London: Batsford.

Ivanov, I. S. 1975. Raskopki na Varnenskija eneoliten nekropol prez 1972 g., Izvestija na Narodnija Muzeji Varna (Bulletin du Musée National de Varna) 11, 1-16.

1978. Sukrovishtata na Varnenskiya Chalkoliten Nekropol (Treasures of the Varna chalcolithic necropolis). Sofia: “September.” (Text in Bulgarian with translation into Russian, English, and German).

1982. The Varna chalcolithic necropolis. In The First Civilization in Europe and the Oldest Gold in the World – Varna, Bulgaria, 21-121 (exhibition catalog, Isetan Museum of Art, Tokyo). Tokyo: Nippon Television Network Cultural Society.

Marx, K. 1970. Capital, vol. I. London: Lawrence and Wishart (first German edition 1867).

Mauss, M. 1954. The Gift. London: Cohen and West.

O’Shea, J. 1981. Coping with scarcity: Exchange and social storage. In A. Sheridan and G. Bailey, eds., Economic Archaeology, 167-186 (B.A.R. International Series 96). Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.

Polanyi, K. 1957. The economy as instituted process. In K. Polanyi, A. M. Arensberg, and H. W. Pearson, eds., Trade and Market in the Early Empires, 243-69. New York: Free Press.

Rappaport, R. 1967. Pigs for the Ancestors. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Rathje, W. L. 1975. The last tango in Mayapan: A tentative trajectory of production-distribution systems. In J. A. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky, eds., Ancient Civilization and Trade, 409-48. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, Renfrew, C. 1972. The Emergence of Civilisation: The Cyclades and the Aegean in the Third Millennium B. C. London: Methuen.

1975. Trade as action at a distance. In J. A. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky, eds., Ancient Civilization and Trade, 3-60. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,

1978a. Varna and the social context of early metallurgy. Antiquity 52, 199-203.

1978b. The anatomy of innovation. In D. Green, C. Haselgrove, and M. Spriggs, eds., Social Organisation and Settlement, 89-117. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.

Sahlins, M. 1972. Stone Age Economics. Chicago: Aldine.

Service, E. R. 1962. Primitive Social Organization. New York: Random House.

Shennan, S. E. 1975. The social organisation at Branc. Antiquity 49, 279-88.

Shennan, S.J. 1982. Ideology, change, and the European early bronze age. In I. Hodder, ed., Symbolic and Structural Archaeology, 155-61. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Sherratt, A. 1976. Resources, technology and trade in early European metallurgy. In G. Sieveking, I. H. Longworth, and K. E. Wilson, eds., Problems in Economic and Social Archaeology, 557-82. London: Duckworth.

1981. Plough and pastoralism: Aspects of the secondary products revolution. In I. Hodder, G. Isaac, and N. Hammond eds., Pattern of the past: Studies in honour of David Clarke, 261-305. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Thorpe, N., and C. Richards. 1982. The decline of ritual authority and the introduction of beakers into Britain. Paper read at the fourth meeting of the Theoretical Archaeology Group, Durham (England), Dec. 1982.

Veblen, T. 1899. The Theory of the Leisure Class. New York: Macmillan.

Wertime, T. 1964. Man’s first encounters with metallurgy. Science 146, 1257.

Winters, H. D. 1968. Value systems and trade cycles of the Late Archaic in the Midwest. In L. R. and S. R. Binford, eds., New Perspectives in Archaeology, 175-222. Chicago: Aldine.

Woodburn, J. 1982. Egalitarian societies. Man 17, 431-51.

Wright, H., and M. Zeder. 1977. The simulation of a linear exchange system under equilibrium conditions. In T. K. Earle and J. E. Ericson, eds., Exchange Systems in Prehistory, 233-54. New York: Academic Press.





CHAPTER 6

Sacred commodities: the circulation of medieval relics


PATRICK GEARY

An examination of sacred relics as commodities in the Middle Ages may seem to be pushing the definition of commodities as “goods destined for circulation and exchange” to an extreme. Could one reasonably describe a human body or portions thereof as destined for circulation? Can we really compare the production and circulation of saints’ remains to that of gold in prehistoric Europe, cloth in pre-Revolutionary France, or qat in northeastern Africa? The differences are of course great. Nevertheless, although relics were almost universally understood to be important sources of personal supernatural power and formed the primary focus of religious devotion throughout Europe from the eighth through the twelfth centuries, they were bought and sold, stolen or divided, much as any other commodity was. As a result the world of relics may prove an ideal if somewhat unusual microcosm in which to examine the creation, evaluation, and circulation of commodities in traditional Europe. Like slaves, relics belong to that category, unusual in Western society, of objects that are both persons and things (Kopytoff, Chapter 2). Reflecting on the production, exchange, sale, and even theft of sacred relics enables one better to understand the cultural parameters of commodity flow in medieval civilization.

“Medieval civilization” is an extremely imprecise designation, obscuring rather than defining a wide variety of distinct cultural and social traditions that appeared across Europe over a period of a thousand years. The specific period I shall discuss embraces the Carolin-gian and post-Carolingian eras, roughly 750–1150, and the region will be generally the Latin West, with an emphasis on those areas that had formed part of the Carolingian Empire.

The analysis of relics as commodities requires the investigation of two complexes of cultural activity. First, we must examine how commodities in general were produced and circulated within this society, and in particular the relative significance and values assigned to various modes of transfer: sale, exchange, gift, and theft. Second, we must consider how relics fit within this transactional culture; that is, we must understand the cultural context within which they moved.





Commodities in medieval society


A century ago medievalists looked upon the emerging society of feudal Europe as one based on a “natural economy,” in which barter and payments in kind were the normal means of exchange. According to this view, Western Europe gradually began to develop a money economy only with the growth of towns, increasing long-distance communication, and the development of first Italian and later northern European trade, phenomena that were largely credited to the Crusades, which began in 1095. This view of medieval commerce owed more to the ideologies of nineteenth-century colonialism than to the evidence of medieval economy and trade in the West, and by the end of the last century economic historians were emphasizing the very real evidence that pointed to the important roles of money, coinage, and commerce in the eighth through eleventh centuries.

At no time in the Middle Ages was the European economy strictly speaking a “natural economy,” in which barter and self-sufficiency characterized the production, exchange, and consumption of commodities. Nor was it a “peasant economy” in the classical sense of the term. Peasants presumably use not capital but cash; profit and the accumulation of captial on an ever-increasing scale are not supposed to be a part of peasant strategies. In the West, even by the ninth century this image can be applied only with some difficulty. For over thirty years, scholars have been investigating the role of great monastic estates in the complex economy of Carolingian Europe. Most recently, J.-P. Devroey has examined the complex network by which food surpluses (principally grain and wine) from these estates were circulated in a flourishing local and regional trade (Devroey 1984). Although Devroey does not directly address the question of how much of this distribution was effected by barter as opposed to sale, the sources he examines clearly indicate the importance of both regional and international markets (Devroey 1984:581–4).

Nor did the transformation of the Carolingian Empire in the tenth century result in the creation or return of a “classic” peasant economy. One example of the complexity of medieval peasant society has been presented by Paul Bonnassie from Catalonia, a region particularly rich in documentation on peasant families (Bonnassie 1967). He describes the family of one Lloreng (died before 987) and his sons and grandsons. Lloreng was quite well off: he owned several houses, a free holding, livestock, military equipment, and a reserve of grain and wine produced from his fields. Bonnassie describes him as typical of a peasant élite that was “enterprising, free, and capable of selfdefense when necessary” (Bonnassie 1967:104). Within 25 years, the more enterprising of Lloreng’s sons, Vivas, entered into 45 land transactions, up to six a year. Land was no sooner bought than it was resold. Other types of property, too, were constantly sold: crops, horses, mules, armor. Vivas and his descendants improved their position in society considerably by the first half of the eleventh century. Their world included a fairly lively market and abundant specie as means of payment. These peasants were clearly moving up socially and economically, and they were using commodities produced from their increasingly specialized agricultural operations as the capital base of their move. Bonnassie considers this family “neither very typical nor very exceptional,” and attributes its rise to the breakdown, already in the tenth century, of early medieval social relations, which he characterizes as “on the whole kindly, relatively undifferentiated as to status, still patriarchal in type.” (Bonnassie (1967:116). To be sure, Barcelona is a unique place, but then so is every location. The forces at work in this region, which also appear in France and Germany in the twelfth century, may differ not so much in their nature as in their frequency, and these Catalan peasants may differ from those elsewhere in their success in achieving their goals more than in the goals themselves.

The evidence of peasant involvement in markets and what might anachronistically be described as capitalist strategies seems to be paralleled by the evidence of long-distance commerce. Not only do mentions of cash sums to be imposed as fines or forfeits abound in charters and laws, but archeologists discovered coin hoards spread across Europe that contain monies minted at places thousands of kilometers distant. Moreover, isolated but tantalizing references to merchants, to trading expeditions, to “eunuch factories,” and the like seemed to suggest that even during the darkest of the dark ages, commerce continued to play an important role, at both the local level and the international level. A generation of historians began to revise the image of the commercial world of the early Middle Ages and to present a picture of a rudimentary but nonetheless important commercial structure tying together the lands between the Mediterranean and the North Sea that differed from later medieval trade more in organization than in volume or nature (Pirenne 1937; Dopsch 1930; Latouche 1956).

Yet even in the midst of this enthusiasm for commercial history, England’s leading medieval numismatist, Philip Grierson, sounded an important warning in a paper entitled “Commerce in the Dark Ages: A Critique of the Evidence” (1959). Grierson argued that the view of a largely monetized commercial economy was incorrect, and that it had resulted from the failure to distinguish between three sorts of evidence: evidence of persons making their living by commerce; evidence of the sale of specialized or surplus goods directly by producer to consumer; and evidence of the distribution of luxury goods and money by unspecified means (Grierson: 124). Too often, he warned, historians suppose that the existence of trade means the existence of traders, whereas most buying and selling of agricultural products seems to have taken place without middlemen. Likewise, historians tend to suppose that luxury goods were normally distributed by commerce, and that specie was primarily a tool of commerce and its discovery prima facie evidence of commercial exchange. Grierson suggests, by contrast, that trade is by no means the only or even the usual means by which commodities change hands. Much of the exchange network connecting the monasteries of the ninth century probably operated by barter rather than sale (a view with which Devroey would no doubt agree). The Catalan example of Lloreng, Grierson probably would argue, might represent the future, but it would remain a marked exception in Western Europe well into the twelfth century. In the early Middle Ages, Grierson argued, gift and theft were more important than trade in distributing commodities. Under gifts, he included all transfers that take place with the consent of the donor not for material and tangible profit but for social prestige. Under theft he included “all unilateral transfers of property which take place involuntarily,” including simple larceny but, more important, plundering in warfare (Grierson 1959:131). Of course, he pointed out, payments and exchanges such as ransoms and compensations might fall between the two.

Grierson strongly suggested, and Georges Duby later affirmed (Duby 1974:48–72), that gift-giving and theft were probably the most important means of property transfers among the elite. Plunder, extortions from neighboring peoples or kingdoms, and ransoms demanded for the return of enemies taken in war formed the major means by which both luxury goods and money circulated in the medieval world. Certainly the circulation of gold seems less connected with commerce than with the payment of tribute, and gold acquired through such payments was often put into circulation again through the conquest of one’s neighbors.

Property exchanged through mutual consent was often less the material of trade than of gift and countergift (Mauss 1967). Ritual exchanges of goods and services formed the normal means of distributing wealth acquired either through plunder or from agriculture. The dynamics of gift-giving were quite different from those of commerce, even though both involved exchanges of material goods. The goal of gift-giving was not the acquisition of commodities but the establishment of bonds between giver and receiver, bonds that had to be reaffirmed at some point by a countergift. As Grierson (1959:137) puts it, “The ‘profit’ consists in placing other people morally in one’s debt.”

Not only were theft and gift more basic forms of property circulation than trade in the early Middle Ages, but they enjoyed higher prestige. Between equals or near-equals, cordial relationships were created and affirmed by the exchange of gifts. Between individuals or groups of differing status, the disparity of the exchanges both articulated and defined the direction and degree of subordination. Similarly, hostile relationships were characterized by violent seizures of property or persons under the control of an enemy. In both situations, the relationship of relative honor and status was at stake, and the property that changed hands functioned symbolically to affirm or deny that relationship. Commerce suggests neutrality, a relationship that, though not unknown, was the weakest of the three alternatives; between the status of amicus (friend) and that of inimicus (literally nonfriend, enemy), there was little middle ground. A stranger, someone not tied to the local community by a bond both formed and manifested in gift exchange, was dangerous and suspect. And conversely, he was himself in danger, since unless he could form such a bond with one of the powerful figures in the community, there was no one to guarantee his safety. From this perspective, it is little wonder that purchase was suspect: If one’s goal was the realization of a profit, then such a transaction, if carried on with one’s friends, was base, and if with one’s enemies, cowardly. Only in the late twelfth century did the cultural perceptions of Europeans change sufficiently to allow for the possibility of a just price and the morality of mercantile activity (Baldwin 1959; Little 1978).

However, even while acknowledging the validity of this image of exchange in medieval society in general, the exceptions must also be considered. Although early medieval Europe was a traditional society, it was by no means either simple or homogeneous. Goods exchanged may have served to create bonds between giver and recipient, but they were also desired for themselves. They could be and at times were converted into cash or even capital, so that both a system of objectified, alienable commodity exchanges and a system of subjective, inalienable gift exchanges coexisted. Rather than positing a developmental model of transition from a gift-based economy to a commodity-based economy, one should examine the specific social and political circumstances that might favor circulation of goods by the one or the other means.

This general examination of the nature of early medieval commerce is necessary to an understanding of the specific structure within which one finds the production, sale, exchange, gift, and theft of sacred relics. The circulation of high-prestige articles in general, of which relics were but one sort (others were luxury imported cloth and illuminated manuscripts), did not occur primarily within a commercial structure. Moreover, even when a purchase lay at the heart of such exchanges, contemporaries were likely to look askance at such transactions or to understand them within the context of one or another of the two more significant forms of circulation of goods, theft and gift. Nevertheless, such purchases did take place, and at times a real production and marketing system did exist for the creation and distribution of prestigious commodities.





The social construction of relics’ value


Relics of saints, whether particles of clothing or objects associated with them during their lives, particles of dust or vials of oil collected at the site of their tombs, or actual portions of their bodies, had no obvious value apart from a very specific set of shared beliefs. Such relics were of no practical use. Once removed from their elaborate reliquaries or containers, they were not even decorative. The most eagerly sought after relics of the medieval period – bodies or portions of bodies – were superficially similar to thousands of other corpses and skeletons universally available. Not only were they omnipresent and without intrinsic economic value, they were normally undesirable: an ordinary body was a source of contamination, and opening graves or handling remains of the dead was considered abhorrent. This was true even though the cult of the saints and the Christian belief in the resurrection of the dead had, by the eighth century, altered in some essentials the strict taboo of Roman society, which considered the dead a source of pollution and forbade burial within the confines of the city. Nor had the late medieval preoccupation with death and decay yet produced the image of the macabre that, in the fifteenth century, would permeate artistic and literary reflections on death. Nevertheless, remains of the ordinary dead were normally disposed of quickly and definitively through burial (Ariès 1981:110–39).

The value attached to the special corpses that would be venerated as relics required the communal acceptance of three interrelated beliefs: first, that an individual had been, during his life and more important after his death, a special friend of God, that is, a saint; second, that the remains of such a saint were to be prized and treated in a special way; and third, and for our purposes most important, that the particular corpse or portion thereof was indeed the remains of that particular saint.

The first aspect, that is, the belief that an individual enjoyed special favor with God, was based on a received tradition of Christian veneration that originated in the Judaic cult of martyrs in the Maccabean period (Rothkrug, in press). In Christian antiquity martyrs, through their passion and death, were seen to have a special relationship with Christ, and the celebration of their memoria came to involve not simply a remembrance of the dead, but the petitioning of these special dead to continue to intercede before God for their friends in this world.

With the toleration and support of Christianity in the Roman Empire that began in the early fourth century, the production of martyrs ended; henceforth, with rare exceptions, only opponents of Christianity died for their faith. Almost all the holy men of the following centuries were those who lived heroic lives as friends of God rather than those who died heroic deaths. These confessors became the objects of the devotions previously reserved for martyrs, and both during their lives and after their deaths Christians came to them for assistance of all sorts: cures, protection from oppression, help in finding lost objects, assistance in settling disputes, and the like. In return for this assistance, the faithful offered them veneration in the form of pilgrimages, vigils, prayers, and offerings – either symbolic (candles or votive offerings of wax or wood, for example) or material (property or money).

The determination of just who these friends of God were remained well into the twelfth century a largely spontaneous and pragmatic evaluation, based upon the efficacy of the individual holy man’s miracles and the strength of his cult. Although it was the responsibility of local bishops and increasingly, from the twelfth century on, of the Pope to recognize the feast of an individual holy man and include it among the official feasts of the Church, the role of the ecclesiastical official was that of recognizing an already established cult, not of creating it. If a dead person worked miracles that attracted an enthusiastic following, then that person was a saint whether or not he had received formal recognition. Conversely, without a cult, without a following, an individual, regardless of the holiness of his or her life, would not be considered one of those special companions of God through whom he chose to act in the world.

In the West, the preferred medium through which God used his saints to act was their bodies. Their corpses were seen as the pignora, literally, the security deposits left by the saints upon their deaths as guarantees of their continuing interest in the earthly community. At the end of the world, the saint’s body would rise and be glorified; in the meantime, the saint continued to live in and to work through it. This of course was the learned theory of educated churchmen. The perception of the operation of relics on the part of most people, lay and clerical, seems to have been much more immediate: relics were the saints, continuing to live among men. They were immediate sources of supernatural power for good or for ill, and close contact with them or possession of them was a means of participating in that power. To the communities fortunate enough to have a saint’s remains in its church, the benefits in terms of revenue and status were enormous, and competition to acquire relics and to promote the local saint’s virtues over those of neighboring communities was keen.

Relics, then, were highly desirable, even essential, since every church altar was supposed to contain the remains of a saint. Although the demand of relics cannot be quantified, one can in general identify two particularly critical periods of demand: the first was roughly from 750 to 850; it resulted both from an aggressive Carolingian expansion in northern and eastern Europe – an expansion in which conversion to Romano-Frankish Christianity and specifically the cult of Roman saints was an essential feature – and from the development of rural parishes with their churches throughout the Empire. The second period of high demand occurred in the eleventh century; it resulted in part from the growth of population across Western Europe with its concomitant need for new churches, and in part from the competition between cult centers for the enormously increasing pilgrimage traffic.

In general, the cultural assumptions about relics, about their value and utility, were broadly shared. The few dissenters, such as Claudius of Turin in the ninth century and Guilbert of Nogent in the twelfth, were the rare exceptions. From the twelfth century on, some heterodox groups denied the efficacy of relics, but often even these groups had their own versions of saints and even of relics. What was frequently at issue, however, was the specific identity of a corpse or grave with a saint: How could one be certain that a bone was not simply that of an ordinary sinner? Even for one who had no doubts about the efficacy and value of relics in general, great doubt could be entertained concerning the identity of any particular bones with those of a particular saint.

For remains to be valuable, they had to undergo a social and cultural transition from being perceived as ordinary human remains to being venerated as the remains of a saint. Thus one can well apply Kopytoff s suggestion that one examine the career or biography of objects as they pass from ordinary remains to treasured relics, and then perhaps back again (Kopytoff, Chapter 2; 1982).

With few exceptions, the career of relics was seldom one of unbroken veneration from the time of the saint’s death through the Middle Ages. Some recently dead saints achieved such status. Indeed, the remains of Simeon Stylites and Francis of Assissi, for example, were eagerly sought after even before they were dead – the danger of someone murdering an aging holy man in order to acquire his relics, or at least stealing his remains as soon as he was dead was ever present. Much more common, whether for saints long dead (if indeed they had ever lived), or for more recently living persons, was the necessity of identifying a particular set of remains with a particular saint. This could be done through an examination of either extrinsic or intrinsic criteria. To the former category belong such formal processes as the examination of the tomb or reliquary and an examination of documents called authenticae found either in the tomb or reliquary itself, or in the descriptions of the burial of saints in hagiographical texts. These processes were usually carried out by the local bishop in public, solemn sessions attended by lay and clerical magnates. Following the positive recognition of the relics’ authenticity was a public ritual known as the “elevation,” in which the relics were formally offered to the public for veneration.

These external examinations, although quite common, did not constitute the only, or indeed the most important, aspect of the recognition of relics in any cases. The most telling evidence usually came from the supernatural intervention of the saint himself, who indicated where his remains were to be found. Then, during the process of determining the relics’ authenticity, the saint often showed by miraculous intervention that they were indeed genuine. Thus the initial impetus for the consideration of a possible relic often came in the form of a vision in which the saint appeared to a holy person and revealed where his remains were to be found. Often this person was a revered member of the local religious community, a person who commanded respect and authority, by virtue of his office or of his own saintliness. When the vision came to a person of more humble status, its interpretation was often the responsibility of someone of superior status (Schreiner 1966).

The vision led to a search by the community at large, often an entire monastery or village, for the relics. When found, they exhibited their authenticity by working wonders. This need for relics to prove themselves efficacious was reinforced by the custom, in existence by the ninth century, of submitting relics to an ordeal by fire to determine if they were genuine.

These processes were essential in the creation of relics’ value. The public, ritual discovery or invention (inventio) and examination of the relics publicized their existence and created or strengthened their cult. So important were these ceremonies that relics long recognized and venerated were periodically “lost” and “rediscovered.” An excellent example is that of the remains of St. Mark, who had been a major patron of Venice since the ninth century. His remains were rediscovered in the eleventh century in the course of restoration of the Basilica of St. Mark – an orchestrated revitalization ritual that enhanced the value and importance of the saint in the community.

Thus corpses passed from the status of mere human remains to that of sacred relics through a public ritual emphasizing both the identity of the remains with those of a saint and the actual miraculous power exercised by that saint through those particular remains. This latter aspect was most important because different communities often disagreed, even violently, over which one possessed the genuine relics of a particular saint. The identification of false relics and the determination of genuine claims ultimately rested on very pragmatic, functional evidence: if the relics worked – that is, if they were channels for supernatural intervention – then they were genuine. If they did not, they were not authentic, regardless of the strength of external evidence. Once relics had achieved recognition – had come to be perceived as genuine and efficacious – their continuing significance and value depended on their continued performance of miracles and on their relative value compared with other relics and other sources of power. Studies of relics’ value indicate considerable fluctuations in both the short and the long term.

The long-term, European-wide fluctuation is most obvious and easily documented. We have already seen that in antiquity, martyrs’ remains were those most eagerly sought after. In time, the remains of hermits and bishops came to offer these earlier saints considerable competition. In the eighth and ninth centuries Roman saints were the most eagerly sought after, to the relative detriment of local saints (Geary 1979). In the eleventh century, apostolic saints such as James, Mary Magdalene, Dionysius, Lazarus, and Marcial, who were reputed to have had direct connection with the West during their lifetimes, became more popular, eclipsing Roman saints who had lived and died in Italy. During the Crusades, biblical and Eastern relics became much sought after as booty carried back from Palestine and Constantinople.

Not only did the taste in specific relics change appreciably over the centuries, but relics’ relative importance measured against that of other sorts of human and supernatural powers likewise changed. During periods of relatively weak central government, for example, in the later sixth and again in the eleventh century, relics were prized not simply for their thaumaturgic power, but also for their ability to substitute for public authority, protect and secure the community, determine the relative status of individuals and churches, and provide for the community’s economic prosperity. When new political, social, religious, and economic systems began to develop in the twelfth century, the relative significance of relics in providing these services was weakened: churches attacked by local laymen could appeal to the king rather than to their saint for protection; a monastery able to rationalize its budget and exploit its agricultural holdings was less dependent on the income brought in by pilgrims (Geary 1978). Thus, although saints’s relics continued to be valued as sources of supernatural power, particularly by pilgrims seeking miraculous cures, in other areas of life they were effectively supplanted by new and more effective forms of power and authority.

Even at the local, individual level, the saints’ relative value underwent considerable change. The fluctuation seems directly related first to the impetus of the clerics responsible for promoting the cult – their efforts at elevations or translations (formal, liturgical processions in which remains of saints were officially recognized and transported from one place to another), the erection of new shrines, the celebration of feasts, and the like – and second to a rhythm of popular enthusiasm in which miracles seem to have led to more miracles, only to die out again in the course of the year. New efforts on the part of the clergy, or the celebration of the next feast, could begin them anew.

One of the most telling and detailed accounts of this process is the study by P. A. Sigal (1969) of the cult of St. Gibrian at Reims in the twelfth century. Gibrian was an obscure Irish hermit, long recognized but hardly venerated at Reims, until Abbot Odo of St. Remi in Reims decided to develop the cult, to the profit of the newly established monastery of Chartreux in Champagne. In 1145 the abbot commissioned a new reliquary shrine for the saint, and on April 16 the saint was solemnly translated into the new shrine in the presence of the Archbishop of Reims. A careful record of miracles was kept between that date and August 24 of the same year. Of a total of 102 miracles, only 20 occurred in isolation. Generally they occurred in groups of at least four on the same day; 39 took place on Sundays and feast days, for example, 24 on Monday, but only one on Tuesday. Moreover, the miracles, which began with one on April 6, gradually increased in frequency as the renown of the saint spread, until they reached a peak of ten on May 13, and thereafter gradually receded across the months of June, July, and August. Unfortunately the record breaks off in August, possibly because the miracles had by then become so infrequent. One hears little of Gibrian for almost two centuries, until 1325, when again his relics were placed in a more worthy and impressive reliquary, and once more his cult began to attract pilgrims (AAS Maii, VII, 651).

The career of Gibrian’s relics is similar to that of many more famous saints’ relics. Thomas Becket, for example, began to attract miracles at the time of his martyrdom, but these soon fell off; they started up again years later, after the erection of a new and impressive shrine (Ward, 1982; he does not note the pattern). In general, the career of a relic seems to begin with its elevation and continue with its exposure in a worthy and impressive shrine and with encouragement of the laity by the responsible clerics to make pilgrimages and seek cures (Geary 1977). When cures ensue, they develop their own momentum, only to gradually die out until the cult receives another impetus.

These fluctuations were also influenced by competition between cult centers for the devotion of the faithful. It was not sufficient that a relic be seen as efficacious – it had to be more attractive than that of other shrines to which someone might go for assistance. A graphic example of the dilemma posed by competing shrines was occasioned by pilgrimages to the body of St. Sebastian, brought from Rome to Soissons in the ninth century. Bishop Ostroldus of Laon, distressed at the loss of pilgrims to his church, is said to have exhorted his congregation with the words: “You have here the church of the venerable Mother of God; frequent it, in it swear your vows and make your contributions. You should not wander to other places to seek external help. All that you ask faithfully through her will be given by the Lord” (Geary 1979, 79). Competition between saints is seen most clearly in the devotional and propaganda literature that was produced at various shrines, in particular the books of miracles such as that of St. Gibrian, in many of which one reads that a cure took place only after the petitioner had tried and failed to find help from a long list of other saints. Sometimes these ineffectual saints themselves instructed the pilgrim to go to the saint who finally effected the cure.

This description of the process by which relics’ values were constructed may seem to imply a certain cynicism on the part of the clerics responsible. Such was hardly the case. Clerics were among the most fervent pilgrims and often the recipients of miracles themselves; their desire to promote their cult over that of competing neighboring shrines in no way indicates cynicism toward the cult of saints in general. Categories such as “popular” and “elite” have little meaning in terms of relic cults. Moreover, the existence of purely popular cults, such as the cult of the dog venerated in southeastern France from the twelfth through the nineteenth century as St. Guinefort in the face of clerical and official condemnation, indicate the value attached by the laity to saints (Schmitt 1979). The clergy, in promoting particular saints, were simply attempting to win for their own patron a significant market share.





Circulation mechanisms


We have seen the social and cultural structures within which some privileged remains of the dead acquired value. Given this value and the need to have such objects in every church across Europe, some sort of ciruclation mechanism was necessary to provide churches far from the “production centers” (Rome, the Near East, the areas of Gaul and Spain that had formed part of the Roman Empire in late antiquity) to more recently converted areas of Christendom.

The circulation of relics, as we shall see, shared characteristics of the circulation of other valued commodities in the Latin West. Thus we shall begin by examining these mechanisms. However, the transfer of relics necessarily breached the cultural context that gave the relic its value. When a relic moved from one community to another, whether by gift, purchase, or theft, it was impossible to transfer simultaneously or reliably the function or meaning it had enjoyed in its old location. It had to undergo some sort of cultural transformation so that it could acquire status and meaning within its new context. The mere circulation of a relic was not enough – a newly acquired relic had to prove itself. Its authenticity, which the very fact that it had been transferred cast in doubt, had to be demonstrated. As we have seen, however, “authenticity” meant less identity with a particular saint’s body than efficacy in terms of communal needs. Thus we must also consider the means by which the transferred relic acquired value within its new context.





Gift


Relics circulated as other valuble objects did – that is to say, by gift, by theft, and by sale. The normal means of acquiring relics was to receive them as gifts (Michalowski 1981:399–416). As Grierson pointed out, this is exactly how members of the elite went about acquiring other valuable objects in the early Middle Ages. He mentions, among others, the example of Servatus Lupus, who wrote to King Ethelulf of Wessex and to his agent to ask for lead for the roof of his church, promising prayers in return. The transaction would be accomplished entirely without recourse to merchants, since the lead would be collected at the mouth of the Canche by serfs of Servatus Lupus (Grierson 1959:129).

Exactly the same sort of request lay behind the acquisition of many relics. Alcuin of York (ca. 730–804), the head of Charlemagne’s palace school and abbot of several important monasteries, was particularly eager to obtain relics, as his correspondence indicates. He requested gifts of relics from such persons as Paulinus, the Patriarch of Aquileia; Angilbertus, chancellor of King Pepin of Italy; Bishop Agino of Konstanz; and Abbot Angilbertus of Centula (MGHEp. IV, to Angilbertus, no. 11, p. 37; to Paulinus, no. 28, p. 70; to Agino, no. 75, pp. 117– 18; to Abbot Angilbertus, no. 97, pp. 141–2; to Volucrus and Vera, nobles of Aquileia, no. 146, pp. 235–6). Such requests differ not at all from requests for other precious objects, and occur in the same breath as a request for gifts of other “objects of ecclesiastical beauty” (no. 97). As in the case of Lupus, such transactions would normally take place without the assistance of merchants. The journey of Alcuin’s messenger Angilbertus was the occasion for a request that Bishop Agino send Alcuin relics (no. 75). The trip of Angilbertus to Rome gave Alcuin the opportunity to ask him to acquire saintly relics there (no. 97). Again in the case of Lupus’s request for roofing lead, the promised countergift was the daily prayers to be offered for the donor (no. 75).

The most important donor of relics was, of course, the Pope, who had at his disposal the vast treasury of the Roman catacombs, containing the remains of the early Roman martyrs. Prior to the mideighth century popes steadfastly refused to distribute these relics, preferring rather to distribute secondary relics or brandia, objects that had come into contact with the martyrs’ tombs (McCulloh 1976). From the mid-eighth century on, however, the Roman pontiffs began to exploit their inexhaustible supply of relics in order to build closer relationships with the increasingly powerful Frankish church to the north (Fichtenau 1952). The distribution of relics placed tangible evidence of papal importance in every region that received these gifts, either directly or through subsequent redivision of the relics. Moreover, as gifts, the relics were not alienated as they would have been had they been sold or traded. They thus remained the Pope’s, and their recipients remained subordinate to the Pope by the ties created in the distribution.

Others who possessed illustrious relics could use them to develop similar patronage networks. Thus, for example, bishops distributed portions of important saints to the churches in their dioceses and even beyond. Rather than diffusing the importance of the central sanctuary, these gifts increased both its prestige as the central location of the cult now known more widely and the prestige of the ecclesiastic who was able so to exercise his patronage. A prime example is the case of the relics of St. Vanne, distributed throughout the diocese of Verdun in the eleventh century (Geary 1978:84–5). Such parceling of remains did not decrease their value but rather enhanced it, since the value lay not in the bones themselves as alienable objects, but rather in the relationships they could create as subjects.

An obvious and extremely significant aspect of the exchange of relics by means of gift was the establishment of personal bonds between giver and receiver, the creation of “fraternal love” between the two amici, as Roman Michalowski has emphasized (Michalowski 1981:404). Where such a bond did not exist, the parties were not amici but rather inimici, and for the transferral of property to take place either such a bond had to be formed, or if one of the parties, particularly the subordinate, did not wish to establish a relationship of dependency, then the transferral had to take place by such mechanisms as purchase or theft.





Theft


Thefts of relics included the same wide spectrum of coerced trans-ferrals as did other forms of theft discussed by Grierson: in the ninth through eleventh centuries, the most frequent form was the isolated theft of individual relics or the theft of the relics from an enemy’s church during a raid (Geary 1978). But theft can also include the systematic extortion of Italian churches under the Ottonians (Dupre-Theseider 1964), and the ultimate theft – the pillage of Constantinople’s relic following the sack of the city by the wayward Fourth Crusade in 1204 (Riant 1875; Constable 1966; Geary 1977).

The usual target of the isolated theft was a distant monastery or church visited by a cleric who, judging that the saints whose relics were there were not receiving proper veneration, entered the church at night, broke open the shrine, and fled with the remains. One example will suffice. In 1058 a monk of the monastery of Bergues-St.-Winnoc in Flanders was traveling to England in the company of merchants when the ship was blown off course and landed on the Sussex coast. The monk, Balgerus, explored the neighborhood and came upon a monastery in which were venerated the remains of St. Lewinna. Impressed by the account of her life and miracles he heard from the local monks, he decided to steal the relics. He entered the church at night and attempted to take the relics, but was first thwarted by the miraculous resistance of the saint. Finally, after much prayer and effort, the saint agreed to accompany him and he stole off to the ship with his prize (Geary 1978:76–8).

When, in the course of raids on neighboring nobles, an enemy’s property was pillaged, relics were normally included in the spoils. Thus, for example, when Count Odo of Champagne in 1033 sacked and burned Commercy, amidst the booty was the arm of St. Pantalon (Geary 1978:83). Likewise, Count Arlulf the Old of Flanders (919–64) took the relics of Sts. Valerius and Richerius when he sacked the towns of St.-Valery and St.-Riquier (Herrmann-Mascard 1975, 380). Such appropriations of an enemy’s sacred protectors to the benefit of the victor’s community belong to an ancient tradition that could no doubt be traced to the tradition of appropriation of the city gods of enemies in antiquity. However, this sacred booty might be treated exactly like other spoils – the arm of Pantalon, for example, was subsequently sold to Abbot Richard of St. Vanne in Verdun for one silver mark.

The greatest theft of relics in the Middle Ages was the sack of Constantinople. Here the appropriation of saints was systematic and thorough, lasting several months. All relics were placed in the hands of Garnier de Trainel, Bishop of Troyes, who saw to their distribution : three-eighths each for the Venetians and the new Byzantine Emperor, the former Count Baldwin of Flanders, and two-eighths for the Westerners. The bishop and then after his death Nivelon de Cherizy saw to the distribution of relics that eventually found their way into churches across France and what is now Belgium (Herrmann-Mascard 1975:370).





Commerce


The third means by which relics circulated was by sale. Commerce in saints’ remains took place not only simultaneously with the more regular systems of gift and theft, but even between the same groups. Here one finds professional merchants, price negotiation, efforts at quality control, and established patterns of transportation and marketing existing side by side with the other, presumably more archaic, systems of gift, countergift, and theft.

The best-documented regular trade in relics was that between Frankish churchmen and Italian merchants in the ninth century. The most famous merchant was one Deusdona, a Roman deacon who negotiated to provide a number of Alcuin’s associates, among them Einhard, Abbot Hilduin of Soissons, and others, with the remains of Roman martyrs in the 820s and 830s (Geary 1978:51–9). Deusdona and his associates met their potential customers at the celebrations of important saints’ feasts in the north and offered to obtain relics for them. During the winter months Deusdona and his associates systematically collected relics from one or another of the Roman cemeteries, concentrating on a different area of the city each year. In the spring their caravan crossed the Alps in time to deliver their wares at the celebrations of feasts; when they arrived at Mühlheim on June 2, 835, the feast of Sts. Marcellinus and Peter, the saints being honored were ones that Deusdona had himself supplied to the Franks.

Deusdona represents the most highly organized and independent sort of relic merchant. Others might be itinerant peddlers who traveled about obtaining relics at random as the opportunity presented itself and then hawking them in other dioceses. Still others, such as the Englishman Electus who operated along the Norman coast, sought primarily relics to sell to a particular patron, in his case King Athelstan (Geary 1978:60).

The official and quasi-official involvement of central authorities, ecclesiastical and royal, in the circulation of relics was part of a careful program of centralized control over the sacred. Carolingian control over the distribution of relics was in particular a means of orchestrating access to the sacred. Unlike living holy men in the Near East or the occasional Celtic pilgrim or local wonder worker who appeared on the Continent, dead saints could be controlled by the episcopal hierarchy. The churches in which they were to be found were supposed to have regular clergy attached to them; the decision to move them about was reserved to the local count and bishop; and Carolingian synods sought to limit the proliferation of shrines containing relics of saints not recognized by the Church (Geary 1972:40–50).

Similarly, one can see the frequently tolerated or even (as in the case of Athelstan) encouraged tradition of thefts as a deliberate attempt to acquire these important prestige objects in a way that would destroy the inalienable relationship between gift and gift-giver that characterized the regular distribution of relics by Popes and prelates. Carolingians needed important Roman relics for the control of their populations; however, the price for relics acquired by gift was subordination to the Pope. The theft or purchase of relics objectified these' sacred objects; turned them, at least temporarily, into commodities; and allowed the new owner to escape being placed in the debt of the Roman Church. The same process might be seen in the means by which the Anglo-Saxon Athelstan sought relics from the Continent.





Reconstruction of value


However it happened, the very act of transferral removed the relic from the cultural structure in which it had originally acquired value. It thus arrived in the new community as an unproven object, the target of considerable skepticism. Was the object really an efficacious relic? If it had been acquired by gift, why would the donor have parted with it if it were really worth having? If acquired by purchase, how could one trust a merchant not to be a fraud selling the “pigges bones” of Chaucer’s Pardoner? As in the case of oriental carpets entering the West discussed in the next chapter, newly acquired relics had to undergo a process of social negotiation within the new community (Spooner, Chapter 7). To allay suspicions, relics thus had to undergo once more the process of authentication described above. They had to be tested, and tested in such a way that the test itself would add to their fame. Thus transferrals of relics, referred to as “translations,” were concluded with exactly the same rituals of authentication, both internal and external, associated with “inventions.”

Moreover, the account of the relics’ translation had to itself become part of the myth of production – the story of how they had come to their new community was itself part of the explanation of who they were and what their power was. In this context, accounts of thefts, as opposed to gifts or purchases, was particularly appropriate and satisfactory. A traditional literary subgenre of hagiography developed between the eighth and twelfth centuries in which translations were presented as thefts. The saints were clearly too precious to their communities to be parted with willingly. Thus they had to be stolen, or rather kidnapped. Moreover, the saints were too powerful to allow themselves to be taken unwillingly. A saint unable to prevent the sacking of his community or his own removal would hardly have been a desirable acquisition. Thus the thief had to have succeeded only by convincing the saint that he would receive more satisfactory veneration in his new location – a promise the flattered local community would have to keep.

A significant number of translations thus presented involve saints previously unknown. Whether this reflects missing documentation or saints who did not exist before someone took anonymous remains from a deserted churchyard is impossible to say. In either case, from the perspective of the community in which the remains came to be venerated, the construction of value and the mode of circulation reflected the same assumptions as the production context: acquiring the relic gave it value because it was worth acquiring, and this acquisition (often in the face of grave natural and supernatural dangers) was itself evidence that the relics were genuine. Circulation thus created the commodity being circulated, although to survive as a commodity it had to continue to meet the high expectations raised by the mode of its creation.





Conclusion


We have seen the creation and circulation of a particular type of sacred prestige commodity, saints’ relics, within a complex traditional society. Although the existence and efficacy of such person-objects as relics was almost universally accepted, every individual case posed the problem of skepticism both because of the ubiquity of similar objects devoid of value (normal mortal remains), the recognition of widespread fraud, and the intense competition of different religious centers, each eager to discredit the main attractions of their neighbors. In addition we have seen that these commodities circulated in the broader context of an exchange system involving a variety of mechanisms, none of which were the exclusive domain of any social, economic, or educational group.

Within this context, human remains could go through a life-cycle closely related to the production-circulation context: a human bone, given by the Pope as a sacred relic, thereby became a sacred relic if the receiver were also willing to consider it as such. Likewise, a corpse once stolen (or said to have been stolen) was valuable because it had been worth stealing. Solemn recognition, by means of ritual authentication normally involving the miraculous intervention of the saint himself, provided assurance that the value assigned by the transfer was genuine. This value endured so long as the community responded by recognizing miraculous cures and wonders and ascribing them to the intervention of the saint. In general, however, enthusiasm tended to wane over time, and the value of the relic had to be renewed periodically through a repetition of transferral or discovery, which would then begin the cycle anew. So long as the relic continued to perform as a miracle worker, it maintained its value as a potential commodity and could be used to acquire status, force acknowledgment of dependency, and secure wealth through its whole or partial distribution.

These specific conclusions concerning relics as commodities suggest more general reflections on the theoretical problems of value and commodity exchange in medieval society. First, when discussing demand formed by need, taste, and fashion, the life history of relics suggests that one must be very careful to distinguish between demand in traditional societies and demand in industrialized (or industrializing) societies. Although the traffic in relics, like that of such commodities as textiles, pottery, and religious icons, was deeply affected by cultural values and collectively shared tastes (Schneider 1978), the needs generated by the political economy of the Carolingian Empire (and, at a later date, the Venetian Empire) are no less relevant.

Second, the transformations of relics from persons to commodities and in some cases back to persons through a process of social and cultural transition suggests that one should examine the biographies of other sorts of objects that may have been both persons and commodities. Along with slaves and relics, this might include sacred images, which in Byzantium and from the fourteenth century on in the West began to compete successfully with relics as sources of personal religious power; and other extremely important prestige objects such as royal and imperial regalia, art, and entailed estates. Under certain circumstances, all these might be the objects of commerce, but under other circumstances they more closely resemble persons. The boundaries between object and subject are culturally induced and semipermeable.

Third, as vital as cultural parameters are for the social construction of value, the problem of the authenticity of relics indicates that there need not be consensus within a society on the value, equivalence, or even identity of specific commodities. On the contrary, high-prestige objects such as relics can play an important role in deeply divided communities. Disagreements and conflicts within society may be expressed and even conducted through disputes over the identity and value of such objects (Brown 1982:222–50).

If the foregoing examination of these “personal commodities” has elucidated something of the complex values of medieval society, one is still left with intriguing and ultimately perhaps unanswerable questions, which, for want of sources, the paper has been unable to address.

First, one must wonder whether it is possible to speak of value equivalences of relics and other commodities, or whether one ought to talk of rank. Much theoretical literature would suggest that a conversion between relics and, say, livestock ought to be impossible to establish – that in gift exchange, the emphasis is on quality, subjects, and superiority, rather than on the quantity, objects, and equivalence emphasized in commodity exchange (Gregory 1983). And yet we know that relics were in fact dealt with both as gifts and as commodities, even though a price list could never be established. During the periods of their careers when relics were objectified, how was value equivalency determined? Did it cease to have any meaning once a relic had again become subjectified in a new social context?

Related to this first question is that of the relative value of different relics. Why was one relic more prized than another? In some instances – a local saint or a famous apostle – the answer is obvious. Usually, however, it is impossible to determine why, for example, Sts. Peter and Marcellinus would be sought by the Franks, or why one would steal the remains of St. Maianus or St. Fides rather than those of some other saint. Were these merely targets of opportunity, or was there a process of comparison and selection?

Third, one would like to be able to establish the relative importance of gift exchange as opposed to the theft or sale of relics. Here again we have no idea. In the cases discussed of Carolingian ecclesiastics who were active in stealing relics as well as in purchasing them and receiving others from the Pope, one sees all three mechanisms. We have suggested above that the mechanism selected depended on the type of relationship the recipient desired to establish with the previous owner. Perhaps here the concept of kin distance (in the sense of artificial kin groups within the Christian community) might be helpful in determining the parameters within which gift, sale, and theft were acceptable.

Fourth, one would like to know more about the acceptance of these objects as valuable within the broader, lay society of the regions into which they were introduced. We have seen that in the eighth and ninth centuries, much of the flow of relics was into the recently Christianized areas of northern Germany. Here they became the objects of officially sanctioned cults. However, in a controversial but fascinating study of pilgrimage sites in Germany in the later Middle Ages, Lionel Rothkrug has argued that pilgrimages to saints’ shrines are almost totally nonexistent in such areas as Saxony, which had been the major focus of these translations (Rothkrug 1979; 1980). Could it be that despite the official propaganda attesting to the popularity of these relics, the native populations were never really drawn into the system of values within which they had meaning? Since Rothkrug shows, on both micro and macro levels, a startling coincidence between areas lacking pilgrimages and areas where the Reformation succeeded, it is tempting to argue that these regions never accepted the hagiocentric religion that was medieval Catholicism.

Finally, one would like more comparative studies and theoretical models of commodities that might elucidate some of the processes we have discussed. Most anthropologists tend to look either at industrialized societies in which the production and distribution of commodities operate in a very different context, or at traditional societies undergoing rapid transformation owing to colonization or at least increasing participation in alien markets and production systems. Neither model is appropriate for medieval Europe. Change was disjointed and internally generated, and was not directed toward a colonial, capitalist, or industrialized economy imposed from without. It is within this very different economy that sacred relics as commodities must be understood.





Note


This essay has benefited from the advice and criticisms provided by participants in the University of Pennsylvania Ethnohistory Seminar. The author wishes to thank particularly Arjun Appadurai, James Amelang, and Bertram Wyatt-Brown for their detailed suggestions for revisions.





References


Acta Sanctorum. 61 vols. (Antwerp, Paris: 1643–1875).

Ariès, Philippe. 1981. The Hour of Our Death. New York.

Baldwin, John W. 1959. The Medieval Theories of the Just Price. Philadelphia.

Bonnassie, Pierre. 1967. “A Family of the Barcelona Countryside and Its Economic Activities Around the Year 1000.” Early Medieval Society, ed. Sylvia L. Thrupp, 103–23. New York.

Brown, Peter. 1982. “Relics and Social Status in the Age of Gregory of Tours.” Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity, 222–50. Berkeley, Calif.

Constable, Giles. 1966. “Troyes, Constantinople, and the Relics of St. Helen in the Thirteenth Century.” Mélanges offerts à René Crozet, 2:1035–42. Paris.

Deveroy, J. -P. 1984. “Un monastère dans l’économie d’échanges: les services de transport à l’abbaye Saint-Germain-des-Prés au IXe siècle,” Annales E. S. C., 570–89.

Dopsch, Alfons. 1930. Naturalwirtschaft und Geldwirtschaft in die Weltgeschichte. Vienna.

Duby, Georges. 1974. The Early Growth of the European Economy. Ithaca, N.Y.

Dupré-Theseider, E. 1964. “La ‘granda rapina dei corpi santi’ dall’ Italia al tempo di Ottone.” Festschrift Percy Ernst Schramm 1:420–32. Weisbaden.

Fichtenau, Heinrich. 1952. “Zum Reliquienwesen im früheren Mittelalter.” Mitteilungen des Instituts für österreichische Geschichtsforschung, 60, 66–8.

Geary, Patrick. 1979. “The Ninth Century Relic Trade: A Response to Popular Piety?” Religion and the People: 800–1700, ed. James Obelkevich, 8–19. Chapel Hill, N.C.

1978. Furta Sacra: Thefts of Relics in the Central Middle Ages. Princeton, N.J.

1977. “Saint Helen of Athyra and the Cathedral of Troyes in the Thirteenth Century.” The Journal of Medieval and Renaissance Studies, 7/1:149–68.

Gregory, Chris A. 1982. Gifts and Commodities. London.

Grierson, Philip. 1959. “Commerce in the Dark Ages: A Critique of the Evidence.” Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, ser. 6, vol. 9, 123–40.

Hermann-Mascard, Nicole. 1975. Les reliques des saints: Formation coutumière d’un droit. Paris.

Kopytoff, Igor. 1982. “Slavery.” Annual Review of Anthropology, 11:207–30.

Latouche, Robert. 1956. Les origines de l'économie occidentale. Paris.

Little, Lester K. 1978. Religious Poverty and the Profit Economy in Medieval Europe. Ithaca, N.Y.

Mauss, Marcel. 1967. The Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies, tr. I. Cunnison. New York.

McCulloh, M. J. 1975. “The Cult of Relics in the Letters and Dialogues of Pope Gregory the Great: A Lexicographical Study.” Traditio, 36:145–84.

Michalowski, Roman. 1981. “Le don d’amitié dans la société carolingienne et les ‘translations sanctorum,’ ” Hagiographie: cultures et sociétés, IV-XIIe siècles, 399–416. Paris.

Monumenta Germaniae Historica, Epistolarum Tomus IV, Epistolae Karolini Aevi Tomus II, ed. Ernest Dümmler (Berlin: 1895).

Pirenne, H. 1937. Mahomet et Charlemagne. Paris.

Riant, Paul Edouard Didier, Comte de. 1875. “Dépouillés religieuses à Constantinople au XIIle siècle. Mémoires de la Société nationale des antiquaires de France. 4ème series, 6:1–214.

Rothkrug, Lionel. In press. “The Cult of Relics in Antiquity.” World Spirituality: An Encyclopedic History of the Religious Quest. Vol. I, European Archaic Spirituality, ed. Charles Long.

1979. “Popular Religion and Holy Shrines: Their Influence on the Origins of the German Reformation and Their Role in German Cultural Development.” J. Obelkevich, ed., Religion and the People. Chapel Hill, N.C.

1980. Religious Practices and Collective Perceptions: Hidden Homologies in the Renaissance and Reformation. Historical Reflections 7:1.

Schmitt, J. C. 1979. Le saint lévrier: Guinefort, guérisseur d’enfants depuis le XIIIe siècle. Paris.

Schneider, J. 1978. “Peacocks and Penguins: The Political Economy of European Cloth and Colors,” American Ethnologist, 5:413–47.

Schreiner, K. 1966. “ ‘Discrimen veri ac falsi’ Ansätze und Formen der Kritik in der Heiligen-und Reliquieverehrung des Mittelalters.” Archiv für Kulturgeschischte 48:1– 53.

Sigal, P. A. 1969. “Maladie, pèlerinage et guérison au Xlle siècle: Les miracles de saint Gibrien à Reims.” Annales E. S. C. 24:1522–39.

Ward, Benedicta. 1982. Miracles and the Medieval Mind: Theory, Record, and Event, 1000– 1215. Philadelphia.





