PART V

Historical transformations and commodity codes





CHAPTER 9

The structure of a cultural crisis:

thinking about cloth in France before

and after the Revolution


WILLIAM M. REDDY

The great French Revolution of 1789–99 brought a general change in the way French people thought about commodities. This change occurred within a society that had centuries of experience with money-based exchange behind it, and one that, although undergoing rapid commercial expansion in the eighteenth century, saw no significant change in the predominant modes of production either before, during, or after the crisis. Industrial capitalism was all but nonexistent in France in 1789 and still quite exceptional in 1815. Yet millions of French people in the interim adopted what could only be called a capitalist mode of evaluating commodities. It is the object of this essay to show that this involved a change in the generally accepted notions of what a commodity was. This is a properly modest goal, made more modest by the concentration on a single kind of commodity, albeit an essential one, cloth. But even in pursuing this modest goal, one is forced to recognize that political institutions, the social hierarchy, the day-to-day relationships between persons at street level, and the farflung workings of ideological control and commercial dependence all had to undergo significant reconstruction in conjunction with this shift in thought about commodities. (No suggestion about priority is implied here.)

At the same time it will become apparent that thought about commodities, like thought about persons and institutions, is necessarily encyclopedic in scope. That is, to act coherently, persons must organize vast numbers of detail according to simple, overarching categories and principles. This limitation of the human mind (if such it is), every bit as material in its own way as wool or stone, introduces limits to the kind of change that can occur, to the scope and character of such change. Along the way, then, this description of a shift in thought will attempt to provide glimpses, at least of how such limits – call them mental, cultural, or cerebral – may have influenced the unfolding of the ancien régime's political crisis. To give more than glimpses of this aspect of the crisis would require the completion of William M. Reddy extensive research projects. For the time being it is enough to identify new problems worthy of inquiry, because current research efforts have brought understanding of the French Revolution to a kind of impasse.

The conflicts of the revolutionary period can no longer be seen as pitting one social class against another; this much is clear. That is, no one-to-one correspondence can be found between parties and classes. The revolutionary bourgeoisie once believed responsible for guiding the patriot and Jacobin parties has proved to be a phantom. Some have suggested rejecting class entirely as an irrelevant category. But even those who insist on seeing class antagonisms as the Revolutions’ ultimate origin recognize that those antagonisms were expressed indirectly, translated into a language that could not distinguish classes as such. Thus all historians now agree that extremely painstaking interpretive work on revolutionary and prerevolutionary language is a prerequisite to adequate explanation.1 Recent attempts to explain the rebellion of the Third Estate in 1788-89 have increasingly sought to discern a cultural crisis of some kind behind the Revolution.2

Documenting the existence of such a crisis is not difficult. It is easy enough to identify a host of institutions and practices of the old regime that had lost their legitimacy in the eyes of an increasingly self-conscious public as the eighteenth century drew to a close. The absolute power of the monarch had been repeatedly challenged in the press and in the royal courts with great popular success. The old restrictions on trade in grain and manufactured goods embodied in the guilds and the official marketplaces of the towns had been reformed, repealed, and partially resuscitated by 1780. No one really believed they could survive in their current form, if only because thousands of merchants and peddlers had been flouting these restrictions for decades. The privileges of Church and nobility were under attack by the crown itself as obstacles to a revitalized tax base after 1786. Privileges and pensions of all kinds had in any case been transformed into marketable properties; titles of nobility, high government offices, seigneuries (the French equivalents of manors), fiefs, church benefices, even bishoprics, were up for sale to the highest bidder, so long as that bidder had the right connections.3 The old ways were still practiced, all the old forms of the feudal monarchy were still floating about detached and transmogrified, infused with unexpected meanings and put haphazardly to new uses. How could these forms be expected to retain the allegiances they once commanded? So much had been brought into question by the 1780’s – from the old Christian cosmology to the equally old three-field system of peasant agriculture – that it is surely not enough to see the Revolution as merely a governmental crisis.4 The government, in any case, had its finger in every pie in the old regime; changing the government meant altering the center of gravity of millions of individual lives. This was a cultural crisis of the first order, of that there can be no doubt.

This is not to say that there was not also a political and economic crisis, nor that the old debate over the existence and aims of a revolutionary bourgeoisie has been definitively set aside. The notion of cultural crisis simply forces all consideration of the Revolution’s outbreak onto a new terrain, requiring that conflict and faction be analyzed in the first instance in terms of the meaning and structure of political discourse. Whatever new economic or social configurations one may see behind the revolutionary crisis, it is certain that these configurations could not express themselves through the old cultural forms, and that the Enlightenment offered no new forms, providing at best only a few hints as to how to proceed. Normal guidelines used up to the 1780’s to resolve political conflicts and shape day-to-day trade (as well as trade policy) were themselves brought into question and slated for reformulation. Party, interest, and opinion could not coalesce and be played out in the routine way (neither in Versailles nor in a provincial marketplace) because the routines themselves had lost credibility. For some period before 1789 it must be supposed that many old practices were followed with declining conviction (especially in certain branches of government), and also that many old principles were no longer adhered to in practice (especially in certain realms of trade). In just this sense the economic and political crisis was cultural in nature. In 1789 the French, or a large number of them, refused to continue down this path. An array of old institutions and practices were seized on and destroyed with an alacrity that still leaves historians breathless. The privileges of Church and nobility, the sovereignty of the crown, the corporate structure of urban government and of the royal judiciary – all were reduced to an ash heap in a matter of months. Provincial boundaries were swept away, venal offices abolished, feudal and seigneurial land tenure slated for oblivion. This zest for destruction suggests one should look for signs of half-hearted compliance and growing doubt in the immediately preceding period. But how is one to investigate rigorously such intangibles as doubt or half-heartedness? What kind of evidence can be used to uncover them? That is the real challenge that any new approach to the Revolution as a cultural crisis must meet.

As it is usually practiced, ethnographic method, the accepted means of determining the structure of a culture, deals exclusively in surfaces. One might interpret at length the ritual forms, dress, and utterances of the first session of the Estates General in May 1789, however, without finding any evidence of the impending Revolution. This paper attempts to find traces of the crisis by looking at a single dimension of French culture over time – a very minor dimension at that. Because the crisis was really general, it is possible to find traces of it even in so small a domain as the way merchants and others in the textile trade talked about cloth. An important feature of these traces turns out to be an odd combination of rigidity and flexibility; that is, there are signs of the blockage of change accompanied by sweeping, improvisational policy shifts from the government. Consideration of these traces will enable us to formulate preliminary hypotheses about why people continued to cling to linguistic and institutional structures as the eighteenth century wore on that were increasingly out of touch with their deepest convictions on the one hand and with many facets of their everyday practice on the other.

Of course no records of casual talk about cloth have survived from the eighteenth century, and casual talk would be the ideal object for investigation. But there is a fascinating reference work that bears on the question, Savary des Bruslons’s Dictionnaire universel du commerce, first published between 1723 and 1730 and reissued, pirated, and translated at least six more times between 1741 and 1784.5 A general work on commerce, Savary’s dictionary nonetheless had a great deal to say about cloth and other textile goods, which were a principal ingredient in the trade of this preindustrial era. The frequency with which the work was reissued, and hawked about Europe, not just France, usually with numerous superficial alterations intended to “update” it, suggests that it was used in a way that the luxurious coffee-table Encyclopédie of Diderot and d’Alembert was not; that is, that it was used by real merchants in their day-to-day dealings.

Savary was well placed to gather the kind of information that practical operators would have wanted. He was a royal customs official based in Paris in the closing decades of Louis XIV’s reign. In his daily work, he needed to have knowledge of the complex production regulations of guilds from towns that shipped goods to Paris. France in the eighteenth century was riddled with internal customs barriers, and dotted with towns whose guilds were carefully controlled and scrutinized by the royal government; any manufactured article entering Paris legally could be expected to have, besides the shipper’s bill of lading, proper wrapping, proper manufacturer identification, seals of inspection from guilds and local market inspectors, and certificates showing what duties had been paid at various points along the article’s path to the city. Savary’s familiarity with these details gave him the expertise necessary to take on the heavy task of preparing the first-ever dictionary of commerce. During the years of research he and his brother put into the project, Savary’s experience of trade told him whom to turn to in the government and in merchant communities throughout France for accurate information. His access to royal files on guilds and guild law was indispensable, as was his concrete knowledge of the look and feel of the products that constantly flooded into Paris.

Savary’s father, a merchant and ministry official of the late seventeenth century, had set an example for his son to emulate; he was the author of the famous Parfait negotiant, a guide to commerce that remained extremely popular in its own right well into the eighteenth century.6 But the scope of this work was dwarfed by that of the Dictionnaire universel du commerce. The appearance of handbooks and reference works on many subjects in this period was an important facet of the emergence of a public sphere in Western Europe, itself a necessary but hardly a sufficient condition for political revolution. The ready availability of voluminous, accurate information on practical matters – commerce, law, music, architecture – came to be viewed in the eighteenth century as a goal worthy of heroic effort.7 Savary was a pioneer in this respect. His was a first attempt to systematize the everyday knowledge and beliefs of merchants, producers, government officials, and consumers about commerce. As such, it is possible to glean from Savary something of the mental landscape of the textile trade at the beginning of the eighteenth century. The organization of articles and the discrimination of relevant details reflect an industrial and commercial Weltanschauung that has long since disappeared.

The article on toile (plain linen cloth), for example, includes a list of seven points to check when buying a piece of toile. This list places great emphasis on the purchaser’s ability to judge by eye. One must make sure, the article recommends, that the weave is tight and the weft threads evenly closed up with one another. The threads themselves must be of uniform twist, as tightly spun on the edge of the cloth as they are in the middle. No part of warp or weft should be stretched or shifted out of alignment with the rest. The cloth must be of the same tightness and fineness at both ends as it is in the middle. The cloth should have as little finishing on it as possible; that is, there should not be so much gum, starch, or chalk applied to it as to conceal irregularities in color, weave, or twist. In addition, the cloth should have as many threads in the warp and weft as general royal regulations and local statutes require. One can imagine the sort of inspection procedure such recommendations would entail. The whole piece, all twenty to thirty yards, would have to be unrolled, different sections folded over each other for close comparison of thread and weave, and. various parts carefully rubbed between thumb and fingers to check for tightness and for the presence of undue finishing. A lead seal affixed to one end of the cloth would certify that it had passed inspection at point of origin and therefore had the proper number of threads in warp and weft for that variety of cloth. Since the 1660s, final decisions even on such minor matters as dimensions of cloth and numbers of threads were made in Versailles, although usually the local guilds’ recommendations were accepted without question. The royal government’s interest lay in ensuring that high quality standards were maintained; by Colbert’s mercantilist doctrine, quality was the key to prosperity.

In a number of places in Savary’s dictionary, lead seals of inspection are described in detail. The Beauvais woolen guild, the Sergetterie de Beauvais, for example, specified a new design for their seal in 1666, when under the tutelage of Colbert they had revised and elaborated their production regulations. On one side of the seal a legend was to read “Louis XIV, restaurateur des arts et manufactures.” On the other appeared the arms of the town and the words “fabrique de Beauvais.” Cambrai linen held a seal with a spread eagle and the word “Cambray.” Valenciennes used a lion rampant and the words “commerce de Valenciennes.” Saint-Quentin used a bust of their patron saint; Armentieres, on the Lys River, used a shield with fleur de lys and the town name.8 These seals were important not just for the purchaser, but also for customs officers, who assessed different duties according to grade of cloth and place of manufacture. (Linen cloth entering the cinq grosses fermes, a customs zone in northern France, for example, had to pay a high duty unless the cloth could be shown to be the product of French provinces outside the grosses fermes.) Besides showing seals, French producers were to weave or sew their name and the name of their town into the end of the cloth.

These and hundreds of other details provided by the dictionary remind one that evaluating cloth in the eighteenth century required the skills of a connoisseur rather than those of a technician. Every bit of thread and of cloth was the product of handwork whose quality was dependent on the ability of the worker at each moment, as well as on the discernment and experience of those merchant manufacturers who bought thread and warped it and put it out to weavers. At each moment personal attention was required. The fact that one end of a piece of cloth looked excellent was no proof that the other end was also good. One had to know what kinds of flaws to look for; one had to be familiar with techniques of production and finishing; one had to know the seals of the various towns and the regulations that lay behind them. The surest way to tell a serge drapée from genuine drap, the dictionary warns in its article on serge, is that genuine drap (high-quality open-weave woolen fabric) will have five blue stripes and seven white stripes on its border, while serge drapée produced in Berry (a coarser, inferior woolen fabric, given a similar finish) had only three or four blue stripes and as many white ones. To the knowledgeable dealer even minor details of a cloth’s appearance could identify its geographical origin, quality, and value.

The geography of textile production was complex. The typical article in the dictionary on a cloth term like serge or camelot begins with a description of the type of cloth in question, followed immediately by the names of those towns which produced it. There might be some discussion – varying greatly in length – of the special varieties produced in each location, along with observations on the reputation of each. Valenciennes produced the highest quality bouracan, for example (a heavy woolen fabric used for coats and rain gear). Lille bouracans were also all wool and quite good, but inferior to Valenciennes’. Abbeville weavers made a bouracan they called façon de Valenciennes, but it was really neither as fine nor as good as genuine Valenciennes. Lille camelots (another variety of heavy, open-weave woolen fabric), were known for their luster, which was due to the hot pressing they received in the last stage of finishing. Camelots from Arras were, however, “very coarse, with a very rough texture, more like a bouracan.” A fine white linen called cambrésine, although no longer produced in the Cambrésis but instead at Peronne, was much better than the equivalent article from Brittany. The Rouen area was known for the “quantity and variety” of coarse linens it produced; the article on toile politely refrains from saying anything about their quality, however, which was widely known to be of the lowest. A good number of basins (a pattern-weave cotton cloth) were imported from Holland, although not because they were any better than French-produced basins. They sold well only because of the consumer passion for foreign goods.

Having reviewed the places of production, the dictionary then lists the guild-mandated cloth dimensions and the numbers of thread in warp and weft used for each variety in each town, apparently because these were important items of information, ones that dealers expected to find in a reference work and needed for their purchasing. At the end of each article is a detailed listing of import and export duties for the cloth in question, both between France and other countries and within France’s own customs zones. Such listings could run to two pages or more for common cloth varieties.

The rapid development of the rural putting-out industry in France in the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries can only be guessed at from the dictionary. Reference is occasionally made to rural production, but in general the names of provinces and of the towns that were their commercial centers are used interchangeably, or the names of towns are used implicitly to stand for the rural regions that produced for them and traded through them.9 The new, unregulated varieties of cloth associated with rural production are dealt with in a cursory fashion if at all – as if, because guild practices and regulations do not exist for them, there is really nothing to say about them. The dictionary says nothing of the growing contraband in French-produced indiennes – printed calicoes that were excellent imitations of the Bengali original. The nature of the cotton-linen blend called siamoise is only briefly described. The origin of the name is mentioned: a cotton-and-silk blend first worn in France by an ambassador from Siam in Louis XIV’s day. But nothing is said of the extent of unregulated siamoise production in the Normandy countryside.

The focus of the dictionary is resolutely on the guilds; on the older varieties of woolen, linen, and silk cloth they traditionally produced; and on their government regulatory apparatus as reformed and centralized under Colbert late in the seventeenth century. The knowledge that is imparted aims at familiarizing the reader with guild regulations and with the complex geography and lore of cloth production. Some of the commentary, in fact, reads almost like the reports of a folklorist, as in the following passage from the article on camelot:

A prodigious quantity of little camelotins, very narrow, very light, are still manufactured in Lille and several other places in French Flanders. Most of them are shipped to Spain. The Flemish give them various quite odd names. The principal ones are: Vamparillas or nompareille; polimitte, polemit, or polomitte; picotte or gueuse; quinette or guinette; and changeant.

Hemp cloth made in Brittany for use in ships’ sails came in five varieties, known by their village of origin: noyalle, perte, locrenan, polledavy, and petite olone. The four varieties of linen made around Morlaix were known as crés larges de trois quarts, crés communes, crés graciennes, and crés rosconnes. Each of these varieties is carefully distinguished in the article on toile. The fine loose-weave étamines used in sieves and sifters made in Reims were known as bluteaux or bouillons (bluter means to sift). These terms distinguished them for those varieties of étamines used in nuns’ veils and other ecclesiastical garb, as well as from a large array of other gauzy, bright étamines varieties. The word étamines itself is related to the word tamis (sifter); but over the centuries, with the proliferation of varieties and uses, the word had completely lost its original associations so that real étamines for sifting had to be called something else.

Any wholesale dealer of the eighteenth century who had been long in the trade must have been full of this kind of knowledge, or must at least have been well-versed in those facets of it that touched on the products he regularly dealt in. At the same time, the vast amount of such information in the dictionary, which took the Savary brothers well over ten years to compile, was doubtless available to no one before the dictionary’s publication. Producing the dictionary represented an effort, in effect, to turn lore into knowledge; but precisely because this was the earliest such effort in France, its value to the historian is that it opens a window onto the folklore of textile production before it had felt the influence of such systematizing projects as dictionaries, and at the very moment when the trade was beginning that last great boom that preceded mechanization.

It is characteristic of the outlook represented in the dictionary that interest in production is always secondary. Methods of production must be mentioned because they affect the appearance, wear, and value of cloth; because local quirks give certain cloths distinctive qualities; because guild regulations limit them. But production is seldom described; it is assumed that the reader has no direct involvement in production. This is quite true to the actual organization of the trade in Savary’s day. Spinners and weavers worked on their own, applying their traditional skills to the making of legally defined varieties of cloth. Merchants put out fiber or yarn to them through commissioners, never laying eyes on the people who worked for them, buying the finished product back from the commissioner only after careful scrutiny to determine its value. Control of production by owners of capital was nonexistent. Except for certain finishing processes, the choice of production method was the guilds’ or the rural weavers’ to make.10 Savary’s attitude toward this fact is decidedly complacent. He accepts the whole complex status quo without question, from the capricious names that Flemish weavers gave their linens to the voluminous customs regulations issued in Versailles. Why should he have done otherwise? The bulk of his expertise lay precisely in his extensive knowledge of all these quirks and details.

It takes only a very cursory look at Savary’s dictionary to recognize how intricately interlaced the textile trade was with the shape of old regime institutions. Merely to put a correct price on a bolt of linen it was necessary to be thoroughly familiar with the methods of operation of the government in Versailles, with the regulations and habits of the privileged corps of urban weavers and merchants, with the customs of the uncharted hinterlands of working peasants, and with the tastes in dress of a highly stratified corporate society. Knowledge of this kind was a daily source of profit to thousands of merchants and a livelihood to hundreds of government officials and lawyers.

But how was such knowledge affected by the crisis of the 1780’s? At first glance, the only answer the dictionary offers is a negative one. Savary’s work was, after all, republished yet again as part of Panckoucke’s grandiose Encyclopédie méthodique in 1784. The changes made by Panckoucke’s editors were minor ones. It would appear that the kind of expertise that Savary had systematized remained useful even at that late date, or at least the savvy Panckoucke thought it sufficiently useful to risk republishing the dictionary yet again.11

A closer look, however, reveals that the republication of Savary’s work at so late a date in the life of the ancien régime may itself be a symptom of the depth of the unfolding crisis. The story behind Savary’s continued success may suggest why it is sometimes necessary to continue doing things even after one no longer believes in them. It is odd, after all, that Savary’s dictionary had not been replaced by a newer one by the 1780’s, given the vogue for reference works following the success of the great Encyclopédie, and given the high status that commerce enjoyed in the eyes of the philosophes. In fact, someone had tried to replace Savary, but failed. In their Introduction to the 1784 edition, the editors apologize for having no newer work to offer the public. They lament the fact that the project of a certain Abbé Morellet to produce a new dictionary of commerce remained incomplete, and that Savary is therefore the only available alternative.12

Morellet, a school chum of Turgot and a protégé of Trudaine de Montigny, a powerful figure in government finance, had announced his intention to produce a new dictionary of commerce fifteen years earlier, in 1769. He had been asked by a publisher at that time to help update Savary for republication, but found the old dictionary sorely lacking. The customs official’s outlook was not to his taste. Morellet was an avid supporter of the physiocrats, a champion of free trade and of the absolute right of property. His 1769 prospectus proposed an entirely new dictionary, in three parts: a geographical section covering towns, provinces, and countries, and their production and trade practices; a section on natural substances and the products made from them; and a third section covering the terms and principles of the theory of wealth.13 Here was a systematic conception in tune with the new currents of thought of the Enlightenment. In his memoirs, written much later, Morellet explained why he never finished the project even though it absorbed his energies for twenty years.14 When he originally proposed it, he was being considered for a post in the Bureau of Commerce, a perfect vantage point from which to gather information, giving access to all the resources and expertise of the Bureau’s nationwide staff of salaried inspectors. Trudaine de Montigny, an intendant de finance, had promised the position to Morellet, but for some reason was unable to deliver. A rival patronage network had won out. This was just a small episode in a decades-long effort by Trudaine and his father before him to restaff the Bureau entirely with officials of physiocratic outlook. They were never completely successful; the personnel of the Bureau and its inspection system continued to harbor many pro-regulation officials alongside the new free trade advocates. Morellet’s disappointment was one among many setbacks over the years. The Bureau’s policies never became unequivocally free trade in orientation.15

As compensation for the lost position, Morellet received a government pension of 4,000 livres a year to continue his work on the new dictionary. He used it to hire assistants and to send out hundreds of questionnaires, but as he complained in his memoirs, his lack of authority as a private citizen handicapped his information-gathering efforts. Further, he says, as a government pensioner he could not afford to refuse requests from his protectors in the ministries to defend their policies with his pen. In the 1770’s he spent a great deal of time writing tracts in favor of the free trade doctrines of royal officials. When his old friend Turgot was made Controller General in 1774, Morellet’s office became overnight the destination of a stream of petitioners and influence seekers. At Turgot’s request he wrote several lengthy tracts defending Turgot’s policies in the pamphlet war his reforms had provoked.16 The dictionary was neglected. After Turgot’s fall, Morellet continued tracking current affairs. In the early 1780’s, his acquaintance with the British Prime Minister Shelburne allowed him tq help out in the British-French negotiations following the end of the American Revolutionary War. When Calonne called for the creation of an Assembly of Notables to approve new taxes and extensive reforms in 1786, Morellet’s talents as a publicist were again called on, and soon he was drawn into the whirlwind of Revolutionary politics. In sum, in his own defense, Morellet insists that the job of writing a dictionary of commerce was too big, that he did not have sufficient resources, and that political debts absorbed too many of his energies.

But each of these arguments really points to the same underlying circumstance, that is, to the developing cultural crisis that culminated in revolution. Political debts absorbed his energies because Enlightenment reformers climbing to high office in the 1770’s and 1780’s faced great difficulty winning public acceptance of their policies. Their opponents were learning to speak the same language, and could deftly parry Quesnay with Montesquieu, or counter Turgot’s reforming zeal with calls for philosophic moderation.17 Public debate over fundamental issues preoccupied an increasing number of people in the literate strata. Likewise, Morellet was denied the resources of the Bureau of Commerce because infighting over lower-echelon positions and patronage went hand-in-hand with this larger public debate. Finally, the writing of a new dictionary of commerce became too large a task for Morellet partly because of his patrons’ own limited successes. Guild monopolies were weakened in 1762, free trade in grain was allowed for a time in the 1760’s, then repealed, then reinstituted in 1775–6. On the last occasion Turgot tried to abolish the whole guild system and all royal regulatory control over manufacturing with a single edict, but fell from grace before he could fully implement the new law. His successor restored the guilds on a slightly altered basis. Necker in 1779–81 instituted another major reform of the guilds and the government regulatory apparatus, establishing his so-called intermediate system.18 Further changes in the grain trade followed in the 1780’s. And the new free trade treaty with Great Britain, signed in 1786, promised to have incalculable effects on commerce in France. Each one of these reforms would have required Morellet to go back and revise tens, even hundreds, of pages of copy for his dictionary. It is easy to imagine that, apart from his other distractions, Morellet may have begun by 1780 or so to feel a real sense of futility about his project. Why try to write a reference work before the situation had settled down a bit? But it never did settle down.

One can get a sense of the problems Morellet faced from a dictionary of commerce that was published later, in 1799, by one of Morellet’s former assistants, J. Peuchet.19 That Peuchet drew on the work he had done for Morellet seems likely. His 1799 dictionary is modeled on one of the three sections that Morellet had proposed to write, the geographical one. Peuchet’s is a commercial dictionary of place names only, in five volumes. The typical entry on a French town or province gives only sketchy details on the current state of trade. These brief remarks are then followed by extensive information on the state of things before the Revolution. Often there are long citations of the guild regulations that were enforced up to 1781, followed by vehement denunciations of the injustices of the pre-Revolutionary guild system. In other cases there are voluminous demographic and industrial statistics, drawn from publications of the 1770’s or 1780’s. In effect, Peuchet knew almost nothing about commerce in the 1790’s – a common condition, since even the government faced grave difficulties gathering information during the revolutionary decade. And all that Peuchet did know no longer applied. This was a reference work of retrospection. This work, too, remained incomplete, confined to geographical terms only, doubtless because Peuchet saw the futility of going any further. When change reaches a certain pace, reference works become impossible. Savary was republished again in 1784 because his steady certainties, product of a more secure era, could not be duplicated. All the intellectual ingredients were there for a new kind of work. But the Enlightenment attitudes that had inspired Morellet’s original plan were having such an unsteadying effect on the social reality around him that he could not hope to complete his dictionary on the new model. The old model, brought into doubt, remained unreplaced.

In the 1784 edition of Savary, its editors patched together a few alterations in a halfhearted effort to bring it into line with the present. In none of the hundreds of articles that cite guild production controls is there any whisper that these controls are now optional. Only if one looks up jurandes (guilds) can one find a discussion of Turgot’s and Necker’s reforms. Savary’s extensive information on internal customs is all put within quotation marks, to what purpose is not entirely clear. Savary’s pro-regulation remarks are countered with free trade propaganda that is simply inserted alongside from time to time. The whole effect is altogether haphazard and unsatisfactory. The fate of Savary’s vast expertise was that it was brought into question, globally, by people who were unable to challenge or replace it in detail. But is this not, after all, one symptom of a cultural crisis? When the cumulative common sense of the past faces a fundamental challenge, the edifice embodying the former is bound to survive in a kind of limbo; it cannot be replaced in a day.

If this was the fate of Savary’s work, then what was happening to the working expertise of textile merchants and guild officials across France as the uncertain prospect of extensive reforms loomed ahead? That their knowledge suffered a parallel fate emerges clearly from reflection on the circumstances surrounding Necker’s formulation of his “intermediate system” for the textile trade in 1779-81. This system was full of incongruities. It left all the guilds and all the official marketplaces with their royal inspectors in place, operating exactly as before. But it made use of these institutions optional, at the choice of the merchant or producer. Anyone who did not wish to submit to guild restrictions or royal production regulations merely had to bring his cloth into the market and have it stamped with a special seal bearing the word libre (free). Necker envisioned this “intermediate system” as a compromise between the free trade and pro-regulation factions. But the very essence of guild control is that it is mandatory. If guilds did not have at least local monopolies in their trades, then they could not possibly function. Their very raison d’être was to ensure the livelihood of local producers by muting competition between them. How could they accomplish this task if they themselves had to compete on equal terms with nonguild producers?

But it appears that Necker was not concerned with the survival of guilds as institutions; he was concerned with the survival of something else, of a way of knowing – about goods, about society. The two kinds of knowledge were, as we have seen, intimately related.

The opinions expressed by a large number of merchants and others in letters and petitions sent to Necker while he was preparing his reform proposal show an overwhelming preoccupation with the danger of fraud. If the guilds were abolished, they argued, widespread fraud would turn consumers away from French products and lead inevitably to the withering away of commerce. Fraud would be easy without the guilds. Consumers lacked the necessary skill to tell if flashy finishing techniques had been used to cover up disproportions and flaws in spinning or weaving. They could not easily discern whether the wool was Spanish or French, whether linen had been mixed with hemp, whether the piece was a few feet shorter than standard length, whether the number of threads in the warp had been reduced by a small fraction to save money. Faced with such uncertainties, they would simply turn to Dutch or English products and avoid French goods.20 This was not the favorite argument of conservatives. The Paris Parlement, when it denounced Turgot’s edict dissolving the guilds in 1776, saw the threat of fraud as only of secondary importance; instead the Magistrates, in their Remonstrance to the King, emphasized the general breakdown in order, subordination, and discipline that would ensue if the guilds disappeared.21 Those directly involved in commerce who argued in favor of guilds in memoirs to Necker’s office in 1779, however, concentrated on the danger of fraud, the threat of fraud to French prosperity, and the function of the guilds in preventing fraud. This was the argument that Necker’s compromise was aimed at answering. Under Necker’s system, anyone concerned with fraud could still find the cloth he was accustomed to buying, still produced, inspected, and marked in the usual way. All others were free to follow the system of caveat emptor. The vast accumulation of expertise about guild regulations – about the appearance of guild seals, the border markings on serge drapée, the superior luster of Lille camelots, and so on – would not be rendered obsolete overnight.

Operators in the textile trade did not argue for the guilds in 1779 entirely out of fraternal concern for the fate of guild masters; instead, many recognized that their own livelihood was based in large part on detailed knowledge of the wide array of practices that guilds and government enforced. Whether or not they believed in the efficacy of the guild system, they remained attached to it simply because, as a cognitive device for making sense of the world, as an instrument of connoisseurship, it remained irreplaceable. Just as Savary’s editors in 1783–4 scattered challenges and doubts through the pages of his dictionary without greatly altering its substance, so Necker’s intermediate system suspended the mechanism of control without abolishing it. Had Necker followed Turgot’s example and sought to abolish the guilds, no one would have dreamed of republishing Savary in 1784; the dictionary would have been reduced to the status of a historical curiosity. But Necker’s compromise recognized what Savary’s editors knew too well, that there was nothing yet available to replace Savary’s kind of knowledge. The new policy was thus a marvelous combination of rigidity and improvisation.

We know today that massive fraud is not a necessary result of free trade. But in 1780 it was possible to believe in this danger because it was impossible to envision the knowledge that would develop along with free trade. In the French textile industry, as it turned out, the kind of knowledge that free trade engendered was starkly different from that of the eighteenth-century connoisseur. Connoisseurship was replaced by entrepreneurship. Concern for the appearance of finished cloth was replaced by a preoccupation with processes of production. In practice the activity of examining and setting a price on a piece of cloth might have looked much the same, but the thinking behind such activities was entirely reformulated on new principles. Establishing such habits of thought throughout the industry – getting the new principles clear and understanding their application to every variety of cloth that the industry produced – was a monumental task. A hint of its magnitude can be gathered from examination of yet another dictionary of commerce, put out by the Guillaumin publishing house in 1839, the Dictionnaire du commerce et des marchandises.22 This dictionary was written not by one person but by a committee of forty-three professors, merchants, and bankers. By pooling their knowledge of special fields and by drawing on a large stock of new thinking about goods that had been painfully elaborated over fifty years of experience of free trade, these experts produced a reference work every bit as mature and consistent in its approach as Savary and far more detailed. By 1839 such a feat was possible.

In its overall format, the 1839 dictionary looks like a realization of Morellet’s original proposal of 1769. It has geographical entries, entries on natural substances and their products, and entries on the theory of political economy. The major difference is that these entries do not appear in separate sections of the book, but are presented intermingled in alphabetical order. The role of entries on theory seems much reduced from what Morellet had envisioned as well; they take up hardly 5 percent of the 2,252 pages. The doctrines of political economy dominate the theoretical entries for price (prix), wages (salaire), commerce, and capital: but the authors are not afraid to differ from official doctrine when they feel so inclined. There are no entries at all for commodity, raw material, or production. The articles for interest and market are full of practical details but devoid of theoretical discussion. No attempt is made to cover the whole theory of political economy. In other words, theory was no longer a battleground by the time this dictionary was written. A new theoretical language was in place and accepted without question; disagreements expressed through its terms incited no passions.

But if explicit theory is muted in the 1839 dictionary, the implicit application of new principles to the organization of facts is everywhere in evidence. The appearance of the typical article is starkly different from Savary. The entry for draperie, for example, is anchored directly in the production process. An effort is made to emphasize those elements of the process which distinguish drap from other varieties of cloth:

Cloth drapée, properly speaking, is woven of cardedwool, fulled, brushed with teasels, stretched, cropped, and put through a press. One of its most distinctive features is to have an extremely loose weave on the loom, easily penetrated by light, of a width usually twice as great as it will have after all the finishing processes are complete. It is by the operation of fulling that this cloth is reduced to its normal width and acquires that thickness and feel characteristic of drapée.

Savary, by comparison, is vague in the extreme:

Drap is properly a cloth made of doubled threads interlaced, of which one group, called the warp, stretches lengthwise from one end to the other, and the others, called the weft, are disposed across the width of the cloth. Draps are made on looms, just like linen, droguéis, étamines, camelots, and other similar varieties of cloth, which do not have patterns.

Savary provides a list of twelve things to look for when evaluating a piece of drap. It is crucial, Savary asserts, to see that the drap has been properly teaseled, so that all the loose fibers have been pulled out, and to see that these fibers have been closely and evenly cropped. Only here, as characteristics the connoisseur must evaluate, are the special production methods for drap finally mentioned. Savary describes these methods, but his description takes the form of a recipe for producing fine drap. In other words, he is concerned with production only insofar as it makes possible a high-quality outcome. (One must be sure, Savary warns, that the spinners make the warp thread one-third less thick than the weft thread and with much higher twist. Another typical recommendation: the cloth must be kept damp throughout the cropping process; this is done by occasionally sprinkling water over the surface. In the Guillaumin dictionary of 1839, by contrast, two pages of description of the production process appear in due course, replete with references to technical progress made in the previous fifty years, and the savings on labor costs these have made possible. The article explains how decisions made on raw material or on the thread used affect the quality and appearance of the outcome – without prescribing, as Savary does, that only the best methods be used. The advent of mechanical spinning is discussed, as well as the recent invention of an ingenious new machine for cropping (which worked exactly the way old hand-pushed lawn mowers do).

Savary’s article concludes with a page and a half of internal customs duties applied on draps from various towns. The Guillaumin article concludes with a four-page, region-by-region breakdown of drap production, mentioning local varieties, output quantities and prices, and shifts in local fortunes as a result of competition in recent decades. The outlook of the quality-conscious, trade-oriented connoisseur has been replaced by that of the cost-conscious, production-oriented entrepreneur. But in making this change, it was necessary to completely rethink hundreds of familiar everyday details about drap production, reorganizing them to fit into a new set of general principles. For Savary, drap – like any other cloth term – was a word defined by guild regulation for a cloth produced in a number of towns where these regulations had been elaborated and imposed. He had no need to define the term carefully in terms of methods of weaving and finishing. His aim was to be able to distinguish quality correctly, just as maintenance of quality was the end of regulation. For the compilers of the Guillaumin dictionary, regulation is not an issue. Nothing stands between the producer and the purchaser; the production process itself is therefore the only possible source of distinctions for determining what a cloth is.

The differences in approach evident in the articles on drap show up consistently throughout the two dictionaries. In the article on camelot, for example, Savary again provides an extremely general definition:

CAMELOT. A plain-weave cloth composed of a warp and a weft, produced with a shuttle on a loom of two peddles, just like line or étamine.

Camelots are of different widths and lengths depending on variety and quality and on the place of manufacture. They are made in all kinds of colors, some of goat’s hair in both warp and weft, some with goat’s hair weft and warp of half goat’s-hair, half silk thread, others with both warp and weft of wool, and still others with wool weft and linen warp.

Guillaumin, on the other hand, explains that camelots originated in Turkey, where they were made originally of Angora goat’s hair, and spread from there to Europe:

It has been in vain that the various European producers have tried to imitate the camelots of Angora; it became necessary to combine other fibers such as silk, [European] goat’s hair, cotton, flax – mixed by various methods. From this, diverse sorts of cloth have resulted, with various names under which they are traded.

Again, the distinctive feature of the cloth called camelot is located in the production process, in this case, in an exotic raw material that has proved difficult to imitate. The diverse kinds of camelot made in Europe are treated in Guillaumin as arising from a series of more or less failed experiments. For Savary the issue of imitation does not even come up.

In general Guillaumin has less to say about specific varieties of cloth than Savary, much more to say about large categories (like drap). Close inspection of articles on specific varieties shows why they are deemed less important: fashion has picked up its pace. Napolitaine, for example, a woolen fabric invented in the 1820’s, is briefly discussed. It was first marketed as an imitation merino (another new variety) by merchants who had an overstock of combed-wool cloth that had not been fulled. Dyed bright colors, it looked something like merino, but sold for much less. Napolitaines soon found favor with a large number of consumers but were later challenged by newer varieties of cheap woolens. (The names of these challengers are mentioned but they do not merit articles of their own.) In such articles the new pace of change in fashion can itself be seen to be linked to constant alterations in production methods.

A consistent preoccupation with production shows up also in the wholly new categories of entry in the Guillaumin work. Geographical entries provide information almost exclusively on the kinds of things produced in the places in question; the Dictionary’s attention is fixed on unique features of the local industries, their history, their size, their output and its value. In addition there are extensive articles on raw materials that dwarf anything Savary had to offer. The article on iron (fer) is fifteen pages long, that on coal (houille) twenty-three. Cotton (coton) is subjected to exhaustive treatment. There are thirty pages on the raw material itself, covering the plant, the fiber, and its chemical and mechanical properties, and the stages of its transformation into thread. A history of the cotton industry is provided, with special attention to the English case (“the most extraordinary phenomenon in the history of industry”). A comparison is made of the costs of production of cotton thread in England and France including extensive tables on harvests, prices, and consumption over the previous century. A separate four-page article appears elsewhere on cotton cloth (tissus de coton), dealing with the weaving process, prices, and the uses to which cotton cloth is put by consumers.

These differences do not reflect merely economic change; they cannot be explained as simply the result of technical advances encouraged by open competition. The very notion of what a commodity is had changed, and every specific commodity dealt in by European society had to be reconceived as a result of this shift. Such revolutions in thought are not accomplished quickly. Of course, the immense task of rethinking represented by the Guillaumin dictionary of 1839 was inseparable from equally large changes in practice. But it is important to recognize that changes in thought and practice did not perfectly mirror each other. To oversimplify a bit, a producer of drap might accomplish the work in much the same fashion in 1839 as his 1730 counterpart, whereas his conception of what he was doing would have changed drastically, making him, for example, prepared to accept at once the introduction of a new shearing machine when it came. In the meantime only those engaged in developing the new machine were altering their practice as well as their thought.

The period between the appearance of Savary’s dictionary and the publication of Guillaumin’s, then, may be seen as having been marked by a series of disjunctures between thought and practice that constituted one facet of the cultural crisis of the old regime. In the eighteenth century, until about 1760, certain features of practice – notably the extra-guild putting-out system in the countryside – broke dramatically with reigning principle. About that time certain thinkers (the physiocrats) sought to draw the necessary conclusions from these new practices and impose reforms from above on the basis of those conclusions (Laverdy’s edicts of 1763-5 freeing the countryside to produce goods; Turgot’s attempt to abolish guilds in 1776). But these measures met widespread resistance because most thought and some practice were threatened with legal disruption by these changes. Necker’s intermediate system of 1779–81 did not aim at saving the guilds so much as preserving a guild-based way of thinking about textile goods that represented a kind of social capital, something so large and so necessary to day-to-day intercourse that it could not be dropped without throwing commerce into confusion. Those who predicted widespread fraud if guild monopolies were abolished, were, in fact, perfectly correct in their own way. Until knowledge was rebuilt on the firm foundation of the notion of a production process, it would be extremely difficult to categorize and evaluate goods in the absence of the old regulatory structure.

In 1789, however, perhaps partly as a result of the accidents of timing and institutional infighting (of the fact, for example, that a fiscal crisis coincided with a disastrous harvest), halfway measures of the kind represented by Necker’s reform were abandoned. Savary’s brand of connoisseurship was just one small faggot on the great funeral pyre that was set aflame in France between May and August of that year. A series of bold new general principles were enunciated (embodied in the Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen) – principles so general that their practical application to everyday life was anything but clear at first. Thought leapt ahead of practice, but at considerable cost in the clarity and mutual ease of day-to-day interaction. Uncertainty and mistrust became widespread. Even if the new general principles had commanded unswerving universal respect (which they did not), even if there had been no animosities separating rich and poor (which there were), applying the new principles would have been a difficult task. As it was, over twenty-five years of turmoil passed in which several quite different modes of application were tried before a stable new world began to come into focus.

These reflections on the nature of the cultural crisis of the pre-Revolutionary decades in France may suggest a way to give prevailing theories of culture a badly needed historical dimension. The situation that reached an extreme in the 1780’s may be a more or less permanent feature of all cultures at all times in their histories. French society at that juncture had a centuries-old, slowly evolved set of practices and institutions that had been brought into question in the most fundamental way. Both new modes of thought (only partially worked out) and new modes of production (only locally followed) that were now in existence did not mesh with these older structures and urged the wisdom of transforming them as soon as possible. The problem was that there was no way to replace them without a long and painful work of rethinking, yet no society could exist for long without some well-elaborated set of practices based on publicly recognized general principles. Hence the agony of indecision over reform measures and the shock of revolution, which, like an earthquake, knocked every habit of mind free from its accustomed place.

Surely every society to one extent or another is living in a similar state of tension, in which the inertia of habit based on old, well-established principles is under attack from the free play of speculative thought, which is constantly formulating new, potentially rival general principles, or else from unexpected technical, commercial, or military developments that demand new forms of thinking in response. Thought can never work through new principles in sufficient detail to put them at once into operation throughout a whole society. People stick with the known, without reference to its intellectual validity, because they value the detailed prescriptions for daily interaction that long years of effort have elaborated. If this is an acceptable inference, it would mean that a traditional notion of reform going back to the Enlightenment in the West is profoundly misconceived.

Enlightenment reformers like Turgot or Condorcet viewed society as fully receptive to instantaneous change on the basis of rational principles. It was simply a question of getting people to recognize the persuasive power of a new idea; practice would follow automatically. Hence the revolutionaries of 1789 realized neither how great a work of destruction they had achieved nor how difficult it would be to replace what they had torn down. This same notion – that practical change follows directly from intellectual persuasion – still informs most of our political life today, from demonstrations against racial prejudice or nuclear weapons to the routine rhetoric of political campaigns, press conferences, and reforming legislation. But it may be that people resist reform for reasons that have nothing to do with its intellectual merit, and that by the same token, their commitment to the present arises from no deep conservatism. Like the petitioners who appealed for a retention of the guilds in 1779, people may simply balk at the vacuum that results when a thousand familiar practices are abolished and replaced with abstractions.

Of course looking at commodities through the lens of reference works has many limitations as an approach to the problem of cultural crisis. If the advantage of this approach lies in the revelation of the profound structure of social thinking that stands behind the use and exchange of any commodity, the disadvantage lies in the fact that reference works full of descriptions of things and processes can depict only a steady state. It is impossible to gain access to living human relationships and the constantly changing terms of agreement and conflict that determine their shape. But students of society need such tools just as much as social actors do. Only with a solid understanding of a particular stasis (however abstract) is it possible to appreciate the implications of conflict and of aspirations for sweeping change.23

Finally, it is worth noting that close examination of the humble commodities of day-to-day commerce not only draws attention to the encyclopedic array of knowledge that persons must be able to command in order to maintain a social routine, but also reveals again the necessary intimacy that always subsists between social relationships and things.





Notes


1.See the excellent review of recent research, William Doyle, Origins of the French Revolution (Oxford, 1980); for a sophisticated defense of the class-conflict approach, see Michel Vovelle, La chute de la monarchie 1787–1792 (Paris, 1972).

2.For example, François Furet, Penser la Révolution française (Paris, 1978); English trans., Interpreting the French Revolution (Cambridge, 1981). Another example: William H. Sewell, Work and Revolution in France: The Language of Labor from the Old Regime to 1848 (Cambridge, 1980).

3.On these developments, see Steven L. Kaplan, Bread, Police, and Political Economy in the Reign of Louis XV, 2 vols. (The Hague, 1976); Eugène Tarlé, L’Industrie dans les campagnes en France à la fin de l’ancien régime (Paris, 1910); Alfred Cobban, The Social Interpretation of the French Revolution (Cambridge, 1964); Jean Queniart, Les Hommes, Véglise, et dieu dans la France du XVIIIe siècle (Paris, 1978).

4.Theda Skocpol argues for an institutional rather than a social or cultural crisis in States and Social Revolutions: A Comparative Analysis of France, Russia, and China (Cambridge, 1979). On the impossibility of separating government from society in the old regime, see David D. Bien, “The Secrétaires du Roi: Absolutism, Corps, and Privilege under the Ancien Régime,” in Ernst Hinrichs, Eberhard Schmitt, and Rudolf Vierhaus, eds., Vom Ancien Régime zur französische Revolution: Forschungen und Perspektiven (Göttingen, 1978), 154–68.

5.Jacques Savary des Brusions, Dictionnaire universel du commerce, 2 vols. (Paris, 1723), was published posthumously under the direction of Jacques’s brother and a collaborator, Philemon-Louis Savary. Philemon-Louis published a supplementary volume in 1730, which was integrated into the first two in a second edition of 1741. A four-volume version was printed in Geneva in 1744. A revised edition published in Paris and then Geneva in 1750 included an additional volume of supplementary articles. Other editions with a greater or lesser number of “improvements” were published in London (in translation) in 1751–5, and in Copenhagen in 1759–65. The title page of the 1784 edition does not mention Savary, but reads Encyclopédie méthodique ou par ordre de matières. Commerce. For this study, both the 1750 Paris-Geneva edition and the 1784 edition were consulted. All references to the dictionary will be made by entry rather than by page number, so that any edition may be consulted. For a complete discussion of the dictionary’s history, see J.-C. Perrot, “Les dictionnaires de commerce au XVIIle siècle,” Revue d'histoire moderne et contemporaine, 28 (1981): 36–67.

6.Perrot, “Les dictionnaires.”

7.For a review of recent discussions, see Doyle, Origins, 66–95; see also Robert Darnton, The Business of Enlightenment: A Publishing History of the Encyclopédie, 1775–1800 (Cambridge, Mass., 1979), 509–19.

8.For descriptions of these seals, see the articles toile (subsection “Marques des toiles blanches”) and sergetterie.

9.For a good example, see the article batiste.

10.For a full discussion, see William M. Reddy, The Rise of Market Culture: The Textile Trade and French Society, 1750–1900 (Cambridge, 1984), 22–47.

11.Darnton, The Business of Enlightenment, 395–472.

12.See the Advertissement, Vol. I, p. 1. On the Encyclopédie méthodique and its publisher Panckoucke, see Darnton, The Business of Enlightenment.

13.Abbé André Morellet, Prospectus d’un nouveau Dictionnaire de commerce, par M. l'abbé Morellet, en cinq volume in-fol., proposés par sousscription (Paris, 1769).

14.Abbé André Morellet, Mémoires, 2 vol. (Paris, 1821); these were written about 1802. The author is especially indebted to Robert Darnton for signaling the existence of these memoires and their bearing on the subject at hand. See also Perrot, “Les dictionnaires,” for a discussion of Morellet’s career.

15.On the Bureau, see André Remond, John Holker, manufacturier et grand fonctionnaire en France au XVIIIe siècle, 1719–1786 (Paris, 1946); Harold T. Parker, The Bureau of Commerce in 1781 and Its Policies with Respect to French Industry (Durham, N.C., 1979). Professor Parker is also preparing a study of the Bureau’s activities in the 1780s and graciously allowed me to examine his preliminary draft.

16.See, for example, Abbé André Morellet, Analyse de l’ouvrage intitulé: “De la législation et du commerce des grains,” 2 vols. (Paris, 1775).

17.See, for example, the Paris Parlement’s Remonstrance of 1776 in Jules Flammermont, éd., Remonstrances du Parlement de Paris au XVIIIe siècle, 3 vols. (Paris, 1888–9), III, 368–88; or Necker, Sur la législation. For further discussion, see Edgar Faure, 12 mai 1776, la disgrâce de Turgot (Paris, 1961).

18.See Parker, The Bureau of Commerce, 31–7; Archives Nationales (hereafter AN) F12654, F12657.

19.J. Peuchet, Dictionnaire universel de la géographie commerçante, 5 vols. (Paris, 1799–1801).

20.See especially the summary of pro-guild opinion in AN Fl2654, “Extrait des avis.”

21.Flammermont, Remonstrances, III, 368–88.

22.2 vols. (Paris, 1839). Citations to this work in the text are also by entry rather than by page number.

23.I have considered records of numerous episodes of conflict from the period in The Rise of Market Culture.





CHAPTER 10

The origins of swadeshi (home industry): cloth and Indian society, 1700–1930


C. A. BAYLY

After 1905, the import of British-made cloth into India and the ensuing destruction of Indian handicraft production became the key theme of Indian nationalism. In the hands first of Bengali leaders and later of Mahatma Gandhi and his supporters, the need to support swadeshi (home) industries and boycott foreign goods was woven through with notions of neighborliness, patriotism, purity, and sacrifice, all of which provided unifying ideologies more powerful than any single call for political representation or independence. The destruction of indigenous weaving and the influx of foreign cloth became visible, material symbols for nationalists, comparable to those represented in other societies by literary or legendary motifs: “loss of country” in Indochina and China, the coming of the Just King in Indonesia, or the notion of the ending of Babylonian Exile in Caribbean and African societies.1

That cloth could evoke such powerful symbols of community and right conduct was due to the important role cloth and clothes played in Indian society – not merely in fixing and symbolizing social and political statuses, but in transmitting holiness, purity, and pollution. This essay seeks first to elucidate these roles of cloth in precolonial society and then to show how they were transformed in the colonial period. In doing so, the essay uncovers some special features of the role and meaning of commodities in Indian society over the last three hundred years. Recent studies of the rise of capitalism through “commoditization” of produce and labor have tended to assume an evolutionary or even dialectical development through time.2 Commodities invested with the “spirit” of gift exchange, products that “seem to embody the social milieu from which they came,” are progressively divested of value to become impersonal things whose value is allocated only through the market. Divine power and the devil are both separated from daily life; relics and talismans lose their worth. The mental and moral conditions of capitalism are established alongside its material manifestations. What is striking about India over these centuries, however, is that development in the external forms of protocapitalism (credit, capital, markets)3 was not matched by an equivalent development of mentalities. The spirit of the gift, the perception of “evil” (here pollution), continued to adhere to products that were circulated within a fully developed market system. That this should have been so reflects the nature of the specific form of commercialization that occurred in the economy of precolonial India. The labile expansion of a cash economy tended to bring “shares” in the royal rights of great and little kingdoms into the cash nexus. It did not, however, even under nineteenth-century colonialism, dissolve the social relations of dominance that arose from the interplay between the norms of caste and the structure of the petty local kingdoms.

What follows is an attempt at the collective biography of cloth in India over time. In the first section, the broad characteristics of the Indian view of cloth as a thing that can transmit spirit and substance is sketched out. The essay then goes on to show how the meaning and function of transactions in cloth changed in response to general political and economic trends. In the long view, this is a study of commoditization, but only of partial commoditization. For if slavery was an example of how persons could be made “things,” the history of cloth in Indian also shows how things could retain the quality of the people who fashioned and exchanged them, even in a fully monetized economy.





Cloth in Indian society: an overview


Symbol, talisman, and pledge


Transactions in cloth and the donning of new cloth or clothes attended every major life cycle ritual in preindustrial Indian society. Cloth transactions also took place during worship and in the creation or confirmation of political alliances.4 We can distinguish three basic uses of cloth in the social process, which often in practice overlap: first, its use in symbolizing status or in recording changes of status; second, its magical or “transformative” use, in which the moral and physical being of the wearer/recipient was perceived to be actually changed by the innate qualities of the cloth or the spirit and substance it conveyed; third, its use as a pledge of future protection. These various uses and the meanings attached to them affected not only the social and economic position of donor and recipient, but also the status of the various artisans and service communities that encountered the commodity cloth as it passed from production into social use.

The use of cloth and clothes to symbolize social status or to change it is, of course, common to all societies, though the complexity of the Indian social order imparts unusual variety to the symbolism of nakedness and dress. But beyond this, cloth as a transactional medium was conceived as a unique conveyor of spirit and substance, holy, strengthening, or polluting. Thus, cloth of different textures, colors, or origins could do more than simply impart information in society; it could change the moral and physical substance of the individual. Two ideas are relevant here. First, cloth was porous, dense, and intertwining, and could thus absorb and retain spirit/substance for many years. As an artifact, cloth of cotton, wool, or silk could not approach the especially powerful transformative capacity of food,5 but, on the other hand, it lasted longer than food, could travel over longer distances, and was much less “hard” and neutral than wood or metals. Second, Indians seem widely to have regarded the individual person as a peculiarly volatile combination of “bio-moral” substances, as an amalgamation of colors, qualities, and textures that each have their own spirit. In Hindu chemistry and physiology, for instance, it seems that color was not merely an accident of matter as in the Aristotelian tradition, but an independent manifestation of the spirit that goes to make up, say, a red cloth.6 Thus, the spirit of red cloth, or redness can combine with the moral substance of a particular person and transform it. For this reason, when a man in parts of central India smeared himself with ochre and donned red garments, he was something more than a man dressed in red; he was, in effect, a red man, that is, sorcerer.7 His costume did not symbolize a status acquired by other means; it was an essential component of the very transformation itself. Similarly, ascetics who smeared their clothes with mud and ashes seem to have been perceived not simply as men symbolizing their social death, but actually as ash-men, as corpses. Since their bodies are therefore devoid of active biological substance, when their brains and hearts ceased to function, they were simply buried and not burned.

The qualities imputed to cloth can best be appreciated through some examples. Barren women in central India used to obtain part of the breast cloth of another, particularly fecund woman who was pregnant. The barren woman burnt it and ate the ashes, “thinking thereby to transfer the pregnant woman’s quality of fertility to herself.”8 Again, when a Hindu widow remarried, a risky activity at the best of times, her old clothes and ornaments were often buried outside the boundary of her second husband’s village.9 She would also put on a new set of clothes. This is because part of the spirit of her dead husband was thought to be trapped in the fabric of her old clothes and might cause trouble as a jealous and malignant ghost.

Of course, these transformative qualities of cloth were not unique to Indian society. In Islamic societies, the turbans of great teachers could transmit spirit; in medieval Christendom, cloth relics such as the Shroud of Turin were particularly venerated, while even in today’s agnostic Western societies, a dead man’s clothes are often considered inauspicious. But in India, a person’s holiness or pollution was perceived as peculiarly lambent and cloth as an especially sensitive medium. It would be hazardous to claim that all Indian societies were critically aware of the principles of purity and pollution, but even for those that were not, transactions in cloth widely implied a pledge of future protection. In many rural communities, for instance, the gift of a man to a woman of a piece of cloth did more than simply symbolize an act of marriage: it was the ritual of marriage itself. In parts of the north Indian hills where poor cultivators were unable to afford whole garments, small squares of cloth were passed as the marriage ritual, and their number was a pledge of the degree of reciprocal aid owed by the bride’s family to the bridegroom’s. This role of cloth had deep roots in Hindu tradition. In the Mahabharata, for instance, the mythic female Draupadhi, under attack by enemies, was endowed by the gods with a sari that had no end. The more cloth the enemies unwrapped, the more remained to protect her virtue. A similar theme pervaded Indo-Muslim culture. According to the flowery Persian metaphor for creation and protection, “God clothes the bosom of nature with the mantle of existence.” As God’s mantle protects the creatures living beneath it, so the king protects men. Cohn has recently noted that the gift of dress was the essential act of homage and rule within the Mughal system of kingship, effecting the incorporation of the subject into the ruler’s body. Thus, in 1857, during the Great Rebellion, the poet Ghalib berated Indians for leaving the skirt (daman) of their “just” rulers, the British, and falling instead into the net (dam) of wickedness.10





Cloth and the social order


Here we consider the qualities of different types of cloth or clothes as they affect producers, donors, and wearers. First, it is interesting to note that different fabrics, weaves, and colors were considered to have distinct individual qualities.

A loose, coarse texture in cloth was often deemed to be the most porous to spirit and substance, whether holy or polluting. The looser and larger the knots, the more could be entrapped in them. One class of very loose-textured fabric was the raksha, used for fancy silk and braid armbands, neckties, and the like and worn on religious festivals. These fabrics were woven by a particular occupational group, the Patwas, who were deemed to be ritually superior to most other weaving castes. During the preparation of rakshas and other cloth talismans, a Brahmin was often employed to tie loose knots in the fabric. Chanting prayers all the while, the priest was able to fasten within the very knots themselves part of the spirit of various beneficent deities.11 The loose texture of the “sacred thread” that the high castes wore had similar qualities – it was a trap for godliness, but at the same time it was quite vulnerable to accidental pollution. During meals, for instance, the thread was often tied around the head to avoid its pollution by contact with food. As we shall see, the porous quality of coarse homespun (khadi) became something to be prized during the nationalist movement: it seemed almost to be able to capture and retain the spirit of the land itself. But the danger was that coarse, hard-wearing fabrics of this sort could easily pick up impurities, or irritate and damage the skin; until Gandhi’s time, homespun was regarded as boorish, perhaps even dirty.

For this reason, the tight, dense weave of quality fabrics was prized, not only for its aesthetic refinement and market value, but also because it rejected pollution more easily. Thus, silk was a peculiarly pure substance for Hindus. For most central Indian and southern Brahmins in the last century, silk was par excellence the dress for ritual and worship, and by extension it was used in other ritualized cultural performances (musicians, for instance, commonly wear silk upper garments). Silk was considered so much purer than cotton even of the best quality that it was not necessary to wash it before ceremonial use. According to the Mitakshara law, mere exposure was sufficient for silk was “washed by the air,” itself a divine spirit.12 But there was a certain ambiguity here, since the production of silk involved the killing of the silkworm, a potentially polluting act, and many castes were prohibited from participating in the preparation of silk thread.13 In general, long exposure and the operations of the market were deemed to have removed the pollution of death before silk reached the final purchaser. It is intriguing to note, however, that some holy centers such as Benares did produce large quantities of a silk called mukta, which was made after the moth had pierced the cocoon and had escaped alive.14 This was an inferior fabric so far as utilitarian and aesthetic value was concerned because the threads were broken, but it was much prized and commanded a high price. It was purchased by orthodox Vaishnavite Hindus and Jains (who both abhorred the taking of life) and was also considered appropriate for the ropes of sacred processional chariots and for the ritual swings used during the Krishna festival of Sawan.15 Mukta kept many artisans and merchants in employment; it exemplifies with great clarity the danger of taking any commodity as a utilitarian given.

The conventions regarding the quality of cloth among Indian Muslims were deeply influenced by the Hindu environment, but did have different rationales, at least among the elites. Both religions had a notion of ritual purity. Ablution was an important precursor of both Muslim and Hindu worship, and garments such as socks, which retain pollution, were to be avoided, particularly at the mosque. But in theory at least, pollution had different connotations for the two religions. For Muslims, impurity was to be avoided, not so much because it endangered “bio-moral substance,” but because (like woman’s hair or narcotics) it distracted the worshiper from the free use of reason during prayer. Paradoxically, whereas Hindus were enjoined to use silk, Muslims were encouraged by the sayings of the Prophet to abjure it, on the ground that the luxurious preening of the individual to which it gave rise inhibited the worshiper from proper submission to God. The tensions between the use of silk as an adjunct to kingliness and the religious injunctions against it were quite severe in Indo-Muslim society. Firoz Shah Tughluq banned its use, but later sovereigns and learned men compromised.16 So silk was forbidden at worship in the mosque but permissible outside it and even encouraged on the battlefield, where it was said to deflect sword cuts. Later, a cotton-silk mix called mashru (permitted silk) was made by weavers and spread all over India since it helped the less orthodox to look fine while conforming to the law.17

Color as much as texture was an essential feature of the quality of cloth and could also modify the moral and material status of the user. The mental or natural origins of color coding are of less importance to us here than the social categories with which it became associated. It is possible, as Pupul Jayakar suggests,18 that the distribution of cloth colors across India represents an adjustment to the natural environment; colors were softer in the lush, subtropical regions, brighter and more varied in the harsh desert landscapes. The dominance of certain color schemes by region may reflect the ancient boundaries of the natural substances and plants from which the dyes were produced; and the reservation of white and yellow to Brahmins and high castes may echo interdicts on relations between them and the tribal peoples who collected and processed the dyes. Be that as it may, a cultural color code, which continues to influence village life, had already emerged by the time of the Laws of Manu before the beginning of the Christian era. White was associated with purity and was thus the proper color for Brahmins and widows. Red, which evokes blood and danger, was appropriate for enhancing the persona of soldiers and powerful female essences of any sort. Soldiers wore red turbans in battle, and women wore red clothes and reddened their hands and hair during marriages or fertility festivals. According to Garga Smriti, a Brahmin should wear white, Kshatriya (warrior) red, a Vaishya (mercantile person or cultivator) yellow (a color that implies an easy, natural fecundity), and a Shudra (menial) ‘dark and dirty clothes.’19 Insofar as it is possible to recapture the meaning of these injunctions, it seems that cloth of different colors was considered to have a magical and not merely a symbolic function; it enhanced or destroyed the innate qualities in individuals. Thus, a man receiving a wrong or inappropriate gift is “reduced to ashes like a piece of wood.” “Evilly taken … gold and food destroy his longevity, land and cow his body, a horse his eye (sight), a garment his skin, clarified butter his energy, sesamum grains his offspring.”20 Cloth, then, was almost literally as integral to the person as his skin.

Islamic color conventions generally overlapped or were penetrated by Hindu ones, but green, the Prophet’s color, acquired particular sanctity. Green banners and green awnings for mosques and saints’ tombs were common, but very devout Muslims adjured the use of green for loincloths and trousers to avoid insulting, or possibly polluting, the color. Muslims also elaborated the use of shot gold and silver fabrics in endowing or creating royalty. Gold and silver cloths for use as dowries were an obvious way of passing on stored value between generations, and symbolizing royal status for the bride and groom, who were regarded as royalty on their wedding day. But gold and silver were also credited with the power of transforming and enhancing human substance, as witness their use in various forms of traditional medicine. For Muslims, gold and silver also had a special value because of their capacity to absorb light. According to Indo-Persian philosophy, light (nur) was a divine quality, a visible manifestation of God’s reason working in the world. Light was essential for the patterning of Islamic architecture, it preoccupied Islamic astronomy and astrology and it gave rise to an enormous taste for mirrors and shiny fabrics. “Light” and “mirror” became pervasive themes in Persian and Urdu literature. A king or noble who donned a cloth of gold or silver was, in effect, becoming a mirror of God, a direct transmitter of his divine light, as regal as the sun and stars, which were no more than other celestial transmitters. An early-nineteenth-century Arcot chronicler is going beyond mere flattery and hyperbole when he states: “The embroidered khilat [dress] of high value worn by the Nawwab [ruler] that day and also the ornaments set with jewels emitted such bright light that the world-illuminating sun felt depressed”;21 and, later, an English general at Trichinopoly was outshone like a “star by the sun.” As at Versailles, in Indian royalty the Sun King is surrounded by his courtiers as stars. But the quality of the clothes is deemed to do more than represent the emanation of royalty. They are an aspect of it; they catch and reflect the rays of God’s light.

Hitherto this section has considered some innate qualities of cloth. But even if the market were considered a neutral medium, it is important to note that the context of giving, receiving, and wearing could also influence the quality of the cloth and hence the moral quality of those who come into contact with it later. A suit of clothes “evilly taken” conveyed sin and destruction. In the same way, clothes received on particularly auspicious days or from holy hands can store their good qualities indefinitely. Village women reserved particularly auspicious saris and colors for important days, but the convention also reached the King himself. In the Emperor Akbar’s court, there was a special department for receiving the shawls and dresses (khelats) given as tributes or pledges by different notables and regions.22 The articles received here were graded according to their quality, the appropriateness and fineness of their colors, but also according to the time when they were received and worn. Goods received on the “first day of the month of Fawardin” or the King’s birthday had a higher rank assigned to them than pieces arriving on other days. These acquired qualities resided in the cloth until it was given to another recipient in a ritual exchange at court.

A cloth could influence the substance and spirit of the wearer, but it could also acquire qualities from him. These qualities depended on the status of the individual, but also the honor and purity of the part of the body on which it had been worn. The feet and loins were the least honorable, the head the most honorable. This accounts for the importance of the turban in Indian dress conventions. Among Hindus the turban not only protected the head, seat of the brain and of a man’s semen, but was also imbued with the power of these substances. Pulling off a man’s turban was indeed the gravest insult, a challenge to his rank, his reason, even his virility. Islamic notions added another layer of meaning. The turban, of course, had become a symbol of spiritual succession in the Muslim countries of the Middle East at an early date. Gravestones of the classical and early Christian period had often featured representations of the human form, but since this was forbidden by Islam, Muslims began to use the turban and hairpiece as a gravestone symbol.23 The turban itself therefore became associated with the teacher-pupil relationship in the Sufi mystical orders. A holy man’s turban became a powerful carrier for his barakat, or spiritual charisma, in Indian Islam. So in 1857 the Lucknow rebels carried as their standard the turban of one of the city’s foremost religious leaders. When the teacher Sayyid Ahmed of Rai Bareilly visited Calcutta in the early years of the nineteenth century, so great was the throng of would-be disciples that, unable to lay hands on all of them, he unraveled his twenty-foot turban and allowed them to initiate themselves by touching part of its length.24





Cloth and its producers


The qualities with which cloth was seen to be imbued by Indians had implications not only for the status of those who used it, but also for those who produced and serviced it. This section is concerned with the social and moral status of spinners, weavers, dyers, and washermen as it affected, and was affected by the qualities of cloth.

In India as in many other societies, the distinction between spinning and weaving was theoretically central to the division of labor within the family. According to the Laws of Manu, unmarried girls were the spinners (“spinsters”), whereas after marriage they graduated to weaving (becoming “wives”). With the development of professional weaving castes, this distinction became less important, though among artisans themselves, it seems to have persisted until the nineteenth century, when imported thread began to make domestic spinning redundant.

More interesting is the deep ambiguity that attached to the status of the weaver himself in Indian society. Most weaving communities hovered uneasily on the line that separated pure castes (best defined in this context as those from whom Brahmins could take water) and impure ones.25 Yet the cloth the weavers produced was generally considered neutral. According to the Shastras, ‘The hand of the artisan is always pure.’26 The low, sometimes impure status of many weaving communities seems best explained in terms of historical contingencies. First, weaving communities had often differentiated themselves only recently from pickers of wild cotton or producers of plaited leaf baskets, groups of tribal origin on the fringes of Hindu society. Second, manual work was widely regarded as degrading in the Hindu scheme of occupational precedence. Finally, lower village artisans, including poor weavers, were usually in a dependent position in relation to the agricultural castes in that they received grain payments from their hands as payment for work. Since taking gifts depressed status, weavers were ranked below the clean Shudra agriculturalists.27 Some evidence for this last interpretation can be found in the fact that urban weavers and more specialized craftsmen in the village who were paid in money through the operation of the market were usually of much higher status.

At the same time, the act of weaving was itself an act of creation, almost an act of worship, and this brought about the ambiguity in the position of the weaver. The notion of creation is central to the caste foundation myths of weaving communities, which themselves embody a claim for high status. According to the legends of the Devangas of Mysore, for instance, in the beginning men went naked and Brahma created Manu to weave clothes for them and hide their shame.28 When Manu achieved beatitude, he was reincarnated from the eye on Shiva’s forehead in the form of Devala. Devala went to fetch the thread for weaving from the heart of the lotus stems that grew out of the navel of Vishnu, the protector. In a battle against demons, Devala invoked the aid of Shiva’s consort who slew them. The blood of the demons was used as coloring matter for the cloth and produced the five elemental colors, black, white, red, green, and yellow. This and similar myths all evoke the notion of creation through images of the navel and the lotus; other weaving caste myths have Vishnu seated by the primeval ocean or relate weaving to images of churning or the movement of waves, which also refer back to basic Hindu creation stories. The weaver was thus a flawed creator, a status that bears comparison with the Greek notion that Hephaistos, patron of artisans, was a divine being, but lame.

Indian weavers could improve on their dubious status by creating finer and “purer” commodities. The social position of coarse cotton weavers was almost always low; that of fine muslin weavers higher, and silk weavers or groups that produced various gold and silver brocades, the highest of all. Not only were the specialist weavers associated with commodities of greater fineness and purity, but their assured market among aristocrats and temples removed them from dependence on ordinary agricultural patrons. In areas where precolonial rulers had been particular patrons of specialist weavers, as in Bengal or Mysore, this appears to have acted to raise the status of the groups as a whole. Weavers also sought to improve their status through the claims to equality or rank offered by non-Hindu religions or sects within Hinduism. In north India, many followed the saint-reformer Kabir, himself a weaver; in the south many were Lingayats. Most common of all was conversion to Islam. This is not to say that weavers were highly regarded among Muslims. On the contrary, they were stereotyped as idle, stupid, and quarrelsome: “a female weaver will even pull her father’s beard,” went the adage.29 Yet weavers were noted for their piety in observing festivals: “What is Id [the major Muslim festival] without the weaver?” it was said. In particular, weavers taxed themselves heavily on a corporate basis in order to prepare ceremonial floats (tazias) for the Mohurrum festival.30 Muslim reformers of the nineteenth century, such as Sayyid Ahmed Shahid in north India or the Faraizis of Bengal, also found a ready audience among weavers who were attracted to the cry for a purified Muslim religion. But within their profession, Muslim weavers like Hindus could always seek to move up, producing finer and purer commodities as a tactic for raising status. For instance, they sought to throw off the rather demeaning title julaha and become instead nur-baft or momin.31 Nurbaft implies “capturer [or weaver] of light,” so here again the Islamic theme of light impinges on the production of cloth. Dacca muslins of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were peculiarly prized for their whiteness, their lightness in weight and texture, and their capacity to pass through a ring.32 Many fine fabrics had names that evoked moonlight or cobwebs, which caught light or the substance of dreams. Weavers who sought the highest status, like the silk-weavers of Madanpura in Benares, often dressed from head to foot in white themselves. The Lucknow historian Abdul Halim Sharar mentions a group of specially favored silk craftsmen dressed all in white, who once produced the fabric for the slippers of the high ladies of the court before its fall in 1856. So attached to their hard-won status were they that those who survived under British rule, “though frustrated and reduced to poverty, will not agree to produce modern slippers to improve their position.”33

The potentially high status of the weaver as a creator or craftsman in light is brought out if we compare him to two other occupational groups that came into frequent contact with cloth as a commodity and as a possession: the tailor (darzi) and the washerman (dhobi). Unlike the carder, spinner, or weaver, who were seen by Hindus as creators, the tailor was a cutter, a destroyer. Thus, stitched garments that had previously been cut were regarded as impious among highly orthodox families because in some sense they had lost their integrity, besides being difficult to wash and so acting as traps for impurity. The occupational habits of tailors were also rumored to be impure because they were said to use spittle in the preparation of thread for sewing and then to wind it between their toes.34 Finally, for some Brahmins, stitched clothes were associated with Islam, in which wholly different perceptions of stitched garments obtained. The Koranic injunction to Muslims to cover all parts of the body necessitated tailoring; unstitched garments were regarded as barbaric. Thus, whereas Hindu women regarded the sari as the highest form of female garment and the blouse (choli) as demeaning until well into the nineteenth century Abdul Halim Sharar, the Lucknow Muslim writer, declared “The sari is an untailored garment and a relic of primitive times.” Moreover, “embellishment was a principle of civilisation, otherwise the simplest thing would be to remain in the nude.”35 The tailor was thus an outcast when he lived in proximity to Hindus; among Muslims he was less condemned, but his work was “women’s work” and therefore degrading.

Finally, the washerman or dhobi intervened when cloth had already become a possession but temporarily became a commodity once again in order to be reprocessed. Here we are reminded of Igor Kopytoff s analysis in Chapter 2. Commodities, once they have passed through the market, become individualized or “singularized” into a particular domestic or ritual role. But their cultural lives may not stop here. In the case of cloth, the act of washing temporarily brought it into society once again as a kind of commodity. But this was not a neutral process; the very act of washing transferred the accumulated dirt and pollution of the individual cloth to the dhobi who cleansed it, with ambiguous consequences for his social standing.

As is well known, the ritual position of the dhobi in Hindu society was particularly low in that his trade required him to touch highly polluting substances such as feces and menstrual blood. Orthodox families generally refused to allow dhobis within their houses, and some Brahmins even ceremonially rewashed their clothes after receiving them back from the dhobi by sprinkling them with Ganges water. Here again one encounters the peculiar quality of cloth retaining and transferring not only dirt, but sin. The dhobi was an inauspicious figure, to be avoided when beginning a journey: he was said to know “the defects of the village”; more precisely and dangerously, he knew its defecations. James Tod, the British historian of Rajasthan, mentions a revealing oath taken over a well in Rajasthan: “If I do not perform so-and-so, may all the good deeds of my fathers fall into the washerman’s well.”36 The washerman’s well here is literally a kind of hell hole, in which the accumulated sin and filth of the village are so powerfully concentrated that they can cancel out the good acts of a family and condemn its ancestors to perdition. Like all malevolent influences, the dhobi was thought to be particularly tricky. One of his favorite games was to pollute a man’s garments without the latter’s knowledge, so “the king’s headscarf becomes the washerman’s loin cloth.”37

But the apparent paradox was this: precisely because the washerman was known to absorb dirt and sin and dangerous substances generally, he was also capable of playing the role of a minor ritualist, a base priest. At a very lowly level, the washerman reproduced the ambiguous position of the Brahmin priest. Because the priest was in contact with sin and pollution, even his great ritual purity could not always prevail against it. For this reason, priests who officiated at temples were often considered to be of relatively low rank within the Brahmin class, and those who took part in cremation ceremonies and absorbed the sin of the dead were even regarded as inauspicious. In the same way, the Mysore washerman, the Agusa, occupied an important ritual position in village society. No worship of the village goddesses could take place without the help of the Agusa, who officiated as a pujari (low ritualist), especially when the goddess of small pox, cholera, and plague had to be propitiated at the outbreak of one of these epidemics.38 The theme of washing was prominent in these rites. The washerman would take the idol of the goddess from the family or village shrine and make offerings to it and cleanse it at the place where he normally washed clothes. The malevolent, overheated female powers of the deity, which had caused the outbreak, were thus washed away in the same way that dangerous female pollutants attached to clothes were dispersed by ordinary washing.





Cloth and the kingdom


The transformative and symbolic qualities of cloth ensured that it retained a position in marking the enhancing relations within broader arenas of society and politics. Like ceremonial food offerings, donations of cloth to temple deities among Hindus or to saints’ shrines among Muslims were appropriate because they could be redistributed after worship as sanctified substances. They could capture holiness and pass it on slowly, long after worship – like food, which has a more powerful but only transitory effect. Whole suits of clothing were offered to the gods as to kings. At the tombs of Muslim holy men, it was customary to present a plain white sheet (chadar, the same type of cloth used for the winding sheet of a corpse); these sheets could later be cut up and distributed among the worshipers.

The role of cloth transactions in both petty local arenas and the wider polity may become clearer if we return to some of the general themes of this book. The concepts of purity and pollution in Indian society provided an unusual pressure in the direction of the singularization of things. That is to say, things were not easily separated from persons; cloth, for instance, could pick up the substance of the people handling it during manufacture, sale, wearing, even washing. In this context, the anthropologist Celestin Bougie remarked, in a little-known essay, that patterns of consumption in India were broken down into vast numbers of small circles. No dynamic general market could exist in India, he thought, because each caste had its own food, its own vessels, its own clothing, insignia, and so forth. So, “Where the caste system reigns, the empire of custom which forces us to imitate our ancestors, opposes the inroads of fashion which invites us to imitate strangers.”39

However, there were equally powerful forces working in the direction of commoditization. Things had to acquire a neutral status within the village for transactions in food and essential goods to take place. In larger polities, exchange had to be general for kings to amass resources, especially revenue paid in silver rupees. Some cultural strategies mediating this conflict have been noted: the “hand of the artisan” was held to be pure; fine, pollution-resistant materials could be used; cloths could be washed or sprinkled with Ganges water. But the major institution that mediated between commoditization and singularization was the office of the king, whether this be construed as the dominant caste brotherhood within the village or the emperor of all India. The duty of the king was to consume the wares of his subjects and to make his court the great engine of redistribution. In this way, the needs of the particularistic local community producing a good could be balanced with the needs of the polity as a whole. The propagation of diversity in patterns of consumption – of cloths, fruits, spices, grains – was the physical manifestation of the King’s classic role as arbiter between the castes. And it was changes in royal consumption, or the consumption of those aspiring to local political dominance, that provided the Indian economy with the dynamism Bougie thought it lacked.

For these reasons gifts of cloth retained their place within the ranking and tribute systems of Indian states long after payments and presentations in kind had been replaced by coin and the outward signs of a fully commercialized economy. But the relationship between flows of cloth and flows of money within early modern Indian kingdoms was extremely complex, for questions of value were intimately bound up with matters of political economy. The use of cloth as a medium for integrating the kingdom might precede, supplement, or even outlast the operation of tributary flows of money, and at no point did cloth become “merely” a commodity, whose production and distribution was solely determined by market forces. The close and ambiguous relationship between coin and cloth is seen at the very heart of Mughal court ritual, for instance, the presentation of nazar or coins in exchange for a suit of clothes or valued cloths (the khelat).40 In this transaction, the king was pledging protection and incorporating the subject into his royal body through the action of the royal charisma that was immanent in the cloth. The donation of cloth in effect prolonged the “sight” (darshan) of royalty for the subject, who was thought to benefit morally and materially from his contact with kingship. But since the subject could not himself confer benefit on the king (unless he was an equal or near-equal) by a gift of cloth or food, the neutral medium of money was used.

Cloth transactions continued to underpin the commercial structure of the Mughal empire. In areas where gold and silver were scarce, payment was often made in cloth. Thus a large part of the tribute of Kashmir was paid in the fine woolen shawls that were its most prized product. An important section of the royal household at Delhi was devoted to the reception, grading, and storage of shawls and other cloths remitted from the outer empire. Later, after the incorporation into the empire of the rich province of Bengal, a new administrative arm, the malmul khas (muslin house) was established to oversee the provision of Bengal muslins and silks for the courts at Delhi and Agra.41 Heavy consumption of Bengal muslins (as of Gujarat silks) was an act of patronage designed to tie the new provinces into the empire and to legitimate the tribute taken from them. The Emperor Jahangir himself set the pattern for wearing light muslins and pearls at court, and the style rapidly diffused through the aristocracy and administration. But the greatest source of demand was the women’s quarters of the north Indian courts. European visitors remarked that in the early seventeenth century, the Delhi court alone housed 2,000 women, the vast majority of whom were aristocratic ladies obliged by convention to replace every 24 hours their dresses, which comprised two or three pieces of Bengal muslin each.42 This demand alone accounted for about one million pieces per annum, at an estimated 50-100 rupees each. The value of the malmul khas therefore equaled a substantial proportion of the land tax that Bengal paid in coin to the center, so that dress conventions established by court ritual exercised a formative influence on the whole structure of north Indian trade. A later observer, William Hamilton, remarked that until about 1730, the tribute of Bengal had been remitted to the center by bankers’ bills, “for the payment of which sufficient funds were at Delhi and Lahore supplied in the sale and consumption of the rich manufactures of Bengal. In fact, if it had not been so, no tribute could ever have been remitted.”43 When Persian invasions and internal turbulence impoverished the nobility of the empire’s heartland, no more tribute was in fact paid “as it was utterly impossible that the same or indeed any considerable sum could have been transferred from a country of which gold and silver form no part of the natural products.”

It can be seen, then, that the consumption preferences of the court played an important part in integrating the money economy of the Mughal Empire. These patterns of consumption, at the heart of which lay the “administered trade” in Kashmir shawls or Bengal and Gujarat clothes, had grown out of systems of ritual presentation. Transactions in goods continued to represent more than simple commodity flows. The Mughal emperor received cloth and other precious things from his domains because a great king was a great consumer and was honored in accord with the variety of fine products displayed at his court. The concept of variety is important here; all the chroniclers harp on it. Whereas “uniform” – a uniformity of clothes – has often symbolized and enhanced the unity of modern states, a controlled diversity of styles signified the greatness of the Mughal and other oriental monarchs. Like God’s, the king’s house must contain many mansions. Courtiers and officials from different regions developed stylized forms of the dress of their different regions and took care to display their particular cloth styles within the broad limits laid down by the prevailing court conventions. The variety of turban, cloak, and mantle represented, but also in a sense fixed, the styles of artisan production appropriate to the different homelands and divisions of the state.

This pattern was common to less exalted dominances also. Much has been written of the remittance of land revenue from peasant to official, landlord, or king. But the opposite flow, representing the duty of the notable to consume the natural and human produce of his territories, has been neglected. For instance, the rapid expansion and growing eminence throughout the subcontinent of the cotton products of the district of Azamgarh after 1650 appears to have been connected with the fact that this district was made over as a land revenue assignment to the daughter of the Emperor Shahjahan. By offering continuous patronage and a ready market, the royal lady’s household ensured the development there of a new cloth industry.44

The importance of the role of presentations in cloth for the structure of Indo-Muslim kingdoms is emphasised by the persistence of these transactions even after the market or administration of the empire or kingdom had declined. At Delhi in the 1780s, observers noted the presence of the distinctive striped cloth of the small province of Kara.45 Kara was almost the last significant political division outside the environs of the capital to be directly ruled by the Mughal emperor, and it was his place of exile during the late 1760’s and early 1770’s. The Muslim kingdom of Arcot in south India provides another example. After 1800 its erstwhile ruler was reduced to the position of a pensioner of the British. His agents had been replaced everywhere by British appointees, and he subsisted on a relatively small allowance. Yet a chronicle of about 1820 records a journey through “his” territory by the ruler with a retinue supposedly numbering 20,000 men, during which the Nawab visited the holy places and reaffirmed his sovereignty over all the petty kings and officials of the realm as it stood about 1760. At every point in this progress the chronicler noted in stunning detail the color, texture, style, and place of origin of the cloth and clothes that passed between the ruler and “his” subjects. Thus, a subordinate official was given a red shawl, a more important one a blue and gold turban manufactured at the reputed center of “Madhra.”46 The guardian of a saint’s tomb received a pure white shawl, and in return a holy man gave the Nawab a dress of pure white,47 which symbolized his own role as a guardian of the holy places of south India, Mecca, and Medina. Again, the particular colors and dresses of the Nawab were noted in great detail because each symbolized – but also enhanced – an aspect of his royalty. He rode at one stage in an “emerald-colored” coach and reclined on a cushion of red English hide for “these two colors betoken the prosperity and contentment of the Nawab.”48 In his aspect of royal sun, he wore a robe of gold thread, but when emphasizing his family and religious status, he rode in a “Wallajahi-green coach,”49 Wallajahi being the family name and green the Prophet’s color. It seems that each gift and each piece of cloth worn conveyed a precise status on the recipient or wearer, though the meanings of these gradations are often difficult to recover.

In the late seventeenth century, India was one of the greatest producers and certainly the greatest exporter of cloth in the world. Even in a society where state revenue was paid in cash and a sophisticated market system existed, direct transactions of gifted commodities – notably food and cloth – bonded a vast number of social relationships. A mid-nineteenth-century source reckoned, for example, that only 20 percent of the subcontinent’s raw cotton production was sold as such in internal or external markets. The vast bulk was made up into cloth and used in local transactions, given as offerings by weavers to superiors, by villagers to Brahmins and temples, or by agricultural magnates to their dependents as patronage. Transactions in cloth or grain could transfer value and honor (though also pollution and dishonor) in a way money could not. Cloth, in comparison with grain or cooked food, was a safer medium of transaction since it stored “biomoral energy” longer, though it was unable to create the same immediate transfer of brotherhood (or pollution) as feast, for instance.

Even within the market, the supply, nature, and distribution of cloth was influenced, though more distantly, by cultural preferences and expectations. Kings and other great men were expected to patronize producers and markets without close reference to questions of price or immediate need. This explains the custom by which a royal cavalcade, entering or leaving the market area of a city, was expected to pause and purchase directly in the bazaars, stepping outside the royal provisioning system for a time. This helped to emphasize the king’s immediate concern for the welfare of his producers. In fact, the totality of such transactions within and outside the market can be regarded as something like a political discourse upholding the legitimacy of the ruler and pledging the attachment of subjects. Indian society spoke partly in the idiom of cloth, though idiom is really too weak a word since cloth could actually transfer power and transform relationships. The penetration of European goods during the nineteenth century and the end of royal patronage for India’s weavers and spinners represented, therefore, something more than a crisis in economic history. It actually came to be a crisis of legitimacy for the new colonial rulers. Following Habermas, we are used to thinking of crises of legitimacy in modern Western societies as the product of a breakdown in the discourse regarding duties and obligations linking state and society. In preindustrial agrarian kingdoms, however, transactions in goods representing the labor and integrity of communities, castes, or families were themselves elevated to the status of discourse. The failure of the king to consume, the artisan to produce, or the merchant to market was tantamount to a denial of political obligation.





The origins of swadeshi


The remainder of this paper concerns the disruption of India’s internal transactions in cloth as a result of the import of European machine-made goods, and the attempt to reconstitute the basis of home consumption through the swadeshi movement of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. These topics have received considerable attention from economic historians, from analysts concerned with the political history of the Indian National Congress and from nationalist writers themselves. The concern here, however, is first the perception of these events by Indians, and second, the elaboration in the modern period of attitudes to cloth, weavers, and weaving that informed the cultural ordering of cloth consumption before colonial rule. Historians have generally addressed the issue of colonial penetration in terms of the practical reason of the marketplace. Indians bought British textiles, it is asserted, because they were cheaper by 30–50 percent than the indigenous ones and of finer quality. Even if this were granted, some consideration is required of the impact of this utilitarian deluge on the customs, assumptions, and relationships that were built around the exchange of cloth.

In fact, though, the spread of British products in India was a reflection of changing culture and political economy and not merely a response to better prices. Similarly, the later rejection of European styles and British goods, partial as it was, transcended purely practical politics and touched on issues of national identity, which temporarily resurrected the transformative value of cloth. In fact, even those Europeans who sold cloth to Indians were aware that simple economizing was not the only issue: taste had to be considered and cultural preferences accommodated. As Sir George Watt put it about 1900:

Throughout India, certain localities are famed for the qualities, design, etc., of their goods. The merchant must ascertain the exact size and shape, the particular quality and colour in demand in each locality. The mere fact of offering a superior quality of goods is no inducement to trade. Few countries in the world are more conservative regarding their garments than the various races and castes of India.50

How, then, do culturally determined patterns of consumption change to accommodate alien manufactures in a society in which the market itself is not powerful enough to create taste? Here it is important that the first English broadcloths and cotton goods were beginning to be imported into India during the final metamorphosis of the Mughal political system after 1740, when new regional consumer aristocracies were establishing themselves, notably in Lucknow, Bengal, and Hyderabad. The elaborate patterns of consumption that emerged in these sub-Mughal courts proved to be an excellent medium through which European cloths and clothes could become valued articles.





Late Mughal kingship and consumption


The consumption patterns of the Mughal successor states of the eighteenth century, whether in food, cloth, or architectural style, were becoming more involute, varied, and elaborate. In part, this reflected political instability and the desire of new dynasties and their servants to validate themselves by use of the material symbols of as many earlier or contemporary rulers as possible. The very instability of office, particularly in a situation where short-lived arriviste dynasties were served by eunuchs and an increasingly professionalized administration severed from direct control of the land, encouraged competitive consumption. When the great Lucknow eunuch-administrator Jawahir Ali Khan paraded his contingent of soldiers and servants “Sabit-khanis [household troops] in mango green livery, irregulars in black, Mewatis [a Muslim convert group] in white,” this display made other rich men of the city “burn with envy” according to the chronicler Faiz Baksh.51 It is significant that this parading of military power by rulers and aristocrats provided the first important avenue through which English textiles achieved value in society and began to balance the English East India Company’s exports in the manner previously reserved for silver. As European military advisers and armaments became more common in eighteenth-century India, rulers sought to enhance the prowess of their own armies by dressing them in scarlet English broadcloth. Thick dyed red cloth and red harness were peculiarly appropriate to the traditional color-coding of the Indian warrior classes; and the use of red serge spread from the Nawab of Awadh’s 60,000-man army to those of his competitors and by degrees to a whole range of irregulars, guards, and doormen. The potency of the image of the “red coat” is evident throughout nineteenth-century India and persists even today. Red sepoys guard the doors of Rajput palaces as murals; redcoats march in marriage processions; and the red sepoy even became the symbol on the banner of the priest-genealogists who await pilgrims at the great Hindu river festivals.

The association of English broadcloth with military prowess was matched by the incentive to use imported styles and fabrics in what might be called political display. Factions in the Mughal court had often marked themselves off by particular dress and preferences for certain types of cloth. Sharar mentions, for instance, the example of the “Kandahari pyjama,”52 which became fashionable at court when nobles wished to associate themselves with the valor of the soldiers from that town. Akbar’s search for a syncretic Hindu-Muslim faith for his reconstituted empire was marked by a greater use of silk and the renaming of articles of Muslim dress with Sanskrit terms.53

Turbans became smaller at this time, to accommodate Muslim headgear to Hindu style. Similarly, in the later eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, court factions trying to establish alliances with the British community adopted some European styles and products. The rise of the “General’s topi” (hat) and the European-buttoned frock coat (sherwani) at Lucknow in the 1820’s54 paralleled the court’s shift from Mughal tributary to a growing dependence on the British. (It is splendid irony that the present-day rulers of Pakistan, embarrassed by the un-Islamic Saville Row suits that their founder, Mohammed Ali Jinnah, habitually wore in contemporary photographs, have retouched him back into the sherwani, a garment that actually marked a much more critical shift toward Western dress.)

Another avenue of consumption preference by which European goods first breached oriental patterns of consumption was the insatiable desire of India’s rulers for novelties. Trade routes and commercial connections established for the sale of clocks, china menageries, mirrors, and elaborate embroidery were later adapted to supply aristocratic taste in cloth, and finally helped create a mass demand for imported textiles. European writers tended to see the demand for novelties as a childish desire for trinkets. Actually, the profusion of novelties in a court was considered another mark of great kingship. It bespoke vast and varied realms, connections with far-off kings; as God the ruler of the universe had created all manner of beasts and objects, so his earthly shadow must rule over a profusion of creations. Commercial agents up-country remarked how much easier it was at first to find a market for novelties than for standard manufactures. Cloths from England with different colors on each side were favored at the Hard war Fair.55 Lucknow supported a huge demand for anything made with glass. Huge quantities of sheet glass from England were used in the creation of the great prayer halls (the Chhota and Bara Imambaras),56 and looking glasses, spyglasses, and sequined cloth found a ready market.

Courts also borrowed and learned from one another, and though knowledge of the aristocratic style of Europe was minimal in India before the mid-nineteenth century, contact with other Asian courts was more frequent. The “Sultan of Rum” – the Ottoman Emperor – was an important model here because most Indian monarchs venerated him as Protector of the Holy Places and retained embassies at Istanbul. Ottoman style had already abandoned its classic Islamic line and color. During the eighteenth century, closer incorporation of Turkey into the concert of Europe had signaled the appearance of Louis Quinze furniture, Meissen porcelain, English velvet, and gloves. Then, after 1780, a wholesale Westernization of court dress occurred as pressure for military reforms grew within the empire.57 What was happening in Istanbul, as in contemporary Indian courts, was a substantial shift in material culture, as the object and furniture replaced the classic line of formal Islamic art as the pattern for living space. The embellishment of the inside of buildings with a profusion of objects, pictures, tapestries, and furniture became the order of the day in India, reaching its apogee in the cluttered Malik Palace of Calcutta, with its crowd of Carrara marble statues, and the Salar Jang Palace in Hyderabad, where grandfather clocks jostled with huge French chaises longues. It was through this shift in aristocratic taste that English fabrics and English clothing styles first gained a foothold in the Indian market.

Two underlying principles were at work here. First, it is probable that, as with the sepoys’ redcoats, a strong magical influence was operating in regard to European fabrics and styles. Hamilton Buchanan noted in 1812 in the up-country Bengal district of Dinajpur that articles used by European gentlemen who were returning home sold in the local market for considerably more than their Calcutta market price and costs of transport.58 It was as if people wanted these objects as tokens of superior European power. Second, it is important that this first stage in the colonization of Indian taste occurred at a time when Indo-Muslim style was itself becoming more varied, embellished, and involute, thus facilitating the incorporation of foreign novelties in its principles of design. It may be that an aesthetic shift was taking place that was largely autonomous of changes in the political economy.59

A transition from pure, classical forms on the one hand to elaborate, “baroque” styles on the other has taken place from time to time within the great artistic traditions, and it is often both difficult and suspect to reduce these transformations to matters of social change or political economy. The mind of the artist, trameled by convention, may seek to break free, first by a dense repetition of themes, later by ornamentation. But if this period of change coincides with intense political competition or the inroads of foreign influences, as it did in eighteenth-century India, variety and complexity might be redoubled.





Cultural factors in the growth of mass imports


If changes in royal and aristocratic taste provide an opportunity for the entry of British commodities into India, what was the social context within which this market penetration dramatically broadened? By the 1870’s, Britain was supplying 25-30 percent of eastern India’s total demand for cloth. First, of course, the growing reputation of European dress styles in India greatly stimulated the market for textiles themselves. Dress, always a marker of identities, became an explosive issue in the early nineteenth century as an obvious marker of cultural change. Sharar’s account of Lucknow in the 1860’s and ’70’s illustrates how complex the process had become. Rival schools of theologians adopted different styles of headgear.60 Modernizing Sunni Muslims like Sir Sayyid Ahmed adopted European clothes and a Turkish headpiece; modernizing Shia Muslims took European clothes and the four-pointed hat associated with Persian reformers. Loose-fitting pajamas were appropriate to the more orthodox among rebellious youth, while alcohol drinkers and meat eaters took to tight English trousers. The emergence of English-style professions after 1850, with their emphasis on occupational rituals and conformity, also tended to break down resistance to European clothing and hence to English fabrics. Class formation and access to the resources of the colonial power both demanded an accommodation with Europe, at least in the public arena. Hindus who had worn Mughal court dress with Hindu dhotis in private now exchanged the Muslim style for frock coat and trousers. European clothes and styles had a differential effect on various occupational groups. Professional men and government servants were the most Westernized, landowners in contact with magistrates and collectors the next so, whereas mercantile people and Brahmins generally retained their traditional loose white garments. In the countryside, there was no appreciable shift toward European styles of clothing. But by 1870, English textiles that could be made up into Indian styles were in widespread use.

The economic facts are well enough known.61 The rapid improvement of internal and external transport after 1850 greatly reduced the costs that the Lancashire mill owners and exporters incurred in selling their goods in India. Railways and better roads opened up villages in the interior, so that by 1880, up to 30 percent of eastern India’s demand for cloth was met by foreign imports. Two other factors were at work. First, the expansion of the silver money supply after 1857, combined with the faster pace of economic and demographic growth, pushed Indian prices higher. This tended to increase the labor cost of the indigenous artisan, who had to pay more for his food and essential supplies. The price differential between European industrial products and local, hand-woven cloth grew greater. Second, Lancashire’s greater competitiveness coincided with a surge in Indian rural consumer spending as agricultural prices went up and the relative weight of state demand for land revenue came down throughout India. Only in the 1890’s did the Indian mills in Bombay and Ahmedabad begin to take back these lost markets.

Although observers such as Watt and Watson emphasised the imperative need for exporters to pay attention to style, color, and use, preference for homespun cloth as such had generally broken down. C. A. Silberrad wrote of the United Provinces, “There is hardly a trace of preference for hand-woven over machine-woven articles on caste or sentimental grounds.”62 He did mention that a number of “old-fashioned landowners” in Bara Banki district patronized indigenous weavers, and other sources indicate that substantial numbers of artisans were still producing fabrics for specialist religious functions, a market completely closed to imported textiles. Superior color and fine texture, always valued in indigenous cloth production, gave English fabrics the advantage. Only where especially durable or very cheap cloth was required did hand-woven textiles hold out in the face of direct foreign competition. In the medium- and high-quality ranges, Lancashire was one-third cheaper at least and was making rapid inroads into the market until India’s own factories moved into mass production in the 1880’s.

However, explanations of the British penetration of the Indian market in these terms seem inadequate in that they seem to suggest that purely economizing and utilitarian consumption preferences had taken over in an area that had previously been influenced by ritual, notions of kingship, and questions of community. This was not so. In the initial phase of mass sales, English cloth succeeded because it was compatible with the cultural preferences of local consumers. In parts of the world where it was not compatible – the Far East, for instance – no such headway was made despite equivalent price advantages and better transport. The fact was the English cloth fitted into the area of consumption preferences once occupied by very fine, close-woven cottons and indigenous silks. Interestingly, a wide range of English-made cloths were designated nankeen, a word taken over from the high-quality, fine-textured Chinese cloths that the East India Company had once imported from the China coast. English nankeen looked good, was easily washed, and was more comfortable to wear than Indian cloth. It was beginning to acquire a cachet: the peasantry considered it “a mark of being well-off to be able to dress their wives and children in English manufactured cloth.”63 A reputation for fineness of weave and “cleanness” contrasted with the still lowly reputation of homespun. Foreign cloth avoided the many dangers and uncertainties associated with artisan products, which still retained the ghost of their transformative essences. Only the impact of nationalism began to shift these preferences.





Swadeshi and home industry


The swadeshi movement, which in its radical form was complemented by a boycott of English goods, bears comparison with other nativistic upsurges in Asia and Africa that rejected European products or refused to produce European crops as symbols of local or national oppression. The interest of these campaigns for this essay is how in their course, Indian nationalist leaders transformed and used the themes of protection, legitimacy, shame, and magic that were associated with cloth and dress in popular mentalities. In particular, Gandhi himself went beyond the use of homespun as a mere symbol to penetrate to even deeper levels of meaning about the nature of weaving as a creative act, about the dhobi’s cleansing as a token of redemption, and about the capacity of cloth to retain the luminosity of place and people.

Before the 1880’s, resistance to the colonialization of taste and the import of European goods was at best sporadic. The Madras army mutinied at Vellore in 1806, when British regulations seemed to threaten the customary style of turbans, and hence the virility of the sepoys. Muslim jurists at first allowed the use of European clothes, provided that indigenous dress (associated with the Prophet himself) was used at mosques. Later, some learned men issued injunctions against European dress and English cloth on the grounds that they damaged the livelihood of weavers who were the ballast of the Muslim community. But the most widespread ventilation of the plight of weavers, outside British papers, was seen during the north Indian Rebellion of 1857 against colonial rule. Many rebel proclamations referred specifically to the ill done by British imports. The Azamgarh population, for instance, noted how weavers, cotton dressers, carpenters, blacksmiths, and others had been reduced to penury. “But under the Badshahi government [restored Mughal rule] the Indian artisans will be employed exclusively in the services of the kings, the rajas, and the rich, and this will no doubt ensure their prosperity.”64 Artisans were urged to join the rebellion, and a substantial number of them did so in the small towns of the Ganges valley. It does seem that the failure of British government to purchase artisan wares – its failure to engage in reciprocal transactions in return for tribute or to provide service – amounted to a crisis of legitimacy for it. British officials in the early nineteenth century frequently encountered complaints that the East India Company had forgone its duty to consume and build, constructing instead merely “jails and courthouses.” If in a literate society, a legitimacy crisis is manifested in the collapse of public discourse about the obligations of society to government, in a preliterate society, the failure of government to transact in an accepted medium of exchange, whether it be cloth, or cattle, or bird-of-paradise feathers, might have the same implication.

Articulate and sustained opposition to British imports, however, only took fire in the later nineteenth century, as a precursor to the nationalist movement. Its first peak was the swadeshi campaign in Bengal from 1905 to 1910, which was a concerted effort to boost home industry through a boycott of British goods. The spark that ignited swadeshi was political, the decision by the government of Lord Curzon to partition the province of Bengal and dampen radical nationalism in the process. But the ideas of the movement had been propagated for several decades by Indian businessmen and mill owners to promote their own products in a difficult commercial environment.65 Swadeshi was also heir to a movement of artistic revival, which sought to protect the values of indigenous craft traditions against the impersonality of all mill production and the drab uniformity of chemical dyes. British officials such as E. B. Havell, long-time proponent of Indian crafts and champion of the fly shuttle, had been stimulating interest in handloom weaving since the 1880s.66 Havell and others like him saw a growing market for Indian hand-made exotica in an England where urbanization and industrialization had brought about an “arcadian reaction” associated with the work of artists such as William Morris. Havell’s ideas, however, were not purely practical. They reflected the stirrings of an idealist philosophy of social progress, conservative in nature, which stressed the integrity of the community and the idea of self-help. Havell warned artisans against taking help from the government, “all that is worth having you must and can do for yourselves.”67 This theme was taken up with passion by the first generation of Indian art critics. Ananda Coomoraswami, for instance, wrote of “the regeneration of India through art and not by economics and politics alone.” The “vulgarization of modern India with its caricature of European dress,” along with “cut glass and china dogs,” was damning proof of “some mighty evil in our souls.” Swadeshi therefore should be “a religious and artistic ideal.”68

In practical terms the swadeshi movement was a limited success. A boycott of British manufactures that lasted more than a few months was usually effective only where powerful landowners took a leading part. Though the decline in the number of rural weavers in Bengal and eastern India seems to have slowed during the two decades between 1890 and 1910, swadeshi could have been only one of the factors involved. But regardless of this, handloom weaving had already been transformed from an endangered rural craft to a powerful symbol of the moral and spiritual regeneration of India. A variety of new themes had emerged. The boycott of British goods was part of a wider aim to “sever all connections with the colonial ruling classes.” In the words of S. N. Bannerjea, swaraj (freedom) and swadeshi were linked: “We must be swadeshi in all things, swadeshi in our thoughts, and in our educational methods and development.”69 Freedom was more than just a European notion, it was “a return of the satyayuga [age of truth] of national greatness.” Indians who sold British goods were also to be boycotted in what was a modern attempt to define the boundaries of community and polity in terms of the production and consumption of cloth. Frequent references were made to the prosperity of Bengal in the time when the Mughal emperors had patronized the weavers of Dacca and Murshidabad through the malmul khas. Indeed, the modern historiography of Mughal India started from this very point and is still infused with themes of swadeshi.

These themes were popularly enacted at the great mass protests against the partition of Bengal, when persons taking a vow to the nation ceremonially cleansed themselves with a dip in the Ganges, then emerged to dress in Indian cloth and tied on one another’s arms the yellow and vermilion braids or bangles called rakhis.70 Previously used to symbolize ties between brother and sister within the family, these bands, which were always locally woven, became symbols of a wider national brotherhood. Because the use of home-produced cloth often involved a financial loss of income, it being more expensive than imported cloth, some popular leaders developed the theme of sacrifice in their pronouncements on swadeshi. Sri Aurobindo, for instance, stressed that the discarding of foreign goods was an act of sacrifice that had to precede personal and national regeneration. “We must abandon the life of the individual and lead the life of the nation.” British textiles were the poison, he said, which fosters the antidote, a new religious fervor and self-abandonment before the “glorified Mother,” the goddess Durga, protector of Bengal.71

Not only the context of consumption and the soul of the consumer but the quality of country cloth itself attracted attention during these years. The cheaper country cloths had been regarded as rough, homely, perhaps even slightly dirty, whereas British cloths had a reputation for fineness and purity. Popular singers, actors, and preachers made strenuous efforts to reverse these stereotypes, directing their message to women in particular. Some rumors circulated to the effect that British cloth, which had been dyed with unknown chemicals was actually unclean, (imported sugar was rumored to be impregnated with cow fat).72 At the same time, the very homeliness and loose, thick weave of village cloth were lauded for their naturalness, purity, and lack of sophistication, which here became a term of opprobrium. Village songs of the 1905-10 period associated country cloth with images of motherhood, with thick white rice and curd, and with the good things of the unpolluted countryside.73

This redefinition of purity and its association with the quality of cloth was, of course, taken to its most elaborate conclusion by Mahatma Gandhi himself. Whereas the Bengali swadeshi leaders of 1905-10 had in general used homespun as a political symbol, Gandhi emphasized its nature as a talisman and pronounced the creation of cloth through spinning to be a prayer. The production of cloth in villages by spinning and weaving was to transform the moral fiber of the nation in a quite literal sense. The themes of the artisan as a pure creator and the exchange of cloth as embodying an augmentation of moral status were, as we have seen, implicit in many popular notions of the quality of cloth. It was Gandhi’s genius that notwithstanding the incoherence of his formal economic and political thought, he was able to enlist around a single issue a huge range of beliefs, aspirations, and popular symbols. Cloth stood alongside the symbols of mother cow and freely prepared salt at the heart of the national movement of the 1920’s and ’30’s.

If we look at the voluminous works of Gandhi and his disciples on the issue of homespun (khadi), several subplots emerge. First there is the reappearance of the notion of protection as an important element of transactions in cloth and clothes. By a symbolic paradox, the consumption of millions of rupees worth of foreign goods leaves Indian men and women poor and naked (the image of female nakedness and shame was a particularly powerful one for Gandhi). Hence, patriotic Indians should spin their own yarn and commission country weavers to make it up into homespun. It was a moral and religious duty to make it possible to return to those prosperous days when “thousands of women of high birth spun their own yarn and got it woven by professional weavers.”74 Women should be brought once again into the labor process and augment India’s productive power, but at the same time the ancient status of women would be reaffirmed: Manu says that the duty of a wife is to weave and of an unmarried woman to spin. On the consumer’s side, total abstinence from machine-made goods was enjoined. Even Bombay-manufactured cloths must be abandoned as part of the elementary religious duty of being “kind and attentive to one’s neighbors,” which was also the basis of good polity. Speaking at the town of Godhra in 1919 Gandhi said:

So long as the Godhra farmers and weavers could supply the wants of the Godhra citizens, the latter had no right to go outside Godhra and support even (say) the Bombay farmers and weavers. He could not starve his neighbor and claim to save his distant cousin on the North Pole.75

The government, moreover, had forfeited its right to rule by failing to acknowledge the basic duty of the raja – to succor its clients and people through the encouragement of their arts and the consumption of their goods.

These arguments were an elaboration of the swadeshi ideology of 1905-10. But where Gandhi was an innovator was in his reaffirmation of the religious and magical aspects of cloth boycott and burning, of spinning and wearing homespun. Rabindranath Tagore perceived this easily and condemned its implications. Neatly turning the metaphor, he wrote: “Consider the burning of cloth heaped up before the very eyes of our Motherland, shivering and ashamed in her nakedness. What is the nature of the call to do this, is it not another instance of the magical formula?”76 Gandhi replied that to him it was “sinful” for a man to wear the “latest finery of Regent Street when his neighbors the spinners and weavers starve The knowledge of sin bursts upon me; I must consign foreign garments to the fire and thus purify myself and thenceforth rest content with the khadi home-spun made by my neighbors.”77 Later, during the 1920s, Gandhi further elaborated the theme that spinning was an act of prayer (a mantra), both a purgation of individual sin and a creation of new life in the spinner and in the community. Against considerable opposition, the spinning of certain quantities of yarn was temporarily adopted as a condition of admission to certain offices within the Indian National Congress. White homespun became and remained the uniform of its party workers and officials. If involute distinctions of dress had been a mark of caste society, the widespread adoption of khadi would create a uniformity of appearance in which good acts alone would distinguish superior castes. Gandhi sought in fact to resolve the ambiguity we noted between the pure and godly action that was embodied in the artisan’s craft and the low, even outcaste status that characterized the country spinner and weaver himself. All Indians were to become spinners, weavers, and washermen, just as they were to become the lowest of all, the sweepers who cleaned lavatories. Finally, Gandhi sought to ritualize once again the very tools of the trade and the “commodity” itself. His own search for the appropriate spinning wheel was infused with the notion of spiritual quest, and at the same time harkened back to anthropomorphic ideas common among spinners and weavers, who held the wheel to be an actual member of the family. At the same time he constantly emphasized the purity and godliness imparted to its wearers by the homespun. Khadi in his hands regained its transformative and magical qualities, while the spinning wheel took its place on the Congress flag.

This article has suggested that the ideas and assumptions associated with cloth in Indian society can be analyzed at more than one level. In the villages and in the Hindu or Indo-Muslim state, the notion that cloth was a thing that could retain qualities imparted to it by individuals or groups who fashioned or came into contact with it stood in opposition to the need to make cloth a neutral commodity in order to facilitate a general exchange of food, silver, and essential goods. The role of the dominant village elite or of the King was to mediate between these processes of “singularization” and “commoditization.” Ideas about the transformation role of cloth therefore continued to perform a functional role in the integration of Indian states and of caste society through the office of the king.

In the modern period, too, Gandhi’s ideology of cloth making and cloth use fulfilled more than one function in the political economy. Gandhi and his closest supporters opposed Indian manufactured cloth as vehemently as foreign products. But industrialists, and politicians such as Jawaharal Nehru who advocated technological progress for India, adopted an ambiguous position on the issue. Consciously or not, they enlisted the moral and political capital generated by the Mahatma’s campaign for village weaving in support of their own push for Indian freedom and industrialization. Bombay’s mills, for instance, produced careful, machine-made copies of different sorts of homespun fabrics for distribution in the interior.78 Industrialists such as the Birlas and Tatas gave money to Gandhi’s swadeshi campaigns out of piety even while they implicitly opposed the anti-industrial tenor of his wider message. In turn, the Republic of India has spent large sums on the propagation of homespun through institutions such as the chain of Khadi Bhawans (homespun retail stores), which often function at a loss despite the government’s strong commitment to competitive industry. Government must still be seen to protect local employment, community, and skills; it cannot promote commoditization through industrialization too rapidly ; it must be seen to mediate between the singular and the commodity.





Conclusion


According to several recent formulations, the Indian economy in the immediate precolonial period was “proto-capitalist” and colonial India an example of “arrested capitalist development.” These influential notions must presumably be taken to imply more than the existence of sophisticated markets and the longstanding payment of land revenue in cash. They must surely also mean that some degree of transformation had taken place in the values and assumptions that linked individuals to one another and to the market. Only in this way could the market itself have begun to allocate value and could a notion of impersonal capital have emerged. Whichever theorists or definitions of capitalism are employed, changes in ideology and social organization are now considered to have been causes and not merely consequences of the transition to early capitalism. Marx himself presupposed the creation of a stable state structure and concepts of property within which new modes of capitalist production could crystallize; many recent Marxist theorists have gone further, illustrating how the ideological and political “superstructure” intervenes as an autonomous force in the very process of production. Weber, of course, argued that the existence of an expansive capitalistic ethic was a precondition for economic transition. Sombart linked changes in family relationships and the “secularization of love” to the growth of a capitalist market through an increased demand for luxury commodities. It is this last angle of approach to the relationship between values and markets that has been least exploited by historians, who have characteristically examined the mentalities of entrepreneurs to the exclusion of any consideration of the relationship between people and commodities. One general test of the emergence of capitalist values seems to be the disappearance from everyday life of a widely accepted working definition of the concepts of “good” and “evil,” of the “auspicious” and “inauspicious.” Relations to people and things mediated through the market leave little room for such judgments of value. This is because it is imperative that individuals be severed from their preexisting statuses and allocated new, universally comparable ones in a capitalistic labor market. In the same way, it is essential that goods be shorn of the luminosity of place and the spirit of reciprocity in a full-fledged commodity market. Thus, the “evil eye” and the “devil” (characteristic incubuses of the peasant economy) had been eliminated from everyday discourse in that classic proto-capitalistic society, sixteenth-and seventeenth-century England, according to Alan Macfarlane.79 The sense of sin and of the inauspicious had been displaced from ordinary parlance and ordinary things to the realm of theological controversy. Only on the fringes of capitalist development, as in tribal Latin America, did the devil retain a place in the village, as a representation of the gathering deluge of a capitalist labor market and capitalist commodities.80 The village and the modern economy were marked off from each other by sin and the devil.

In India, such stark transitions have not been seen over the last three hundred years. What is striking here is the way in which the formal apparatus of markets and a monetized economy molded themselves to and were accommodated by mentalities that still viewed the relationships between men, commodities, and other men in terms of good (pure) and evil (polluting). For one thing, goods were only marketed commodities for a short span of their lives in society. As artifacts in the process of production, they carried the spirit of the maker and in turn influenced his ranking; as gifts they acted in complex ways to modify the nature of the donor and the recipient; as possessions, goods could retain and store good and evil. The life of a commodity in the impersonal market was a short one. But even here, market value did not wholly obliterate human value. Buyers and sellers were constrained by obligations that required that they purchase certain things at certain times, in certain markets. The widespread existence of markets, moneylenders, and double-entry account books was not incompatible with the persistence of precapitalist mentalities in material culture. In fact, material culture was never simply material, and it certainly cannot be simply opposed to capitalism or even luxury; money of itself could not transform relationships – an obvious point, but one that needs stating in the face of much contemporary Indian economic history. Even the eruption into India of British textiles occurred in the context of systems of redistribution and ideologies of taste that could promote or retard the development of a utilitarian perception of commodities in the market. Again Gandhi’s movement, although as leftists continually assert, fully committed to the notion of private property, was decidedly anti-capitalist as far as relations between people and things, people and producers, were concerned. Obviously, questions of value and community have never been wholly banished from the market even in capitalist societies; witness recent “Buy British” and “Buy American” campaigns. But the intricacy of relations reflected by the transactional role of commodities in rural India was of a different order. And if many of the attitudes demonstrated in this paper have begun to disappear, it is the very recent mechanization of production through factories, rather than precolonial merchants or the colonial state, that has effected the transformation.





Notes


This paper benefited greatly from the general seminar discussion in Philadelphia but particularly from the comments of Arjun Appadurai, David Ludden, Gyan Prakash, and Igor Kopytoff. In addition, I am grateful to Chris Gregory, Susan Bayly, Sugata Bose, Richard Waller, and Raj Chandavarkar. In the Netherlands, I was helped by the comments of members of the Kern Oriental Institute and the Centre for the Expansion of Europe in the University of Leiden. The ideas of Frank Perlin, Jonathan Parry, Tony King, and Bernard Cohn have also proved enlightening in a more indirect fashion.

1.See R. B. Smith, Vietnam and the West (London, 1968); David Marr, Vietnamese Anti-Colonialism (Princeton, N.J. 1973); Peter Carey, “The origin of the Java War, 1825–30 ” English Historical Review, i, xci, 1976; F. Fanon, A Dying Colonialism (London, 1970).

2.For example, Keith Hart, “On commoditization,” in E. N. Goody, ed., From Craft to Industry: The Ethnology of Proto-Industrial Cloth Production. (Cambridge, 1982).

3.F. Perlin, “Proto-industrialisation and pre-colonial South Asia,’ Past and Present, 98, 1983; see also my Rulers, Townsmen, and Bazaars (Cambridge, 1983).

4.When I wrote this paper, I had not yet seen Bernard S. Cohn’s paper “Cloth, clothes, and colonialism: India in the nineteenth century,” prepared for the symposium on Cloth and the Organization of Human Experience, New York, October 1983. It is hoped that the papers are complementary.

5.A. Appadurai, “Gastro-politics in Hindu South Asia,” American Ethnologist, viii, 3, 1981, 494-512. M. Marriott and R. Inden, “Caste systems,” Encyclopedia Britannica, iii (1974), 982–91; D. McGilvray, ed., Caste Ideology and Interaction (Cambridge, 1982), introduction.

6.See B. Seal, The Positive Sciences of the Ancient Hindus (Varanasi, 1958).

7.L. Ananthakrishna Iyer et al., Mysore Tribes and Castes, i, (Madras, 1935), 435.

8.R. Russell and Hira Lai, Tribes and Castes of the Central Provinces of India (1916, repr. Ossterhout, 1969), i, 123.

9.Ibid., i, 123-5; G. A. Herklots, Islam in India by Jafar Shah (London, 1921), pp. 228, 269, 272.

10.Ghalib, Dastunbuy, trans. K. A. Faruqi (London, 1978), p. 28.

11.Russell and Hira Lai, Tribes and Castes, iv, 367.

12.A. Yusuf Ali, A Monograph on Silk Fabrics Produced in the North Western Provinces and Dudh (Allahabad, 1900), p. 120; see also S. N. Dhar, Costumes of India and Pakistan (Varanasi, 1969).

13.Sir G. Watt, The Commercial Products of India (London, 1908), pp. 1,011, 1,121.

14.Yusuf Ali, p. 75.

15.Ibid., p. 67.

16.Ibid., p. 121.

17.Watt, p. 1125.

18.Pupul Jayakar, “India fabrics in Indian life,” in Textiles and Ornaments of the Museum of Modern Art, New York (New York, 1956).

19.P. Kane, History of Dharmasastra (Poona, 1963), ii, 670-2.

20.The Laws of Manu, iv, 189; trans. G. Biihler (Oxford, 1886), p. 158.

21.Ghulam Abdul Qadir, “Bahar-i-Azamjahi,” Sources of the History of the Nawabs of the Carnatic, no. 11, trans. Nainar (Madras, 1950), p. 50.

22.Abul Fazl, “Ain-i-Akbari,” trans. H. Blochman, i (Calcutta, 1893), 91.

23.Council of Europe exhibition on “Anatolian Civilizations,” Aya Sofya Museum, Istanbul, 1983.

24.S. Rizvi, Shah Abd-al Aziz (Canberra, 1982), p. 483.

25.See, for example, Russell and Hira Lai, ii, 144 (Julaha), iv, 144 (Muher), 385–6 (Patwa); ii, 581 (Kashti).

26.Manu, ed. Biihler, v, 129, p. 191; see also iv, 219, p. 163.

27.Russell and Hira Lai, i, 50.

28.Ananthakrishna Iyer et al., iii, 18–19.

29.G. Pandey, “The bigoted julaha,” Economic and Political Weekly (Calcutta), Jan. 1983.

30.E. Blunt, The Caste System of Northern India (1931; repr. Delhi, 1969), p. 244.

31.Pandey, “Bigoted julaha.”

32.For Dacca muslins, see J. Taylor, Topography and Statistics of the City of Dacca (Calcutta, 1840).

33.A. Sharar, The Last Phase of an Oriental Civilisation, trans. E. Harcourt and F. Hussain (London, 1969), p. 180.

34.Yusuf Ali, p. 70.

35.Sharar, 131.

36.Cited Russell and Hira Lai, ii, 523.

37.Ibid., 526.

38.Ananthakrishna Iyer et al., ii, 21.

39.C. Bougie in D. F. Pocock, ed., Essays on the Caste System by Celestin Bougie (Cambridge, 1971), p. 153.

40.See Cohn, “Cloth, Clothes, and Colonialism.”

41.Taylor, Dacca, p. 64.

42.N. Manucci, M. Edwardes (ed.), Memoirs of the Mogul Court (London, 1964), 73.

43.W. Hamilton, An Historical Relation of … the Rohilla Afghans (London, 1787), p. 169.

44.Yusuf Ali, p. 91.

45.Pollier to Ironside, May 22, 1776, Asiatic Annual Register, ii, 1800, 29.

46.“Bahair-i-Azamjahi,” tr. Nainar, p. 92.

47.Ibid., p. 82.

48.Ibid., p. 77.

49.Ibid., p. 50.

50.Watt, p. 618; see also Watson, The Textile Manufactures and the Costumes of the People of India (London, 1868), i, 5.

51.Munshi Faiz Baksh, “Tarikh-i-Farah Baksh,” trans. W. Hoey, Memoirs of Delhi and Fyzabad (Allahabad, 1889), ii, 97.

52.Sharar, p. 177.

53.‘Ain,’ trans. Blochman, i, 92.

54.Sharar, p. 173.

55.Commercial resident Bareilly to Governor General, 13 January 1803, Board’s Collections, 2947-53, India Office Library and Records.

56.Vazir Ali’s marriage, 1795, Asiatic Annual Register, misc. tracts, 9, pp. 11– 12.

57.See Topkapi Sarai Museum, collection of sultans’ ceremonial dresses, 1770-1820.

58.Hamilton Buchanan, in Montgomery Martin, ed., History, Antiquities, Topography of Eastern India (London, 1838), ii, 999.

59.See, for example, M. Shapiro, “Style,” in A. Kroeber, ed., Anthropology Today, (Chicago, 1953), and H. Wolfflin, Principles of Art History (London, 1963).

60.Sharar, 173ff.\ for the relation between material culture and social organization, see I. Hodder, Symbols in Action: The Ethnoarchaeological Study of Material Culture (Cambridge, 1982); see also R. Tagore on “Coat or Chapkan,” Rabindra Rachanavali, xii, (Calcutta, 1960), 223-9.

61.For the impact of British imports, see, for example, D. Kumar, ed., The Cambridge Economic History of India, ii, (Cambridge, 1983), 668–73, 842–3; J. Borpujari, “Indian cottons and the cotton famine of 1865,” Indian and Social History Review, 10 (1973).

62.C. Silberrad, Monograph on Cotton Fabric Production in the North Western Provinces and Oudh (Allahabad, 1898), p. 46.

63.Ibid.

64.Azamgarh Proclamation, Aug. 25, 1857, reprod. R. Mukherjee, “The Azimgarh Proclamation,” in B. De, ed., Essays Presented to S. C. Sarkar (Calcutta, 1976), pp. 497-8.

65.S. Sarkar, The Swadeshi Movement in Bengal, 1903–8 (Delhi, 1973), pp. 20– 30.

66.Ibid., p. 120.

67.A. Coomaraswami, Art and Swadeshi (Madras, n.d.), p. 3.

68.Ibid.

69.H. and U. Mukherjee, ed., India's Fight for Freedom or the Swadeshi Movement, 1905–6 (Calcutta, 1908), p. 203.

70.Amrita Bazaar Patrika, Oct. 16-17, 1905.

71.Bande Mataram, Oct. 10, 1907.

72.Amrita Bazaar Patrika Aug. 10, 1905; Abhyudaya (Allahabad), March 19, April 2, 1906.

73.Dr. S. Bose, of Tufts University, has kindly sent me the following note on the “Mota Kapar” ethic in Bengal at the turn of the Century:

At the turn of this century, with the rise of swadeshi, we find a deliberate effort to propagate the virtues of mota kapar – the thick, unrefined, home-spun cloth – as part of a philosophy of simple living ensuring loyalty to the mother country. This obviously had as its background the damage done to the indigenous refined cloth industry in the nineteenth century and the invasion of the home market by foreign milled cloth. The psychological attachment to the older light and sophisticated varieties, notably silks, with their connotations of ritual purity, as well as the new attraction to the glitter of manufactured commodities, had to be broken. A number of rustic composers and singers and also a few more sophisticated poets tried to preach the new message. Most of their songs were written between 1903 and 1908. The best-known of the rustic singers is Charankabi Mukundadas.

Mota literally means thick or rough, but mota kapar had a wider range of connotations – it was thick and unrefined but also simple and homely cloth. In fact, mota chal, mota kapar (coarse, simple rice and thick, homely cloth) and mota khabo, mota porbo (we will eat mota and wear mota) went together. One of the best-known swadeshi couplets on cloth goes:

Ma-er deya mota kapar, mathay tule ne re bhai,

Ma je amar deen-daridra, er beshi aaj sadhya nai.

The Mother has given us this simple cloth, wear it with pride,

She is poor and destitute today and can afford no more.

The following is a free translation of a song that amounts to a simple but comprehensive summary of the mota khabo, mota porbo, attitude. It is by Rajanikanto Sen, quite well-known as a composer of swadeshi and devotional songs.

We may be poor, we may be small,

But we are a nation of seven crores [seventy million]; brothers, wake up.

Defend your homes, protect your shops,

Don’t let the grain from our barns be looted abroad.

We will eat our own coarse grain and wear the rough, home-spun cloth,

What do we care for lavender and imported trinkets.

Foreigners drain away our Mother’s milk,

Will we simply stand and watch?

Don’t lose this opportunity, brothers,

Come and congregate at the feet of the Mother.

Giving away from our own homes and begging from foreigners.

We will not buy the fragile glass, it breaks so easily,

We will rather be poor and live our simple lives,

No one can then rob us of our self-respect.

Don’t lose this opportunity, brothers,

Come and congregate at the feet of the Mother.

In another very famous song, Charankabi Mukundadas exhorts the women of Bengal to throw away their silk and glass bangles. He asks them not to be deceived by the false glitter of imported goods and not to wear kalanka (shame) instead of shankha (the white chank bangle, symbol of chastity). That they don’t have real gold bangles is hardly a cause for mourning, he tells them. The daughters of Bengal must see to it that the Mother’s wealth is not drained away any further.

74.M. K. Gandhi, Collected Works (Delhi, 1962-73), xv, 485.

75.Ibid., xvi, 30.

76.Quoted by S. Sinha, The Social Thinking of Rabindranath Tagore (Calcutta, 1965), p. 48.

77.Ibid., p. 49.

78.Personal communication, Rajnarayan Chandavarkar. See also his Cambridge Ph.D. dissertation (1983), “Labour and society in Bombay, 1918– 1940.”

79.Alan Macfarlane, “The root of all evil,” in D. Parkin, ed., The Anthropology of Evil (Oxford, 1985).

80.Michael T. Taussig, The Devil and Commodity Fetishism in South America (Chapel Hill, N.C., 1980).





