The social life of things





The social life of things


Commodities in cultural perspective



Edited by

ARJUN APPADURAI

University of Pennsylvania





CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo, Delhi, Mexico City

Cambridge University Press

The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK

Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York

www.cambridge.org

Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521323512

© Cambridge University Press 1986

This publicationis in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.

First published 1986

First paperback edition 1988

11th printing 2013

Printed and bound in the United Kingdom by the MPG Books Group

Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication data

Main entry under title:

The social life of things.

Includes index.

1. Commerce – Social aspects – Addresses, essays,

lectures. 2. Economic anthropology – Addresses, essays,

lectures. 3. Commerce – History – Addresses, essays,

lectures. I. Appadurai, Arjun. 1949–

GN450.S63 1986 360′.3 86–19529

British Library Cataloguing in Publication data

The social life of things: commodities in

cultural perspective.

1. Economic anthropology 2. Raw materials

I. Appadurai, Arjun

306′.3 GN450

ISBN 978-0-521-35726-5 Paperback

Cambridge University Press has no responsiblity for the persistence or accuracy of URLs for external or third party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.





Contents


Contributors

Foreword by Nancy Farriss

Preface


Part IToward an anthropology of things

1Introduction: commodities and the politics of value

Arjun Appadurai

2The cultural biography of things: commoditization as process

Igor Kopytoff


Part IIExchange, consumption, and display

3Two kinds of value in the Eastern Solomon Islands

William H. Davenport

4Newcomers to the world of goods: consumption among the Muria Gonds

Alfred Gell


Part IIIPrestige, commemoration, and value

5Varna and the emergence of wealth in prehistoric Europe

Colin Renfrew

6Sacred commodities: the circulation of medieval relics

Patrick Geary


Part IVProduction regimes and the sociology of demand

7Weavers and dealers: the authenticity of an oriental carpet

Brian Spooner

8Qat: changes in the production and consumption of a quasilegal commodity in northeast Africa

Lee V. Cassanelli


Part VHistorical transformations and commodity codes

9The structure of a cultural crisis: thinking about cloth in France before and after the Revolution

William M. Reddy

10The origins of swadeshi (home industry): cloth and Indian society, 1700–1930

C. A. Bayly

Index





Contributors


ARJUN APPADURAI is Associate Professor of Anthropology and South Asian Studies at the University of Pennsylvania. He is the author of Worship and Conflict Under Colonial Rule (1981).

C. A. BAYLY is Fellow of St. Catharine’s College, University of Cambridge, and Smuts Reader in Commonwealth Studies. He has published The Local Roots of Indian Politics: Allahabad, 1880–1920 (1975) and Rulers, Townsmen and Bazaars: North Indian Society in the Age of British Expansion, 1770–1870 (1983).

LEE V. CASSANELLI teaches in the Department of History at the University of Pennsylvania. He is the author of The Shaping of Somali Society: Reconstructing the History of a Pastoral People (1982).

WILLIAM H. DAVENPORT teaches anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania, where he is also Curator for Oceania at the University Museum. He has done field research in Jamaica and the Solomon Islands and historical research on pre-European Hawaii, and has published extensively on all these areas.

PATRICK GEARY is Associate Professor of History at the University of Florida. He is the author of Furta Sacra: Thefts of Relics in the Central Middle Ages (1978) and Aristocracy in Provence: The Rhone Basin at the Dawn of the Carolingian Age (1985).

ALFRED GELL teaches social anthropology at the London School of Economics and Political Science. He is the author of Metamorphosis of the Cassowaries: Umeda Society, Language and Ritual (1975).

IGOR KOPYTOFF of the Department of Anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania is coeditor (with Suzanne Miers) of Slavery in Africa: Historical and Anthropological Perspectives (1977) and author of Varieties of Witchcraft: The Social Economy of Secret Power (forthcoming).

WILLIAM M. REDDY is Assistant Professor of History at Duke University and is the author of The Rise of Market Culture: The Textile Trade and French Society, 1750–1900 (1984).

COLIN RENFREW is Disney Professor of Archaeology, University of Cambridge, and Fellow of St. John’s College. He is the author of Problems in European Prehistory (1979) and Approaches to Social Archaeology (1984).

BRIAN SPOONER teaches in the Department of Anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania. He is the author of Ecology in Development: A Rationale for Three-Dimensional Policy (1984).





