                                                                                   ieee
                                                                                   mir                 ad
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                     zt
                                                                                                        :i




                           satis
                              trer
                                rhe
                                ets
                                                                                          tteae
                                                                                                  Ke
                                                         :
                                                                 :
                                                                               ;

                                                                               she

                                                                 cts
                                                                           r



                                                                           i


      rowin:
     ait
      OL
                                                     ‘
                                                                 BERS
                                                                           sarees


                                                                                          aries
                                                                                          st  oy

                                                             :
               err    25
                     on


                                                             :
                                                                       r




                                                       ee
                                                    tiie
                                           re
                                                =                      it




ty

                                                 reprriesta
                                      iat: 7354. Lirtada
L206




       From the Library
             0f
          JOHN    J. DAVIS

            No.
          Digitized by the Internet Archive
              In 2022 with funding from
               Kahle/Austin Foundation




httos://archive.org/details/newperspectivesi0000sall
New Perspectives in Archeology
                                New
           Perspectives
   in Archeology
Edited by Sauty R. Binrorp AND Lewis R. Binrorp

                           University of New Mexico




             ALDINE PuBLisHING Company / Chicago
Copyright © 1968 by Wenner-Gren       Foundation
for Anthropological Research, Inc.


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording,
or any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher


First published 1968
Aldine Publishing Company
529 South Wabash Avenue
Chicago, Illinois 60605


Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 67-27386
Designed by Miles Zimmerman
Printed in the United States of America


Second Printing 1969
Since   historical events   and essential
social divisions of prehistoric peoples
don’t find an adequate expression in
material   remains,   it cannot   be right to
try to arrive at a knowledge of them
through archaeological interpretation.—M. S. Sm1TH.

With the proper approach it should be
possible to discover and document a
great deal about social systems and the
political and religious organizations for
most prehistoric ... cultures. There must
be limits, kinds of information we cannot
reconstruct, but until we have tried we
shall not know these limits are.—W. H. Sears.
                                                               Preface




Most of the papers in this volume were presented at an all-day sym-
posium entitled “The Social Organization of Prehistoric Communities”
held at the 64th Annual Meeting of the American Anthropological Asso-
ciation at Denver in November, 1965. The symposium was organized by
the editors, prompted by a conversation the previous spring with Stuart
Struever and William Longacre. All of us were engaged in archeological
research which represented a departure from conventional studies, and
we were aware of the fact that there were many other archeologists in the
country also working toward the same ends, utilizing various theoretical
and methodological approaches. It was felt that the time was ripe to
present the findings of some of these workers, both to inform non-arche-
ologists of what was going on in our sub-field and to stimulate discussion
of common problems between archeologists and cultural anthropologists.
  The list of participants in the symposium was not exhaustive of those
engaged in new kinds of research and should not be taken to represent
any “school” of archeological thinking. The participants were selected
with an eye toward maximizing areal and temporal coverage and diver-
sity of innovation in method. Albert C. Spaulding and Paul S. Martin
were asked to be chairmen of the symposium’s two sessions since they are
senior men in the field who have consistently encouraged and inspired
many of us and have aided greatly the development and acceptance of
new ideas.
  The plans for organizing the symposium papers and comments into
publishable form were made at the Denver meetings. Since then there
have been many changes in specific contributions as well as in the overall
plans for presentation. Most of the symposium papers have been substan-
                                   Vii
viii                                                                 Preface
tially revised, and five papers have been added which were not included
in the original symposium. The introductory paper here, “Archeological
Perspectives,” was written especially for this volume to provide a back-
ground against which the substantive papers might be viewed. Spauld-
ing’s paper was presented at the 1965 meeting of the American Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science and was solicited for this book by
the editors. Cowgill’s paper was read at the Denver meeting of the Amer-
ican Anthropological Association but was not included in the symposium
because of lack of time. The paper by Longacre and Ayres was presented
to the 1966 meeting of the Society for American Archaeology at Reno.
Williams’ paper was especially written for this volume at the request of
the editors. The oganization of the entire volume was worked out be-
tween the editors and Alexander J. Morin of Aldine Publishing Company.
  There were major contributions of individuals and organizations which
made publication of this book possible. The tapes of discussants’ com-
ments at the symposium were transcribed by Mrs. Karla Maddox, who
also had the unenviable task of riding herd on the authors to complete
revisions on their manuscripts. We are very grateful to Mrs. Maddox for
her herculean efforts. Richard Humphrey of the University of California,
Santa Barbara, prepared some of the illustrative material, and we are
appreciative of his work.
   Funds used in the preparation of manuscripts, photographic work, and
clerical assistance were provided to the editors by a grant from the Grad-
uate Council of the University of California, Santa Barbara, and addition-
al assistance has been given by the Department of Anthropology, Univer-
sity of California, Los Angeles.
  The Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research provided
a grant to support the publication of this work. We are most grateful to
Mrs. Lita Osmundsen, Director of Research, and to the Board of the
Wenner-Gren Foundation for their generous and gracious assistance.

                                                  SALLY R. BINForD
                                                 Lewis R. Binrorp
                                                                                        Contents




PARTI      ARCHEOLOGICAL THEORY AND METHOD                                    Re               eee       1
 1   Archeological Perspectives, Lewis R. Binford .........0.0..060.cccccecee                            5
 2   Explanation in Archeology, Albert C. Spaulding .0.....0.0...0...00.0500ccees                       33
 3   The Inference of Residence and Descent Rules from Archeological
     OEE              RII,        REE sR.          28s ON Gar nes Vea a            ge Bile a            Al
 4   Variability and Change in the Near Eastern Mfstarion of
     Levallois Facies, Sally R. Binford      ee         ee ee                           ne mee          49
 5   Method and Theory of Upper Paleolithic Archeology!in
     Southwestern France, James R. Sackett                 «2... .. .cccscscsssssscccccssscceceseons    61

PART Il INVESTIGATING VARIABILITY IN THE ARCHEOLOGICAL RECORD:
     A SINGLE OCCUPATION UNIT ......  ae     be Per ei f. Potet ere                                     85
 6   Some Aspects of Prehistoric Society in East-Central Arizona,
     William A. Longacre                                                                          ..    89
 7   Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Foe janes N. Hill. LOS
 8   Computer Analysis of Archeological Data from Teotihuacan, Mexico,
     Ed       te SEO) ieSocRG a iol ween ae ir eae rern Ate   eee      TEE 143
 9   Archeological Lessons from an Apache Wickiup,
     William A. Longacre and James E. Ayres .......                       5               nate tea      ot
10   Establishing Cultural Heterogeneities in Settlement Parterne:
     An Ethnographic Example, Bobby Jo Williams 00.0000000...cccccu                                    161

PART III    INVESTIGATING VARIABILITY IN THE ARCHEOLOGICAL RECORD:
     VARIABILITY AMONG OCCUPATION UNITS               ...........00000:cseeeeees   ,,          Wal
11   Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic in the Midwest,
     EATEN       VYCU et       ee          ig iu Na Papen ts kousis crsctedneensbdanncaunr
                                                                                        snes 175
                                                                                            Contents
       Investigations of Late Prehistoric Social Organization in N ew York State,
       Robert: Whadloss [40 sieccasts Ress veiuads pli aa eRe ak coasted a ee    ee 223
       Evidence of Social Organization from Western Iran, 8000-4000 B.c.
       Frank Hole cise cate tle eee ba AOR at ee ae ee eee 245
       Social and Economic Systems in Formative Mesoamerica,
       Kent’ V. Flannery and Michael DAG 06 4 sss satssmcsttatieresnavonesietrns-sa0dt 267
       Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems in the Lower Illinois
       VAMOS     SHUOTES   SERGE OC? eo ra5stos okaais aviv nbs   raion   meee                       285
16     Post-Pleistocene Adaptations, Lewis R. Binford ..........0......ccccccceeie                   313

PART   IV    DISCUSSION

Comments by:
       RiChara BBL ebhiin           Geer sam et nce as A                                             343
       LADEN BIDCV OF CAN erate                      ha ae          ED,        ae io ee         Oe   346
       IMAOPEOVREIIECL ariiocsca vie cli Sits seco ote Ne Late RAE              aN                   350
       BOGOR IO ster ihn. ik seal pat eee ct                               et eae ee                 352
       David Ee ADE re Aen W533.                   Me ee              a            ee    ie eee      353
       AVACPO AELGPTts Geo        cee          Sool Stnsiete etn ter Seay ate eon   ES     ee        359
GONTREBUTORS san.atest feta ren arenes alt pase eae           eae tier te ee ee re     en a          363
TINIDEX are et ier oo aaehere Ma ainhaere eeu ail cera          SRN Gy         eine es Ae            365
                                                                          PART I




                                                          Archeological
                                              Theory and Method




   Archeology is neither history nor anthropology. As an autonomous disci-
   pline, it consists of a method and a set of specialized techniques for the
   gathering or “production” of cultural information (Taylor, 1948, p. 44).

      It has been said that archaeology, while providing data and generaliza-
   tions in such fields as history and general anthropology, lacks a systematic
   body of concepts and premises constituting archaeological theory. According
   to this view, the archaeologist must borrow his theoretical underpinning
   from the field of study his work happens to serve, or do without. Whether
   the latter alternative be an admissible one does not seem to be an arguable
   point. Acceptable field work can perhaps be done in a theoretical vacuum,
   but integration and interpretation without theory is inconceivable. . . . It
   seems to us that American archaeology stands in a particularly close and, so
   far as theory is concerned, dependent relationship to anthropology (Willey
   and Phillips, 1958, p. 1).

  These quotations voice a common          opinion regarding the degree to
which archeology can be said to make use of a body of theory which is
unique or even specific to itself. Taylor defines archeology as a method
and set of specialized techniques; Willey and Phillips accept this view, at
least in part, in stating that it is possible to do field work in a vacuum, but
they add that interpretation is dependent upon theory, in this case an-
thropological theory. In the papers that follow it will be argued that
scientific methods and techniques can be developed only when they are
relevant to certain aims and only with regard to the properties of the
empirical data utilized. A. C. Spaulding has stated:
                                       1
2                                          Archeological Theory and Method
    Archaeology can be defined minimally as the study of the interrelationships
    of form, temporal locus, and spatial locus exhibited by artifacts. In other
    words, archaeologists are always concerned with these interrelationships,
    whatever broader interests they may have, and these interrelationships are
    the special business of archaeology (1960, p. 439).
  Accepting Spaulding’s minimal definition of what archeology is, we can
go a step further and specify its aim as the explanation of the observed
interrelationships; in other words, as an explanation of the order we ob-
serve in the archeological record. Archeological theory consists of proposi-
tions and assumptions regarding the archeological record itself—its ori-
gins, its sources of variability, the determinants of differences and similar-
ities in the formal, spatial, and temporal characteristics of artifacts and
features and their interrelationships. It is in the context of this theory that
archeological methods and techniques are developed.
   Since artifacts are cultural data and since they once functioned as ele-
ments of a cultural system, many of the explanations we might offer for
observations made on the archeological record will refer to organizational
features of past cultural systems. On the other hand, the archeologist
might explain an observed pattern in his data by citing sampling error.
The former situation is no more justification for saying the archeologist is
a technician in the service of anthropology than is the latter for calling
him a technician in the service of probability statistics. The archeologist is
an anthropological scientist, but this does not imply that there is no body
of theory specific to his specialty. On the contrary, advances in archeolog-
ical theory are prerequisite to the achievement of broader anthropological
goals. It is through theoretical advances and sound arguments of rele-
vance that we can link our observations on the archeological record to
particular questions on the operation of past cultural systems.
   Archeology shares with other anthropological sciences the aim of ex-
plaining differences and similarities among cultural systems. We are,
therefore, concerned with cultural theory and processual arguments
which treat problems of the interrelationship of cultural (and any other
relevant class of )variables which have explanatory value.
   If archeological theory attempts to develop arguments of relevance for
archeological data to past conditions, then it should develop arguments
on the explanatory relevance of cultural and ecological variables to differ-
ences and similarities among cultural systems. Archeological anthropolo-
gists must try to advance both of these complementary areas. We might
be able to demonstrate the relevance of our observations to certain past
conditions, but if these conditions are irrelevant for measuring either
cultural change or variability, then our accomplishments would be (as
Deetz cautions) “sterile methodological virtuosity.” On the other hand,
advances in cultural theory which place crucial explanatory value on
variables not previously considered challenge the archeologist to develop
arguments of relevance so that he may make use of these advances. In
Archeological Theory and Method                                               3
such a case the hope would be that archeological data could be used in
testing hypotheses drawn from theories of general anthropological inter-
est. The ability of archeologists to maximize advances in culture theory
depends on the existence of a viable and progressive body of archeolog-
ical theory and method.
   There are five papers in the first portion of this book, and they are
arranged in a progression from more exclusively theoretical-methodologi-
cal discussions to specific consideration of archeological materials. In the
final paper of this first part, a particular cultural-historical period is dis-
cussed in terms of many of the points treated theoretically in the preced-
ing papers. It should be pointed out that there are disagreements and
incompatibilities in some of the archeological theory and method dis-
cussed in these papers. This volume is not a monolithic presentation of
any particular school of archeological thought; there are common interests
and many points of agreement among the authors, but there is also diver-
sity of opinion on several points. It is these points which we can expect to
be the focus of research interest in the coming years.


                                 References

SPAULDING, ALBERT C. 1960. The dimensions of archaeology. In Gertrude E.
   Dole and Robert L. Carneiro (Eds.), Essays in the science of culture: in
  honor of Leslie A. White. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.
TayLor, WALTER W. 1948. A study of archeology.       Memoir   no. 69, American
  Anthropologist, 50(3), Part 2.
W1L-tey, Gorpon R., and Partie Puriuirs. 1958. Method and theory in Amer-
   ican archaeology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
4   Ae   nese   ent
  ONE                                                      LEWIS   R. BINFORD




                                                          Archeological
                                                              Perspectives




 A book whose title proclaims something new immediately challenges the
 reader to verify the claim to novelty or innovation. The purpose of this
 paper is to justify this book’s title by making explicit what is new and,
 also, how familiar ideas and arguments gain a new significance when
 viewed in the perspective being developed.
    This paper does not attempt an exhaustive historical analysis of the
 field of archeology but is rather the selective treatment of several general
 areas of archeological concern put into historical perspective. It is hoped
 that this background will offer the reader a greater depth of field against
 which to view the substantive papers which follow.


                             The Aims of Archeology
    The most profitable inquiry [of archeology] is the search for the origin of
    epoch-making ideas in order to comprehend the history of civilization
    (Mason, 1893; p. 403).

va Archaeology, by etymology the study of beginnings, has historical reconstruc-
    tion for its objective (Kroeber, 1937, p. 163).

    These early statements summarize the generally accepted view on the
 aims of archeology.     Taylor (1948, pp. 26, 207) has thoroughly docu-
 mented the fact that reconstruction of culture history was widely ac-
 cepted as the end of archeological research. Since Taylor’s publication,
                                          5
6                                            Archeological Theory and Method
this aim has been reiterated frequently and continues to be stated in very
recent publications (Rouse, 1965, p. 2; Meggers, Evans,             and Estrada,
1965, p. 5; Willey, 1966, pp. 2-3; Deetz, 1967a, p. 3).
   If seeking origins and tracing the history of culture was one task of
archeology, some researchers considered a further aim to be the recon-
struction of the lifeways of the peoples responsible for the archeological
remains. Such an aim appears early in the literature—for example, in H. I.
Smith (1910) and Sollas (1924). Concern with the reconstruction of life-
ways of extinct peoples has been expressed by many, but probably the
most influential advocate for more attention toward this end has been
Taylor:
     The conjunctive approach . . . has as its primary goal the elucidation of
     cultural conjunctives, the associations and relationships, the “affinities,”
     within the manifestation under investigation. It aims at drawing the com-
     pletest possible picture of past human life in terms of its human and geo-
     graphic environment (1948, pp. 95—96).

   Most archeologists would agree that we should not lose sight of “the
Indian behind the artifact” (Braidwood, 1959, p. 79) and would accept as
‘a
major aim of archeology the reconstruction of lifeways.
 ~ While these aims of reconstructing culture history and lifeways cannot
be said to have been satisfactorily achieved, a few archeologists during
the 1930’s began to suggest aims reaching far beyond these:
    - Some day world culture history will be known as far as archaeological
      materials and human intelligence permit. Every possible element of culture
      will have been placed in time and space. The invention, diffusion, mutation
      and association of elements will have been determined. When taxonomy and
     history are thus complete, shall we cease our labors and hope that the future
     Darwin of Anthropology will interpret the great historical scheme that will
     have been erected? . . . Candor would seem to compel the admission that
     archaeology could be made much more pertinent to general cultural studies
     if we paused to take stock of its possibilities. Surely we can shed some light
     not only on the chronological and spatial arrangements and associations of
     elements, but on conditions underlying their origin, development, diffusion,
     acceptance and interaction with one another. These are problems of cultural
     process ... (Seward and Setzler, 1938, pp. 5-7).

  And one year earlier a Scandanavian archeologist also urged that his
colleagues take stock of where they have been and where they were
going:
     It appears that archaeology, in spite of its remarkable achievements, has got
     into a cul-de-sac. ... The whole subject consists merely of a comparison of
     forms and systematization. . . . Brilliant systematization, regarded as exact,
     has not led to and does not lead to an elucidation of the organic structure of
     the whole life of the period studied, to an understanding of social systems,
     of economic and social history. . . . Forms and types . . . have been regarded
     as much more real and alive than the society which created them and whole
L. R. Binford Archeological Perspectives       —                                fi
  needs determined these manifestations of life. . . . Have we reached a crisis
  where the procedure and aim of our science must be revised? (Tallgren,
  1937, pp. 154—55),

  Statements urging archeologists to concern themselves with problems
of process appeared with increasing frequency in the literature of the next
twenty years (Steward, 1942, p. 139; Bennett, 1943, p. 208; Childe, 1946,
p. 248; Clark, 1953a, 1953b; Barth, 1950; and especially Caldwell, 1959).
As recently as 1958 this concern with process was still being defined and
distinguished from other aims of archeology:
  So little work has been done in American archaeology on the explanatory
  level that it is difficult to find a name for it.... In the context of archae-
  ology, processual interpretation is the study of the nature of what is vaguely
  referred to as the culture-historical process. Practically speaking, it implies
  an attempt to discover regularities in the relationships given by the methods
  of culture-historical integration. . . . On this explanatory level of organiza-
  tion . . . we are no longer asking merely what but also how and even why
  (Willey and Phillips, 1958, pp. 5-6).

   Willey and Phillips’ statement about so little work having been done on
the explanatory level was made despite such efforts as Steward’s (1937)
investigation of settlement patterns which were later elaborated on in the
Viru Valley project. Willey himself had expressed great optimism about
the possibilities for “processual interpretation” as well as for the recon-
struction of cultural institutions (Willey, 1953, p. 1). Some of the other
efforts made between the late 1930’s and the late 1950’s toward gaining
an understanding of cultural process were White’s arguments on the role
of energy in the evolution of culture      (White,   1943, pp. 335-56), Stew-
ard’s “Cultural Causality and Law .. .” (1949), and Steward and Witt-
fogel’s study of irrigation (Steward et al., 1955).
   In his 1962 Presidential Address to the American Anthropological Asso-
ciation, Willey again commented on the lack of progress in gaining a
processual understanding of culture history:
  Certainly the answers to the . . . causal questions as to why the ancient
  American civilizations began and flourished as they did and when they did
  still elude us, and what I can offer. . . will do little more... than describe
  and compare certain situations and series of events (Willey, 1962, p. 1).

   There began to appear in the literature a general dampening of enthu-
siasm of those who some twenty years earlier had called for the archeolo-
gist to turn his attention to processual investigations. There was a similar
pessimism expressed in the writing of British scholars despite the work of
such authors as Childe (1936), Crawford (1953), and Clark (1951,
1953):
  We have lost the confidence of the nineteenth century, and are children of
  an age of doubt. . . . We must recognize that in archaeology . . . there are no
     8                                           Archeological Theory and Method
         facts other than those which are ... “observational data.” . . What we have
         at our disposal, as pretitorsmes:is the accidentally suite durable rem-
         nants of material culture, which we interpret as best we may and inevitably
         the peculiar quality of this evidence dictates the sort of information we can
         obtain from it (Piggott, 1965b, pp. 4—5).
        The linking together of the limits of archeological interpretation with
     the fragmentary nature of the archeological record is a phenomenon we
     examine in some detail later (see pp. 18—23), but the points to be made
     here are: (1) there was general acceptance of the three aims of archeol-
     ogy—reconstruction of culture history, reconstruction of lifeways, and the
     delineation of cultural process; and (2) there has been increasing despair
     over the feasibility of achieving the third aim.


               The Methods of Archeology—Traditional Approaches
     This section examines       the methods    traditionally used in attempts to
     achieve the aims of archeology. We shall deal with each of the aims sepa-
     rately, attempt to describe the methods employed, and analyze some of
     the problems underlying the application of method to problem.

     RECONSTRUCTING CULTURE HISTORY
     Reconstructing culture history consists of arranging cultural units in a
     way which accurately reveals their generic affinities. Archeologists have
     generally operated on the basis of the following two assumptions:
        1. The degree of genealogical affinity between two cultural units varies
     directly with the similarities they exhibit in generically related character-
     istics (for example, whole culture traits or complexes, design elements on
     artifacts, etc.).
        2. The degree of genealogical:affinity between two cultural units can
     be measured by the ratio of shared generically related characteristics to
     the number of such traits not shared.
       It is evident that each culture trait tabulated in obtaining the ratio
     which measures degree of genealogical affinity must be evaluated to de-
     termine whether the similarity between traits arose as afunction of lineal
     transmission, diffusion between cultural units, or ‘independent         develop-
     ment within each cultural unit. It is here that a basic, unsolved problem
     lies: How can archeologists distinguish between homologous and analo-
ot



     gous cultural similarities?
       As early as 1896 E. B. Tylor concerned himself with this problem and
     suggested a procedure for analyzing observed similarities by
            . division into constituent elements showing so little connection with one
         another that they may be reasonably treated as independent. The more
         numerous such elements, the more improbable the recurrence of the combin-
         ation (1896, p. 66)

     In other words, Tylor suggests that one might calculate the probabilities
     L. R. Binford Archeological Perspectives                                       9
     of independent occurrences      of identical combinations     among    a set of
     independently varying characteristics.
        Other workers worrying over the same problem offered similar sugges-
     tions. For example, Graebner (1911) cites two criteria for evaluating
                                                                                        “
     cultural similarities : the criterion of form, and that of «quantitative coinci-
     denc   For e.
                 Graebner the criterion of form consisted of the degree to
     which there was a coincidence of characteristics which did not necessarily
     stem from “the nature of the objects compared”; the criterion of coinci-
     dence lay in determining whether or not the trait or item under study
     occurred as an isolated similarity or as an element of a greater cultural
     complex. On the basis of the criterion of form, this greater cultural com-
     plex could not reasonably be viewed as having arisen independently.
        Robert Lowie pointed out some of the shortcomings of Graebner’s rea-
     soning: “The comparison of form can never do more than establish the
     identity of forms; that such identity is to be explained by genetic relation-
     ship is an hypothesis ...     (1912, p. 28). He also noted that Graebner’s
     quantitative criterion was not probabalistic as was Tylor’s but was simply
     the criterion of form raised to a higher level of abstraction and was
     therefore not an independent criterion for judgment (1912, p. 27).
        A recent evaluation of the applications of Tylor’s probability method
     notes that probability calculations of concrete cases have seldom been
     performed accurately, and in many instances the apparent accuracy of
     probability reasoning has been a semantic rather then a methodological
     addition to the anthropological literature (Erasmus, 1950, pp. 374—75).
     A more basic flaw in Tylor’s procedure is the assumption of a worker's
     ability‘to recognize constitutent elements which are in fact independent
     variables. This problem has been discussed (Erasmus, 1950, pp. 375-87;
     Rands and Riley, 1958; and indirectly by Sackett, 1966), but no methods
     have been advanced for the solution of the problem other than the inten-
     sive analysis of the distribution and patterns of covariation demonstrable
     among selected characteristics. Such studies have rarely been conducted
     by archeologists and certainly have never been a routine analytical com-
     ponent of the works of archeologists proposing historical reconstructions. \\
                                                                                  \
     This particular problem has been the almost exclusive concern of ethnog-
     raphers, and is one of which archeologists involved in reconstructions of /
 ‘culture history have seemed deliciously unaware.
      Lowie (1912, pp. 24—27) pointed out another problem in method—
   that while some workers have attempted to identify similarities which
 a
   arose from generic connections between cultural units, no one had con- »
   sidered the means for evaluating the alternative of independent develop-
i,
   ment, except by lack of ability to demonstrate historical connections.
     Without first gaining some understanding of laws of cultural develop-
     ment, such independent means for evaluating particular cases will con-
     tinue to be lacking.
       Despite these unsolved problems of method and our consequent inabil-
10                                            Archeological Theory and Method
ity to distinguish accurately between analogies and homologies, archeolo-
gists have continued to formulate reconstructions using the procedures set
forth by Tylor and Graebner          on a common       sense   level, often adding
distributional criteria. The principles of interpretation which have guided
archeologists’ reconstructions of culture history can be summarized as
follows:
     1. The probability of diffusion having taken place increases directly
with the degree of formal resemblance between items and traits (Jen-
nings, 1957, p. 265; Linton, 1936, p. 372) and with the degree of compo-
nential complexity of the traits compared (Linton, 1936, p. 372).
     2. The probability of diffusion having taken place decreases with the
amount of temporal and spatial separation between the traits being com-
pared (Linton, 1936, p. 370; for relevant discussions see Wallis, 1928;
Meggers, Evans, and Estrada, 1965, pp. 157—78; and Rowe, 1966, pp.
334—37).

Such guides to interpretation ignore the inherent unsolved problems of
method and epistemology, and most taxonomic schemes proposed as aids
to historical reconstruction      also fail to cope   with them.     For example,
McKern in his discussion of the Midwestern Taxonomic System made it
quite clear that classifications are to be made with respect to a list of
culture traits undifferentiated as to the likelihood of their representing
analogies or homologies:
     All the traits characteristic of a given culture manifestation comprise the
     culture complex for that manifestation. . . . In any comparison of this
     manifestation with another, made for purposes of classification, certain traits
     may be demonstrated as present in both complexes, and these linked traits
     [serve] to show cultural similarity between the two culture variants (1939,
     p- 205).

Numerous cases of the application of the Midwestern Taxonomic System
(Smith, 1940; Cole and Deuel, 1937, pp. 207-219; Griffin, 1943; Morse,
1963) demonstrate that there was no attempt made to distinguish be-
tween analogous and homologous traits. (It should be pointed out, how-
ever, that the McKern system is internally consistent and logical; most of
the problems with it have arisen from those who have misused it.) Other
schemes have also employed summations of observations whose relevance
to discussions of cultural phylogeny and contact might well be questioned
(Gladwin, 1934; Colton, 1939). Rouse (1955) recognized the difference
between classification based on gross measures of similarity and “genetic
correlations”; he went on to suggest that for the purpose of historical
reconstruction

        . it would seem advisable first to eliminate all those resemblances which
 L. R. Binford Archeological Perspectives                                      ll
   do not appear to have been accompanied by contact. Next, one must decide
   which of the remaining resemblances are due to genetic connection rather
   than to some other factor such as adaptationto a similar environment or
   attainment of the same level of cultural development. Only then will it be
   saféto choose from among two various possible forms of genetic connec-
   tion... (1955, p. 719).

 However, Rouse offers no guidelines for deciding which traits are generi-
 cally related and which ones might exhibit similarity from other causes. In
 short, Rouse’s statement shows an awareness of many of the shortcomings
 of taxonomic schemes but offers no solution to one of the major underly-
 ing methodological problems.
    It is argued here that the accomplishment of the reconstruction of
 culture history is predicated upon an overhaul of method and theory, that
 traditional methodology and analytical procedures are inadequate for the
 successful achievement of the stated aims of the field. Given our current
 sophistication in dating techniques, we can fairly accurately place arche-
 ological remains in their proper chronological relationships to one an-
 other. We can inventory the remains and discuss additions, deletions, and
 “hybridizations” in the inventories of sites through time. We can also
 formulate classifications of assemblages on the basis of summary meas-
 ures of formal similarities between recovered items (see Ford, 1954); we
 can also measure likenesses by comparing the total composition of the
 sample of recovered materials (see Bordes, 1953). Arguments can then be
 formulated about the probability of one such taxon being the cultural
 ancestor, descendant, or collateral relative of another taxon (see Hodson
 et al., 1966; Doran and Hodson, 1966), or whether another unit might be
 more appropriately considered (see Warren, 1967, pp. 168—85; Sanger,
 1967, pp.    186-97;   Aikens,   1967, pp. 198-209;   and Schlesier,   1967, pp.
 210-22).
   These procedures, however, do not help to achieve the stated aims Of
 archeology. An accurate and meaningful history is more than a genera-
 lized narrative of the changes in composition of the archeological record
 through time (see, for example, Griffin, 1967); it is also more than a
reconstruction from that record using interpretive principles such as those
 discussed above which can be shown to have inherent flaws. If we hope
 to achieve the aim of reconstructing culture history, we must develop
 means for using archeological remains as a record of the past and as a
 source of data for testing propositions which we set forth regarding past
 events, rather than as a record we can read according to a set of a priori
 rules or interpretive principles whose application allow the skilled inter-
 preter to “reconstruct” the past. We know much toolittle about_both
 archeological data and processes ofcultural development.to. make “read-
 ing the archeological record” anything but a shallow and _suspicious
ee      nee        el
  12                                      Archeological Theory and Method
  pastime. What we seek to investigate is cultural process, and only with an
  understanding of such processes can we reconstruct the events: which
  form the context in which the archeological record was produced.~
  RECONSTRUCTING PAST LIFEWAYS
  The reconstruction of the lifeways of extinct peoples is the second aim of
  archeology which we will examine in order to evaluate traditional meth-
  ods. The standard operating procedure for achieving this aim is set forth
  in the following quotation:
     Everyone is aware of the fact that is is impossible to explain and to give
     absolute meaning to all the discoveries which are made while digging an-
     cient villages. All we can do is to interpret what we find in the light of our
     knowledge    of modern   . . . [peoples].   . . . In this way,   it is possible to
     moderate our conjectures, and piece them together by means of reasonable
     imagination. Thus, the cold, unrelated and often dull archaeological facts are
     vivified and the reader may have some sort of reconstruction in his mind’s
     eye of what [past peoples] . . . were like and how they lived. (Martin and
     Rinaldo, 1939, p. 457. [This statement is one of the first in the literature of
     American archeology that deals with the reconstruction of lifeways. Paul
     Martin was in the avant-garde of archeological thought in the 1930’s, and
     he still is today. This quotation should in no way be considered a statement
     of his current views, which have grown and changed remarkably in thirty
     years—Eps.]).
   Most archeologists would agree with this statement (see Willey, 1966, p.
   3; Chang, 1967a, p. 109; Ascher, 1961). Analogytoliving peoplesh     has
  _been the traditional answer to the question of how one goes.; aboutrecon-
“ structing lifeways. (see Randall-Maclver, 1932, pp. 6—7; Hawkes, 1954,
  pp.
   yp. 157—58; Vogt, 1956, p. 175; Piggott, 1965b, p. 12; Rouse, 1965, p. 10;
  Willey, 1966, pp. 3-4). The major controversy has concerned the appro-
  priateness of a given ethnographically known group or set of conditions as
  a model for the lifeways of the groups under archeological study (see
  Lowie, 1940, pp. 369—70; Slotkin, 1952; S. R. Binford, 1968).
     Given the method of analogy to living peoples, appeals have been
  made by archeologists to explore the record in search of units which can
  be meaningfully compared in analogies to living peoples. One obvious
  plea has been for archeologists to excavate the remains of entire commun-
   ities, to concern themselves with the comparative study of settlement, as
  well as with the internal organization of sites. Taylor (1948), in appealing
  for archeologists to study in detail the contextual relationships among the
  archeological remains, asked for a search for order demonstrable among
  the elements in an archeological deposit. Willey (1953, 1956), Chang
  (1958, 1967a), and Trigger (1967) among others, have stressed the desir-
  ability of the investigation of settlement patterns, since these are observ-
   able among living peoples and are said to be informative about social
  organization.
L. R. Binford Archeological Perspectives                                                13
   Pleistocene archeologists also are increasingly viewing sites as the re-
mains of activities conducted by social units; this kind of data collection is
 stressed in the search for living floors and in attempts at fairly complete
excavation of sites.
   The living places of Pleistocene peoples are capable of yielding the same
   kind of evidence as to the behavior and ecology as do those of much later
   times when the appropriate techniques of exposure and excavation are ap-
   plied to their recovery. . . . Such field studies . . . of . . . Paleolithic sites [are]
   infinitely more rewarding and significant, as can be . . . appreciated from
   sete .. . relating to living floor excavation (Clark and Howell, 1966, pp.
   VV)    «


   Another aspect of data collection which has been dealt with in recent
 years is the problem of sampling. There has been frequent discussion of
 the use of sampling techniques which are designed to increase the prob-
 ability that archeological samples taken are in fact representative of what
 remains from the past (see L. R. Binford, 1964; Rootenburg, 1964).
 .. Along with these refinements in data collection, there has been a grow-
 ing interest in the study of living peoples by archeologists (Crawford,
 1953; Kleindienst and Watson, 1956; Thompson, 1958; Ascher, 1962; Wat-
 son, 1966). Such studies have as their aim the delineation of behavioral
 correlates for material items (Chang, 1958; Robbins, 1966), and the pur-
 pose of archeologists undertaking such research has been to maximize
 their interpretive powers by increasing their knowledge of living peoples
 —that is, to make more secure the analogies they draw between lifeways
 of peoples known archeologically and those known ethnographically.
    While we applaud all attempts to increase the reliability of data col-
 lected archeologically, and while we certainly favor a firmer basis for
 determining the behavioral correlates of material culture, both refine-
 ments in data collection and increased ethnographic knowledge cannot by
 themselves increase our knowledge of the past. Facts do not speak for
 themselves, and even if we had complete living floors from the beginning
 of the Pleistocene through the rise of urban centers, such data would tell
 us nothing about cultural process or past lifeways unless we asked the
 appropriate questions. We can infinitely expand our knowledge of the
 lifeways of living peoples, yet we cannot reconstruct the lifeways of ex-
 tinct peoples unless we employ a more sophisticated methodology. Fitting
 archeological remains into ethnographically known patterns of life adds
 nothing to our knowledge of the past. In fact, such a procedure denies to
archeology the possibility of dealing with forms of cultural adaptation
 outside the range of variation known ethnographically (see S. R. Binford,
 1968). In view of the high probability that cultural forms existed in the
 past for which we have no ethnographic examples, reconstruction of the
 lifeways of such sociocultural systems demands the rigorous testing of
 deductively drawn hypotheses against independent sets of data.
           14                                           Archeological Theory and Method
                This perspective is in marked contrast to the epistemological basis of
          traditional method, whose implications can readily be seen in a recent
          statement:
                As to analogy, archaeology as a whole is analogy, for to claim any knowl-
                edge other than the objects themselves is to assume knowledge of patterns in
                culture and history and to apply these patterns to the facts (Chang, 1967a,
                p. 109).
           I have criticized this view elsewhere (L. R. Binford, 1967a, 1967b, 1968)
           and would state here that so long as we insist that our knowledge of the
          "past i8 limited”by our Knowledge of the present, we are painting ourselves
 wv
           into a methodological corner, The archeologist must makt use of his “data
           as documents of past conditions, proceed to formulate propositions about
           the past, and devise means for testing them against archeological remains.
           It is the testing of hypotheses that makes our knowledge of the past more
           certain, and this is admittedly a difficult business. Archeology as part of
           anthropology and anthropology as a social science are often guilty of the
           charges made against them by the “harder” scientists:
                The most important feature about a hypothesis is that is is a mere trial idea
                   . [and] until it has been tested, it should not be confused with a law....
                The difficulty of testing hypotheses in the social sciences has led to an
                abbreviation of the scientific method in which this step is simply omitted.
                Plausible hypotheses are merely set down as facts without further ado (Wil-
                son, 1952, pp. 26—27).

           Traditional archeological methodology has not developed this final link in
           scientific procedure. For this reason, reconstruction of lifeways has re-
           mained an art which could be evaluated only by judging the competence
           and honesty of the person offering the reconstruction (Thompson, 1956).

           THE STUDY OF CULTURAL PROCESS
           Different _authors_ have referred to different phenomena         iin their Soe

          relationships: (causes oa effects )operative among sociocultural soe
         ‘to those processes responsible for changes observed in the organization
      |
      Eh “and/or content of the systems, or to.the integration. of new formal com-
      \
      }
      J
           ponents into the system. The term gultural fprocess ,‘Jhas been used“by
           others to refer to_patterns or configurations iin the temporal o
                                                                          or,spatial
           distributions ‘of the archeological materials themselves (see Wauchope,
           1966, pp. 19-38). The first set of meanings—that of dynamic relation-
age
           ships operative among cultural systems—is the one used by this author
            and by the other authors in this volume.
              Let us examine the methods and procedures traditionally followed in
           seeking an understanding of culture process, regardless of the meaning
           given to the term. Most often, the procedure has been to equate process
  L. R. Binford Archeological Perspectives                                   15
  to a transformational sequence of forms, normally summarized in a stage
  classification. A second, or sometimes an alternative, procedure has been
  to pursue a comparative study of temporal and spatial changes of arche-
  ologically known cultural forms, to note certain trends or regularities.
  These trends are then stated as empirical generalizations which, in turn,
  are taken as statements regarding culture process (see Steward, 1949;
   Braidwood, 1952, 1960; Braidwood and Reed, 1957; Willey and Phillips,
   1958; Willey,   1960; Beardsley et al., 1956). The criticism to be offered
  here is that any stage classification is simply an ordinal scale for measure-
  ment. The application of such a scale to innumerable empirical cases, or
  even the ultimate systematization of all archeological materials, can never
  provide us with an understanding of the processes operative in the past
   which   resulted in the stadial sequence.    An empirical. generalization
                                                                           of
  data—no matter how accurate it is—is never an explanation for the data.
  The ordering of forms of life, the end-products of evolution, by Linnaeus,
  did not describe or define the process of organic evolution.
       teward   has suggested that the comparative study of distribution of
  cultural forms in space and through time will reveal certain trends, regu-
  larities, or patterns for which historical or generic interpretations are
  appropriate; he suggests further that these trends or patterns reflect cul-
   tural process   (Steward,   1949, p. 3). This suggestion is, however, predi-
  cated on our ability to discriminate between cultural analogies and ho-
  mologies. As pointed out above (pp. 8—11), methods for such discrim-
  ination have yet to be developed. Even if we were capable of making this
  distinction, the demonstration of empirical “regularities” simply docu-
   ments similarities which need to be explained; it is to be hoped that the
  explanations offered would deal with cultural or ecological processes op-
  erative in the past.
     Rouse (1964, 1965) has offered archeologists an “out,” and his ideas
  undoubtedly have great appeal for those who would like to study cultural
  processes but lack the methods for doing so. He states that since we
  recognize a difference between the process of evolution and the products
   of evolution, that the study of the process should properly be the domain
   of ethnologists, “who are able to observe change as it is still going on”
   (Rouse, 1964, p. 465). He suggests further that the archeologists might
  more appropriately study the products of evolution in systematic terms—
   by descriptive taxonomic     and distributional schemes. In this view, pro-
  cesses of cause and effect cannot legitimately be studied by archeologists,
  since they are not part of the archeological record, cannot be dug up, and
 are not available for direct observation.
    Others, working within the traditional framework, have stated that
                                                                                  Pl




 archeologists can gain understanding of cultural process, and that the
 means for doing so is to interpret data from the past in the light of our
Ta

 understanding of the present. An example of this approach can be seen in
16                                    Archeological Theory and Method
what Willey and Phillips term “developmental interpretation’—a process
which allows the archeologist to “abstract . . . certain characteristics that
seem to have significance from the point of view of the general develop-
ment of ... culture” (Willey and Phillips, 1958, p. 77).
  However, the decisions as to which characteristics are significant in the
general development of culture do not derive from the data themselves;
they are given meaning by the ideas we hold about the processes of
cultural development. If we simply employ these ideas for interpreting
archeological remains, then no new information can be gained from the
archeological record about processes which operated in the past. In short,
traditional archeological studies have often recognized the desirability of
investigating process, but methods for successfully conducting such
studies have not been developed. It is toward this end that much of the
thought and work of the authors in this volume have been directed.


        Archeological Theory and Method—New Perspectives
We have offered a brief review of the methods commonly employed for
achieving the stated aims of archeology. In this section we hope to com-
pare and contrast some aspects of traditional method and theory with
very recent developments in the field which are substantively illustrated
in this book. This discussion of theory and method will be conducted
under several problem headings.

INDUCTION   AND DEDUCTION

One striking feature of traditional archeological method, regardless of the
aims of the research, has been the lack of any rigorous means of testing,
and thereby gaining confidence in, ropositions about the past. State-
ments about the historical, functional, or processual significance of ob-
served characteristics of the archeological record have been evaluated by
two criteria:   (1) the degree to which our knowledge of contemporary
peoples might justifiably be projected back to extinct sociocultural sys-
tems, and (2) the degree to which we might have confidence in the
professional competence and intellectual aan of the archeologist ad-
                                                                     rate




cedure, and the archeological record is viewed as aa body ofae
from which one makes inductive inferences about the past. Such infer-
ences are to be guided by our knowledge of contemporary peoples and
also by certain principles, such as mechanical principles which govern the
fracture of flint. The application of ethnographic knowledge and of guid-
ing principles are the traditional means for increasing confidence in our
inferential generalizations about the past.

  Inference is the key or the methodological pivot of archaeology, for it is only
  L. R. Binford Archeological Perspectives                                             17
     through inference that inanimate objects are reassembled into the milieu of
     life. Inferences are drawn from analogies. . . (Willey, 1966, p. 3).

     At the inferential level, the archaeologist is at last providing the flesh for the
     bare bones of his data, and, if done: with care and imagination, such a
     procedure makes possible the delineation and ultimate understanding of past
     cultures (Deetz, 1967a, p. 11).

    The changes in archeology which are documented in this book are more
  than simply new methods and new theories; the changes consist of theo-
  ries and methods developed in the context of a new epistemological per-
  spective on such basic issues as the appropriate scientific procedures to be
  followed in investigating the past. In this perspective, a central point to
  be made concerns the role of induction in science:

     There can be no general rules of induction; the demand for them rests on a
     confusion of logical and psychological issues. . . . What determines the
     soundness of a hypothesis is not the way it is arrived at (it may have been
     suggested by a dream or a hallucination), but the way it stands up when
     tested,   ie., when   confronted   with   relevant   observational   data   (Hempel,
     1965, p. 6).
  In stressing induction and the drawing of sound inferences, then, the
  stress falls on the psychological issue, as pointed out by Hempel, of how
  to make meaningful statements about archeological remains and what
  they represent from the past. What is argued     here is that thegeneration
  of inferences regarding the past should not      be the end-product of the
  archeologist’s work. While an awareness of as great a range of variability
~ im sociocultural phenomena        as possible and the citation of analogy to
  living peoples are not belittled here, the main point of our argument is
  that independent means of testing propositions about the past must be
  developed. Such means must be considerably more rigorous than evalu-
  ating an author’s propositions by judging his professional competence or
  intellectual honesty.
     We assert that our knowledge of the past is more than a projection of
  our ethnographic understanding. The accuracy of our knowledge of the
  past can be measured; it is this assertion which most sharply differentiates
  the new perspective from more traditional approaches. The yardstick of
  measurement is the degree to which propositions about the past can be —
  confirmed or refuted through hypothesis testing—not by passing judg- —
  ment on the personal qualifications of the person putting forth the propo-
(met   on ie ‘role of ethnographic training for archeologists, the use of -
 analogy, and the use of imagination and conjecture are all fully acknow-
 ledged. However, once a proposition has been advanced—no matter by
  what means it was reached—the next task is to deduce a series of testable
  hypotheses which, if verified against independent empirical data, would
  tend to verify the proposition.
18                                             Archeological Theory and Method
     The shift to a consciously deductive philosophy, with the attendant
emphasis
       on the verifi cation of ‘propositions through hypothesis testing,
has far-“reaching consequences..for..archeology. As an example of such
consequences I will discuss briefly two topics commonly treated in pres-
entations on archeological theory and method: the limitations of the arch-
eological record, and the appropriate units of archeological observation.

LIMITATIONS     OF THE   ARCHEOLOGICAL    RECORD

The arguments on this topic generally begin by citing the fact that much
of the material content of an ongoing sociocultural system is lost through
decay or the action of other physical agents (such as fire) before the time
the archeologist can make his observations. It is then asserted that our
knowledge of the past is limited to those classes of data which survive and
that, depending on variations in past behavior, our knowledge of the
operation of the sociocultural system in question may be enormously
distorted (see, for example, Piggott, 1965a, p. 8). Such arguments also
frequently take the form of asserting that since we can never know what
is missing |
           ‘from the archeological record, we can never correctly evaluate
whatispresent. How car we know that an empirical generalization about
archédlogical data is accurate, since there may be pertinent and noncon-
forming evidence that has been lost? (See M. A. Smith, 1955, p. 6;
Heider, 1967, p- 62; Deetz, 1968.)
  An excellent example of reasoning of this kind is found in a recent
discussion of the proper historical interpretation of distributions of Afri-
can art styles:
     It is a curious fact that, with certain exceptions in Tanganyika, little rock art
     in the form of either painting or engraving, has been found north of the
     Zambezi. . . . It would appear that there is an almost complete break
     between the painting and engraving traditions of southern Africa and those
     of the Sahara. If this is so it makes the similarity between the two groups .
     appear as a striking example of parallel development. This would be a very
     hard case to prove . . . in view of the practice in many parts of the world of
     painting and engraving on such perishable substances as wood. . . . Indeed
     there is no reason to suppose that Late Stone Age man in East Africa and in
     the Congo did not paint or draw or engrave, simply because his work has
     not been preserved. . . (Allchin, 1966, p. 41).

Allchin’s dilemma arises directly and inevitably from the fact that she is
offering an empirical generalization directly from the data and makes use
of an a priori principle for interpreting the historical-cultural significance
of the generalization. In this case the unstated principle would be that an
interrupted distribution signifies a cultural boundary and independence
for the two traditions represented. If one accepts the interpretive princi-
ple, the only possible way of invalidating the interpretation is to question
the validity of the empirical generalization itself (namely, that there is a
L. R. Binford Archeological Perspectives   —                           19
geographical break between the painting and engraving traditions of
southern Africa and those of the Sahara). The validity of the generaliza-
tion can be destroyed by citing an empirical case to the contrary (an
instance of painting or engraving in the “empty zone”). The generaliza-
tion can also be challenged, and this is what Allchin does, by suggesting
the possibility of such an empirical case to the contrary.
   The possibility of an undocumented case to the contrary normally takes
the form used in Allchin’s argument—speculation about conditions under
which data might be destroyed, overlooked, or “hidden.” The validity of
all generalizations may be questioned if this procedure is followed, since
the possibilities for speculation about “hidden data” are infinite. Further,
the validity of the interpretive principle itself can never be independently
tested, since its accuracy is tested only by reference to the empirical
generalization it is said to cover. Extension of the generalization to cover
new cases simply provides more instances for which the principle might
be relevant; it in no way tests the principle itself. Cases to the contrary of
the generalization only show that the data generalized are inappropriate
to the principle employed; they in no way serve to test the principle itself.
This is one of the crucially weak points of a purely inductive methodol-
ogy. Thus, Allchin’s principle implicitly used for interpretation of her
generalization cannot, with the methodology employed, be validated or
refuted, and the generalization itself can always be questioned by the
possibility of citing hidden data or the incompleteness of the archeolog-
ical record.
   The procedure we would advocate as a way out of Allchin’s dilemma
would be as follows:
Observations:
   1. There is a geographical break in the archeological distribution of
      rock paintings and engravings between southern Africa and the
      Sahara.
   2. The style of paintings and engravings from the two areas are very
      similar.
Proposition:
  The geographic break is the result of there having been two independ-
   ent cultural traditions in the respective areas.
Deduction:
   Therefore, the similarity in form of painting and engraving is the re-
   sult of parallel development.
Prediction:
  We would expect a similar break in the distribution of stylistic at-
   tributes of other items—for example, bead forms, decoration on bone
  implements, projectile point forms, etc.
Bridging Arguments:
  Here we would attempt to establish the relevance of some classes of
20                                       Archeological Theory and Method
     archeological data to our deduction and prediction. We would try to
   establish that certain formal characteristics of artifacts, other than
   rock paintings and engravings, were stylistic and would therefore vary
   as a function of tradition.
Hypothesis:
   The distribution of the data whose relevance has been argued will
   exhibit interrupted distributions between southern Africa and the
   Sahara.
   If the hypothesis were confirmed, then arguments about hidden data
would be irrelevant since the existence of cultural boundaries would have
been established by independent data. If the hypothesis were refuted,
arguments of hidden data, while possibly relevant to the original general-
ization, would in no way place limits on our ability to gain knowledge of
cultural boundaries from the archeological record.
   High-probability statements covering a broad range of phenomena are
the aim of science, not empirical generalizations which can be destroyed
by the citation of a single empirical case to the contrary. The endless
search for data in harmony with empirical generalizations is a wasteful
procedure at best, and the data can never serve to validate the generaliza-
tion. Propositions can be evaluated by deducing hypotheses which must
be tested against independent data. The argument of hidden data can
always be made about generalizations, but it is significant only insofar as
it prompts testing the validity of propositions made regarding the signifi-
cance of the generalization. The citation of possible hidden data has no
inherent value as a statement of limitation of our knowledge of the past,
nor it is applicable to the truth or falsity of propositions. Confidence in
any given proposition can be evaluated only with respect to the history of
hypothesis formulation and with: testing relevant to that proposition.
   Another common argument on the limitations of the archeological »,
record asserts that the reliability of conclusions reached by an archeolo-
gist varies directly with the degree to which the subject is removed from
discussions of artifacts themselves. (see MacWhite, 1956, pp. 4-6;
Hawkes, 1954, p. 161; M. A. Smith, 1955, pp. 3—4; Piggott, 1965a, pp.
10-11).
     Artifacts and the study of artifacts—including typologies—are placed at the
     lowest level, and historic interpretations based upon such studies are consid-
     ered to be of the greatest reliability. Moving into the socio-cultural system is
     moving up the levels of abstraction with increased use of inferences, and
     moving down the ladder of reliability. . . . Those who want to make infer-
     ences and to step beyond the limitations of archaeological remains can do so
     and engage in the fancy game of socio-cultural reconstruction (Chang,
     1967a, pp. 12-13).
A frequent way of stating this argument is to propose a formal ladder of
reliability:
    L. R. Binford Archeological Perspectives                                           21
        1. To infer from the archaeological phenomena to the techniques producing
        them I take to be relatively easy... .
        2. To infer to the subsistence-economies of the human groups concerned is
        fairly easy. ...
        3. To infer to the socio/political institutions of the groups, however, is
    _   considerably harder.
/       4. To infer to the religious institutions and spiritual life . . . is the hardest
        inference of all (Hawkes, 1954, pp. 161-62).

       These statements are predicated upon two major premises: first, that
    the archeological record is incomplete, that many items of the material
    culture have been lost through decay, destruction, etc.; second, that the
    archeological record is lacking in all the non-material             features of the
    sociocultural system under study. The conclusion is then drawn that the
    reliability of our interpretations will vary directly with the degree to
    which we can justify the acceptance of a partial record as representative
    of the total material culture, and also with the degree to which we can
    believe that the non-material components of any sociocultural system are
    reflected in the imperfectly preserved material items.
       This reasoning is functionally linked to a methodology that limits the
    archeologist to generalizing about the “facts” he uncovers. Since preserva-
    tion is always imperfect, inferences from the facts of material culture to
    statements about the non-material culture move us away from the pri-
    mary data and thus diminish the reliability of our statements.
      There has been a wide range of opinion expressed on this latter point— 2.
    the degree to which non-material aspects of culture can be inferred from \
    material facts; the ultraconservative range of this spectrum can be seen in y
    the following statement:

        Since historical events and essential social divisions of prehistoric peoples
        don’t find an adequate expression in material remains, it cannot be right to
        try to arrive at a knowledge of them through archaeological interpretation
         (M. A. Smith, 1955, p. 7).
       Most of the authors in this volume would take strong exception to this
    statement. In the first place, theargument that archeologists must limit
    their knowledge to features of material culture is open to serious question;
    and second, the dichotomy between material and non-material aspects of
    culture itself and the relevance of this dichotomy for a proposed hierarchy
    of reliability have also been the subject of critical discussion (Service,
    1964; L. R. Binford, 1962, 1965). It is virtually impossible to imagine that
    any given cultural item functionedin a sociocultural system independ-
    ently of the operation of “non-material” variables. Every item has its
    history within a sociocultural system—its phases of procurement of raw
    material, manufacture, use, and final discarding (see Deetz, this volume).
                                                   irical prop
    There iis every reason to_expect that the empirical                      ifacts
                                                            properties of artifacts
22                                       Archeological Theory and Method
and their arrangement in the archeological record will exhibit attributes
which can inform on different phases of the artifact’s life history.
   Many different determinants which were operative in the past might be
cited as proper explanatory variables for archeologically recovered items.
For example, pottery vessels manufactured in two different communities
for use in identical tasks may vary significantly in form, depending on
local habits of ceramic manufacture and on local design and decorative
concepts. On the other hand, different forms of vessels made for different
uses (for example, cooking vs. storage) might be produced with the same
techniques and have similar decorative elements. In this latter case, the
formal properties of the vessels relating to use would vary independently
of formal properties relating to local ceramic techniques. It is conceivable
that many other independently varying classes of attributes in combina-
tion might characterize the final form of any given class of item. Each
kind of independently varying attribute might be relevant to a different
set of determinants and would thus require independent explanation for
their form and distribution in the archeological record. Each such inde-
pendent explanation would, upon verification, inform us about the opera-
tion of different variables in the cultural system under study. It is highly
improbable that the multiple, independent      variables which determined
the form of any item or the distribution of items should be restricted to
only one component of a cultural system. This means that data relevant to
most, if not all, the components of past sociocultural system are pre-
served iin the archeological record (L. R. Binford, 1962, pp. 218—19).
   Our task, then, is to devise means for extracting this information from
our data, and this demands more than making summary generalizations
about items of material culture. There is no reason to expect that our
explanations of the archeological record should necessarily refer to the
same order of phenomena as that being explained. If this is so, it follows
that we cannot be restricted to the knowledge of “material culture”:
rather, to explain our observations from the archeological record, we must
deal with the full range of determinants which operate within any socio-
cultural system, extant or extinct.
_ There has been as yet no attempt to assess the limitations of the arche-
ological record for yielding different kinds of information; nor does there
seem to be the means of accurately determining these limits short of total
knowledge of all the systematic relationships which characterized past
cultural systems. Thus, present discussions of limitations of reliability are
inappropriate and are based on speculation. And it is speculation which
the more conservative exponents of such arguments have sought to
avoid!
   The position being taken here is that different kinds of phenomena are
never remote; they are either accessible or they are not. “Non-material”
aspects of culture are accessible in direct measure with the testability of
propositions being advanced about them. Propositions concerning any
L. R. Binford Archeological Perspectives                                            23
realm of culture—technology,        social organization,    psychology,    philoso-
phy, etc.—for which arguments of relevance and empirically testable hy-
potheses can be offered are as sound as the history of hypothesis confir-
mation. The practical limitations on our knowledge of the past are not
inherent in the nature of the archeological record; the limitations lie in
our methodological naiveté, in our lack of development for principles
determining the relevance of archeological remains to propositions regard-
ing processes and events of the past.

UNITS   OF OBSERVATION   AND   UNITS OF RELEVANCE:    A BASIS   FOR ANALYSIS

The shift to a rigorous hypothetico-deductive method with the goal of
explanation implies changes also in our perception and use of the archeol-
ogical record. Archeologists have normally accepted certain observational
units—such as the item, the industry, or the assemblage—as the approp-
riate units for comparative investigation. Such investigation generally
proceeds by breaking down archeological remains into categories based
on raw materials: bone, stone, ceramics, basketry, etc. Or, in other cases,
the investigator may use functional classes, such as projectile points,
knives, axes, etc. Whatever the breakdown used, such analysis serves only
to clarify information already available; it cannot increase our knowledge.
After his initial comparative analysis, the archeologist may offer descrip-
tive generalizations regarding his analytical categories; he may also offer
some kind of synthetic statement, assigning categories to proposed events
which presumably were the context in which the materials in question
were produced. The end-product of this kind of analysis is normally com-
parison, either by verbal generalizations     or summary        statistics, among    a
series of sites in order to evaluate differences and similarities which are
then used to reconstruct culture history or formulate statements about
culture process.
   One of the assumptions underlying such a procedure is that the analyti-
cal categories used are adequate and useful components of a nominal
scale for measuring cultural differences and similarities. By definition the
categories of a nominal scale are mutually exclusive and presumably part
of an exhaustive scale which can accomodate all archeological observa-
tions (see Siegel, 1956, pp. 21—30;      Blalock,    1960, pp. 11—16, for a dis-
cussion of scales for measurement). One other linked assumption is that
information tabulated by such a scale is additive (this is well documented
in Thompson     et al., 1956, pp. 42—45). Stated another way, the assump-
tion is that culture consists of a single class of phenomena which can be
accurately measured by our analytical units and about which accurate
summary statements, based on those analytical units, can be made. When
we compare the summary statements or statistics from a number of sites
and observe differences or similarities, these are generally taken as indica-
tors of degrees of cultural relationship.
   We can criticize this kind of analysis on two grounds. First, it is highly
      24                                       Archeological Theory and Method
      questionable that the analytical categories used by archeologists actually
      measure a single class of phenomena; we would argue that they are
      measuring along several dimensions simultaneously, that culture is neither
      simple nor additive. Second, intuitively established analytical units, whose
      significance is not specified, can at best be of limited utility in testing
      hypotheses. For in hypothesis testing we must always be able to justify
      our observations as relevant measures of the variables identified in the
      propositions we have formulated (see Nagel, 1967, p. 10).
         With respect to the first criticism—that culture is not additive and
      consists of more than summed traits—we would argue further that culture
      is a systemof interrelated components.s.The archeological record must be
      viewed as the byproduct of the operation of such a system, and any single
      facet of that record can be referred back to multiple variables or compo-
      nents of that system. The determinants which operated to produce one
      part of the archeological record need not be, and probably are not, the
      same determinants which produced another part of the archeological
      record.
         We may explain changes or differences in certain attributes of artifacts
      or features in terms of variations in prehistoric economy;    such explana-
      tions may be largely irrelevant for explaining variations in motor habits as
      documented in the same artifacts. If we treat both these kinds of varia-
      tion as undifferentiated measures of cultural difference, we are scarcely
      getting reliable information about past cultural systems. This same criti-
      cism is applicable to consideration of a single attribute and also to gener-
      alizations about summed attributes. A single characteristic observed in the
      archeological record might well be the compounded byproduct of a num-
      ber of codeterminant variables.
         An example of the confusion produced by treating independent vari-
      ables as though they were one compounded variable can be seen if we
      take the case of measuring attributes of people rather than of artifacts.
      Let us assume that what we wish to explain is variation in human        size,
      and the attribute we select as informing most economically on size is that
      of volume. We might proceed to measure a large number of people and
      even work out a taxonomy based on variation as measured by volume.
      The next step would be to attempt to explain variability in size and the
      distribution of size among human groups. We might investigate the de-
      gree to which size as measured by volume tends to covary with other
      variables such as environment, diet, disease, etc. Any such attempt would
      necessarily be doomed to failure, since at least two independent variables
      —height and weight—were being observed compounded into a single
      variable—volume. Someone who is 6% feet tall and very thin might yield
      an identical value for volume as someone who is 5 feet tall and exceed- ° \
      ingly stout. In studying the archeological record, there is no reason to
\\     expect that our units of observation are, in their form and distribution,
     “referrable to the operation of a single variable in the past.
L. R. Binford Archeological Perspectives                                 25
  The crucial question for archeology is the relationship of our obserya-
tions to the oper
              perati
                  of past on
                          cultural systems. What are we measuring
when we apply various scales to the archeological record: ‘either nominal
scales (typologies) or ordinal scales (stage classifications)?Do our stone
tool typologies, for example, measure   function or style, or do the attri-
butes which define types involve two or more variables? At each juncture
of explaining observations from the archeological record, we must ques-
tion anew to what variables operative in the past our observations refer.
Any explanatory proposition must be reasoned in terms of relevance to
the operation of the cultural system under study (see Spaulding, 1957, p.
87). These arguments of relevance frequently result in the modification of
our analytical units and the generation of further analytical categories.
This procedure insures the expansion of our knowledge of the past, since
it facilitates the testing of propositions. With the acceptance of a hypo-
thetico-deductive method for archeology and the use of a multiple-stage
scientific procedure—observation and generalization, formulation of ex-
planatory propositions, testing these against the archeological data—it
becomes evident that the analytical units employed in the initial stage
may not be very useful during the final stages of testing. The sets of
phenomena selected for observation, from the infinite number of possible
observations, are not most profitably determined by the formal structure
of the archeological record itself. On the contrary, they are data which we
must justify as relevant to the particular propositions advanced and as
useful for hypothesis testing. A crucial role is thus given to the develop-
ment of analytical techniques and to the generation of increasingly accu-
rate analytical units for measuring cultural and environmental variables.
During the past thirty years archeologists have warned against the mixing
of levels and inaccurate partitioning of archeological deposits; the warn-
ing offered here is against the analytical mixing of variables and against
the partitioning of our observational universe into irrelevant analytical
units.
   Relevance is established by reference to the propositions being ad-
vanced and by the theoretical context of those propositions. We can anti-
cipate that progress toward achieving the goals of archeology will be
marked by continued refinement of the units of observation by which the
archeological record can be summarized and by the development of more
accurate and less multivariate scales for measurement.

                               Conclusions
I have attempted to point out rather specifically what is new about the
new perspectives. In doing so, I have made several points of contrast with
more traditional approaches. I have noted that most archeologists of
whatever theoretical persuasion would agree on the triple aims of the
                  ruction
discipline—reconst of culture history, reconstruction of extinct life-
26                                      Archeological Theory and Method
ways, and the delineation of culture process. There are, however, major
differences among archeologists when it comes to theory and method, and
it is argued that revamping traditional theory and method is essential for
achieving any or all of the generally agreed-upon aims of the field.
   The major methodological and theoretical points of contrast involve
distinctions between cultural analogies and homologies, between culture
viewed as a summation of traits and culture viewed as a system, between
units of observation and units of analysis, between inductive and deduc-
tive approaches to the archeological record. A basic underlying problem
involves the use of scales of measurement. It was argued that traditional
archeological measures compound variables which probably operated in-
dependently in the past, and that a solution of the problem of measuring
along several dimensions simultaneously must be reached in order to
determine just what it is we are measuring. Despite remarkable advances
in data collection techniques and in techniques of analysis, so long as the
data from the past are considered within the framework of traditional
theory, they can bring nothing new to bear on our knowledge of the past.
It is a concern with the nature of knowledge, with the testing and verifi-
cation of hypotheses,    and with the relevance       of questions   asked   that
distinguishes much of the work in this book. We assume that the past is
knowable; that with enough methodological ingenuity, propositions about
the past are testable; and that there are valid scientific criteria for judging
the probability of a statement about the past besides ad hominem argu-
ments or “common sense.”
  The problems raised by the relationship of theory, method, and ques-
tion-asking were elegantly dealt with fifteen years ago by Sherwood L.
Washburn. Although Washburn was writing specifically about physical
anthropology, his statement seems uncannily relevant for archeology in
the 1960's:
  The assumption seems to have been that description (whether morphologi-
  cal or metrical), if accurate enough and in sufficient quantity, could solve
  problems |of process, pattern, and interpretation. . . . But all that can be
  done with the initial descriptive information is to bald a first understanding,
  a sense of problem, and a preliminary classification. To get further requires
  an elaboration of theory and method along different lines (Washburn, 1953,
  pp. 714—15).
   The elaboration of theory and method which characterizes much of the
recent work in archeology consists minimally of two elements: First, the
active search for understanding variability in the archeological record—
all of the variability and not just that judged a priori to be significant;
second, an attempt to explain variability scientifically, rather than by
conjecture or by “hunch.” Some variability may be more apparent than
real and may reflect sampling error, partial erosion, redeposition,           etc.
Only with the self-conscious use of sophisticated method can this “noise”
L. R. Binford Archeological Perspectives                                  27
be factored out. Many kinds of variation will be shown to be the result of
the normal functioning of internally differentiated cultural systems;
others may document evolutionary changes within cultural systems. Still
other kinds of variation may reflect changes in content within an essen-
tially stable cultural system. In our search for explanations of differences
and similarities in the archeological record, our ultimate goal is the formu-
lation of laws of cultural dynamics.
   Many of the authors in this volume would agree that advances in
achieving the aims of archeology necessitate the enforced obsolescence of
much of traditional theory and method, and thus many of the papers in
this book are radical in the original sense of the word. If we are success-
ful, many traditional archeological problems will prove to be irrelevant,
and we will see an expansion of the scope of our question-asking which
today would make us giddy to contemplate. Despite a recent statement
that one should not speak of a “new archeology” since this alienates it
from the old (Chang, 1967a, p. 3), we feel that archeology in the 1960’s is
at a major point of evolutionary change. Evolution always builds on what
went before, but it always involves basic structural changes.
   In a rather caustic analysis of the field of archeology, Spaulding has
stated that apparently
     ... truth is to be determined by some sort of polling of archaeologists, that
     productivity is doing what other archaeologists do, and that the only pur-
     pose of archeology is to make archaeologists happy (Spaulding, 1953, p.
     590).
We     think that this statement     was        more   appropriate in 1953 than it is
today, and its inappropriateness today is a rough measure of the extent to
which our field has advanced.



                                     References

Arkens, C. MeExvin. 1967. Plains relationships of the Fremont                 Culture:    a
  hypothesis. American Antiquity, 32(2): 198-209.
ALLCHIN,    BripceT.   1966.   The stone tipped arrow,       late Stone Age hunters of
  the tropical Old World. New York: Barnes and Noble.
AscHer,     Ropert.    1961.   Analogy     in    archaeological   interpretation.   South-
  western Journal of Anthropology, 17 (4): 317—25.
—. 1962. Ethnography for archeology: a case from the Seri Indians. Eth-
  nology, 1(3): 360-69.
BartH, Freprix. 1950. Ecologic adaptation and cultural change in archae-
   ology. American Antiquity, 15(4): 338—39.
BEearpDsLEY, R. K. et al. 1956. Functional and evolutionary               implications   of
  community patterning. In Robert Wauchope (Ed.), Seminars in archaeol-
  ogy: a special publication of American Antiquity, 22(2), Part 2: 129-57. —
BENNETT, JoHN W. 1943. Recent developments in the functional interpretation
  of archaeological data. American Antiquity, 8(2): 208-219.
28                                                Archeological Theory and Method
Brnrorp,     L. R. 1962.      Archaeology    as anthropology.    American       Antiquity,
     28 (2): 217-25.
—. 1964. A consideration of archaeological research design. American An-
 tiquity, 29(4); 425-41.
       . 1965. Archaeological systematics and the study of culture process. Ameri-
     ican Antiquity, 31(2): 203-210.
        . 1967a. Smudge pits and hide smoking: the role of analogy in archaeologi-
     cal reasoning. American Antiquity, 32(1): 1-12.
        . 1967b. Comment on K. C. Chang’s “Major aspects of the interrelation-
     ship of archaeology and ethnology.” Current Anthropology, 8(3) : 234—35.
         . 1968. Methodological considerations of the archeological use of ethno-
     graphic data. In Richard B. Lee and Irven DeVore         (Eds.), Man the hunter.
     Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
BinFrorp, Satiy R. 1968. Ethnographic data and understanding the Pleistocene.
     In Richard B. Lee and Irven DeVore            (Eds.), Man   the hunter.      Chicago
     Aldine Publishing Company.
BuaLock, Husert M., Jr. 1960. Social statistics. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Borves, Francois. 1953. Essai de classification des industries “moustériennes.”
  Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique Francaise, 50(7 and 8): 457—66.
Bratpwoop, Rosert J. 1952. The Near East and the foundations for Civiliza-
     tion. Condon Lectures. Eugene: University of Oregon.
         . 1959. Archeology and the evolutionary theory. In Evolution and anthro-
     pology: a centennial appraisal, pp. 76—89. Washington, D.C.: Anthropol-
     ogical Society of Washington.
       . 1960. Levels in prehistory, a model for the consideration of the evidence.
     In Sol Tax (Ed.), The evolution of man (Vol. 2 of Evolution after Darwin).
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Braiwwoop, Rosert J., and CHARLES REED. 1957. The achievement and early
  consequences of food production. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia in Quanti-
  tative Biology, 22: 19-31.
CALDWELL,      JosEPH    R.   1958.   The   new   American   archeology.     Science,   129
     (3345): 303-307.
Cuanc, Kwanc-cuin. 1958. Study of the Neolithic social grouping: examples
     from the New World. American Anthropologist, 60 (2): 298-334.
     . 1967a. Rethinking archaeology. New York: Random House.
      . 1967b. Major aspects of the interrelationship of archaeology and ethnol-
  ogy. Current Anthropology, 8(3) : 227-34.
CuILDE, V. Gorpon. 1936. Man makes himself. London: Watts and Co.
      . 1946. Archaeology and anthropology. Southwestern Journal of Anthro-
  pology, 2(3): 243-51.
Crark,     GraHaME.     1951. Star Carr. Cambridge:      Cambridge    University Press.
       . 1953a. The economic approach to prehistory. Proceedings of the British
     Academy, 39: 215—38.
        . 1953b. Archaeological theories and interpretation: Old World. In A. L.
     Kroeber (Ed.), Anthropology today. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ciark, J. DesmMonp,       and F, Ctarxk Howeut. 1966. Preface.             In J. Desmond
  Clark and F. Clark Howell (Eds.), Recent studies in paleoanthropology, a
  special publication of the American Anthropologist, 68 (2), Part 2.
Cote, Fay-Coorer, and THorngE DeEveEL. 1937. Rediscovering Illinois. Chi-
  cago: University of Chicago Press.
Cotton,     Haroxtp    S. 1939. Prehistoric culture units and their relationships in
     northern Arizona. Bulletin 17. Flagstaff: Museum of Northern Arizona.
L. R. Binford Archeological Perspectives                                          29
Crawrorp, O. G. S. 1953. Archaeology in the field. London: Phoenix House.
DeeEtTz, JAMEs. 1967. Invitation to archaeology. Garden City, N.Y.: American
   Museum Science Books, Natural History Press.
     . 1968. The archeological visibility of food-gatherers. In Richard B. Lee
  and Irven DeVore (Eds.), Man the hunter. Chicago: Aldine Publishing
  Company.
Doran, J. E., and F. R. Hopson. 1966. A digital computer analysis of Palae-
  olithic flint assemblages. Nature, 210 (5037): 688—89.
Erasmus, CHarLEs J. 1950. Patolli, parchisi, and the limitation of possibilities.
  Southwestern Journal of ‘saKfopalege: 6(4): 369—87.
ages ee         ey    The type concept revisited. American      Anthropologist, 56

Giapwin,    Haroip    S. 1934. A method for designation of cultures and their
  variations. Medallion Papers, (15). Globe, Ariz.: Gila Pueblo.
GrakEBNER, Fritz. 1911. Methode der Ethnologie. Heidelberg: Universitiits-
   buchhandlung:
GrirFin, JAMeEs B. 1943. The Fort Ancient aspect. Ann Arbor: University of
  Michigan Press.
    . 1967. Eastern North American archaeology: a summary. Science, 156
  (3772): 175-91.
Hawkes, CurisTopHER. 1954. Archeological theory and method: some sug-
  gestions from the Old World. American Anthropologist, 56(1): 155—68.
Hemmer, Kart G. 1967. Archaeological assumptions and ethnographical facts:
  a cautionary tale from New Guinea. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology,
  23(1): 52-64.
HeMPEL, Cart G. 1965. Aspects of scientific explanation. New York: The
  Free Press.
Hopson, F. R., P. H. A. SNeatu, and J. E. Doran. 1966. Some experiments in
  the numerical analysis of archaeological data. Biometrika, 53(3 and 4):
  311-24.
JeNNiNGs, JEssE D. 1957. Danger Cave. Memoir of the Society for American
  Archaeology no. 14, American Antiquity, 23(2), Part 2.
Krorser, A. L. 1937. Archaeology. In Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences,
  Vol. 2.
Kuernprenst,    Maxine    R., and Patry    Jo Watson.   1956.   Action   archeology:
  the archeological      inventory   of a living community.     Anthropology     To-
  morrow, 5 (1): 75-78.
Linton, RALpx. 1936. The study of man. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Lowe, Rosert H. 1912. The principle of convergence in ethnology. Journal of
  American Folk-Lore, 25 (45): 24—42.
     . 1940. An introduction to cultural anthropology.        (2d ed.) New York:
  Farrar and Rinehart.
McKeEnrn, W. C. 1939. The Midwestern taxonomic method as an aid to archae-
  ological culture study. American Antiquity, 4(2): 301-313.
MacWurre, Eorn. 1956. On the interpretation of archeological evidence in
  historical and sociological terms. American Anthropologist, 58 (1): 3-25.
Martin, Pauw S., and Joun Rrnatpo. 1939. Modified Basket Maker sites
  Ackmen-Lowry area southwestern Colorado. Anthropological Series, Field
  Museum of Natural History, 23(3), Publication 444: 307—444.
Mason, Otis T. 1893. The birth of invention.      In Annual Report Smithsonian
  Institution for 1892. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution.
Meccers, BETTY J., CLirFoRD Evans, and Emitxio Estrapa. 1965. Early form-
30                                                  Archeological Theory and Method
     ative period of coastal Ecuador: the Valdivia and Machalilla phases. Smith-
     sonian Contributions to Anthropology, Vol. 1. Washington, D.C.: Smith-
  sonian Institution.
Morsg, Dan F. 1963. The Steuben village and mounds:                    a multicomponent late
     Hopewell     site in Illinois.    Anthropological      Papers,    no.   21.    Ann   Arbor:
     Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan.
NAGEL, Ernest. 1967. The nature and aim of science. In Sidney Morganbesser
   (Ed.), Philosophy of science today. New York: Basic Books.
Prccott, Stuart. 1965a. Ancient Europe: from the beginnings of agriculture
   to classical antiquity. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
      .1965b. Approach to archaeology. New York, Toronto: McGraw-Hill Paper-
  backs, Harvard University Press.
RANDALLH-MaclIver, Davin. 1932. Archaeology as a science. Antiquity, aLADs
     5—20.
Ranps, RoBerT L., and Carrouii L. Ritey. 1958. Diffusion and discontinuous
  distribution. American Anthropologist, 60 (2): 274—97.
Ropsins, MicHaeL C. 1966. House types and settlement patterns: an appli-
     cation of ethnology to archaeological interpretation. The Minnesota Archae-
     ologist, 28(1): 3-35.
ROOTENBERG,            S. 1964.   Archaeological   field   sampling.    American      Antiquity,
     30 (2): 111-88.
Rouse,       Irvinc.    1955. On the correlation of phases of culture.             American       An-
  thropologist, 57 (4): 713-22.
     . 1964. Archaeological approaches to cultural evolution. In Ward Good-
  enough (Ed.), Explorations in cultural anthropology. New York: McGraw-
  Hill.
     . 1965. The place of “peoples” in prehistoric research. Journal of the
  Royal Anthropological Institute, 95(1): 1-15.
Rowe, Joun Howranp. 1966. Diffusionism and archaeology. American Antiq-
  uity, 31(3): 334-37.
SACKETT, JAMES R. 1966. Quantitative analysis of Upper Paleolithic stone tools.
     In J. Desmond Clark and F. Clark Howell (Eds.), Recent studies in paleo-
     anthropology, a special publication of the American Anthropologist, 68(2),
     Part 2: 356—94.
SANGER, Davin. 1967. Prehistory of the Pacific northwest plateau as seen from
     the interior of British Columbia. American Antiquity, 32(2): 186—97.
SCHLESIER, Kari H. 1967. Sedna Creek: report on an archaeological survey of
   the arctic slope of the Brooks Range. American Antiquity, 32 (2): 210—24.
SERVICE, Erman R. 1964. Archaeological theory and ethnological fact. In
   Robert A. Manners (Ed.), Process and pattern in culture: essays in honor of
  Julian H. Steward. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
SIEGEL, SIDNEY. 1956. Nonparametric statistics for the behavorial sciences.
   New York: McGraw-Hill
SLorkIn, J. S. 1952. Some basic methodological problems in prehistory. South-
   western Journal of Anthropology, 8(4): 442—43.,
SMITH, BENJAMIN L. 1940. The Midwestern taxonomic method and its applica-
     tion to an eastern Massachusetts group. Bulletin of the Massachusetts Archae-
     ological Society, 2(1): 1-13.
Smitu, H. I. 1910. Prehistoric ethnology of a Kentucky site. Anthropological
     Papers, 6(2). New York: American Museum of Natural History.
SmitH M. A. 1955. The limitations of inference in archaeology. Archaeological
     Newsletter, 6: 3—7.                                                                      .
Sotxas, W. J. 1924. Ancient hunters and their modern representatives. (3d rev.
   ed.) New York: Macmillan,
L. R. Binford Archeological Perspectives                                             31
Spautpinc, A. C. 1953. Review of “Measurements              of some prehistoric design
  developments      in the southeastern   states” by James          A. Ford. American
  Anthropologist, 55 (4): 588—91,                     /
     . 1957. Review of “Method and theory in American archaeology,” by Gor-
  don R. Willey and Philip Phillips. American Antiquity, 23 (1): 85—87.
STEWARD, JuL1aAN H. 1937. Ecological aspects of southwestern society. Anthro-
  pos, 32: 87-114.
     . 1942. The direct historical approach to archaeology. American Antiquity,
  7(4): 337-43.
    . 1949. Culture causality and law: a trial formulation of the development
  of early civilizations. American Anthropologist, 51(1): 1-28."
     . 1960. Evolutionary principles and social types. In Sol Tax (Ed.), The
  evolution of man (vol. 2 of Evolution after Darwin). Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press.
STEwarbD, JuLIAN H., and Frank M. Serzier.                1938. Function and configu-
  ration in archaeology. American Antiquity, 4(1): 4—10.
STEWARD, JULIAN H., et al. 1955. Irrigation civilizations: a comparative study.
  Social Science Monographs I. Washington, D.C.: Pan American Union.
TALLGREN, A. M. 1937. The method of prehistoric archaeology. Antiquity,
   11(42): 152-61.
TayLor, WALTER W. 1948. A study of archeology. Memoir No. 69. American
  Anthropologist, 50(3), Part 2.
THompson, RayMonpd H. 1956. The subjective element in archaeological infer-
  ence. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 12(3): 327-32.
     . 1958. Modern Yucatan Maya pottery making. Memoirs of the Society for
  American Archaeology, no. 15, American Antiquity, 23(4), Part 2.
TricceR, Bruce G. 1967. Settlement             archaeology—its      goals and promise.
   American Antiquity, 32(2): 149-59.
Tytor,    E. B. 1896. On American    lot-games as evidence of Asiatic intercourse
  before the time of Columbus. Internationales Archiv fiir Ethnographie, Vol.
  9.
Voct, Evon Z. 1956. An appraisal of “Prehistoric settlement patterns in the
  New World.” In Gordon R. Willey (Ed.), Prehistoric settlement patterns in
  the New World. Viking Fund Publications in Anthropology No. 23. New
  York: Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research.
Wa us, Witson D. 1928. Probability and the diffusion of culture traits. Amer-
  ican Anthropologist, 30(1): 94—106.
WarreEN, Ciauve N. 1967. The San Dieguito complex: a review and hypoth-
  esis. American Antiquity, 32(2): 168—85.
Wasupurn, S. L. 1953. The strategy of physical anthropology. In A. L. Kroe-
  ber (Ed.), Anthropology today. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Watson, Parry Jo. 1966, Clues to Jranian prehistory in modern village life.
  Philadelphia: University Museum of the University of Pennsylvania.
Waucnore, Rosert. 1966. Archaeological survey of northern Georgia, with a
  test of some cultural hypotheses. American Antiquity, 3(5), Part 2. Memoir
  no. 21.
Waiter, Leste A. 1943. Energy and the evolution of culture. American An-
   thropologist, 45 (3): 335—56.
Witter, Gorpon R. 1953. Prehistoric settlement patterns in the Viru Valley,
  Peru. Bureau of American         Ethnology     Bulletin    155.   Washington,   D.C.:
  Smithsonian Institution.
——.      1956.   (Ed.) Prehistoric settlement patterns in the New World. Viking
  Fund Publications in Anthropology No. 23. New York: Wenner-Gren Foun-
  dation for Anthropological Research,
32                                            Archeological Theory and Method
——. 1960. Historical patterns and evolution in native New World cultures. In
  Sol Tax (Ed.), The evolution of man (Vol. 2 of Evolution after Darwin).
  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
     . 1962. The early great styles and the rise of the Pre-Columbian civiliza-
  tions. American Anthropologist, 64(1): 1-14.
     . 1966. An introduction to American archaeology. Vol. 1: North and
     Middle America. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
WILLEY, Gorpon R., and Puiip Puiiies.          1958. Method and theory in Ameri-
     can archaeology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wixson, E. Bricut, Jr. 1952.        An   introduction   to scientific research.   New
  York: McGraw-Hill.
TWo                                               ALBERT     C. SPAULDING




                                                         Explanation
                                                      in Archeology




My intention here is to produce an argument or, stated more cautiously, a
sketch of an argument to the general effect that the papers in this volume
and the remarks of the commenters are clear examples of the convergence
of the theoretical underpinnings of archeologists and social anthropolo-
gists. The argument turns on (1) the abandonment in effect by both
groups of the notion of historical explanation as a valid category of intel-
lectual activity and, with even more force, of scientific activity, and (2)
the explicit recognition by social anthropologists of the technically imper-
fect nature of social systems. A careful argument of this nature would
present a voluminous and fully documented history of anthropology to
support these assertions, but owing to limitations of space and ambition I
will rely instead on what I hope are persuasive allusions to well-known
main trends in anthropological theorizing. Some characteristic items ex-
emplifying these trends are such statements as: by and by, anthropology
will be history or it will be nothing; culture areas have lost most (or all)
of the theoretical significance formerly ascribed to them, but they remain
convenient devices for organizing data; anthropology, like astronomy,
belongs in the category of historical sciences; the present can be under-
stood only in terms of the past; culture history is for dilettantes, and it
contributes nothing to real anthropology; and so on. The major import of
these statements seems to be that there are, or were, two kinds of anthro-
pologists with rival claims to anthropological truth. One kind asserts that
satisfactory understanding of anthropological data is a matter of historical
                                    33
34                                        Archeological Theory and Method
explanation, the other that understanding lies rather in generalizations
derived from analyses of functioning social systems. The remainder of this
paper is an attempt to show that a consideration of the nature of explana-
tion, history, historical science, and anthropology leads to the dismissal of
these rival claims and to a satisfactory theoretical foundation for interre-
lating all types of anthropological data.
     My discussion of explanation is derived from a selective scanning of the
work of various philosophers of science, among whom the topic seems to
be a lively one. It is not true, however, that an appeal to philosophers is
an appeal to ultimate authority; the task of philosophy of science is to
describe in general terms what scientists do, not to legislate on what they
can or cannot do. But it is true that philosophers are impressively skillful
at their special business and that the problem at hand involves generaliza-
tions that are squarely within this area of special competence. The discus-
sion that follows is an attempt to apply a point of view especially associ-
ated with the work of Carl G. Hempel, and the essential features of the
matter are set out in Hempel (1962), Brodbeck (1962), Kaplan (1964),
and references cited by these authors.
   The issue which seems directly relevant here is whether or not there are
two kinds of explanations of the way in which the world works—historical
explanation with its appropriate body of data, and scientific explanation
with a second kind of associated data. If there are two fundamentally
different kinds of serious explanation, it may well be that both are appro-
priate for anthropology, depending on the nature of the data considered,
and there may be two anthropologies linked only by a common interest in
customary human behavior. If there is only one kind, then the interrela-
tionships of the various kinds of anthropology will have to be analyzed
on some other ground.           ‘
     The view which I find convincing is attractively simple: there is only
one kind of serious explanation, the nomological or covering-law explana-
tion. All serious explanations relate the circumstance to be explained to
relevant general laws or at least to empirical generalization. Explanations
may be deductive, in which case the covering law admits of no excep-
tions, or they may be probabilistic-statistical (or inductive, if you prefer),
in which case the covering law has the form of a frequency distribution.
Explanations may be causal (when they identify some more or less com-
plex set of antecedent circumstances as sufficient to produce that which is
to be explained ) or they may not be causal (when they refer to some law
of coexistence rather than to a law of succession; for example, the laws on
the volume, temperature, and pressure of gases, or the laws on the length
and period of a pendulum).Explanations may be complete, as in the case
of the universal covering laws of nomological-deductive explanations (all
relevant variables are taken into account), or they may be partial, that is,
account for the occurrence of the general class of circumstance to be
Spaulding Explanation in Archeology                                   35
explained but not of the narrow class to which the circumstance belongs.
The idea of completeness here refers only to some         selected aspect or
aspects of the event or thing to be explained; the notion of a complete
explanation of any particular event is self-defeating for obvious reasons.
  What has become of the historical explanation? The leading candidate
for a peculiarly historical explanation, the so-called “genetic explanation,”
can be shown to be nomological in character; the mere recitation of a list
of successive events is not an explanation at all unless there are implicit
laws or empirical generalizations linking the events. The list of prior
events which explains something must have been selected with some cri-
terion of relevance if the explanation is to be successful. “There is no such
thing as ‘historical’ explanation, only the explanation of historical events”
(Brodbeck, 1962, p. 254).
   If this disposal of the historical explanation is accepted, we can turn to
the problem of history, historical science, and anthropology with a new
point of view. As a first observation, it is not possible to link anthropology
and history on the basis of the common possession of a special kind of
explanation, nor is it possible to separate them on the ground that they
use different kinds of explanation. In fact, it is not possible to distinguish
between history and science at all by means of broad types of explana-
tion, and we can ask on what ground, if any, they can be distinguished.
The answer, is, I think, that history and science can be distinguished by
the degree of explicitness of the covering laws (or empirical generaliza-
tions )which make explanation possible. History and science share a set of
techniques for producing warranted or intersubjectively verifiable knowl-
edge, but the explanatory generalizations of history are characteristically
matters of common knowledge on human dispositions or motivations, and
they are quite properly implicit rather than explicit in the historical narra-
tive. It is for this reason that skillful historical narratives are so immedi-
ately satisfying; the historian and the reader possess in common       the im-
plicit generalizations that make sense of the narrative. Science, on the
other hand, has as its avowed goal the production of explicit, formal laws
to provide a basis for the deductive explanation of particular things and
events. In history, the stock of explanatory generalizations is given as
primitive concepts; in science, the search for increasingly broad explana-
tory generalizations is the characteristic preoccupation. History has a par-
ticularizing quality (note the phrase “for historical reasons”); science, a
generalizing one.
   All of this leads directly to the question of whether or not anthropology
is a science. There seems to be general agreement among anthropologists
that it is, at least by intention and aspiration, however short it may fall of
the deductive elegance of physics. The goal of anthropology is presum-
ably the explanation of the similarities and differences of customary be-
havior in all possible pairs of societies, past and present, and common
36                                          Archeological Theory and Method
knowledge of human         dispositions is clearly not equal to this task. Al-
though it may be true that anthropologists have not advanced very far
toward the goal of deductive elegance, it seems plain enough that they
are trying to point in this direction. Anthropologists are devising objective
measuring instruments, looking for association, and thinking about con-
necting generalizations.
  Granted that anthropology is a science, what are the implications of the
old idea that it is a historical science as opposed to some other kinds of
science? If “historical science” means a science in which successive trans-
formations of things and classes of events over a substantial span of time
is of fundamental importance, then it is apparent that anthropology is a
historical science, as Kroeber, Sapir, and others pointed out. The contrast
here is with laboratory science; the materials of anthropology are complex
and the processes are slow. The implication is that they must be observed
in the field and that description must be elaborate because of the com-
plicated interaction of the many variables in every social situation. Labor-
atory sciences, on the other hand, can isolate relevant variables and dupli-
cate processes under controlled conditions. Taken in this sense, there is no
reason to quarrel with the characterization of anthropology as a historical
science. The only point to be made is that a historical science is no less a
science for being historical.
   There is a second sense in which the adjective “historical” can be ap-
plied to anthropology. In this sense, the implication is that anthropology
is like history not only because of its preoccupation with successive events
but also because,     as is the case with history, already well-understood
human dispositions are adequate for explanation. This position in effect
either denies the status of a science to anthropology, as I have done with
history, or claims that there is no possibility of developing further explan-
atory generalizations, whatever the intentions of anthropologists may be.
In the second case, anthropology would be in a state of permanently
arrested development; new data would be simply more of the same thing
appropriately presented in particularistic, historical fashion. This latter
claim is a factual one; it can be refuted only by the discovery of more
laws or empirical generalizations. Social anthropology and the papers of
this symposium are representative attempts to refute this claim.
     Anthropology, like social science in general, can be contrasted with that
paradigm     of science,   classical mechanics,   in terms   of other aspects of
explanation. Clearly, anthropological explanations are characteristically
probabilistic-statistical rather than deductive, and they are partial rather
than complete. This is the penalty for dealing with anything so multidi-
mensional and unwieldy as human behavior, and there is no easy remedy.
Anthropologists are not forbidden, however, to strugglé toward covering
generalizations with greater powers of prediction and retrodiction. They
can strive to sharpen statements of the frequency distributions underlying
probabilistic explanations, to make explanations more complete. In the
Spaulding Explanation in Archeology                                       37
case of causal vs. non-causal explanations, have little to say simply
because I cannot think of any examples of non-causal explanations in
anthropology. In short, anthropology is a science not because it is just like
physics in every respect. It is a science because, or insofar as, it examines
its data with the object of discovering systematic interrelationships there-
in, and it is a successful science insofar as it is able to explain its data by
means of these interrelationships.
  I turn now to the question of whether or not there are profound differ-
ences among the various activities conventionally embraced by the term
“anthropology” as it is used in the United States. I have excluded the
possibility of distinguishing between activities on the basis of whether or
not historical explanation is a characteristic instrument by arguing that
there are no historical explanations and that probably all anthropological
explanations are causal, partial, and probabilistic. It is nevertheless true
that some aspects of anthropology appear to be historical in some mean-
ingful sense of the concept while others do not. Prehistoric archeology,
with its explicit interest in chronology and its heavy content of particular-
istic description, is the obvious choice to represent the historical branch of
anthropology. Social anthropology, with its stated lack of interest in his-
tory and its interest in functional relationships, is an equally obvious
candidate for a non-historical anthropology.
  Certainly archeologists consider their subject to have a strong historical
component. Archeology is, after all, the study of the past. The connection
with history is revealed by the term “prehistory” and by the linking of
anthropological and undoubted historical research through the common
employment of the technique called “archeology.” And it is archeologists
who keep asserting that the present can be understood only through the
past, although I am not aware that anyone making this claim has pro-
duced a respectable explanation of why we can understand the present
only in terms of the past or even an explanation of just what is meant by
the assertion. It seems that a discussion of the place of archeology within
anthropology might better begin by reversing the dictum and asserting
that the past can be understood only through the present. All studies of
the past are conducted by taking present objects (or present memories )
as relics of the past and drawing inferences as to past events from them.
The premises by means of which the inferences are drawn are based on
observations   of present things, events, and relationships. Moreover,      the
implied claim that the past influences the present has the magical quality
of action at a distance unless it is carefully qualified. All of this being the
case, archeologists must be regarded as primarily consumers rather than
producers of anthropological knowledge and theories. They illuminate the
past through application of this knowledge, and they are successful inso-
far as there is a good stock of knowledge to apply to their relics and
insofar as they are diligent in seeking out and applying this knowledge.
   Despite this undeniably dependent role, however, archeologists are not
38                                   Archeological Theory and Method
merely passive consumers of anthropological knowledge. This is so be-
cause they also apply non-anthropological knowledge to their relics to
produce plausible inferences as to relative and absolute age, ecological
circumstances, and other relevant dimensions of cultural variation. In so
doing, they contribute independent data to theories of sequence of forms
and rate of change of at least some aspects of customary behavior. The
chronological data are clues to the identification of antecedent and con-
sequent conditions in slow-moving cultural transformations. I conclude
that prehistoric archeology is indeed historical in the sense of having a
primary interest in objects of the past, but that this historicism is a benefi-
cent state that does not imply that archeology should be cast out from
either science or anthropology. Archeology is scientific to the degree that
it is anthropological, and it is anthropological to the degree that anthro-
pology can provide cogent premises for inferences about archeological
data. In fact, archeology as such is simply a technique (essentially dig-
ging holes in the ground or stooping over to pick up objects) which can
be employed in the service of anthropology, history, or amusement.
  Social anthropology, or an idealized version of social anthropology, is a
much closer approach to our polar type of non-historical science. In pur-
est form, the units of study are existing human societies, and the attri-
butes or variables in terms of which the societies are studied are the class
of behavioral events directly concerned with interpersonal relationships.
In conventional terms, social anthropologists study kinship and social
organization. A central activity of social anthropologists is the intensive
study of a society to produce a description of the social structure and an
analysis of the functions performed by the various elements of the struc-
ture, although completely satisfactory explications of the concepts of
structure and function do not seem to have been attained. It appears that
the goal of social anthropology is to achieve through comparative studies
a typology of social organization together with transformation rules for
successions of types. There are indications of a claim of logical priority of
social analysis, presumably on the ground that explanations of societies
are what anthropology is really about and that social organization is the
heart of the matter. There are (or were) also indications of a goal of
closure: an attempt to treat social organization as a closed system, a
system which could be described and explained solely in terms of interact-
ing social variables. This goal excludes historical (particularistic) studies
of efficient causes; identification of individual circumstances connected
with a social innovation are unimportant. What is important is why the
innovation is incorporated into the social system. Social anthropology as a
program for research is beyond criticism. If its researches succeed in
demonstrating an independent order of social phenomena explicable in
their own terms, then social anthropology is a new science. It might then
perhaps be considered a historical science in the sense that its phenomena
Spaulding Explanation in Archeology                                          39
are not endlessly repeatable in a laboratory, but its historicism would not
constitute any important link with archeology. Archeologists do not dig
up social structures, and social anthropologists would not speak of arti-
facts or relationships among artifacts.
   This discussion can be ended on a question of fact. As I interpret the
results of a hundred years of anthropology and something like forty years
of social anthropology, there is abundant evidence that social systems are
not closed systems. Instead, they are articulated at almost every point
with biologically and environmentally oriented behavior. Social anthro-
pology is a research specialty and a research program, not an independent
science. Social anthropologists speak of subsistence techniques and eco-
nomic principles because they must if they are to have adequate explana-
tions of social phenomena. Cultural ecology and cross-cultural investiga-
tions of associations between social and technological behavior are the
necessary link between the poles of archeology and social anthropology,
between artifacts and behavior.
   The papers in this volume are clear examples of explicit attempts to
explain observed regularities in archeological data by means of observed
regularities in social processes. The remarks of the commenters suggest
that the attempts do offer hope of an enriched science of anthropology.


                                   References

BropBEcK, May. 1962. Explanation, prediction, and “imperfect” knowledge. In
  Herbert Feigl and Grover Maxwell (Eds.), Scientific explanation, space and
  time. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Minnesota Studies in the
  Philosophy of Science, Vol. 3.
Hempet, Cart G. 1962. Deductive-nomological vs. statistical explanation. In
  Herbert Feigl and Grover Maxwell     (Eds.), Scientific explanation, space and
  time. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Minnesota Studies in the
   Philosophy of Science, Vol. 3.
KapLaANn, ABRAHAM. 1964. The conduct of inquiry. San Francisco: Chandler.
     (ce .                                                                                                                                                                                                 :                      7"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        td

     Sete attsance anata af coliap                                                                                                                                                   eee                                                       ‘
     pikes                                Gian                        ok sehtelly eG                                                                                                                                          i pai
                                                                               ila                                                                                                                                                      5      te
                                                            ens Huy ‘oeceuns |
     einai
      oT                              a                o         es                                                          « salto Gwate                                                                                                         ee
                              lank            oh             ie re                                                  wt                          deriva
~s                                        rere                                                                 er                                                               or?                                         eae
     esate                                    ite
                                                © Gh:                 yqqper’y
                                                                         2A Clngee Re, Seeaperd                                                                                                                                        Sa
 Saad                        jo               Goer + te “ens aie args                                                                                      Lert                                                                             evaay
     a                                         ee                                                                  Tiaste die as a ae heehee
                                                                                                                                                                        ‘ae Wh eta?                                                                          24,
     apeplen pies The gasrigete \ bee sete
         ms borage Oi. et                              ee                               wi ee                       ||                          ee)                                                        ae                         tet ty           Reagale
                                                   4         oie) Se                            yt                           soyene at.                                                           Cae! 5 --Done hee
         apie                            sen famvir                        ts                   san                          |a            1    ab 7                        a                         re                                ae     ee
                 b vitae RAUL
                            RG HP et bio Be                                                                                                              Rey                                               qi (ety toee
     —--                                       een                          dap os is. aptly                                                                                                                            eel eee
                                                                                                                                 i»    \ecoigtiat Segeeee                                                                                                        =
                                               iWpal Sa lap cater                                                                     a een GN          repel                                                                                           ya
     ia                           yoshi                          ": peal escorts                                                                     ot,           eMaigiah                                             Sar yaabegiy (ge
      PERN ROS Or                                                          awit                                                                 qtyage Med tee bali sh
             er                                io aie                                   per                                                Mm                  HOS                                    epee
         one                      a                                                                                                                                                           a            |                      :

     a            _               ame              _                                                                                       >                                :                         :

                             me                            Tae         |                        mpl                 Le,                                    j                        bese                           48




                                                                                                                                                                                      eee
             ae        de         os                        @e                              ]                        .                                                                            ‘            7


                                                                           let ates)                                                           veer                                 _pal ae

      Aho
                   wer                             pial
     ~~                           Seti        +s           ae Bok 4        --               .            5    =              '                                          >                 7           ~§                :
                              as                       les                                      ;                                                              RP —« Fx,                                                                %
     “ary lle                                  t ignated                                                                                                 a                                        Qe                    ow
      a iw.                                        (tera               we                           ««             shh»               herent
                 a          aia           vsAlegre                         2st                                       ac-H                                  SWAG,
                                                                                                                                                     re                         i     g


                                                                                                               i                               =                        At                        15                    a¢inden Pred


                             ee                                                                              enek



                                                                                    ;                    has                                    ¢                                   ub’:                       + eae                           er
             .                                                                  -                                  se                           7                                                     past" aia                                    +}. ie
                                               }                                                               ee                                              :                          + aoe                             cone Bag: gee)
                  :                            el                      1                                       Jveira.                              TV             heer                                    ee ere                              i 7, SA
                                                                                        =                                                      iia.                                                   othe, alr?                            pany             |
         .        ie                                                   :                                                 :             ;        .                  0)               (i.                   eee                               nae, oh                  7

             * coe:                                                         ‘i 4 sie                                                  A)       Gs                                   iaeaele ey
               tite                       @                                        ee                                            ae             bo                              aia                                                                y
                                                           rel              the                                      2                 ee aeeae
THREE                                                         JAMES DEETZ




                                    The Inference of Residence
                                                and Descent Rules
                                    from Archeological Data




The recent interest in the reconstruction of prehistoric social systems has
served to call attention to the nature and possible causes of patterning as
it is seen in archeological materials. Whether inferences are drawn con-
cerning social institutions based on settlement pattern, tool groupings
which indicate patterning that suggests particular activities, or the cluster-
ing of attributes indicative of the nature of social units, they all stem from
an awareness, perhaps implicit, of consistent and meaningful patterning
of certain modular units—houses, tools, or attributes. The purpose of this
paper is to make explicit the types of patterning encountered in archeo-
logical data, to suggest possible applications of these types to the refine-
ment of method, and to explore, in a preliminary way, the nature and
significance of patterning at the level of individual behavior as it relates
to the inference of rules of residence and descent.
   It is generally agreed that meaningful inference from the archeological
record concerning the cultural systems responsible for its existence de-
pends on an understanding of the manner in which culture is reflected in
its products. Behavior is a product of culture which is perishable and
therefore beyond recovery to the archeologist in a direct sense, but the
products of this behavior—sites, structures, artifacts—reflect behavior in
a systematic manner. By acknowledging how different levels and types of
behavior might affect their products, one is provided with valuable in-
                                     4]
42                                        Archeological Theory and Method
sights regarding the behavioral significance of archeological assem-
blages. Four levels of behavior, and their archeological equivalents, can
be defined and shown to have particular relevance to four types of infer-
ential problems.
   The first of these levels is that of the individual. Individual behavior is
reflected at the attribute level, since the patterning of attributes exhibited
by a group of similar artifacts results from similar patterned behavior on
the parts of a number of individuals. While this behavior is shared by
these individuals, as it would have to be if a pattern were to exist, it is the
individual alone who is responsible for combining, for example, side
notching with basal concavity on a projectile point. It is unlikely that
more than one individual was responsible, in a direct sense, for the attri-
bute configuration of any given artifact of the type commonly encoun-
tered in archeological analysis. For this reason, patterning of attributes at
the level of individual activity, is archeology’s only case of perfect associa-
tion. Neither rodent activity, incorrect excavation procedure, nor impro-
per laboratory sorting can destroy the association of cord-impressed deco-
ration and lip thickening on a rim sherd. This perfection of association
does not obtain with such an absolute guarantee at any of the three
higher levels of patterning to be considered.
  The second level of patterning is that which results from the actions of
members of various minimal groups of interacting individuals—lineages,
families, hunting groups, males, or females. Individuals grouped into such
aggregates share in sets of behavioral patterns which can be seen in the
patterned combination of artifacts as coordinate groups, as well as in the
attributes of these artifacts. Such artifact complexes result either from
individual or group action. Therefore, while only individuals are respon-
sible for attribute groupings, both individuals or groups of individuals can
produce artifact clusters. Unlike attribute groupings, artifact groupings
are vulnerable to mixing and imperfect recovery due to field and labora-
tory procedural error.
   The third level of patterning, that of the community, reflecting behay-
ior of a face-to-face group of individuals, and including in most cases a
number of minimal groupings as described above, is most frequently
observed in the patterning of individual sites at the level of a single
component. For example, the spatial arrangement of houses and the form
of their architecture are a function of behavior at the community level,
although one must also consider patterning at the individual and minimal-
group levels in forming coherent inferences.
   The fourth level is that of the entire society as a coordinate unit, and
behavioral patterning at this level is a function of those pattems which
are universal to the society as a whole. This level is seen archeologically in
settlement pattern, as the term is used by Chang (1958) distinct from
community pattern, as well as in certain aspects of patterning at the three
lower levels.
Deetz Inference of Residence and Descent Rules                              43
   Examples of each of these four levels will make their definition more
clear. At the level of the individual, recent studies of attribute patterning
in ceramics (Deetz, 1965; Longacre, 1964) have demonstrated that tight
clustering of attributes might result from the orderly transmission of be-
havioral pattern relating to pottery manufacture along female lines, per-
mitting the postulation of matrilocal residence, a social convention which
expectably would lead to such a phenomenon. Patterning of individual
behavior manifested in attribute patterning can also provide information
concerning culture-contact situations. During the excavation of a tanning
vat complex at La Purisima Mission, Lompoc, California (Deetz, 1963), a
series of beamers was recovered from the vat floors. These had been used
in the removal of hair from hides tanned for use in the mission ships, a
technology introduced to the Chumash neophytes living at the mission.
The particular attribute combination exhibited by these tools is quite
illustrative of the nature of aboriginal conversion to European practices.
The beamers are made from ribs; bone was a commonly used raw mate-
rial by pre-Mission Chumash for tool manufacture. While the material
was one familiar to the Indians, it was used to make a tool which formed
a part of an introduced technological process, although the general form
of the implement is similar to native ones used in similar activities, includ-
ing bone-sweat sticks. The ribs used, however, were from cattle, an intro-
duced animal. The pattern here is that of an aboriginally used raw ma-
terial (bone) from an introduced animal (cow) to fashion an aboriginally
known tool (bone beamer or scraper) to accomplish an introduced tech-
nological process (hair removal for vat tanning).
    Patterning in artifact groupings is demonstrated by several recent stud-
ies. At La Purisima Mission during the nineteenth century, male Chumash
neophytes were employed in a complex of roles introduced by Europeans
—farming, cattle herding, and various crafts in the mission shops—while
female neophytes continued in an occupational tradition not dissimilar
from the aboriginal one, involving food preparation and the production of
artifacts involved in this and related activities. Excavations in the neo-
phytes’ quarters (Deetz, 1963) produced data which provide a striking
demonstration of this differential shift in roles according to sex. While it is
known that nuclear families resided in the barracks, a classification of the
aboriginal artifacts according to activity by sex reveals that all artifacts
associated with male activities had vanished from the inventory of the
missionized Chumash, while female-associated artifacts were as numerous
as they had been in pre-contact and contemporary aboriginal sites. Bas-
kets, mortars, pestles, manos, metates, and comales formed the vast ma-
jority of the aboriginal assemblage,      while scrapers,   projectile points,
arrow-shaft straighteners, and chert flakes resulting from the manufacture
of stone implements were exceedingly rare. It was possible to determine
that one portion of the barracks had been used earlier in time, and this
earlier occupation produced almost all of the few male-associated artifacts
44                                        Archeological Theory and Method
recovered. One other aspect of these data is of significance to those infer-
ences regarding acculturation on a sexually differential basis. When one
considers the nature of the complete assemblage from the barracks struc-
ture, including European and aboriginal artifacts, it is obvious that in the
case of female material culture change, this was an additive process.
European objects such as pottery, scissors, and knives were added to the
aboriginal female tool kit, resulting in a complex actually somewhat richer
than before, while change in male material culture was largely substitu-
tive, with the European objects replacing rather than supplementing abo-
riginal items.
   Other examples of this level of patterning are to be seen in the recent
analysis of Mousterian sub-assemblages by Sally Binford (1965 and in this
volume) and in Longacre’s analysis of materials from the Carter Ranch
Site in eastern Arizona (Longacre, 1964). That the level of minimal group
behavior depends in part on individual behavior is shown by Longacre’s
demonstration that different ceramic attribute groups which are a func-
tion of individual behavioral patterning have spatial significance, in that
attribute clusters resulting from different modal individual behavior tend
to group in artifact clusters which are a function of the shared behavior of
segments of the community.
   Examples of the third level of patterning are provided by those artifacts
which represent an entire community, and are usually encountered in
settlement-pattern studies. The artifacts in this case are usually structures,
and their number and arrangement provide an indication of community
behavior. The clustering of houses and storage pits within tightly formed
defensive moats and palisades seen in the Middle Missouri Region late in
the eighteenth century reflects defensive behavior in the part of the com-
munity as a whole.            ;
   Chang’s study (1958) of the correlation between certain social systems,
classified according to residence and descent rules, and community layout
is another case which demonstrates the manner in which community be-
havior might be expected to reflect in the physical arrangements of mate-
rial objects.
   At the fourth level of behavioral patterning, that common to an entire
society, emphasis shifts to the nature of patterning of whole communities
into larger groups. The patterning seen in contemporary archeological
sites in a region is a reflection of the manner in which the society repre-
sented by those sites grouped its community units on the landscape, a
form of patterning which in its formal analysis might reasonably be ex-
pected to reflect certain aspects of the behavior of the members of the
society in certain universal categories. Examples would include the nature
of ceremonial center distribution in Middle America or the relationship
between seasonal camps and semipermanent villages in the Santa Barbara
Channel region of southern California. In the latter case, small camps in
Deetz Inference of Residence and Descent Rules                             45
the area inland from the foreshore suggest a seasonal division of the
larger communities into smaller more economically efficient units during
part of the year, probably during the dry summer months and early fall.
   The brief examples cited above are intended only to serve as an indica-
tion of the nature of the four levels of patterning inherent in archeological
data. What is of primary importance is the realization that different levels
require somewhat different analytical approaches, and that certain ques-
tions are better answered at certain levels of analysis. Basic to inferential
method based on the analysis of patterning is that the very term pattern
denotes repetition. Unless a number of examples of similarly patterned
phenomena can be produced, sound inferences cannot be drawn, since
the patterning must be demonstrated by numerous cases.
   The remainder of this paper will be concerned with patterning at the
lower two levels as it might permit the inference of rules of residence and
descent in prehistoric societies. While it can be argued with considerable
effect that to concentrate on the aspects of descent and residence in a
social system is at least potentially dangerous, in that it can lead to an
undesirable narrowing of perspective, certain recent archeological analy-
ses have been directed at the inference of either or both of these institu-
tions. For this reason, it is perhaps advisable at this time to inquire into
the possibility as well as the feasibility and practicality of such efforts. As
has been suggested above, residence might be expected to be inferred
from the individual level of patterning, that of attribute-clustering pheno-
mena. While unilocal residence is in a sense a group activity, the effect
which this practice might have on material objects would be the produc-
tion of a series of similar artifacts resulting from family-based microtradi-
tions of style, reflected in the attribute patterns produced by the individ-
ual. This assumption underlies both Deetz’s (1965) and Longacre’s
(1964) recent ceramic studies. It is also demonstrated by the patterning
observed in assemblages from historic Chumash sites in southern Cali-
fornia. In this case, objects manufactured by males, particularly projectile
points, exhibit a high degree of stylistic similarity within single sites,
although intersite formal variation is high. While one might explain such
variation as the result of different functions served by projectile points at
different sites, our knowledge of Chumash subsistence patterns would
suggest a highly homogeneous tradition within the area represented by
the sites in question. This is almost certainly true of two of the sites,
which are but ten miles apart, and located in identical environmental
situations. At most, functional differences would only be a matter of
virtually identical problems being met with alternate solutions and, as a
result, explaining the variation as primarily due to social factors is more
economical and efficient. In contrast to chipped-stone implements, made
and used by males, milling equipment and basketry are strikingly similar
throughout the entire range of the Chumash as they were known during
46                                      Archeological Theory and Method
the early nineteenth century. This pattern of high intersite variability but
low variation within an assemblage shown by projectile points, and of the
converse pattern seen in basketry and milling equipment is at least in
agreement with the known facts of Chumash social organization, which
was characterized by patrilocal residence and community exogamy. In
this case, highly distinctive microtraditions of projectile-point manufac-
ture might have been preserved by patrilocality, and similar isolated mic-
rotraditions in female manufacture prevented by a continuous circulation
of females between communities.
   This example serves to place emphasis on one important aspect of
inferring residence rules from modes of attribute patterning. It would
seem to be most urgent that one investigate patterning in objects known
or thought to have been manufactured by both sexes or, lacking this, to
investigate the nature of patterning of single-sex traditions over time. By
doing this, one avoids the difficult question: How much is enough? That
is, to what degree must one demonstrate clustering to be certain that
matrilocality or patrilocality has been reasonably established? A simple
statement that the patterning can be shown not to be random is not
sufficient, since theoretically one might expect a significant degree of
attribute association to result from bilocality, particularly if combined
with a unilineal descent rule, which might tend to bias residence in either
an uxorilocal or virilocal direction. Most bilocal situations could reason-
ably be expected to produce significant attribute clustering in both male
and female manufactures, particularly if accompanied by bilateral de-
scent and a nearly even distribution of uxorilocal and virilocal modes of
residence. To infer relatively rigid unilocality of either type in the absence
of a controlled chronological series, one must not only demonstrate clus-
tering of attributes in the products of one sex, but also a corresponding
lack of clustering in the products of the opposite sex. In this sense, uni-
local residence is an asymmetrical institution, and the existence and
degree of asymmetry must be shown.
   An alternative approach to the problem is provided by an analysis of
change in patterning in ceramic attributes among protohistoric Arikara
(Deetz, 1965). In this instance, although patterning in only female cul-
tural objects was considered, it was shown that over time this patterning
became more random, and was accompanied by a reduction in house size.
Furthermore, a reasonably sound historical reconstruction of later Arikara
kinship change was made to provide the necessary control. Even in this
case, however, one cannot say with certainty that residence was the sole
causal factor in attribute clustering, nor to what degree clustering must
occur to demonstrate matrilocality conclusively. The study does demon-
strate that as matrilocality became less frequent, association of attributes
became more random. No inference was formed from the data alone
regarding residence; two simultaneous aspects of change were demon-
Deetz Inference of Residence and Descent Rules.                      47
strated, and their probable systematic relationship suggested. Relative
degrees of clustering and association are indicated, but absolute frequen-
cies cannot be postulated as reliable indicators of unilocality.
   Inference of descent from archeological data, at least in terms of pat-
terning, is a much more difficult and complex problem. Unlike residence,
descent is a group function, and therefore fits the level of group behav-
ioral patterning described above. As such, it requires more meticulous
care in handling the data, since this level is subject to the problems of
mechanical mixing discussed earlier. Furthermore, descent is a subunit of
residence, in a sense, since some but not all unilocal societies have a
consistent residence rule Therefore the demonstration of residence rule
should be firmly established prior to the postulation of a rule of descent.
The study of unilineal descent systems is, of course, the focus of much of
ethnological theory, and many of the classics of ethnological writing treat
the subject. As yet, there is not unanimous agreement on just what is
meant by unilineal descent, or what purpose it serves in those societies
which utilize it. It is very likely that there has been a confusion of cause
and effect underlying much of the controversy in this area, and it can be
suggested that unilineal descent is but a manifestation of another process,
that of the formulation of clear-cut corporate groups which are structured
in such a way as to function efficiently in a certain rather special social
context. It is highly unlikely that a member of the most highly unilineal
society would in fact deny biological descent from both parents, but at
the same time, he would indicate that certain corporate rights and respon-
sibilities reach him through either his mother’s or his father’s side. In this
sense, descent is but a means to an end of corporate group formation, and
perhaps if the term descent had not become one of general usage, clearer
understandings would have been forthcoming more rapidly. Part of the
cause is historical; the first workers concerned with unilineal descent
worked in those areas, particularly Africa, where it was most clearly
developed, and only later did it become apparent that there is more than
one type of corporate kin group, and that unilineal descent is an organiz-
ing principle of only some.
   If unilineal descent is seen as a mechanism by which sharply bounded
corporate units are formed, then what must be demonstrated archeologi-
cally is a group concept of corporate participation. Even if a means of
accomplishing such an end were devised, it would not necessarily indicate
unilineal Cescent, but only corporate membership in one or another social
group, organized on the basis of residence, descent, or voluntary partici-
pation, to name but three possibilities. Conversely, the presence of an
extended family unit in the same dwelling over a long period of time,
using similar artifacts and perhaps sharing in a subsistence pattern from
the same parcel of land, does not necessarily indicate the existence of a
corporate concept. Unlike residence, which can be described in terms of
48                                        Archeological Theory and Method
purely physical and spatial relationships between people and objects,
descent, at least in its corporate sense, involves in its description certain
essential conceptual relationships between people and objects held by the
people and, as a result, there is a dimension of patterning which may well
not be reflected in the tangibles of archeological data.
   In conclusion, it is perhaps legitimate to ask why we are so concerned
with the reconstruction of prehistoric social systems at all. There is always
the danger of a certain method or area of inquiry becoming an end unto
itself. The true value of such inferences would seem to lie in the direction
of the ultimate benefit to general anthropological theory; the elucidation
of system and orderly process in culture, past and present. Until and
unless this type of inquiry is joined in a systematic fashion to the main
body of ethnological theory, the danger is always present of such recon-
structions entering the realm of ultimately sterile methodological virtuos-
ity. This should not happen, but it must be kept in mind at all times that
such a pursuit must relate in some way or another to the attainment of a
broader understanding of culture. There is every reason to be confident
that such will in fact take place but, at the same time, the possible pitfalls
should be kept in mind. At the present point in our progress in this
direction, perhaps the most significant value of recently gained under-
standing is that they indicate the nature of articulation between objects
and people, and man’s behavior in the larger sense. If this behavior is
social, all well and good, but it must be studied regardless of the realm of
culture it relates to. Studies such as those cited above, particularly in
relationship to residence patterns, are of less value in their present imper-
fect state to social reconstruction than they are to indicating the nature of
patterning and process in prehistoric cultures as shown by their material
remains. Only with refinement will they become truly incisive and truly
useful in the detailing of extinct social systems. However, though the
route will be a long and difficult one, the longest journey must begin with
a single step, and these first steps seem to lie in the right direction.


                                 References

BinForD, SALLY R. 1965. Social groupings and settlement systems in the Mous-
  terian. Presented at the Amercian Anthropological Association annual meet-
  ing. (Unpublished.)
Cuanc, K. C, 1958. Study of the Neolithic social groups: examples from the
  New World. American Anthropologist, 60: 298—399.
DeETz, JAMES. 1963. Archaeological investigations at La Purisima       Mission.
  Annual Report 1962—63, UCLA Archaeological Survey.
     . 1965. The dynamics of stylistic change in Arikara ceramics. Urbana: Uni-
  versity of Illinois, Series in Anthropology, no. 4.
ripe ce’ WituiAM. 1964. Archaeology as anthropology. Science, 144 (3625):
   1454—55.
FOUR                                                    SALLY   R, BINFORD




                                      Variability and Change
                        in the Near Eastern Mousterian
                                                 of Levallois Factes




As anthropologists we are concerned with cultural differences and similar-
ities. The most impressive schemes for the description of differences and
similarities in flint assemblages have developed in Old World prehistory,
partly as a function of the academic context of prehistory in Europe,
where it is considered a natural science and students are trained in the
basic skills of the natural sciences—among which is systematics (see
Sackett’s paper, this volume, for a complete discussion of this point). To
those trained in North America and familiar with the relatively unsyste-
matic treatment of projectile points and the lack of systematic treatment
of other kinds of flint materials, work such as that of the Bordes (Bordes,
1953a, 1961; deSonneville-Bordes,    1960) in France in dealing with total
flint assemblages in clearly defined, repeatable ways is all the more im-
pressive. Morphological and technological criteria have been explicitly
and consistently applied, so that total assemblage differences and similari-
ties can be expressed in precise, quantitative terms.
   Problems arise, however, in the explanation of differences and similari-
ties and in understanding changes through time. All too often prehistori-
ans view flint industries “evolving” through time, as though they con-
tained genetic materials and were capable of mutation. It is on the ex-
planatory level that anthropological concepts are particularly valuable.
Our basic concept is culture, and it is to the understanding of functional
                                     49
50                                        Archeological Theory and Method
variability and change within cultural systems that we wish to direct
attention. Because of the nature of the preserved material from Paleolithic
sites, systematic and consistent typologies are essential. But the descrip-
tion, however detailed, of assemblages does not constitute an explanation
of differences and similarities. Certainly one of the most productive as-
pects of prehistoric research in recent years has been the feedback and
mutual stimulation between European and American prehistorians. The
benefits to both groups and to prehistory have far outweighed the few
moments of misunderstanding and asperity between them.
   The major thesis of this paper is that assemblage variability does not
necessarily indicate either fixed local traditions (style) or evolutionary
change within cultural systems. The alternative of functional variability
must be considered. The distinction between stylistic and functional dif-
ferences, on the one hand, and evolutionary change, on the other, must
not only be a logical one but must be made operational through the
development of the appropriate methods of analysis.
   Two aspects of Paleolithic assemblages in the Near East will be dealt
with: first, variation within a single cultural level; second, change from
one cultural level to another. In examining variability between assem-
blages of the same broad culture type, our main purpose will be to sug-
gest an explanation for the observed variability which is not predicated
upon immutable     local traditions.   In the examination   of evolutionary
change, we shall offer an explanatory hypothesis which does not require
assumptions about the genetic qualities of stone artifacts or invoke migra-
tions of populations.


                              _ Variability
If we view lithic assemblages as sets of tools designed to perform specific
tasks, then differences between assemblages on the same broad cultural
level can be interpreted as reflecting: (1) differences in the jobs being
performed (Kleindienst, 196la, 1961b); (2) differential site utilization—
that is, a different settlement type (Beardsley et al., 1956); (3) replace-
ment of one functional unit of the assemblage for another—what is com-
monly termed stylistic variability (L. R. Binford, 1963); or (4) sampling
error.
   The specific use which we infer for a set of tools must necessarily be
tentative, but it is maintained that a functional view of artifactual mate-
rial is more in keeping with reality than a view in which variability is
interpreted as lithic mutation. A functional approach further forces us to
cope with several variables simultaneously when interpreting variability.
The determinants of the nature of a specific assemblage, or of its com-
ponents, are related in a complex way, and our mode of analysis must be
geared to dealing with multivariate causation.
S. R. Binford Near Eastern Mousterian of Levallois Facies                 51
   Factor analysis (Fruchter, 1954; Harmann, 1961) is designed to express
just such multivariate relations. It is designed to isolate from a matrix of
many variables those which consistently share mutual determinants. With
lithic assemblages we assume that these mutually determined units repre-
sent functional categories of tools, their specific functions being inferred
from the nature of the working edge of the implements and/or from
known ethnographic examples.
  In the summer of 1964 a factor analysis study was undertaken by L. R.
Binford and the author (Binford and Binford, 1966a) of one specific kind
of Mousterian   assemblage—the    Mousterian    of Levallois   facies     ( Bordes,
1953a, 1953b)—to determine what units might be isolated as “tool-kits”
and how these varied in their distribution.
   The data we used were the stone implements from Couches 2—8 of
Shelter I at Jabrud, Syria (Rust, 1950; Bordes, 1955) and from Mugharet
es-Shubbabiq,   a cave   site near Tiberias,   Israel   (S. R. Binford,     1966.).
Jabrud was excavated by Rust and the lithic material reanalyzed by
Bordes; Shubbabiq was excavated by the author and the tools analyzed
with Bordes’ assistance. They are, to the best of my knowledge, the only
Near Eastern assemblages of the Mousterian of Levallois facies which
have thus far been completely analyzed using the same criteria so that
intersite comparisons are possible.
   Despite the often bitter disputes about correlations of the Mousterian
sequence in Western Europe and the Near East (Bordes, 1955, 1960,
1962; Garrod, 1953, 1956, 1963; Howell, 1959, 1961), there is general
agreement that the Mousterian of Levallois facies is relatively late in the
Middle Paleolithic of the Near East. Thus, in our selection of data we
were able to hold three variables constant: typological consistency, gen-
eral geographical area, and relative time.
  The limitations of the data we used are: first, the absence of published
faunal material from Jabrud, the deeply stratified site in our sample.
Second, the major portion of the artifacts from Shubbabiq came from a
midden deposit in the rear chamber of the cave; thus, only one small
sample of artifacts could be tied in with features such as fire layers, which
could serve as a check on functional hypotheses. Despite these limitations,
our results provided useful information which can serve as a basis for the
formulation of hypotheses to be tested against more complete data in the
future.
   The factor analysis separated the 63 Mousterian artifact types (Bordes,
1953a) into five clusters. Factor I, the most inclusive of the factors, con-
sists of sixteen artifact types; those sharing the greatest degree of mutual
determinancy    are: borers, becs, endscrapers, atypical burins, and natu-
rally backed knives. Due to the absence of elements which seem to be
associated with hunting or butchering and the absence of heavy-duty
tools, plus our as-yet-undemonstrated proposition that when this factor is
BV:                                Archeological Theory and Method
dominant we have a base-camp type of settlement, we have interpreted
this factor as representing activities carried out around the home base—
manufacture of secondary tools and perhaps hide-finishing.
   Factor II appears to be the hunting and butchering tool kit; the domin-
ant types are points of all kinds, as well as almost every type of side-
scraper.
   The types diagnostic of Factor III which exhibit a high order of mutual
determinancy are: backed knives, naturally backed knives, end-notched
pieces, typical and atypical Levallois flakes, and unretouched blades. All
of these types, with the exception of end-notched pieces, can be seen as
fine-cutting implements, and their association with fire layers suggests
that this group of tools might have been used in the preparation of food.
   Factor IV has the most obvious relation to one of Bordes’ subtypes of
Mousterian assemblage, the denticulate {Bordes, 1953a, 1963). The ele-
ments in this factor are: denticulates and notched tools, scrapers with
abrupt retouch, raclettes, and truncated flakes. The specific use of this
group of tools is difficult to guess at; Bordes (1963, p. 47) suggests that
the denticulate Mousterian is associated with the processing of plant ma-
terials.
   Factor V’s tightly associated elements are: elongated Mousterian
points, discs, scrapers on the ventral surface, typical burins, and unre-
touched blades. The fact that only one kind of point and one kind of
sidescraper are represented in the diagnostic cluster suggests that this
group represents a more specialized hunting and butchering factor than
was seen in Factor II.
   The percentages in Figure 1 represent the degree to which the variabil-
ity in each assemblage can be accounted for by a single factor. At Shub-
babiq, with the exception of one small group of artifacts (Unit 8), the
assemblage as a whole is quite internally consistent, with the major part
of the variation being accounted for by Factor I and the rest shared by
Factors II and III. Units 5 and 6 exhibit a small degree of determinancy
by the denticulate factor (Factor IV), but otherwise fit the general pat-
tern well. Unit 8, with its very high loading on Factor III, the fine-cutting
or food preparation factor, is from a remnant deposit in the front of the
cave where there were three small fire lenses. The homogeneity of the
other units confirms the original hypothesis about Shubbabiq (S. R. Bin-
ford, 1966), based on Bordes’ method       of analysis and on Chi-square
testing of samples—that the cave was intensively occupied but that a
relatively short period of time seems to be involved.
  The hypothesis that Factor I would be associated with a base-camp
type of settlement is supported in this case by the consistent co-occur-
rence of Factors I and III, as well as by the nature of the site itself. The
cave is large, well-lighted, and well-protected against wind and remains
dry during the rainy season. The area within the limits of natural light
 S. R. Binford Near Eastern Mousterian of Levallois Facies
                                                                                                                               53




             PerRcentTace               GrapHws                 oF          Factor          DeTeRMINaNcy
                For       StTupiep      SamPres               oF      “Levartctois          Moustrerian”
                           SAMPLES       FROM           SHELTER             *;        YABRUD,      4YRIA
                          FEee
                                          Facroe              Facroe         Factor             Factor        CLA6SIFICATION
                                                                    ake          mr                           By    Boroes
                                                                                                              Femeassia

                                                                                                              Ferrasoe

                                                                                                              Fereassie

                                                                                                              DentricuLatre

                                                                                                              Feerassie

                                                                                                              Ty Pica

                                                                                                              Feeracsie

                                                                                                              DentTicuLare

                                                                                                              Feerassie



                  SamPLEee       FROM      MUGHARET                         ES —       6HUBBABIQC,         ISRAEL
    PrRovenience
   Unir    100                                                                                                TrPicaL
   Uner    lOOA                                                                                               Typical
   Unir    103-109                                                                                            Tr rPicaw
   Unit    1IS-lle                                                                                            TYPICAL

   Uner    17                                                                                                 Ty Picaw

   Unir    300-310                                                                                            Tyr Pica

   Unit    200- 208                                                                                                “F



                      SAMPLE      FROM      HOUPEVILLE,                     NEAR         ROVEN,          FRANCE

    Seme        Cisaiee   ore                                       | sears                      aa           Te PIiCcAL


                                                ScaAatce       iw    Peecentr

                                                ©   ©   W   S040 50 60 70 BO SC KO



                                                        Figure 1.


consists of almost 300 square meters of floor space.
   The samples from Jabrud were recovered from a trench averaging 3
meters in width and running the length of the shelter for about 22.5
meters (Rust, 1950; Plates 3 and 4). We estimate that approximately half
of the living space of the shelter at the time of the occupations of Couches
2—8 is represented. The determinants of the variability in the assem-
blages from these levels exhibit a great deal more variance than can be
observed at Shubbabiq. There are also striking differences in the factors
represented at the two sites. Nowhere in Jabrud does Factor I play the
dominant           role it does at Shubbabiq;                             in Jabrud, Factors               II, IV, and V
account for most of the variance. Factor III is absent in all the levels
except Couche 2, and this is the only level for which Rust mentions the
presence of fires (1950, p. 61). The entire configuration of the factors in
Jabrud 2—8 suggests various kinds of temporary occupations of the shel-
ter by specific work groups, and the large role played by Factors II and V
54                                      Archeological Theory and Method
would seem to suggest that the site was used for small hunting encamp-
ments. The relatively open nature of the site, its relatively small size (an
estimated average of 175 sq. m. of floor space at the time of these occupa-
tions), and the nature of the determinants of the observed variance all
support the hypothesis that Shelter I served as a temporary work camp,
rather than as a base camp.
   There is a general trend observable in the variation of Couches 2—8—
the replacement through time of Factor V by Factor II. Since both of
these factors suggest hunting and butchering, this trend could be interp-
reted as the replacement of one functional unit by another—that is, stylis-
tic change. However, since Factor II is a less complex tool kit, this trend
might also signify changes in hunting behavior along with the develop-
ment of more specialized tools. The current work at Jabrud being done by
Dr. Ralph Solecki should yield faunal data to confirm or refute our cur-
rent hypotheses.
   The factor analysis results from Jabrud and Shubbabiq demonstrate
that variability in a single culture type can profitably be examined within
a functional frame of reference. Variability between assemblages at the
same site may well represent activity variants, not necessarily “culture
change” or occupations by bearers of different “traditions,” and we must
develop analytical tools for distinguishing between these phenomena. Va-
riability between sites may represent differences in settlement type, not
necessarily regional traditions, and we must also make a distinction be-
tween these.


                                 Change
Let us turn to the second problem mentioned above—that of interpreting
change from one major culture type to another. The data under discussion
are those pertaining to the Middle-to-Upper Paleolithic transition in the
Near East.
   Dorothy Garrod has stated that the Emiran culture is transitional be-
tween the Levallois-Mousterian and Upper Paleolithic in the Palestinian
region of the Near East and asserts that the Emireh point is the hallmark
of this culture (Garrod, 1951, 1955). The type site consists of three shel-
ters in Wadi Amud, Israel, two of which yielded the artifacts by which
Garrod defines the Emiran.
   The Emireh point is known from several sites in the Palestinian area. It
is always made on a Levallois point, which may or may not be marginally
retouched, and it is characterized by the removal of small, subparallel
flakes at the base of the point on the bulbar side. The point always occurs
in very low frequencies and is known in several different contexts.
   At Abu Halka, Lebanon, there is some ambiguity about context. The
example there occurs in Layer IVf, which is termed Upper Paleolithic
because of the presence of the Emireh point (Haller, 1946, pp. 6—7). All
S. R. Binford Near Eastern Mousterian of Levallois Facies                 55
the artifacts illustrated from the level in question appear to be typical of
the Levallois-Mousterian (Haller, 1946, Plate I), but the percentages of
burins and endscrapers reported are exceedingly high for a Mousterian
assemblage. The possible interpretations of this situation are: (1) two
archeological horizons were mixed during excavation; (2) errors were
made in typology; or (3) this does in fact represent a “transitional” in-
dustry.
   Ewing reported the presence of Emireh points at Ksar ‘Akil, Lebanon,
one of which occurred in this site below the zone which Ewing termed
transitional; it was in the upper     portion   of the Levallois-Mousterian
(Ewing, 1947, p. 191).
  Two   Emireh    points were    recovered   from    Mugharet   es-Shubbabiq
(S. R. Binford, 1966 )—one from a disturbed level which yielded artifacts
ranging from Mousterian stone tools to Early Bronze sherds, the second
from an unmixed horizon of Mousterian of Levallois facies.
   Five Emireh points from el-Wad are illustrated in The Stone Age of
Mount Carmel (Garrod and Bate, 1937, Plate XXVI, Nos. 1—3, Plate
XXVII, Nos. 7 and 8). Three were in layer G, originally called Lower
Aurignacian, and two in Layer F, which was identified as Upper Leval-
lois-Mousterian. The report states that in places layer G was indistin-
guishable in appearance from F, which immediately overlay it, and, as it
contained a small proportion of Lower Aurignacian implements, it “can-
not be regarded as quite free from disturbance” (Garrod and Bate, 1937,
p- 23).
  After the identification of Emireh points at Abu Halka and Ksar ’Akil,
Garrod was led to reexamine her findings from el-Wad (Garrod, 1951).
The reexamination consisted of treating the lithic materials from layers F
and G as if they represented “an archaeological horizon containing an
industry with the same mixed characters as those of the Lebanese sites”
(Garrod, 1951, p. 121). The average thickness of layer F is 10 cms. while
layer G varies from 40 cms. to over 7 meters (Garrod and Bate, 1937, p.
23). The interpretation of materials from over 7 meters of possibly dis-
turbed deposits as though they represented a single archeological hori-
zon seems a doubtful procedure and one which would obscure rather than
clarify differences.
  Garrod’s original interpretation of the type site, the Emireh        shelters,
excavated forty years ago under far from ideal conditions (Turville-Petre,
1927), was that the deposits were disturbed. Yet the collection from these
shelters was made the type assemblage for the Emiran        (Garrod, 1955, p.
21). After field inspection of the remaining deposits in the large shelter at
Emireh, I am strongly inclined to agree with Garrod’s original interpreta-
tion of the site—that the deposits are disturbed and mixed, and that at
least two components are present.
  In summary,    at the sites under discussion the Emireh point occurs at
two locations—Ksar    ’Akil and Shubbabiq—in        clear Mousterian   context.
56                                               Archeological Theory and Method
At two other sites—el-Wad and Emireh—there is a good probability of
disturbance and/or mixing. Only at Abu Halka can there be said to be
anything “transitional” about the context. Skinner (personal communica-
tion, 1964) in his examination of this question has drawn up an even
longer list of Emiran ambiguities. In view of this, the value of the Emireh
point as a fossile directeur is open to serious question.
   It is further suggested here that the traditional emphasis on “transi-
tional industries” is open to question. If we view the change from Middle
to Upper Paleolithic         in an adaptive framework,          we   can   observe   that
several significant shifts occur. Anatomically modern man (Homo sapiens
sapiens )puts in his first appearance. New and more economical ways of
utilizing raw material rapidly become dominant—the consistent manufac-
ture of implements by punch-blade technique and a marked increase in
frequencies of composite tools. It is hypothesized that these changes were
predicated on new kinds of relationships between man and his environ-
ment, both physical and social, and that the changing relationships oc-
curred within the latter part of the Middle Paleolithic itself. The emerg-
ence of new biological and cultural forms is the end-product of adaptive
change, and it is in the nature of the basic adaptive changes that we will
begin to understand why and how new forms appeared.
   Although the currently available data are limited, the kinds of changes
which occurred within the social environment can profitably be examined
by techniques such as factor analysis which allow us to make inferences as
to settlement systems and the structuring of work groups. If new methods
of data collection and analysis are employed, we can certainly learn much
more about both the internal divisions of local groups and between-group
relations and how these might have changed throughout the Middle Pale-
olithic.
   Changes in man’s relations to his physical environment will be reflected
in subsistence activities, and there is an intriguing hint of such a shift at
Skhil, one of the Mount Carmel caves (Garrod and Bate, 1937). Accept-
ing Howell’s relative dating of Tabun and Skhul (1957), Tabian being the
earlier of the two, a marked change in the exploitation of game can be
observed through time.’ Tabiin yielded a fauna characterized by a wide
variety of species with no evidence of preference for any single form, but
with an increase in Bos fragments in the Upper Levallois-Mousterian
levels (Garrod and Bate, 1937, pp. 143-50). Skhul, the more recent site,
is described as follows:
     The most striking character of the collection from this deposit is the ex-
     tremely large number of Bos (Garrod and Bate, 1937, p. 149).

Certainly this suggests a shift from generalized to specific hunting, and it
is the systematic exploitation of a single species of herd mammals which
     ’ This is set forth in a more playful manner in Binford and Binford 1966b.
S. R. Binford Near Eastern Mousterian of Levallois Facies        57
characterizes much of the Upper Paleolithic. It is Skhal which also
yielded the remains of the Neanderthals which Howell terms “sapien-
sized” (1957).
   It is suggested that the place to see a “transition” is in the basic adapta-
tion itself and not in the technological means developed within the frame-
work of the new adaptation. The shift to specialized exploitation of spe-
cific kinds of game and the emergence of anatomically modern man were
probably achieved over a considerable period of time, whereas the adop-
tion of a more efficient mode of tool production might well have been
change of a quick, replacive nature.
   In dealing with lithic assemblages, we must distinguish between stylis-
tic change and functional change. The battleship curve is an excellent
model for dealing with style change, but the kind of technological
changes reflected in the assemblages of the Middle to Upper Paleolithic
of the Near East is of a completely different order and cannot be under-
stood in terms of the same model. Man does not continue to use less
efficient tools when newer and better ones are readily available. The steel-
point pen very quickly replaced the quill, and modern commercial airlines
do not continue to purchase piston engine planes instead of jets because
of “tradition.” These are two examples of more efficient technological
means quickly replacing older forms, and there is no reason to believe
that Paleolithic man made his artifacts half by Levallois-Mousterian tech-
niques and half by Upper Paleolithic techniques because of cultural con-
servatism. The isolation of the archeological horizons where the techno-
logical change occurred will not only be very difficult; it will tell us
almost nothing about how and why the underlying adaptive shifts took
place.
  Even more basic questions might be raised with respect to “transi-
tional” industries when the problem is understanding the change from
one major culture type to another. The assumptions underlying the search
for transitional industries appear to be not only that stone tools them-
selves somehow evolve but also that changes are more or less evenly
distributed through time and do not cluster. The first assumption and the
problems it raises are discussed by Sackett in this volume. The latter
assumption is often made explicit by American anthropologists in the
form of statements to the effect that culture is a continuum. The analyti-
cal problems arising from such an assumption have been discussed by
Spaulding (1957, pp. 86—87), who points out that while space and time
are indeed continua, cultural phenomena        are characterized by their ten-
dency to cluster in space and time:
   I am of the opinion that clustering of this sort is generally characteristic of
   cultural data and that the development of adequate scaling and analytical
   techniques for its study is the most important methodological problem con-
   fronting archeologists (1957, p. 87).
58                                           Archeological Theory and Method
     The pressing need for the development of scaling and analytical tech-
niques for studying the kind and degree of culture change involved be-
tween Middle and Upper Paleolithic can be readily seen in the extant
literature. A recent example is the article by Pradel (1966) and the com-
ments published with the article which exhibit the futility of attempting
to explain the observed differences in terms of migrations         (Gallus, 1966,
pp. 39-40; Echegaray, 1966, p. 41), transitional industries (Garrod,
1966, pp. 40—41; Freund, 1966, pp. 38—39), and lithic mutation (Brace,
1966, p. 37; Smith, 1966, p. 44). Almost all prehistorians agree that the
Mousterian and the early Upper Paleolithic are somehow different; some
see little difference (Bordes, 1961) and therefore assume lineally related
populations responsible for the two kinds of assemblage, while others
(Vogel, 1966, p. 46—47) assert that the change in lithic industries is so
marked and rapid that different populations must be involved.
   Until the Mousterian and the early Upper Paleolithic are both analyzed
in terms of units which are relatable to human activities (that is, tool-
kits) and their spatial distribution (settlement types and patterns), we
have no means for accurately measuring the degree of difference between
Mousterian and Upper Paleolithic cultural systems. The rapid adoption of
new technological means for flint-tool manufacture may mask underlying
similarities and differences in subsistence base, settlement pattern, and
social organization. It is only when these differences and similarities are
measured and compared that we can hope to explain the kind and degree
of change which took place.
   Two problems have been discussed—variability within a single culture
type and change from one culture type to another. It is important to
distinguish between these phenomena, since they are radically different
yet are often treated as though they were the same. Variability within the
same broad culture type, defined in terms of lithic assemblages, has often
been interpreted as reflecting culture change or as the expression of re-
gional traditions. It is suggested here that such variability must be inves-
tigated functionally—in terms of the activities represented and the struc-
ture of settlement systems. If structural change can be demonstrated in
these aspects of behavior in the past, then we have the basis for develop-
ing processual models for understanding changes in lithic assemblages.


                                    References

BEARDSLEY, R. K., et al. 1956. Functional and evolutionary implications        of
  community patterning. American Antiquity, 22(2), Part 2: 130—57.
Brnrorp, L. R. 1963. Red ocher caches from the Michigan area: a possible
  case of cultural drift. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 19(1): 89—-
     108.
BrnForp, SaLty R. 1966, Mugharet es-Shubbabiq: a Mousterian cave in Israel.
     Journal of the Israeli Exploration Society, 16(1 and 2): 18—32, 96—103.
S. R. Binford Near Eastern Mousterian of Levallois Facies                               59
Binrorp, L. R., and Sarty R. Binrorp. 1966a. A preliminary analysis of
  functional variability in the Mousterian of Levallois facies. American An-
  thropologist, 68(2), Part 2: 238—95.
      . 1966b. The predatoray revolution: a consideration of the evidence for a
  new subsistence level. American Anthropologist, 68(2), Part 1: 508-512.
Borves, F, H. 1953a. Essai de classification des industries “moustériennes.”
  Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique Frangaise, 50(8): 457—66.
      . 1953b. Levalloisien et Moustérien. Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique
  Francaise, 50(4): 226—35.
      . 1955. Le paléolithique inférieur et moyen de Jabrud (Syrie) et la ques-
  tion du pré-Aurignacien. L’Anthropologie, 59(5 and 6): 486—507.
     . 1960. Le pré-Aurignacien de Yabroud (Syrie), et son incidence sur la
  chronologie du Quaternaire en Moyen Orient. Bulletin of the Research Coun-
  cil of Israel, 9G(2 and3): 91—103.
     . 1961. Typologie du paléolithique ancien et moyen. Bordeaux: Imprimerie
  Delmas.
  i ap Sur la chronologie du paléolithique au Moyen Orient. Quaternaria.

——.    1963. Le moustérien a denticulés. Arheoloski Vestnik, 14: 43—49.
oa      C. L. 1966. Comments on Pradel’s paper. Current Anthropology, 7(1):

et        J. G. 1966. Comments on Pradel’s paper. Current Anthropology,
 (1): 41.
Ewine, J. F. 1947. Preliminary note on the excavations at the Palaeolithic site of
  Ksar ’Akil, Republic of Lebanon. Antiquity, 21(84): 186—96.
Freunp, G. 1966. Comments         on Pradel’s paper. Current Anthropology,        7(1):
  38-39.
Frucuter,    B. 1954.    Introduction    to factor analysis. Princeton:    D. van      No-
  strand.
Gauxus, A. 1966. Comments on Pradel’s paper. Current Anthropology, 7(1):
  39—40.
Garrop, D. 1951. A transitional industry from the base of the Upper Palae-
  olithic in Palestine and Syria. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute,
  81: 121—30.
     . 1953. The relations between south-west Asia and Europe in the Later
  Palaeolithic Age. Cahiers d'Histoire Mondiale, 1: 13—38.
      . 1955. The Mugharet el-Emireh in Lower Galilee: type station of the Emi-
  ran industry. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 85: 1—22.
      . 1956. Acheuléo-Jabroudien et “Pré-Aurignacien” de la grotte de Taboun
  (Mont     Carmel);    étude   stratigraphique   et chronologique.     Quaternaria,    3:
  39-59.
     . 1963. The Middle Palaeolithic of the Near East and the problem of
  Mount Carmel Man. The Huxley Memorial Lecture, 1962. Journal of the
  Royal Anthropological Institute, 93: 232—59.
     . 1966. Comments on Pradel’s paper. Current Anthropology, 7(1): 40-41.
Garrop, D., and D. Bate. 1937. The stone age of Mount Carmel, Volek
  Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hatter, J. 1946. Notes de préhistoire phénicienne: !Abou Halka. Bulletin du
  Musée de Beyrouth, 6: 1—20.
Harmann, H. H.          1961.   Modern    factor analysis.   Chicago:     University    of
  Chicago Press.
Howe tt. F. Ciark.      1957. The evolutionary significance of variation and vari-
  ties of “Neanderthal” man. Quarterly Review of Biology, 32(4): 330—47.
60                                              Archeological Theory and Method
      . 1959. Upper Pleistocene stratigraphy and early man in the Levant. Pro-
  ceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 103: 1—65.
     . 1961. Stratigraphie du Pleistocene supérieur dans l’Asie du sud-ouest.
  l'Anthropologie, 65: 1—20.
Kiernpienst, M. R. 1961a. Components of the East African Acheulian assem-
  blage: an analytic approach. Actes de 4° Pan-Africain Congres de Préhistorie.
     (Leopoldville, 1959): 81—111.
     . 1961b. Variability within the late Acheulian assemblage in East Africa.
  South African Archaeological Bulletin, 16: 35—50.
PraDEL,    L. 1966.    Transition   from   Mousterian   to Perigordian:   skeletal   and
  industrial. Current Anthropology, 7(1): 33—50.
Rust, A. 1950. Die Hohlenfunde von Jabrud (Syrien). Neumiinster.
DESONNEVILLE-Borves, D. 1960. Le paléolithique supérieur en Périgord. Bor-
  deaux: Imprimerie Delmas.
SmitH, P. E. L. 1966. Comments on Pradel’s paper. Current Anthropology,
  7(1): 44-45.
SpauLpinG, A. C, 1957. Review of “Method and theory in American archaeol-
  ogy.” American Antiquity, 23(1): 85—87.
TURVILLE-PETRE,       F. 1927. Researches in prehistoric Galilee 1925-26. London:
 British School of Archaeology in Jerusalem.
as y C. 1966. Comments on Pradel’s paper. Current Anthropology, 7(1):
  6—4
FIVE
                                                               JAMES      R. SACKETT




                                                 Method and Theory
                             of Upper Paleolithic Archeology
                                               in Southwestern France




The aims of this essay are to review the present state of method and
theory in Upper Paleolithic archeology and to examine some of the prob-
lems that must be met in attempting to design its future research stra-
tegy.’ Like the other essays in this volume, it is based upon the assump-
tion that the growing alliance between archeology and cultural anthropol-
ogy will not only prove mutually beneficial, but that indeed it will play a
determinant role in the future development of both disciplines. Unhap-
pily, despite the enormous wealth and importance of the cultural data for
which it is responsible, Upper Paleolithic archeology is less a part of this
alliance than any other major field of prehistory. Few of its actual prac-
titioners have but the most generalized notions of either modern culture
theory or the substantive data of ethnography, while most anthropologists
in turn know no more of it than is provided by brief summaries in out-
dated textbooks. Although directed primarily toward archeologists, the
following discussion will—it is hoped—suggest to both of these almost
mutually exclusive audiences that a synthesis of their respective formula-
  1A short draft of this paper was      read at the annual meeting of the American
Anthropological Association, Denver, 1965. Several developments since the present
version was written (June, 1966) indicate that much of its argument is not as original
as I believed. Particularly relevant is the appearance of Philip Smith’s Le Solutréen en
France (1966), which proposes.many aspects of the research strategy advocated here.

                                          61
62                                         Archeological Theory and Method
tions and analytic approaches may well be of profit to the scientific study
of culture history.
   The Upper Paleolithic (late Old Stone Age) consists of a relatively
diverse block of hunting and gathering cultures that occupied Europe and
the Near East during the latter half of the Final or Wiirm Glacial period,
Late Glacial extensions of which penetrated as far as western North Af-
rica and northern Asia. Although their precise genetic connections remain
undefined, all of these cultures appear to be historically related by their
common possession of distinctive stone-tool industries that are usually
dominated by advanced blade technologies. Wherever it appears, the
Upper Paleolithic seems to represent a qualitative advancement in re-
gional culture history as measured by elaboration of artifactual remains
and density of sites. The disparity between it and the preceding Mouste-
rian period is nowhere more dramatically expressed than in the periglacial
zone extending across mid-latitude Europe from the Atlantic Ocean to the
South Russian Plain. Here Upper Paleolithic societies seem to have
achieved levels of economic success and cultural complexity that were not
to recur until Neolithic times in the Old World and that have been rivaled
among historic hunters and gatherers perhaps only by such groups as the
maritime cultures of the Pacific Northwest Coast.
     In this paper we shall deal systematically with only one segment of this
Upper Paleolithic climax—the classic archeological sequence of the Peéri-
gord region of southwestern France, centering upon the modern depart-
ment of the Dordogne.’ This regional restriction will preclude examina-
tion of some of the most important achievements of Upper Paleolithic
archeology, such as the refined analysis of extremely informative open-air
sites in Russia (Boriskovski, 1965) and central Europe (Klima, 1962;
Rust, 1958), and even some of the most advanced research being con-
ducted in France itself (for example, Leroi-Gourhan, 1963; Leroi-
Gourhan and Brésillon, 1964; Escalon de Fonton, 1961). However, since
the Dordogne has traditionally played a leading role in the development
of archeological theory and method, this discussion should prove to be of
at least general relevance to Upper Paleolithic investigations throughout
mid-latitude Europe.
   Figure 1 provides an extremely simplified version of the Dordogne
sequence within its climatic and geological framework. The chronology is
based upon a radiocarbon regime that is very incomplete; subsequent to
20,000 B.c., the assigned dates may be no more than a millenium off, but
their likely range of error increases markedly for earlier periods. It should
be noted that the somewhat inconsistent terminology of cultural periods
  * The primary source for the Dordogne is de Sonneville-Bordes (1960), which in
both content and method furnishes the indispensible point of departure for all
research in this region.
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France                                            63




                 CuLTuRAL                                                                  a
                       aed nace                                                    Pbpb
                     AZILIAN




                                                                                   Leare       Wim




             Upeam    PkmiconDiaNn



                                                                                   Mioco-e     Wirem




            Upper     Paragourrnic            Sequence          of   THe     Dornoane
                      (Baszo      UPON   Movive   1960, 19663   Laviiie    1964)



                                             Figure 1.



and traditions partially reflects older historical interpretations that are
now widely questioned.
  The Dordogne sequence is based upon what is at present the world’s
richest concentration of Upper Paleolithic sites. The bulk of these are
rock-shelter or abri stations which have been uncovered in the talus of
limestone cliffs that dominate many of the valleys in this region. Although
intensive exploration has been restricted to the Dordogne and Vézére
river valleys, more than 150 such sites have been at least partially exca-
vated—a number that probably represents but a small fraction of those
64                                              Archeological Theory and Method
that remain to be discovered. These sites often yield several meters’ thick-
ness of occupation levels containing many thousands of stone implements
and vast quantities of kitchen and industrial garbage. Residence seems to
have continued the year-round in many of the levels, and often appar-
ently involved several neighboring rock-shelters simultaneously; in locali-
ties such as the Gorge d’Enfer and the Les Eyzies cliffs, buried occupa-
tion zones may actually extend more or less continuously for almost a
kilometer. Moreover, the region is richly endowed with open-air sites and
painted and engraved caves, both of which are ascribed to the same
peoples who inhabited the rock-shelters. In view of the sheer volume and
elaboration of their cultural remains, there can be little doubt that Upper
Paleolithic societies in the Dordogne achieved one of the most successful
hunting and gathering adaptations in culture history.
   The factors accounting for this success presumably stemmed from an
almost ideal combination of exploitative skills and environmental re-
sources enjoyed by Upper Paleolithic men in this region. Though serious
gaps and ambiguities remain in our knowledge of their technology, espec-
ially with regard to perishable manufactures and in specific areas such as
food storage and preservation, their extant artifacts and pictorial art
strongly suggest that Upper Paleolithic men possessed almost the entire
range of techniques and equipment found among historic hunters and
gatherers aside from those items that have only recently diffused from
semi-industrialized societies. This range seems to have included in at least
many cultural phases all of the specialized technology required for inten-
sive semi-Arctic land and riverine exploitation, such as tailored skin cloth-
ing, refined missile systems involving the throwing board and bow and
arrow, and fishing harpoons, leisters, and gorges.°
     The environmental side of the equation was dominated by an extremely
high biomass that apparently greatly exceeded the present carrying ca-
pacity of Arctic and sub-Arctic tundras and ‘steppes, which today exist
only at much higher latitudes (Butzer, 1964, p. 374). This mainly con-
sisted of large populations of herbivores such as reindeer, horse, and
bison, in addition to a variety of birds and fish, the latter including
anadromous forms like salmon. The region also provided rich sources of
workable stone, housing in the form of numerous rock-shelters immedi-
ately accessible to water, and a variegated landscape that was particularly
well suited for pedestrian big-game hunting. This heterogeneous topo-
graphy of wind-swept plateaus and sheltered valleys may itself have been
a dominant factor in the economic success of Paleolithic hunters. Exposed
simultaneously to generally severe continental and relatively mild oceanic
weather conditions, it apparently accomodated a variety of contiguous
micro-environments among which the principal game animals could usu-
     * See J. G. D. Clark (1952)   for a general survey of Upper Paleolithic technology
from the perspective of subsequent culture history.                                   ;
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France               65
ally find suitable conditions for regional occupation regardless of seasonal
variations and even the long-range climatic oscillations represented in
Figure 1 (Bouchud, 1959).
  While the preceding may be a reasonably valid sketch of Upper Paleo-
lithic man-land   relationships   in the Dordogne,     one   can only speculate
about the details of the economic practices involved and the broader
cultural contexts within which they operated. For there exists no signifi-
cant body of literature that is directly concerned with the systematic
analysis of Old Stone Age cultural patterns and the processes that deter-
mined them. Frequent and occasionally penetrating cultural inferences
are in fact drawn by most archeologists, but these generally remain iso-
lated and particularistic, most often based upon archeological facts taken
out of context and explained in terms of ethnographic facts equally out of
context. Their emphasis moreover is heavily oriented toward “humanistic”
considerations of the more spectacular artifactual remains such as burials,
Venus figurines, and cave art. Little rigorous analysis is devoted to such
areas   as the functions   of stone    and bone tools, demography,     and the
seasonal distribution and availability of food resources—precisely those
topics that must first be understood if prehistoric cultures are to be recon-
structed (much less, if their art and ideology are to be interpreted in a
meaningful context).As a result, the more basic questions of Upper Pale-
olithic life remain unanswered        and, in fact, seldom asked. For example,
what precisely were the subsistence techniques of Upper Paleolithic for-
agers, what population sizes and densities might they support, and with
what kinds of settlement patterns were they associated? Or again, do the
successive Upper Paleolithic artifact complexes refer to distinct types of
economic and social organization, or do they merely reflect stylistic varia-
tions within a single cultural tradition? Indeed, were it not for their
apparent associations with distinct types of hominids, most archeologists
would be hard pressed even to suggest a testable hypothesis accounting
for the obviously different levels of economic success achieved by the
Mousterian and Upper Paleolithic cultures in general (however, see
Bordes, 1960).
  Now, it could be argued that the deficiencies of current archeological
interpretation in the Upper Paleolithic, as in other fields of prehistory,
largely indicate no more than that other research tasks have necessarily
had greater priority. In fact, the artifactual and stratigraphic complexity
of the Dordogne have necessitated that primary concern be given to
purely descriptive classification, that is, typological definitions of arche-
ological assemblages and the construction of a regional sequence of cul-
tural phases. Nevertheless, this alone cannot explain the general lack of
interest in the kinds of questions raised above. For archeologists have not
even obtained the organized data upon which interpretations of cultural
pattern and process could be systematically tested once the basic require-
66                                       Archeological Theory and Method
ments of descriptive classification are met. Only a handful of artifact
assemblages representing all of the rock-shelters that have been excavated
to date are in any manner complete, well documented, or accompanied
by adequate provenience and paleoenvironmental information. Hence,
regardless of what research objectives may be given priority, it would
seem that prehistorians in the Dordogne have generally failed to employ a
culturally meaningful frame of reference for either the collection or inter-
pretation of their data.
   This of course does not mean that research has evolved in a theoretical
vacuum, but rather that its primary frame of reference has traditionally
lain in another area. From the pioneer work of Gabriel de Mortillet
(1869) down through World War II, research strategy was strongly in-
fluenced by the notion that the archeological record was best approached
in the same manner that earlier had proven successful in interpreting the
fossil record. Just as paleontologists subdivided organic history according
to successive forms of index fossil organisms, so prehistorians attempted
to define and order their archeological data in terms of artifact fossiles
directeurs—qualitatively diagnostic tool forms whose restricted strati-
graphic distributions were believed to delineate major culture blocks and
their principal evolutionary subdivisions. In the hands’ of gifted typolo-
gists (Bourlon, Bouyssonie, and Bouyssonie, 1912), a refined excavator
 (Peyrony, 1933), or a subtle culture historian (Breuil, 1912), this ap-
proach furnished a useful classificatory tool through which the French
sequence became established as the model for Upper Paleolithic research
throughout the Old World. Yet regardless of its general utility in space-
time systematics, the continued acceptance of this approach undoubtedly
retarded the development of sophisticated cultural reconstruction and
interpretation.
   First, the similar manner in which archeological and paleontological
fossiles were conceived inevitably fostered the assumption that culture
history was   amenable   to an organic, or at least a natural, evolutionary
model. This was clearly implicit in even the classificatory schemes of
Denis Peyrony, the Dordogne’s most brilliant traditional prehistorian. In
his revolutionary Les industries “aurignaciennes” dans le bassin de la
Vézére (1933) and continuing to dominate his subsequent papers (for
example, 1939, 1948) was the attempt to equate artifact fossiles, cultural
stages, and geological horizons as narrowly as possible into mechanical
systems whose parts articulated with almost robotic precision. Further,
when the patterns of culture dynamics reflected in these schemes could
not be “explained” as concomitant expressions of change in the natural
universe, they were attributed to behavioral expressions of biological dif-
ferences among human groups. Thus Peyrony maintained that a racial
split within Homo sapiens was sufficient to account for the simultaneous
occupation of the Dordogne by two distinct cultural traditions over sev-
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France               67
eral millenia.‘ Hence, it is not surprising that the writings of Peyrony and
his contemporaries nevertheless expressed strong if particularistic interest
in archeological evidences of art and ritual. A “humanistic” concern with
prehistoric ideology and esthetics was in effect predictably the focus (and
extent) of traditional interest at the detailed level of cultural inference, as
it was precisely these aspects of culture that most obviously eluded syste-
matic explanation within an organic frame of reference.
  A second and equally unfortunate consequence of the fossile approach
was that, by assuming a one-to-one correlation between cultural and nat-
ural stratigraphy, it led prehistorians to underestimate           grossly the com-
plexity of the archeological record. The minimum excavation unit recog-
nized by the best researchers was no less than an entire archeological
couche, an artifact-bearing zone of distinct sedimentary composition that
very often incorporates a number of discrete occupational subdivisions. At
the same time, sampling techniques concentrated only upon the data that
were required to obtain a sequential ordering of couche-specific archeo-
logical horizons: artifact assemblages were collected with no regard to
vertical and horizontal tool distributions within strata, and little paleoen-
vironmental data were systematically recovered other than the macro-
faunal remains that were considered to be primary chronological indica-
tors. Moreover, there was a strong tendency to overlook the more banal
areas of typology in favor of the established fossiles that were believed
capable of providing at once an adequate definition of both the formal
contents and genetic affiliations of assemblages—a procedure that of
course only intensified the analytic circularism inherent in traditional sys-
tematics. Thus the application of sampling techniques designed to meet
only the limited requirements of fossile classification prevented accumula-
tion of the organized body of information that we previously noted must
underlie culturally meaningful analysis in archeology.
   However, during the past fifteen years,        a number of fundamental inno-
vations in the techniques of data collection and analysis undoubtedly
signal a dramatic shift in the research strategy of Upper Paleolithic arch-
eology. Under the leadership of Frangois Bordes, excavation techniques
have approached the limits of micro-stratigraphic control in which com-
plete and fully documented artifact assemblages are segregated according
to the minimal sedimentary components that can be discerned in archeo-
logical couches    (for example, Bordes, 1958, Fig. 2). At some sites, as in
the ambitious research program conducted by Hallam Movius at the Abri
Pataud   (see below), detailed stratigraphic control is complemented by
   *Even more extreme organic models were adopted during this era for earlier
cultural stages, as in the so-called parallel phyla theory of Lower and Middle Paleo-
lithic evolution. Here the confusion of biology and culture often became intense, with
divergent hominid lines being held responsible for distinct cultural traditions at the
same time that archeological terminology frequently hinted at the practice of sexual
relations among stone tools. .
68                                           Archeological Theory and Method
horizontal dissection aimed toward determining the spatial relations of
tool distributions and architectural features over occupational surfaces.
Refined techniques are now available for obtaining detailed ecological
information from sedimentology (Bonifay, 1957; Laville, 1965) and paly-
nology (Lavocat, 1966), while paleontological analysis has been extended
both to micro-faunal remains and to such problems as the reconstruction
of hunting practices as these are reflected in the age and sex structures of
butchered animal assemblages (Bouchud, 1961). Equally revolutionary
advances have been made in descriptive classification. Of supreme im-
portance here has been the replacement of traditional systematics by
comprehensive typologies in which the entire range of artifactual varia-
tion found in the Upper Paleolithic may           be codified,    and the use of
descriptive statistical techniques for assessing and ordering archeological
assemblages. First introduced into Upper Paleolithic studies by de Son-
neville-Bordes and Perrot (1953) as an extension of techniques earlier
applied by Francois Bordes to the Mousterian Complex (1950), numeri-
cal taxonomy has rapidly become established as the foundation of archeo-
logical classification throughout Western Europe.’ To date it has pro-
vided the most thoroughgoing revision of traditional schemes in the Dor-
dogne itself, as is summarized in de Sonneville-Bordes’ monumental Le
Paléolithique supérieur en Périgord (1960).
   It is to be hoped that one day the results of these several lines of
investigation will be synthesized in an extensive literature devoted to
cultural interpretation in the Upper Paleolithic. No doubt this will emerge
only gradually, due to the vast expenditure of time and money that is
demanded by the new techniques of excavation and laboratory analysis.
Equally important, however, it will require the development of a more
viable interest in research strategy than is now apparent in the writings of
most archeologists. Aside from purely descriptive reviews              of the new
techniques, there is presently almost no concern expressed in print with
regard to general questions of theory and method. This silence is so
profound that an outside observer might well conclude either that archeo-
logists are naively assuming that their data—when available in sufficient
quantities—will automatically fall into culturally meaningful patterns or,
conversely, that there actually has been no rejection of the traditional
goals of fossile strategy. As for the latter, one prehistorian in an allied
field (Moberg, 1961, p. 26) suggests that nothing really has changed: the
quantitative procedures used in ordering assemblages, for example, sim-
ply represent the introduction of techniques that are current in the natu-
ral sciences, and are perhaps intended to reflect the same kinds of pat-
terning. And, in fact, the most ambitious attempt in the last decade to
explain Upper Paleolithic culture history is grounded upon an extreme
     * Escalon de Fonton and de Lumley, 1955; Bohmers,   1956; Laplace, 1964; Ronen,
1966.
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France        69
organic model whose mechanisms are allegedly verified by the facts of
primate history, the early Tertiary radiation of fissiped carnivores, and I.
Vavilov’s epicenter theory of plant domestication (Laplace, 1961, p. 66).
  Nonetheless, even a modest familiarity with the current literature indi-
cates that such examples are no more than individual expressions of conti-
nuity in the evolution of present research from that of the past. It is no
doubt true that interest in method and theory has been diverted by prag-
matic emphasis upon the immediate gain in refined descriptive classifica-
tion that is provided by the new techniques. But the general climate of
opinion is one of ambivalence rather than reaction; the traditional frame
of reference has been discarded by most students, but its successor has
not yet clearly emerged. Therefore, the remainder of this discussion will
be devoted to.a programmatic statement that will attempt to define the
nature of cultural interpretation in Upper Paleolithic archeology and the
kind of research strategy it might entail. What should be our research
objectives,   and with    what    analytic techniques      and interpretive    frame-
works ought we to be concerned in order to begin approaching them?
   With regard to the former, the design of future research strategy should
focus upon the complementary goals of (1) reconstructing the content
and structure of Upper Paleolithic cultural systems, and (2) elucidating
the processes that determined their form and mode of change. The term
system is employed here in L. R. Binford’s (1964) sense to emphasize
the view that prehistoric cultures were more than complexes of discrete
archeological traits and that to be understood they must be analyzed
structurally as systems of functionally interrelated elements. A cultural
system is posited by the archeologist from the sum total of his inferences
regarding the component technological, social, and ideological aspects of
all the activities that can be referred to it. Activities are culturally pat-
terned segments of human behavior that have received ordered expres-
sions in the archeological record. They are isolated and analyzed in terms
of clusters of associated elements—more specifically, the presence of non-
random variation in the complementary distributions of attributes and/or
classes of what Spaulding (1960) has called the “dimensions” of archeo-
logy: space, time, and form. Time and space define the loci of activities,
while the activities themselves are formally expressed by artifacts—
concrete manifestations of human behavior such as implements and archi-
tectural features—and       by paleoecological      remains.’ An “activity” is a
purely relative analytic unit that may range in scope from the manufac-
ture of a single artifact to the total lifeway of a community, and hence the
  6 While it is convenient to distinguish a paleoenvironmental order of formal data, it
should be noted that most if not all of its elements concretely express prehistoric
behavior patterns and are therefore artifactual in the strict sense of the term. Thus a
faunal assemblage recovered from an archeological site invariably reflects selective
cultural agents and does not provide a random sample of the animal communities that
actually existed in nature when the site was occupied.
70                                      Archeological Theory and Method
activities that can be identified with a specific prehistoric culture are
neither additive nor mutually exclusive categories. It is of course for this
reason that a systemic approach is required, since our analysis must obvi-
ously focus as much upon the functional articulations that once related a
variety of cross-cutting and overlapping activities as upon the contents of
the activities themselves.
   Aside from its emphasis upon a systemic view of culture, the above is of
course no more than an explicit description of what archeologists have
always done. The difference between one area or phase of prehistoric
research and another simply depends upon the kinds of activities that
receive paramount attention and the manner in which they are analyzed.
Therefore our problem may be stated as follows: assuming that present
data-gathering techniques provide reasonably complete information on all
cultural activities that are archeologically represented in the Upper Paleo-
lithic, upon what activities should cultural interpretation primarily focus
and in terms of what method and theory should their analysis be con-
ducted? An answer to this question must begin with the assumption of a
theoretical attitude regarding the nature of culture and the terms in
which it can most profitably be interpreted. The approach advocated here
is that of cultural ecology, which is based upon the proposition that the
content and structure of a cultural system are primarily, if not wholly,
determined by the technological procedures and sociodemographic ar-
rangements employed by its members in exploiting their environment.
Defined in its modern form by Julian Steward (1955), cultural ecology
has proved to be efficacious in a variety of interpretive studies in both
ethnology and archeology (see Sahlins, 1962; Helm, 1962). Due to its
wealth of materials directly reflecting man’s technological exploitation of
his environment, the Dordogne’ Upper Paleolithic should be particularly
amenable to analysis and interpretation oriented in terms of this ap-
proach.
   Given the perspective of cultural ecology, the initial focus of our pro-
posed research strategy should be directed toward those activities that
can be distinguished as primarily economic tasks; these by definition
involve the extraction of raw materials and their consumption either in
the form of food or implemental manufacture. Analysis of the artifactual
and paleoenvironmental components of such activities in the light of their
spatial distributions within and between archeological sites should enable
us to identify in at least general terms the nature of the tasks performed
and the composition of the groups undertaking them. Gradually from
such analysis should emerge a paradigm of the ecological adaption of
the cultural system under consideration, expressing how its integral tasks
were functionally related within a settlement pattern and population de-
mography through the year-round cycle of environmental exploitation
and occupation. This formulation should provide a background against
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France              me
whjch non-economic activities may then be projected for analysis, and in
turn related to each other and to the more explicit patterns of subsistence
and settlement. Ultimately, with continual readjustment to accomodate
newly incorporated information, the paradigm may be expanded to em-
brace the total range of inferences that can be deduced concerning the
economic,   social, and ideological aspects of the prehistoric cultural sys-
tem.
  Although the precise form such an approach will take must remain
obscure until adequate materials become available for testing, it is pos-
sible to anticipate some of the methodological problems that will be
involved. Obviously it will require an interdisciplinary effort in which
parallel studies in natural sciences like palynology and paleontology are
coordinated with each phase of the archeological investigation. This syn-
thesis has already begun to emerge        in the Dordogne       (for example,
Bouchud, 1961), and excellent precedents are available from other areas
of Paleolithic research (J. D. Clark, 1960; J. G. D. Clark, 1954). Equally
important, however, it will require a sophisticated use of the data and
theory of anthropology, especially as these relate to foci of cultural eco-
logical interpretation such as the demographic (Birdsell, 1968), residen-
tial (Chang, 1964), and social (L. R. Binford, 1964) correlates of sub-
sistence pursuits. Here of course the problems of research design will be
especially formidable. Anthropologists themselves are only just beginning
to achieve some amount of detailed predictive control in explaining living
societies, while—even at the level of cultural reconstruction—past failures
have revealed the dangers inherent in attempting to isolate specific eth-
nographic analogues for Upper Paleolithic societies. However, this phase
of the investigation can still proceed on the assumption of cultural uni-
formitarianism—the theoretical position that the basic form and articula-
tions of prehistoric activities were at least analogous to those found in
modern cultural systems and that both can be accounted for in terms of
similar processes. Unlike students of earlier Stone Age phases, we are
concerned with the cultural by-products of essentially modern forms of
Homo sapiens whose behavioral capabilities were presumably at least
equal to those found in the present races of men.
   In any event, it must be stressed that our analytic procedures will
themselves differ fundamentally from those of ethnography or social an-
thropology. While the investigation of an extant culture invariably pro-
ceeds in a systemic frame of reference, any one of its various com-
ponents or aspects may still be discretely identified and interpreted by
independent   observations   of human   behavior.   Thus,   ethnographers   ap-
parently seldom find it necessary to work with more variables than can be
intuitively controlled at one time. A prehistoric cultural activity, however,
is much more difficult to isolate as a discrete entity, due to the incom-
pleteness of the archeological record and the inherent ambiguity of its
72                                      Archeological Theory and Method
data. The definition and interpretation of an activity must therefore de-
pend as much upon an analysis of its relations to other activities as upon
its artifactual contents. Conversely, the validity with which it has been
formulated must itself be measured largely in terms of its analytic feed-
back, that is, the consistency it (or additional formulations based upon it)
may exhibit in articulating with these same activities in the paradigm of a
cultural system. It is obvious, therefore, that our investigation might pro-
fitably be conducted within a framework of multivariate statistical analy-
sis, without which it would be impossible to order systematically the large
numbers of variables whose covariance expresses the presence of activities
and their mutual relations.
   The kind of analytic approach suggested here is not unknown in other
fields of prehistoric research. Many of the essays in this volume provide
detailed examples of refined ecological interpretation, some of which in
addition incorporate multivariate procedures whereby activities are ana-
lyzed in terms of statistically significant associations among artifact
classes, or between artifacts and classes of paleobiological data, that ap-
pear in different loci which make up the settlement patterns of prehistoric-
cultures. However, the most suggestive examples for Upper Paleolithic
research are recent studies by the Binfords (S. R. Binford, this volume,
1965; Binford and Binford, 1966) and Leslie Freeman (1966) in which
factor analysis is used to partition Mousterian artifact assemblages into a
number of “tool-kits” that seemingly refer to aggregates of exploitative
and maintenance economic tasks and their associated residence patterns
which were to some extent spatially segregated. Redefined in this manner,
the assemblage types making up Bordes’ (1953) Mousterian Complex
may be viewed as primarily representing complementary structural poses
in the year-round subsistence pursuits of a single cultural system. The
capabilities for meaningful interpretation inherent in such an approach
are especially apparent in the most recent phase of this investigation
(Binford and Binford, 1966). In their recent unpublished research the
nature of the activities involved is more precisely defined by incorporat-
ing faunal and botanical evidence into the multivariate analysis, and
ethnographic inference is used in conjunction with the archeological data
in an attempt to outline the social and demographic correlates of eco-
nomic activities in a paradigm of Mousterian cultural ecology.
   At present there is available only one attempt to apply similar tech-
niques to the Upper Paleolithic: Robert Whallon’s (1963) unpublished
master's thesis on Dordogne Aurignacian I stone-tool assemblages. While
extremely provocative, Whallon’s results are nevertheless inconclusive, at
least in part because they are based on inadequate data that mainly
derive from fossile-oriented excavations. However, the accumulation of
large quantities of new evidence by modern data-gathering techniques
will not in itself guarantee that the Upper Paleolithic can be successfully
analyzed by the kind of research strategy proposed here. For there remain
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France            73
at least three problems in method and theory that must first be overcome
before we can be assured either that the new data are properly ordered or
even that they can provide the kinds of information that will be needed
for culturally meaningful analysis.
   First, the classifications and analytic procedures that are now used in
ordering artifactual data must be fundamentally revised. The available
comprehensive stone-tool typologies obviously mark a distinct advance
over traditional fossile classifications, and their quantitative application
has brought considerable refinement to both the comparison of archeolog-
ical assemblages and the construction of space-time ordering schemes.
But it is questionable whether any of them is in fact capable of systemati-
cally codifying the varieties of formal patterning inherent in archeological
assemblages that must be controlled if activities are to be consistently
isolated and interpreted. Taxonomists, perhaps still influenced by the
traditional paleontological model, appear to assume that artifact types are
in some manner natural units like species, and that consequently a single
typology is capable of serving all purposes. At the same time, the question
of what precisely types represent in behavioral terms is largely ignored
and the investigation of their functional employment is even discouraged
(Tixier, 1963, p. 17).
  No doubt such attitudes are both an effect and cause of the fact that
typologies continue to be designed solely by intuitive sorting procedures
that are incapable of systematically controlling the extremely subtle kinds
of patterning that are inherent in stone tools. This is apparent even in the
taxonomic structure of the typologies themselves. For example, detailed
typological subdivisions are usually recognized among “two-dimensional”
tool families like burins, whose formal variation may be codified in terms
of simple geometric relations on a single plane; but even more variable
“three-dimensional”      tools, like the carinate-nosed family of scrapers on
elevated blocks, usually receive only minimal subdivision.
   The best solution available to this problem entails replacing intuitive
type design by an approach known as attribute-cluster analysis, which
isolates typological categories by means of an explicit quantitative analy-
sis of the patterns in which formal attributes segregate non-randomly
(that is, cluster) among artifact samples.’ Although the specific statistical
techniques employed are quite different, attribute-cluster typology is pur-
sued in a framework of multivariate analysis which is basically similar to
that used in isolating cultural activities; indeed, a type defined by this
approach is in reality no more than a particularly discrete variety of
cultural activity. While attribute-cluster analysis has had several trials in
the New World, its only comprehensive application to the Upper Paleo-
lithic is found in an unpublished thesis on the Dordongne Aurignacian
   7 The term “statistical typology” is used frequently by Upper Paleolithic archeolo-
gists, but it refers to the quantitative applications of typologies in ordering assem-
blages and not to type design itself.
74                                         Archeological Theory and Method
tradition (Sackett, 1965). A brief article is however available on Aurigna-
cian endscraper typology that summarizes the major features of the
method and theory involved (Sackett, 1966). The study is based upon a
version of Spaulding’s (1953) non-parametric approach to isolating at-
tribute clusters, to which is added a procedure for controlling the higher
order interaction effects in multivariate analysis that presumably reflect
multiple-attribute contingencies. Although the application of such tech-
niques requires a considerable expenditure of effort, it does seem to yield
considerably enhanced refinement in typological discrimination when
compared with the intuitive procedures now used in designing artifact
classifications.
   For example, this analysis demonstrates that the Aurignacian end-
scraper categories recognized in the current typologies largely fail to
equate with the attribute clusters revealed by statistical analysis, even
when the attributes subjected to analysis are precisely those that were
used in defining the current types. Some of the latter appear to be intui-
tively idealized trait configurations that actually recur among only a mi-
nority of endscrapers, while others either fail to constitute mutually exclu-
sive units or express no more than random combinations of attribute
segregation. A second conclusion is that it should be possible to distin-
guish between what may be called stylistic and functional typological
variation, and that these to a great extent seem to provide cross-cutting
bases for type definition. Hence there is no single typology inherent in
endscrapers,   and the manner     in which   these tools are classified must
depend upon the way in which their typological categories are to be
employed in subsequent phases of research. Thus an endscraper typology
designed for space-time systematics would presumably be based upon
stylistic variables, as these provide the most sensitive reflections of his-
toric relations among archeological assemblages. On the other hand, an
analysis of economic activities among archeological sites would require an
endscraper classification that systematically controlled functionally signif-
icant typological variation. A third conclusion is that the behavior of lithic
attributes was strongly influenced by complex networks of mechanical
contingencies that seemingly originated in the raw materials and tech-
niques involved in stone-tool maufacture. In other words, a large degree
of attribute clustering in stone tools reflects neither stylistic nor functional
patterning, and in fact is not typologically significant in the usual sense of
the term.
   The last point is of particular interest, both because it greatly increases
the statistical difficulties of isolating meaningful stone-tool types and be-
cause it would appear to call for a reexamination of some of the theoreti-
cal assumptions that are currently employed in interpreting the meaning
of typologies. With regard to the latter, the type concept may not be valid
to the degree it involves the notion that types are the material expression
of mental models or templates, since lithic patterning seems to involve
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France           75
mechanical factors—as well presumably as motor habits—of which the
artisan himself may not have been aware. Hence, while it is possible to
isolate culturally meaningful typological patterns by attribute-cluster
analysis, their precise behavioral significance may in many cases remain
obscure.
  Similar and considerably more refined cluster analysis must of course
be pursued before a substantial body of new typologies can be designed
or before it can even be concluded that the varieties of patterning ob-
served in Aurignacian assemblages recur elsewhere. It is quite possible
that the interplay of stylistic, functional, and purely mechanical attribute
contingencies may in fact vary considerably among the Upper Paleolithic
cultural traditions over and above their more obvious differences in form
and relative frequencies of tools. In addition, it will be necessary to define
much more precisely the meaning of stylistic and functional variation in
stone tools and the manner in which these are to be identified in attribute
clustering.* The question of tool function is especially crucial in view of
the emphasis a cultural ecological approach places upon the reconstruc-
tion of economic tasks. Aside from the search for relevant ethnographic
parallels, what little analysis of tool function there is at present concen-
trates solely upon formal variation within artifact assemblages themselves.
Examples of this are Semenov’s (1964) microscopic investigation of the
stigmata of cutting-edge wear and the writer's ongoing statistical analysis
of breakage patterns in different categories of stone tools. While consider-
ably more work must be done along these lines, it would appear that the
results of such investigations are most often equivocal unless independent
confirmation is available. Obviously, the study of tool function must be
extended to contextual analyses that will focus upon the manner in which
attributes and classes of implements spatially covary both with each other
and with architectural features and paleoecological remains on the living
floors of archeological sites. If valid inferences are to be drawn con-
cerning the functional roles of tools in cultural activities, the tools must
ultimately be viewed in the actual matrix in which they were manufac-
tured and used.
   A second prerequisite for the proposed research strategy is a revision of
the present taxonomies and procedures that are used in the space-time
ordering of archeological assemblages. Unlike the Mousterian Complex,
which may be sufficiently uniform for all of its manifestations to be
   § One aspect of this definition must obviously concern the relativistic natures of
style and function themselves. For example, a split-based bone javelin head may be
considered a functional class of early Aurignacian assemblages;      however,   from the
viewpoint of the Upper Paleolithic in general, it might be regarded as but one stylistic
variant of this class—which it isomorphically shares with Gravette points, Magdalenian
harpoons, etc. Moreover, within any given tool, a single attribute may behave either as
a stylistic or as a functionable variable (aside from its mechanical contingencies with
other such variables), depending upon the context within which it is analyzed. Thus
marginal retouch on Aurignacian endscraper samples appears to be almost as sensitive
to temporal and spatial factors as a design element in ceramics.
76                                    Archeological Theory and Method
profitably analyzed in terms of a single ideal culture type, the Upper
Paleolithic seems to incorporate extreme formal heterogeneity over time
and space that strongly suggests the presence of both a number of distinct
types of cultural systems and a considerable amount of micro-evolution-
ary change within systems. However, it may be questioned whether these
could be isolated with sufficient precision by current ordering techniques
even if adequate data and refined typologies were available. Although
assemblages are presently ordered on the basis of quantitative assessment
of their artifact inventories, the statistical methods involved are of limited
value. They are restricted to purely descriptive techniques such as graphs
and tabled artifact percentages, while the analysis of interassemblage
frequency variation remains a purely qualitative operation that allows
only intuitive control over the effects of sampling error. Another weakness
in the current approach is that the artifact-type frequencies used in order-
ing are usually calculated as percentages of the total artifact assemblage.
Yet the latter often may not be representative of their respective levels,
since most assemblages are the product of restricted and somewhat arbi-
trarily placed excavations within occupation zones whose tools are by no
means horizontally distributed at random. Hence the interassemblage fre-
quency variations that are used in ordering may be due as much to
differential sampling as to temporal and spatial factors. Finally, it should
be noted that the principles of seriation are incompletely appreciated by
many taxonomists, who—when direct stratigraphic evidence is lacking—
often design essentially organic schemes of culture change in which tem-
porally sensitive artifact frequency shifts are attributed to a speciation
model of evolutionary radiation (évolution buissonnante ).
   Experiments with the Aurignacian materials discussed previously
(Sackett, 1965, 1966) suggest that fairly rigorous space-time ordering can
be obtained for lithic assemblages which is at least analogous to, if not as
refined as, those which New World archeologists have designed for cer-
amic traditions. Aside from employing an artifact typology that was spe-
cifically designed to reflect what is presumably stylistic formal variation,
the approach adopted in this study differs from current systematics in two
fundamental ways. First, relative artifact-type frequencies are calculated
not from the total assemblage but rather from restricted groups of tools
that—it is hoped—refer to the same broad functional category. In other
words, the popularity of a specific endscraper type is measured in terms
of the frequencies of other endscrapers, and is completely unaffected by
the numbers of such tools as burins and points. This procedure serves
both to reduce the effects of skewed assemblage sampling noted above
and to provide a basis for confirming assemblage variations by means of a
number of independent tests (since endscrapers, burins, points, etc., are
treated as distinct statistical universes). Second, assemblage comparison
and ordering are conducted in terms of a quantitative measure of formal
likeness and tested within a framework of statistical inference. This is
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France        Tt
achieved by combining the seriation matrix technique designed by Rob-
inson (1951) and Brainerd (1951) with the use of independent Chi-
square goodness-of-fit tests for determining the role of sampling error in
the frequency variations of gach pair of assemblages indexed in the ma-
trix. By these means it is possible to obtain simultaneously both a precise
mathematical expression of the formal differences among assemblages
and a statement of the degree to which each of these differences is statis-
tically significant.
   While such procedures may never attain the level of control required
for delimiting the archeological expressions of self-conscious social
groups, they still afford considerably greater refinement in assemblage
ordering than is now generally available. Moreover, they also provide
important auxilliary information about cultural continuities and discontin-
uities and the demographic patterns of settlement that help elucidate
many problems of cultural interpretation. For example, assuming that the
rate of stylistic change was constant, the results of the above study sug-
gest that Aurignacian societies underwent no marked temporal changes in
the intensity of their occupation of the Dordogne. This conclusion directly
contradicts both the traditional and most current ordering schemes, which
indicate a progressive diminution of the numbers of Aurignacian sites
over time—a result of assuming that the postulated stages of Aurignacian
evolution were of equal length. In reality, two-thirds of all Dordogne
Aurignacian temporal variation falls within stage I, while stages III and
IV cannot statistically be distinguished either from each other or from
stage II.° The spatial aspects of social demography may also be illumin-
ated by these techniques. In this case the Aurignacian results suggest that
it may be possible to define subregional stylistic zones that correlate
highly with river valley systems, presumably a reflection of both the areal
distributions of some kind of social frontiers and the ecological factors
that may have determined them.
   Finally, aside from sophisticated typologies and space-time ordering,
the analysis of Upper Paleolithic cultural systems will require a body of
evidence that is not only well documented but moreover representative.
Although current excavation techniques are sufficiently refined to guar-
antee the former, there remains the question of sampling procedure: how
are we to ensure that our evidence represents the full range of activities
archeologically expressed in Upper Paleolithic societies? This undoubt-
edly will call for systematic investigation of the spatial distributions of
activities both within individual sites and among the site complexes that
make up the settlement patterns of cultural systems.

   °Excluded from this analysis is the enigmatic Aurignacian V stage, known at
present from a single assemblage (Laugerie-Haute). Aside from the fact that it
stratigraphically succeeds the entire Upper Périgordian block, its tools fail to equate
with the attribute cluster types which accomodate all other Aurignacian assemblages
from the Dordogne that have been tested.
78                                        Archeological Theory and Method
   Our understanding of the localization of activities within sites is ex-
tremely limited because of the excavation techniques that were tradition-
ally employed in fossile-oriented research. While archeologists have long
been aware that artifacts and features are not randomly distributed with.
in occupation levels, there are few examples—such as the Solutrean “hut”
excavated by Peyrony (1932) at Fourneau du Diable—in which horizon-
tal patterning was systematically recognized and described. However, this
kind of information is of extreme importance to cultural interpretation
since there is much evidence to suggest that Upper Paleolithic rock-
shelter occupations may simultaneously have incorporated most of the
activities that were segregated among a number of different localities in
Mousterian     times. Thus, in comparison    with those of the Mousterian,
Upper Paleolithic sites tend to be considerably larger in extent and more
often occupied the year-round; their associated tool assemblages at once
indicate both exploitative and maintenance      economic activities; and cer-
tain tasks that one might expect to have been carried on elsewhere—such
as reindeer butchering—often took place in the habitation sites them-
selves. In fact, the only food preparation task that has been clearly dem-
onstrated not to have occurred in the rock-shelters is salmon cleaning and
drying (J. G. D. Clark, 1948, p. 48).
   The wealth of information that is actually to be found in rock-shelters is
indicated by preliminary reports of the excavations at the Abri Pataud
(Movius, 1965). Although no detailed review has yet appeared concern-
ing the full range of activities represented at this site, initial study of the
hearth and artifact distributions at least reveals that their residential asso-
ciations may vary dramatically from one level to the next. In the Péri-
gordian VI level, for example, hearths are aligned in 2-meter intervals to
form so-called “long house” patterns of occupation, while in underlying
Aurignacian horizons occupational debris tends to concentrate about iso-
lated hearths that are more or less randomly distributed. Furthermore,
Movius has been able to demonstrate how the relative frequencies of
exotic raw materials and manufacturing debris complement the age and
sex structures of butchered reindeer assemblages in indicating that the
various residence types at this site appear to represent different patterns
of seasonal exploitation.
     Future investigation may similarly demonstrate that considerable varia-
tion exists in the spatial distributions of economic tasks and residence
patterns that make up the settlement systems of Upper Paleolithic cul-
tures. This is suggested by what appear to be marked differences in the
intensity and localization of rock-shelter occupation in the various Dor-
dogne cultural traditions. Summarizing information provided by de Son-
neville-Bordes (1960), the Lower Périgordian is represented by relatively
thin and areally dispersed layers, while the Aurignacian replaces it mas-
sively with intensive occupations and a tendency to cluster in more or less
contiguous rock-shelters in narrow valleys or cliff faces. The Upper Peri-
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France                   79
gordian in turn appears in somewhat thinner occupation levels that are
generally evenly dispersed throughout the region. The Solutrean exhibits
an especially interesting temporal development, being represented by rel-
atively few but intensive occupations in its earlier phases and them seem-
ingly fragmenting into dispersed settlements later on (see also Smith,
1964, p. 91). Finally, the Magdalenian recurs intensively in a great num-
ber of sites, many of which were previously unoccupied, with perhaps a
progressive trend toward settlement along low-lying riverbanks.”
   In addition to much more detailed information of this kind, an under-
standing of Upper Paleolithic settlement patterns will also require consid-
eration of the numerous open-air sites in the Dordogne, which only re-
cently have begun to receive systematic attention. Excavation of open
stations in the Bergerac area by F. Bordes and J. Guichard (Bordes and
de Sonneville-Bordes, 1966), and in the Isle Valley by J. Gaussen       (1965),
are revealing a hitherto unsuspected dimension of Upper Paleolithic
economics and demography. In this connection, it may prove that the
development of new techniques for isolating and interpreting prehistoric
activities will depend largely upon such sites. This is due to their mode of
habitation, which presumably involved shorter occupation spans and less
spatial restriction than was the case in rock-shelters, and which resulted in
considerably more explicit horizontal patterning of artifact complexes.
Spatial segregation of activities is particularly clearcut in the Isle Valley
sites, whose artifacts associate with cobblestone “pavements” that obvi-
ously define regular architectural features (Sackett, 1967).
   Now, since Upper Paleolithic settlement patterns varied over space and
time, and since most of our archeological assemblages probably express a
variety of different kinds of activities, we are faced with extremely com-
plex decisions about excavation procedure. Should we concentrate upon
the complete recovery of a relatively few occupation levels in order to
refine our techniques for distinguishing the multiple activities that were
engaged in by individual residence groups? Or, rather, ought we to con-
centrate upon randomly sampling a large number of sites hoping to in-
crease our knowledge of the total variety of activities and demographic
patterns that occurred in the Upper Paleolithic as a whole? Circumstances
and the personal inclinations of individual students will probably dictate
both courses. Nevertheless, given the enormous cost in funds and time
that is required for refined     excavation,   the development    of culturally
meaningful sampling techniques is of paramount importance in the de-
sign of future research strategy.
  Especially when outlined so briefly, a programmatic statement such as
this can intend only to provoke further discussion, not wholesale agree-
ment. Indeed, in a field as viable and diverse as Upper Paleolithic arche-
ology, it should neither be expected nor desired that research strategy will
   ©The Aurignacian V and “Proto-Magdalenian phases are presently known from but
a single and two occupations respectively.
80                                                 Archeological Theory and Method
develop according to any single formula. It is to be hoped, however, that
this paper has demonstrated that long-range goals are of immediate con-
cern. The present absorption of archeologists in data collection and de-
scriptive classification is obviously not wrong in itself, as these must nec-
essarily precede meaningful cultural analysis. At the same time, however,
it should be equally apparent that both the methodology and degree of
sophistication with which these more fundamental tasks are approached
are determined by the kinds of assumptions we make regarding the na-
ture of Upper Paleolithic cultural systems and the means we plan to use
in pursuing their interpretation.



                                         References

Binrorp, Lewis R. 1962. Archaeology as anthropology. American Antiquity,
  28: 217-25.
      . 1964. A consideration of archaeological research design. American
   Antiquity, 29: 425—41.
BINFoRD, SALLy R. 1965. Social groupings and settlement systems in the Mous-
   terian. Presented at the American Anthropological Association annual meet-
   ings. (Unpublished. )
Brnrorp, Lewis R., and Satty R. Binrorp. 1966. A preliminary analysis of
   functional variability in the Mousterian of Levallois facies. In J. Desmond
   Clark and F. Clark Howell (Eds.), Recent studies in paleoanthropology.
  American Anthropologist, 68(2), Part 2: 238-95.
BIRDSELL, JOSEPH. 1968. Some predictions for the Pleistocene based upon equi-
  librium systems among recent hunters. In Richard B. Lee and Irven DeVore
   (Eds.), Man the hunter. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Boumers, A. 1956. Statistics and graphs in the study of flint assemblages.
  Palaeohistoria, 5: 1—6.
Boniray, EucENE. 1957. Les sédiments détritiques grossiers dans les rem-
  plissages des grottes. Méthode d’analyse morphologique et statistique. L’An-
  thropologie, 60: 477-61.
Borpes, Frangois.       1950, Principes d’une méthode d’étude des techniques de
  débitage et de la typologie du Paléolithique ancien et moyen. L’Anthropol-
  ogie, 54: 19-34.
      . 1953. Essai de classification des industries “moustériennes.” Bulletin de
  la Société Préhistorique Francaise, 50: 457—66.
——.       1958.   Nouvelles   fouilles    a Laugerie-Haute      Est.    Premiers    résultats.
  L’Anthropologie, 62:205—44,
      . 1960.     Evolution   in the Paleolithic    cultures.   In Sol Tax       (Ed.),   The
  evolution of man (Vol. 2 of Evolution after Darwin). Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press.
Borpes,    FRANcoIs,    and DrenisE      DESONNEVILLE-BorpDEs.         1966.   Protomagdale-
  nien ou Périgordien VII? L’Anthropologie, 70: 113-22.
BorisKovskI, P. J. 1965. A propos des récents progrés des études paléolithiques
  en U.R.S.S. L’Anthropologie, 69: 5—30.
Boucuup, JEAN. 1959. Le milieu et la vie pendant le Paléolithique moyen et
  supérieur. Bulletin de la Société d'Etudes et de Recherches Préhistoriques et
  Institute Pratique de Préhistorie. Les Eyzies. 9: 10—5.
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France                              81
——. 1961. Etude de la faune              du gisement      des Cottés     (Haute-Vienne).
  L’Anthropologie, 65: 258—70.
Bourton,    M., A. Bovuyssonie,     and J. Bovyssoniz.        1912.    Grattoirs   carénés,
  rabots et grattoirs nucléiformes. Essai de classification des grattoirs, Revue
  Anth ‘opologique, 22: 473—86.
BrainerD, G. W. 1951. The place of chronological ordering in archaeological
  analysis. American Antiquity, 16: 301—13.
Brevi, Henri. 1912. Les subdivisions du Paléolithique supérieur et leur signi-
  fication. Compte-Rendu de la XIVe Session, Congrés International d’Anthro-
  pologie et d’Archéologie Préhistoriques, Geneva. Lagny: E. Grevin.
 Burzer, Karv. 1964. Environment and archeology. Chicago: Aldine Publish-
   ing Company.
CHANG, Kwan-cuin. 1962. Typology of settlement and community patterns.
  Arctic Anthropology, 1: 28—41.
Cuark, J. D. 1960. Human ecology during Pleistocene and later times in Africa
  south of the Sahara. Currnt Anthropology, 1: 307-24.
esa, J. G. D. 1948. Fishing in prehistoric Europe. Antiquaries Journal, 28:
     —85.
        1952. Prehistoric Europe: the economic basis. London: Cambridge
  University Press.
     . 1954. Excavations at Star Carr: an early Mesolithic site at Seamer near
  Scarborough, Yorkshire. London: Cambridge University Press.
EscaLon DE Fonton, Max. 1961. Informations archéologiques:                    Montpellier
   (Grotte de La Salpetriére). Gallia Préhistoire, 4: 291-95.
EsCALON DE Fonton, Max, and H. pe Lumtey. 1955. Les civilisations de la
  Mediterranée septentrionale et leurs intercurrences. Le complexe Montadien.
  Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique Francaise, 51: 379—94.
FREEMAN, LesLtre G. 1966. The nature of Mousterian facies in Cantabrian
  Spain. In J. Desmond Clark and F. Clark Howell (Eds.), Recent studies in
  paleoanthropology, a special publication of the American                Anthropologist,
  68 (2) Part 2: 230—37.
GaussEN,    JEAN. 1965. Le Paléolithique supérieur de la Basse Vallée de l'Isle.
  Centenaire de la Préhistoire en Périgord (1864—1964). Numéro Special du
  Bulletin de la Société Historique et Archéologique du Périgord, pp. 47—54.
HELM,   June. 1962. The ecological approach in anthropology.              American Jour-
  nal of Sociology, 67: 630—39.
Lapiace, Georces. 1961. Recherches sur l’origine et évolution des complexes
  Leptolithiques. Le probléme des Périgordiens I et II et ’hypothese du syn-
  thétotype aurignaco-gravettien. Essai de typologie analytique. Quaternaria, Ls
  153—240.
       1964.    Essai   de   typologie    systématique.     Annali     dell’Universita   di
  Ferrara, Sezione XV, 1: 2.
Lavitte, Henri. 1964. Recherches sédimentologiques sur la paléoclimatologie
  du Wurmien recent en Périgord. L’Anthropologie, 68: 1—48, 219—52.
Lavocat, R., et al. 1966. Faunes et flores préhistoriques de l'Europe occi-
  dentale. “L’Homme et ses origines,” Atlas de Préhistoire, vol. UI. Paris:
  Boubée.
Leror-GourHAN, ANDRE. 1963. Chatelperronien et Aurignacien dans le Nord-
  Fst de la France (d’aprés la stratigraphie d’Arcy-sur-Cure, Yonne). Bulletin
  de la Société Méridionale Spéleologie et de Préhistoire, 6-9: 74—84.
Leror-GourHAN, ANDRE, and M. BrésiLton. 1964. Le site Magdalénien de
  Pincevent (Seine-etMarne). Bulletin de [Association Frangaise pour [Etude
  du Quaternaire, 1: 59—64.
82                                                             Archeological Theory and Method
MoserG, Cari-AxeL. 1961, Mangder av Fornfynd, Kring Actuella Tendenser I
  Arkeologisk Metodik, Acta Universitatis Géthburgensis, LXVII: I. (Sum-
  mary: Trends in the present development of quantitative methods in arche-
  ology).
DE een tee GapriEL. 1869. Essai d’une classification des cavernes et des
  stations sous abri fondée sur le produit de lindustrie humaine. Bulletin de la
  Société Géologique de France, 2: 583-87.
Movius, Hattam L., Jr. 1960. Radiocarbon dates and upper Paleolithic
     archeology        in central           and    western    Europe.    Current     Anthropology,      1:
     155-91.
       . 1965. Upper Perigordian and Aurignacian hearths at the Abri Pataud,
     Les Eyzies (Dordogne). Miscelanea en Homenaje au Abate Henri Breuil, 11:
     181—96.
        . 1966. The hearths of the Upper Périgordian and Aurignacian horizons
     at the Abri Pataud, Les Eyzies (Dordogne), and their possible significance.
     In J. Desmond Clark and F. Clark Howell (Eds.), Recent studies in paleo-
     anthropology. American Anthropologist, 68(2) Part 2: 296-325.
Peyrony,           Denis.     1932.    Les gisements          préhistoriques   de Bourdeilles       (Dor-
     dogne). Archives de l'Institut de Paléontologie Humaine, Mémoire 10.
       . 1933. Les industries “aurignaciennes” dans le bassin de la Vézere.
     Aurignacien       et Périgordien.            Bulletin   de la Société Préhistorique Francaise,
     30(10): 543-59.
——.         1939. Les Grimaldiens                 en Périgord. L’Anthropologie,        49(6):     702—8.
     708.
       . 1948. Le Périgordien, ’Aurignacien, et le Solutréen en Eurasie d’aprés
     les derniéres fouilles. Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique                          Frangaise,   45
   (9-10) : 305—28.
PRADEL, Louis. 1961. La Grotte des Cottés, commune de Saint-Pierre-de-Maille
   (Vienne). L’Anthropologie, 65: 229-70.
Rozerts, J. H. Zuni daily life. Laboratory of Anthropology, Notebook,
  deposits. American Antiquity, 16: 293-301.
ee            AvRAHAM.        1965. Observations sur l'Aurignacien. L’Anthropologie, 69:
            —86.                                    ‘
Rust, ALFRED.               1958.     Die     Jungpalaolithischen       Zeltangen    von     Ahrensburg.
   Neumiinster.
SACKETT, JAMES R. 1965. Aurignacian culture in the Dordogne: a study in
  archeological systematics. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University.
     . 1966. Quantitative analysis of Upper Paleolithic stone tools. In J.
  Desmond Clark and F. Clark Howell (Eds.), Recent studies in paleoanthro-
  pology, a special publication of the American Anthropologist, 68(2) Part 2:
  356—94.
     . 1967. Solvieux: an Upper Paleolithic open-air site in southwestern
  France. In preparation.
SAHLINS, MarsHatt D. 1964.                        Culture    and environment.       In Sol Tax     (Ed.),
  Horizons of anthropology. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
SEMENOY, S. A. 1964. Prehistoric technology. Translated by M. W. Thompson.
  London: Cort, Adams and MacKay.
SMiTH, Pump. 1964. The Solutrean culture. Scientific American, 211:
  86-94.
     . 1966. Le Solutréen en France. Publications de l'Institut de Préhistoire
  ie YUniversité de Bordeaux, Mémoire No. 5. Bordeaux: Imprimeries
    elmas.
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France                   83
DE SONNEVILLE-Borpes, Denisr. 1960. Le Paléolithique supérieur en Périgord.
  2 vols. Bordeaux: Imprimeries Delmas.
DE SONNEVILLE-BorbeEs,   Denise, and J. Perrot.    1953. Essai d’adaptation des
  méthodes statistiques au Paléolithique supérieur. Premiers resultats. Bulletin
  de la Société Préhistorique Francaise, 50: 323—33.
     . 1954—56. Lexique typologique du Paléolithique supérieur. Bulletin de
  la Société Préhistorique Francaise, 51: 327—35; 52: 76—79; 53: 408—412,
  547-59.
SPAULDING, ALBERT C, 1953. Statistical techniques for the discovery of artifact
  types. American Antiquity, 18: 305-313.
     . 1960. The dimensions of archaeology. In Gertrude E. Dole and R. L.
  Carneiro (Eds.), Essays in the science     of culture:   in honor of Leslie A.
  White. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.
STEWARD, JULIAN H. 1955. Theory of culture change. Urbana: University of
   Illinois Press.
TIXIER, Jacques. 1963. Typologie de l’Epipaléolithique du Maghreb. Centre de
   Recherches Anthropologiques Préhistoriques et Ethnographiques, Mémoir 2,
WHALLON, RosBert. 1963. A statistical analysis of some Aurignacian I as-
  semblages from southwestern France. Unpublished master’s thesis, University
  of Chicago.
                                                                       PART II




                                      Investigating Variability
                                in the Archeological Record:
                                 A Single Occupation Unit




The papers in this section all focus on the analysis of archeological re-
mains from a single site. Concern is primarily with the recognition, mea-
surement, and explanation of variability in the form and distribution of a
site’s cultural remains. The authors argue that internal variability is to be
expected and that it derives from the differential composition and distri-
bution of the societial segments represented at the site. These segments
were distinguished by their activities and tasks and by their cultural
means of relating to one another.
   All of the papers deal with analytical techniques that facilitate the
demonstration of non-random distributions and associations among units
of archeological observation. The isolation and definition of ordered rela-
tionships in the archeological record are necessary for empirical generali-
zations about the record; these generalizations then can serve as the refer-
ents for our explanations. An assumption basic to this process is that the
archeological deposits are undisturbed and have been investigated in a
manner which takes sampling error into account, and that order in the
record derives from the systematic relationships which characterized the
social life of the cultural unit under study. Explanations for order there-
fore take the form of propositions as to the organizational and/or behav-
ioral characteristics of the sociocultural unit represented. If these proposi-
tions are verified, they may then account for the observations made on
the archeological record,
                                      85
86                                Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
   Most of the papers in   this section  emphasize the initial, exploratory
phase of analysis. This emphasis  is probably  due to an enthusiasm on the
part of archeologists free to explore their data for classes of order not
considered before. These classes of order are not to be seen in the “self-
evident” units of observation, nor would they be seen by those who pro-
claim our knowledge of the past limited by the incompleteness of the
archeological record. These papers are examples of some of the directions
in which our knowledge of the past can expand, given the new perspec-
tives developing in archeology.
   The papers by Longacre, Hill, and Cowgill are concerned with the
analysis of the archeological record at a single site. Problems related to
data collection, handling, and analysis are discussed—problems which
could arise only when the archeological record is viewed as a complex of
structured relationships arising out of the organizational and dynamic
characteristics of extinct cultural systems. Pursuit of the arguments of
relevance presented by these authors can result in the development of
general systems of measurement of cultural variables in the operation of
any number of cultural systems. It is here that much of the excitement of
this kind of archeology lies: By developing archeological theory and veri-
fying arguments of relevance to past conditions, we can gradually build
up a battery of measurement scales for the comparative study of behav-
ior or of cultural and ecological variables. The crucial link here is the
development of sound, verifiable arguments of relevance. However, the
comparative study of archeological observations can bring us understand-
ing of the operation of past cultural systems only insofar as our observa-
tions can be shown to be relevant to stated classes of cultural variables.
   The papers by Ayres and Longacre and the paper by Williams explore
the feedback that can be developed between archeological and ethno-
graphic problems. The expected relationships between material items and
behavioral features of cultural systems are frequently most economically
analyzed and tested with non-archeological data. Similarly, many prob-
lems originating in the investigation of non-archeological data may be
efficiently tested by the use of archeological data. These papers exemplify
both these cases and demonstrate kinds of research which will be more
frequently taken up in the future.
   The grouping of these papers under a single section heading is not
meant to imply that the authors have failed to consider the relevance of
the particular site under study to broader regional and more general
anthropological considerations. But one lesson to be drawn from the pa-
pers presented is that without a rigorous investigation of the meaning of
the internal variablity at a single site and the contexts in which such
variability is produced, comparisons of differences and similarities be-
tween sites can be very misleading. Comparisons made on such a basis
can frequently obscure variability within a stable system and change from
Variability in a Single Occupational Unit                            87
one kind of system to another (see S. R. Binford’s paper, this volume).
The arrangement of these papers in the book is the work of the editors
and does not reflect the context in which individual authors developed
their arguments. Thus, some of the arguments offered here as to processes
of culture change and the significance of ecological relationships should
more appropriately be considered in the context of the discussion of the
following section, Part III.
 SIX                                                     WILLIAM     A, LONGACRE




                                                             Some Aspects
                                                      of Prehistoric Society
                                           in East-Central Arizona




This paper discusses a series of archeological investigations conducted in
east-central Arizona (Fig. 1) directed toward elucidating the nature of
cultural stability and change in the extinct societies of the region.’ The
primary focus is on the Carter Ranch Pueblo (ca. a.v. 1050—1200), where
we attempted to isolate and explain certain organizational features of the
sociocultural system as an initial step toward gaining a better understand-
ing of adaptive changes made by the society to environmental stress. This
report must be viewed as a case study and the research as a somewhat
crude and initial effort. It is our hope that as the field advances our
   * The field work that provided the data for this report was carried out in eastern
Arizona during the summers of 1959-62. This work was supported in large measure by
grants from the National Science Foundation to the Chicago Natural History Museum,
Paul S. Martin, Principal Investigator. I thank Dr. Martin and his colleague, J. B.
Rinaldo, for their encouragement and help both in the field and at the Museum.   Most
of the statistical operations were undertaken with the help of the IBM 7094 computer
at the University of Chicago. A grant to the Chicago Natural History Museum by the
Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research made these operations pos-
sible. The work reported here formed the basis for my doctoral dissertation at the
University of Chicago (Longacre, 1963). I acknowledge and thank the members of
my dissertation committee: L. R. Binford, Director; Fred Eggan; L. A. Fallers; and P.
S. Martin. This paper grew out of a shorter one presented by J. N. Hill and myself at
the 64th annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association, Symposium on
Prehistoric Social Organization, Denver, in 1965. _

                                          89
90                                                        Variability in a Single Occupational Unit


                                                                                             COLORADO
                                                                                   @ACKMEN



                                                                                       CORTEZ
                                                                                      e




                                                                                     @SHiPROCK




                                                  CHIN   LEEe



           <7
                a
                 e
                  om               ARIZONA                              |
                   is}
                    te)                                                 l
                     ¢




     erFLAGSTAFF
                                                                                                    NEW
                                                                                                  MEXICO
                          CARTER   RANCH   SITE
                                   SNOWFLAKE

                              CHILCOTT SITES
                            1957 EXCAVAT!                                                @ QUEMADO

                                                                           TUMBLE WEED CANYON
                            MINERAL CREEK SITE                  mee Bonrst~ HOOPER RANCH PUEBLO
                                    THODE SITE



                                                                             v
                                                                            &
                              ®e.OBE                                        -,     @MOGOLLON
                                                                                 )®6LENWOOD


                                                                                                                 ANOe


 @CABA   GRANOCE


                                                                                                 eSiILVER CiTy




                                                                                                   [Tee

         / Oh ine, aca                                                                                 MEXICO
                                                  ‘pce               eee oe                        |


                                       Figure 1. Area of investigations.
Longacre Prehistoric Society in East-Central Arizona                 91
findings will be rendered obsolete by refinement and growth of methods
of data collection and analysis.
  In the undertaking of this research we were guided by several assump-
tions of a basic theoretical nature. First, we adopted a perspective which
views culture as a systemic whole composed of interrelated subsystems,
such as the social system, the technological system, the religious system,
etc. This view of culture has been discussed and described by L. R.
Binford (1962, 1965). Such a perspective compels the paleoanthropologist
to focus on the nature and interrelations of the component parts of the
cultural system under study, and to work within an ecological frame of
reference. The aim is to isolate and define cultural processes, the means
by which cultures remain stable or change.
  The second assumption underlying this work is that the patterning of
material remains in an archeological site is the result of the patterned
behavior of the members of an extinct society and that this patterning is
potentially informative as to the way the society was organized. Our first
task, then, is to define the structure of the archeological remains at a site
and to offer hypotheses as to the organization of the society and associ-
ated patterns of individual behavior. The patterned relationships among
classes of artifacts should document the context in which they were made,
used, and lost or abandoned. It is essential to measure the mutual covaria-
tion among all classes and types of archeological data; the structure of
this covariation,   once   delimited,   should   reflect the organizational   and
behavioral aspects of the society that produced it.
  We will begin by discussing the environmental and cultural setting of
the prehistoric pueblo under consideration, and this will be followed by a
description of the archeological structure delimited at the site. We then
offer some propositions as to the nature of the society represented and
the cultural processes operative in the region.


      Sociocultural Background and the Environmental Setting
This section consists of a brief synthesis of environmental and cultural
changes which occurred in east-central Arizona before a.p. 1200 in order
to provide a background for the period under study. Data for this synthe-
sis come from excavation and survey (Martin et al., 1964, pp. 201-215).
   The area today is environmentally transitional between the White
Mountains and the Colorado Plateau. It is a semi-arid, topographically
rugged region in the upper drainage of the Little Colorado River. The
landscape is dotted with basalt-capped mesas, cinder cones, deep river
valleys, and numerous arroyos. This area was occupied from at least 1500
B.C. until approximately a.D. 1350, at which time permanent occupations
became restricted to the deepest stream valleys such as Silver Creek and
the Little Colorado itself.
   At the present time the region is marginal for most forms of agriculture;
92                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
the most important economic activity is stock-raising. The only economi-
cally significant agricultural lands are the irrigated lowlands in the deep
stream valleys such as those at Taylor and Shumway on Silver Creek
where corn and other cultigens grow readily. The lack of upland agricul-
ture cannot be explained simply by a lack of water; the critical factor
seems to be the absence of a regular growing season of at least 120 frost-
free days. In the upland town of Vernon, individuals who maintain irri-
gated garden plots tell us they are lucky to get a crop of corn to mature
once every three or four years. It is significant that these upland regions
are dotted with prehistoric sites dating from about a.p. 700 to about 1000
and we know that occupants of the sites were dependent upon corn
agriculture. Obviously there must have been some important changes in
the local environment.
   The study of fossil pollens has been a significant part of the investiga-
tion of the degree and kind of climatic change which has occurred.
Schoenwetter (Martin et al., 1962, pp. 191-94) and Hevley (1964) can
find no palynological evidence of major climatic change in the area. Both
workers, however, indicate that there are subtle and critical shifts in the
nature of the environment. It is argued here that these minor shifts neces-
sitated major adaptive changes on the part of the area’s prehistoric inhab-
itants. The nature of these changes must be seen against the preceding
centuries of gradual development.
   The period from about a.v. 600—700 to about 1000 or 1100 shows a
basic trend suggesting continuity despite numerous stylistic changes in
material remains. After the initial appearance of established village farm-
ing communities in the region, there was a regular and impressive increase
in the population, resulting in a network of small agricultural communi-
ties (Martin et al., 1964, pp. 205-209). Village distribution was linked to
the presence of arable lands in the alluvium of the many small streams in
the area, streams which today are arroyos. Pueblo architecture appears
later, but community size remains unchanged—small hamlets of from three
or four to fifteen or twenty rooms replaced the earlier pit house villages.
Rectangular or circular kivas are sometimes associated with these small
pueblo villages. When the population of a village reached a critical size,
budding-off seems to have occurred, and this process resulted in the
establishment of increasing numbers of small agricultural communities in
previously unoccupied habitats. The newly founded villages probably
maintained kinship and ritual ties with the mother community for several
generations, but there are indications that through time these ties became
attenuated.
  Cohesion within the villages was probably maintained along kin lines
and might have been reinforced by the emergence of non-kin-based
membership     groups, a ceremonial sponsorship system, or both. There is
no evidence suggesting strong multi-community integration during this
period.
     At about 1000 or 1100, or perhaps earlier in the eastern portion of the
Longacre Prehistoric Society in East-Central Arizona                         93
region, there is evidence of major structural change in these cultural
systems. The palynological data reflecting minor but critical environ-
mental shifts are correlated with these cultural changes. Schoenwetter
(Martin et al., 1962, pp. 194—206) argues that the pollen spectra suggest a
minor shift in rainfall pattern beginning about a.p. 1000. His report hints
also that about 1350 there might have been a slight decrease in the mean
annual temperature. Subsequent work by Hevley (1964) supports this
suggestion and points to a drop in mean annual temperature of about 2°—
3°F. at about 1300. This order of change may appear to be insignificant,
but it was of sufficient magnitude to have jeopardized the subsistence
base of the local people. The small temperature drop would have meant a
shorter growing season which, in turn, made corn agriculture hazardous.
As modern    environmental    conditions   were   reached,   the uplands   were
abandoned and there was a convergence of the prehistoric populations in
the deeper valleys, where the lower elevations meant mean temperatures
2°—3°F. higher. The importance of these conditions can be seen today if
the agricultural productivity at Taylor and Shumway is compared with
the marginal agricultural activity in the uplands.
   The coincidental occurrence of changes in critical climatic variables
and changes in location and size of settlements suggests that the local
populations underwent rather striking adaptive responses. Some of the
changes are readily apparent in the data; others are more difficult to
delimit.
   Two main trends can be detected. First, the beginning of population
convergence, with small, single-residence-unit villages coalescing to form
larger communities of more than one residence grouping; second, the
appearance of Great Kivas at a few sites at about a.p. 1000—1100 docu-
ments an attempt to integrate a number of villages via a religious mech-
nism such as a ceremonial sodality. This pattern of convergence continued
and culminated in the presence of a few very large towns composed of
units which had previously formed single villages.
   This aggregation forming larger population units posed certain integra-
tive problems. A community composed of residence units with strongly
traditional kinds of internal cohesion had built-in sharp lines of cleavage.
Some of the means available for a new level of integration were religious;
some might have involved sodalities such as curing societies which cross-
cut residence units; mutual interdependence among social groups could
have been created through reciprocal exchange of goods and services.
   Carter Ranch Pueblo was investigated in order to determine more pre-
cisely the nature of the environmental and cultural changes of this region
between a.p. 1050 and 1200.


                  Description of the Carter Ranch Site
The Carter Ranch Site consists of a U-shaped block of rooms which face a
courtyard with various activity areas such as cooking and storage facilities
94                                                     Variability in a Single Occupational Unit




                                                                                                          z


                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                 ee

                                                                                      TRENCH C        s


                                                                                                      4




      OO      tinerir                    MEALING BIN                                                 3
              PosT                =                                                              I
          °                      0}      eToRaee PIT                         warere
     —   C—   vent on coorway    * © |                                                            5
     ——TI_—   SALE Door
                                a        DEFLECTOR AND ASHPIT                                    -—S
       A      WALL ABUTMENT
                                                                                                  '
                                 @       OUTDOOR COOKING PIT
              WALL    BOND                                                                       —            4
        ae                      [LLL LT? suesesTeD Masonry
     ==,      NICHE               a      BURIAL



                                         Figure 2. Carter Ranch Site.


and religious structures                  (Fig. 2). The ceremonial structures include a
large D-shaped kiva and a small rectangular kiva adjacent to a detached
unit of rooms in the northeast section of the site. A large jug-shaped
granary pit lies just east of the large kiva and contained several bushels of
Longacre Prehistoric Society in East-Central Arizona                             95
charred corn. A detached circular Great Kiva is located about 10 meters
northwest of the north wing. This kiva is approximately 18 meters in
diameter and has a long lateral entry ramp to the east.
  A mound of trash of considerable size occurred just east of the site; this
midden yielded a number of burials which clustered in three distinct
areas. The burials in the northern cluster were oriented east-west; those in
the southern area were oriented north-south; burials in the central area
were mixed with respect to orientation.
  The site as a whole is oriented toward the east. The interior features of
the kivas and most of the rooms are lined up from west to east, and the
Great Kiva is also oriented in the same direction, 7°30’ south of true east.
This angle corresponds with the angle of sunrise in this location during
the first week of March, two weeks before the vernal equinox.’ Although
we have been unable to correlate this orientation with any specific celes-
tial phenomena,      such as solstice, eclipses, or constellations, it remains
clear that the measuring devices of the site’s inhabitants allowed a high
order of accuracy in that the Great Kiva and the community itself are
aligned exactly.

SEQUENCE OF CONSTRUCTION
The first rooms to be built at the site were in the north end of the central
section: rooms 19, 3, 5, 12, 15, 18, 16, and 10. There were four later
periods of construction, and the pueblo expanded mainly to the east and
the south. The last addition was probably the detached unit in the north-
eastern part of the site.’

THE ASSEMBLAGE
Thousands of potsherds, whole vessels, whole and partial tools of stone
and bone as well as ornaments and other kinds of cultural items were
recovered. They are described in detail elsewhere (Martin et al., 1964).

SUMMARY
The arrangement of the site is that of a “front-facing” plan (Reed, 1956).
The nature of the cultural items from the site suggests that it is stylisti-
cally affiliated with what Rinaldo (1964) has called “Late Mogollon”
culture. The easterly orientation of the site is support for this interpreta-
tion.

                 Formal and Spatial Correlational Analysis
Forming the initial archeological work at the Carter Ranch Site in 1961, a
statistical analysis of a portion of the data was undertaken by L. G.
   2 This was done with the help of Dr. Frank Jettner of the Adler Planetarium in
Chicago.
   3 Details of the sequence of construction and the supporting evidence are given by
Rinaldo (Martin et al., 1964, pp. 49—51).
96                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
Freeman and James Brown         (Martin et al., 1964; Brown and Freeman,
1964), Frequencies of ceramic types and their distribution were subjected
to bivariate regression analysis using a Univac computer at the University
of Chicago.
   Frequencies of fourteen pottery types in eighteen floor and subfloor
samples from twelve features were used in the analysis; frequencies of
each of these pottery types was analyzed against each of the other thir-
teen types. The results showed a strong mutual correlation among certain
of the pottery types, a non-random distribution of these covarying ce-
ramic classes among distinct classes of rooms. There were four such clus-
ters of pottery types which varied independently of one another. Brown
and Freeman (1964) were able to discard temporal variation in pottery
styles as a possible explanation for the observed independence and for the
related differential distribution of the ceramic classes among different
room types. An alternative explanation was advanced—that of functional
independence for the ceramic classes. This functional hypothesis was sup-
ported by the strong association between the ceramic classes and room
types; the defining attributes for the room types were the presence or
absence of features such as hearths, mealing bins, etc. The findings indi-
cate that the correlated differences in features and pottery reflect differ-
ent kinds of activities localized in different kinds of rooms.
   Excavations were continued at the Carter Ranch Site during 1962 with
finer control of provenience employed. The newly gathered data on ce-
ramic types and their distributions were subjected to multiple regression
analysis using the IBM 7094 computer at the University of Chicago. In
addition, non-ceramic artifact frequencies and distributions from both the
1961 and 1962 seasons were analyzed in the same way. Multiple regres-
sion analysis (IBM Bimed 34) proved to be a more powerful analytical
technique and resulted in some refinement of the findings.
   The four classes of pottery types originally suggested were expanded to
five; these five classes are presented in Table 1. One major point of
interest concerns class number three which contains a number of smudge
types. This corresponds to a class proposed by Freeman and Brown (Mar-
tin et al., 1964, pp. 129ff.) which was noted to occur in high frequency in
a ceremonial context (that is, kiva floors and burials). This same correla-
tion was demonstrated in the second multiple regression analysis (Great
Kiva and burials) and confirmed the association of this ceramic class with
ceremonial activities.
     Artifact frequencies by location were also subjected to multiple regres-
sion analysis. A number of clusterings were defined, but there was a great
deal of overlapping between them. Generalized tools would probably
have been used in a number of tasks, and this might account for the less
tight artifact clusters when compared to ceramics.
Longacre Prehistoric Society in East-Central Arizona                      97
———
eee

 Table 1. Pottery Constellations from Floors of Rooms 18—23 and
           Great Kiva, Carter Ranch Site.
OE            ES              LE LSE        ES AE
 I. Snowflake Black-on-White, Snowflake variety.
    Alma Plain.
    McDonald Corrugated, indented.
II. Snowflake Black-on-White, Carterville variety.
    St. Johns Polychrome.
    McDonald Corrugated, plain.
III. St. Johns Black-on-Red.
      Plain Brown Corrugated.
     Brown Indented Corrugated, smudged interior.
     Plain Brown Corrugated, smudged interior.
     Patterned Corrugated.
IV. Snowflake Black-on-White, Hay Hollow variety.
    Show Low Black-on-Red.
    Brown Indented Corrugated.
 V. Plain Brown Corrugated.
    Show Low Black-on-Red.
    St. Johns Polychrome.




  There were, however, two strong associations, each between two classes
of artifacts. First, the class called “ceremonial” and the weaving imple-
ments were highly correlated. Since weaving today is a male activity
associated with the kiva among the people of the Western Pueblos, this
correlation is consistent with the ethnographic data from the area.
   Second, there was an unusually tight association between the chopping
artifacts and those used in the manufacture of arrow-shafts. Since both
tool kits suggest male activities, this association strengthens the interpre-
tation of a fairly strong division of labor and functionally specific male
and female activity areas at the site.


      The Distribution of Design Elements and Element Groups
Our pre-excavation research design involved the formulation of a series of
testable hypotheses. One of these concerned post-marital residence pat-
terns. Briefly, the argument might be stated as follows: if there were a
residence rule which led to related females living in the same locale
through several generations, then ceramic manufacture and decoration
would be learned and passed down within the context of this residence
98                                  Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
unit (assuming female potters). Non-random preference for certain de-
signs might reflect this social pattern.’
   One hundred seventy-five design elements and element groups were
defined, using more than 6,000 sherds and a number of whole vessels.’
The first analytical step involved the plotting of distribution of relative
frequencies for each design on a site plan. This suggested that there was a
non-random distribution, but the technique was crude at best. It was
decided, therefore, to refine the analysis by using multiple regression
analysis. In this operation, actual counts were used rather than relative
frequencies.
   The counts from each floor were run against every other floor sample.
Floors were correlated on the basis of the frequencies of occurrence of the
175 design elements and element groups. The same was done for some of
the fill samples. Fourteen floor proveniences were used, and the following
clusters emerged: (1) Rooms 2, 4 (both floors), 7, and 8 (both floors)
form a tight group; (2) Rooms 3, 5, 10 (both floors), 12, 15, and Kiva I
form an equally tight group. Room               11 consistently shows        associations
with the first group.
  When the location of these rooms is noted on the site plan (Fig. 2), the
significance of these clusters becomes clear. The first group consists of a
block of adjacent rooms at the south end of the pueblo. The second group
is a block of rooms with an adjacent kiva at the north end of the pueblo.
Room 11, which associates with the first group, is in the northeastern
portion of the site and is part of a group of unexcavated rooms.
  The analysis of room fill was less successful, but there were similarities
among the fills of Rooms 3, 5, 12, 15, and Kiva I. This suggests continuity
in the pattern of design similarities in the floor distributions and argues
for the consistent production of similar designs in the northern part of the
village, probably over several generations of potters. Therefore, our hy-
pothesis on the spatial distribution of design elements correlating with
residence unites received support.


                                 The Burial Analysis
Thirty-four burials were excavated at the Carter Ranch Site; most were
in the trash east of the pueblo. Grave goods were associated with male
and infant burials, while interments of females yielded few or no associ-
ated goods.
  *The first demonstration of a correlation between changes in residence and the
distribution   of design attributes   of pottery was   made   by Deetz   (1960,   1965), by
utilizing data from the historic period in the Plains. The usefulness of the distribution
of design elements and element groups as a tool for sociological interpretation in
prehistory was first realized by Cronin (Martin et al., 1962, pp. 105 ff.). It was out of
the initial research by Cronin that the hypothesis reported here developed.
   ° This was done by two Chicago Natural History Museum artists, Mr. and Mrs.
Stevens Seaberg. I am grateful to Dr. Anna O. Shepard for excellent suggestions
regarding design terminology (personal communications, 1965).
Longacre Prehistoric Society in East-Central Arizona                     99
  The burials occurred in three clusters: the north and south clusters each
had eight burials, and there were nine in the central area. Seven of the
eight burials in the northern clusters were oriented east-west; all eight in
the southern group were oriented north-south. Orientation of burials in
the central area was mixed.
   The design elements and element groups of the mortuary ceramics
were analyzed to see if the burial groups could be related to the architec-
tural units of the site. Our results showed that the northern burial area
had pottery with designs that occurred in the northern cluster of rooms at
the site, and the southern burial group was similarly linked to the south-
ern group of rooms. The central area was mixed with respect to design
distribution, although there are more affinities to the northern block of
rooms.
   There were many respects in which the central burial cluster differed
from the other two. This group was mixed in orientation and in the
distribution of design elements and element groups. Further, almost all
of the ceremonial items included as grave offerings came from this cluster
of interments. There is also a non-random distribution of ceramic vessels
in the center cluster:
                              North     Center     South
                Vessels         19        32        20
                Burials          8         9          8

   The mixed orientations of the central burials, together with the large
number of ceremonial items and vessels, suggest that the central cluster
represents high-status individuals from the residence units. It would ap-
pear that each of the residence units maintained its own burial area but
that a separate portion of the cemetery was reserved for high-status indi-
viduals.
                        Summary and Conclusions
At the Carter Ranch Pueblo, 175 design elements and element groups
were analyzed in terms of their distribution in rooms, kivas, burials, and
trash. The designs clustered in association with two major architectural
units at the site. Kivas, discrete burial areas, and trash deposits were also
associated with the architectural units. On the assumption that the fe-
males were the potters, this patterned distribution argues for post-marital
residence in the vicinity of the wife’s female relatives, with ceramic deco-
ration learned and passed down within the residence unit. Time depth is
demonstrated by the association of designs on pottery in the architectural
units and associated trash in deposits of over one meter deep.
   The localization of females in architectural units at the site over a
period of several generations suggests in turn that non-portable objects,
such as rooms    and access   to a specific mortuary   area, were   inherited
within the residence units and that this inheritance was probably in the
100                                    Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
female line. The corporate nature of the residence unit is also suggested
by the maintenance of a kiva and by associated mortuary practices. A
large bell-shaped storage pit was excavated in association with one of the
kivas; this large storage facility contained the charred remains of several
bushels of corn. This adds support to the inference regarding the corpor-
ate nature of the residence units themselves, as it appears to have been a
jointly used storage area which must have been maintained by a social
unit larger than a single family.
   Although it has not been possible to demonstrate the actual lineality of
the residence units, it seems       likely that they were      localized matrilineal
descent groups.’ The inferred corporate nature of the units and the sug-
gested pattern of matrilineal inheritance support this suggestion. In addi-
tion, the maintenance of a discrete cemetery with design elements and
element groups clustering in terms of residence units argues for a lineage
organization and one which reckoned descent in the female line.
   Social groups smaller than the residence unit have not been archeolog-
ically determined. Arguing from the ethnographic present, one might
expect a household to be present, essentially a familial social unit. Among
the Hopi and Zuni, households are localized in adjoining rooms and form
the basic local unit among the Western Pueblos (Eggan, 1950, pp. 29—31,
297—99; Beaglehole, 1937, pp. 5—6; Titiev, 1944, pp. 7-14; Roberts, 1956,
p- 2). There is today a great deal of variation in the number of individuals
who compose a household and variability in the number of rooms consti-
tuting the spatial unit (cf. Roberts, 1956). The household today isa basic
economic unit and is the one which is the land-holding unit.
ently multi-functional, but the strong correlations among the ceramic
classes with room types suggest that each room had a primary or more
   The households at Carter Ranch Site probably consisted of groups of
adjoining rooms which formed residence areas. The rooms were appar-
usual function. Isolation of specific functions is admittedly difficult, but
the ceramic classes themselves offer some clues. The pottery types associ-
ated with ritual units such as the kivas are found in relatively low fre-
quencies on habitation room floors. This indicates that some ritual was
conducted in some houses, although on a small scale. The same pattern
exists among the present day Western Pueblo peoples (Eggan, 1950, pp.
298—99).
   Specific groupings of pottery types may indicate certain generalized
room functions. Painted pottery never shows signs of having been used
for cooking (absence of sooted exteriors), whereas the smaller brown,

   * Although I refer to these residence units as “localized matrilineal descent groups”
in earlier publications (Longacre, 1963, 1964), I have been able to refine my thoughts
regarding the difficulty if not the impossibility of getting at descent using archeolog-
ical data. This refinement is largely due to discussions with David Schneider, Univer-
sity of Chicago; F. K. Lehman, University of Illinois; and James N. Hill, University of
California, Los Angeles. Of equal importance have been my students, all of whom are
excellent teachers and to whom I extend my gratitude.
Longacre Prehistoric Society in East-Central Arizona              101
textured jars often show such evidence. Brown and Freeman (1964) have
noted a high frequency of such brown pottery at the site in rooms with
circular floor pits, suggesting that these rooms might have had cooking as
their primary function. They were probably also used for storage (many
had storage pits), general work (such as manufacture of household ar-
ticles),and other tasks as well.
  Painted ceramics occur as bowls, pitchers, and jars. Since they appar-
ently did not serve as cooking vessels, they were probably used in the
preparation of food for cooking and in the serving of food. As Brown and
Freeman (1964) point out, a grouping of painted pottery types consisting
principally of pitchers and bowls appears to be associated with rooms
with square fire pits and mealing bins. This suggests a function of food
preparation for rooms with these features. The smaller, featureless rooms
were probably used for storage.
   The pattern, then, appears to be one of multi-functional uses for each
room but with a more common set of activities for each room type. This is
precisely the pattern of the modern Western Pueblos (Roberts, 1956).
The multi-functional nature of the rooms makes the delimitation of
households at Carter Ranch very difficult. Chang (1958, p. 302) has
suggested that the fireplace (kitchen) is the most obvious index of a
household. His suggestion is, however, based on ethnographic data from
tropical or semi-tropical environments. In the more temperate climates,
heating fires would also be necessary. It is, therefore, not surprising to
find fire pits in so many of the rooms at the Carter Ranch Site. Some of
these fires might well have served also for lighting and food preservation.
   The Carter Ranch Site stands as a turning point in the prehistory of this
particular region of the Southwest. The occupation of the site by two
residence units ushers in an era of population aggregation in the area.
Prior to this—over a period of more than 500 years—villages consisted
of small groups of people approximating the size of one of the residence
units of the Carter Ranch Site. This striking shift in the structure of
population culminates     in a pattern of fewer but considerably larger
towns during the fourteenth century.
   The process of aggregation coincides with the onset of a period of
environmental stress and would seem to be an adaptive response on the
part of these extinct societies. The initial set of adaptive changes docu-
mented at the Carter Ranch Site are a prelude to the even greater
changes that appear in the region by 1300 (cf. Hill, 1966). Many of the
adaptive shifts that have been noted appear to be in the direction of a
form of cultural system exemplified by the modern Western Pueblos (cf.
Longacre, 1964).
  The inferences drawn in this report were largely justified by reference
to a set of propositions drawn within a particular theoretical context
(general systems theory) which served to structure the field research (cf.
L. R. Binford, 1965). The implications of our conclusions have not been
102                                  Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
stressed here, since they are made explicit elsewhere (Longacre, 1963,
1964, 1966). The conclusions offered here are tentative and only further
testing and research can strengthen, modify, or replace them.


                                   References
BEAGLEHOLE, Ernest. 1937. Notes on Hopi economic life. Yale University
   Publications in Anthropology, no. 15. New Haven: Yale University Press.
BinFrorD, Lewis R. 1962. Archaeology as anthropology. American Antiquity,
  28: 217-25.
——.   1965.     Archaeological   systematics and the study of culture   process.
  American Antiquity, 31: 203—210.
Brown, James A., and Leste G. Freeman, Jr. 1964.         A UNIVAC analysis of
  sherd frequencies from the Carter Ranch Pueblo, eastern Arizona. American
  Antiquity, 30(2): 162—67.
Cuanc, Kwano-cuin. 1958. Study of Neolithic social groupings: examples
  from the New World. American Anthropologist, 60(2) : 298—334.
DeEtz, James D. F. 1960. An archaeological approach to kinship change in
  eighteenth century Arikara culture. Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University.
     . 1965. The dynamics of stylistic change in Arikara ceramics. Illinois
  Studies in Anthropology, no. 4. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Eccan, FRED. 1950. Social organization of the western pueblos. Chicago: Uni-
   versity of Chicago Press.
HeEviy, Ricnarp H. 1964. Pollen analysis of Quaternary archeological and
  lacustrine sediments from the Colorado Plateau. Unpublished Ph.D. disserta-
  tion, University of Arizona.
Kroeser, A. L. 1917. Zuni kin and clan. Anthropological Papers, American
  Museum of Natural History, Vol. 18, Part 2.
Loncacre, WiLtiAM A. 1963. Archaeology as anthropology: a case study.
  Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.
——. 1964. Archaeology as anthropology: a case study. Science, 144 (3625):
  1454—55.                                 s
     . 1966. Changing patterns of social integration: a prehistoric example
  from the American Southwest. American Anthropologist, 68(1): pp. 94—
  102.
Markt, P. S., J. B. Rivatpo, W. A. Loncacre, C. Cronin, L. G. FREEMAN,
  and J. SCHOENWETTER. 1962. Chapters in the Prehistory of eastern Arizona,
  I. Fieldiana: Anthropology, vol. 53.
Marti,   P. S., J. B. Rivatpo, W. A. Loncacre, L. G. FREEMAN, J. A. Brown,
  R. H. Heviy, and M. E. Coorry. 1964. Chapters in the prehistory of eastern
  Arizona, II. Fieldiana: Anthropology, vol. 55.
REED, Erix K. 1956. Types of village-plan layouts in the Southwest. In G. R.
  Willey (Ed.), Prehistoric settlement patterns in the New World, Viking Fund
  Publications in Anthropology, no. 23. New York: Wenner-Gren Foundation
  for Anthropological Research.
RINALDO, JOHN B. 1964. Notes on the origins of historic Zufi culture. Kiva,
  29(4): 86—98.
Roserts, J. H. 1956. Zuni daily life. Laboratory of Anthropology, Notebook,
   no. 3. Lincoln: University of Nebraska.
Tittev, Miscua, 1944. Old Oraibi, a study of the Hopi Indians of Third Mesa.
   Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology,
   no. 22, Cambridge.
SEYEY                                                            JAMES     N. HILL
CR               ete ere ee              ee      Pe              | yt           ee




                                                    Broken K Pueblo:
                             Patterns of Form and Function




As the other papers in this volume indicate, there is an increasing ten-
dency among archeologists to be concerned with making inferences about
prehistoric human behavior. In addition to the useful and time-honored
concerns with developing typologies and studying the spatial and tem-
poral distributions of artifacts, there is an increasing emphasis on trying
to find out how prehistoric peoples actually lived. While this concern is
by no means new, it is evident that our capabilities of implementing it are
being greatly enhanced by recent theoretical, methodological, and techni-
cal developments. Most of the contributions along this line have involved
examinations    of settlement    pattern,   ceremonial   organization,   mortuary
practices, craft specialization and social status (Sears, 1961). Within the
last half-dozen years or so, it has even been possible to describe prehis-
toric residence patterns (Deetz, 1960, 1965; Longacre, 1963, 1964; Hill,
1965, 1966; Martin, Longacre, and Hill, 1967). In short, we are beginning
to develop the means for gaining knowledge of many aspects of prehis-
toric cultural systems that were formerly considered beyond the limita-
tions of our data and competence.
   This paper attempts to describe a limited aspect of a cultural system
that existed in eastern Arizona during the thirteenth century a.p." My
  1 The data for this paper were derived from two summers of excavation (1962—63 )
at Broken K Pueblo, in east-central Arizona. Excavation and analysis were sponsored
by the Chicago Natural History Museum (now F ield Museum of Natural History),
and supported by the National Science Foundation (Grants G16006 and G22028).
Computer research was supported by the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropologi-

                                        103
104                                      Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
primary concern is threefold: (1) to describe the locational patterning of
various kinds of cultural features at the site, (2) to offer explanations of
the demonstrated patterning in terms of past behavior, and (3) to test the
accuracy of these explanatory propositions. This is intended as a case
study in the demonstration             of “activity-areas”      or “activity-structure”
within prehistoric communities.
  This paper also serves as an example of a general methodological ap-
proach that should prove useful in nearly all archeological studies, regard-
less of the kinds of archeological remains being considered (cf. L. R. Bin-
ford, 1957). I have attempted to illustrate          a means by which it is possible
to go beyond merely making inferences about past behavior; we can also
test these inferences, and gain confidence (or lose confidence) in their
validity. This can be done, even in those cases in which direct ethno-
graphic evidence is not available.
  The focus of the analysis is Broken K Pueblo, located eleven miles east
of Snowflake, Arizona (excavated by the Chicago Natural History Mu-
seum, with National Science Foundation support; cf. Martin, Longacre,
and Hill, 1967). The site is a 95-room,’ single-storied, surface masonry
pueblo, dating from about a.p. 1150 to 1280 (Fig. 1). It is the largest and
latest site in the Hay Hollow Valley, and it is located in a savanna-wood-
land vegetation zone. The climate is semi-arid today, and the terrain has
been heavily dissected by the prevailing pattern of torrential summer
thundershowers.
   Since the site was too large to excavate completely, it was necessary to
sample it. After extensive wall-trenching had revealed the locations of
nearly all of the rooms at the site, it was decided that a system of simple
random sampling would be employed; this provided a basis for making
probability statements, and permitted an objective evaluation of the rep-
resentativeness of the sample. Forty-six rooms were excavated in the ini-
tial sample, and eight additional rooms were excavated as the importance
of doing so became apparent. All unexcavated rooms are shown in Figure
1 as shaded areas. The plaza was scraped with a tractor blade to reveal
the major features, and several trenches were dug in that area.

cal Research   (Grant   1524).   The   project was   directed   by Paul   S. Martin,   Chief
Curator of Anthropology at the Museum. Dr. Martin and Dr. John B. Rinaldo (then
of the Museum) are responsible for stimulating the research; I have also received help
and encouragement from Lewis R. Binford (University of California, Los Angeles),
William A. Longacre (University of Arizona) and John M. Fritz (University of
Chicago). The pollen analyses were performed by Richard H. Hevly (Northern
Arizona University, Flagstaff). I thank all of these individuals and institutions, as well
as Mr. and Mrs. James Carter, who graciously permitted us to excavate on their
property.
   *’The room-count is complicated by the fact that the initial wall-trenching (to
discover all of the rooms in the site prior to sampling) failed to locate all of the rooms
accurately, Rooms 31 and 33 should be considered a single room, as should Rooms 35
and 37 (cf. Fig. 1). Room 44 was divided into two rooms            (Rooms 44a and 44b);
Room 92 (located in the west wing) is numerically out of place because it was not
discovered until the simple random sample had already been chosen, thus “freezing”
the room numbers.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                              105




      ts
          OuTLien




                                                              =
                                                                        a 3OUTLIER




      Ashpit



                    ia 3                       :S
                                                                            2OUTLIER


                     ei £3            le
               =    =s       gé            ~   =A~}
               H2            33
                             =
                                               :       Ss
                                                       or
         i}                  sit.                     os
                                                       a =6
Pst
      i555
               ss
                               fs
                             2522 3
                                                       Fy          ss
                                                                   Pe
 eo

3.1
3                        i    B..
                              iB                                   re
                                                                  oss


      Figure 1. Plan of Broken K Pueblo. Shaded rooms were not excavated.
106                                      Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
  All levels containing       cultural    material   (except in the plaza)       were
screened with a 1/4-in. screen in an attempt to ensure comparability of
samples. Materials found directly on the floors of the rooms were kept
separate from those in the fill levels, since in isolating the functions of the
various rooms the materials lying directly on the floors are clearly most
informative.
  Much of the data was quantified and manipulated statistically; both the
Chi-square test of association (Cochran, 1952; Siegel, 1956; Spaulding,
1953) and the Fisher Exact Test (Fisher, 1938) were extensively em-
ployed in demonstrating formal variability among the rooms, and in dem-
onstrating associations among attributes of rooms and other categories of
cultural remains. Factor analysis (Fruchter, 1954) was employed in dis-
covering non-random clusters of pottery-types.’ The IBM 7094 computer
at the University of Chicago was used to perform this multivariate analysis.
  A final item of concern, and a crucial one, involves an evaluation of the
degree to which the activities or functions carried out in the rooms at
Broken K Pueblo can be expected to have either remained stable or
changed during the period the site was occupied. The site was not con-
structed at a single point in time. Radiocarbon dating, as well as ceramic
cross-dating, indicate that the occupation lasted for about 130 years.*
Architectural and stratigraphic evidence show that in general the south-
em portion of the site was constructed slightly earlier than the northern
portion. There could, of course, have been changes in the kinds of activi-
ties performed at the site during this time period, and changes in the
kinds of locations in which they were carried out. If so, we should expect
this analysis of activity-structure to reveal evidence of two different activ-
ity-systems, separated somewhat in time—or perhaps a gradual change in
the activity-system through time.
   There is some independent evidence, however, which indicates that we
can expect no such change to be discovered. The basis for this expectation
lies in the fact that both architectural and stratigraphic data provide
evidence that people were living in the pueblo throughout its entire ex-
tent prior to abandonment. In the first place, there was ample evidence of
remodeling in the southern portion of the site, both in terms of construc-
ting new floors and in terms of changes and additions to the walls of
rooms. These architectural additions exhibit a style of masonry similar to

  * Factor analysis is a multivariate statistical technique useful in isolating non-
random clusters of materials that “behave” together, or occur together. The results of
a factor analysis of pottery-types are reported in this paper. This analysis yielded
seven clusters of pottery-types, and each cluster is a “factor.”
   *Pollen data were also found useful in intra-site dating. A pollen chronology for the
area   (Schoenwetter,   1962; Hevly, 1964) showed a gradual temporal change in the
relative proportions of pollen-types, characterized by decreasing percentages of arbo-
real pollen and increasing percentages of non-arboreal pollen during the period of
occupation of the site. Most of the “early” rooms at the site (based on architectural
and stratigraphic evidence) had significantly more arboreal pollen (esp. pine) than
did the “late” rooms; the late rooms contained more non-arboreal pollen (cf. Hill and
Hevly, 1968).
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                                 107
that used in the northern portion of the site. And secondly, many of the
rooms in the southern portion had not had trash dumped into them, as
might be expected if that area had been abandoned before the northern
half was occupied (Hill, 1965). We may thus infer that the entire site was
occupied contemporaneously, at least during a portion of its existence. It
must be pointed out, however, that even if this were not the case, the
temporal disparity between the two portions of the site would not mean
that there had necessarily been any changes in the kinds of activities
carried on, or in their spatial structure.
  More detailed discussions of the methodological aspects of the research
presented in this paper are given elsewhere (Hill, 1965, 1966; Martin,
Longacre, and Hill, 1967).

                                Variability in Rooms
During the excavation of the site it was noticed that there were differ-
ences in the formal characteristics of the rooms. In order to explain this
formal variability (in a behavioral or functional sense), it was first neces-
sary to define the differences among the rooms in a clear and rigorous
fashion. Traditionally, variability among pueblo rooms has been rather
loosely described, and the attributes that are chosen for use in measuring
variability are often not made explicit; it is frequently difficult to specify
what really distinguishes different kinds of rooms. I have attempted here
to describe such differences as rigorously as possible.
   Four of the rooms at the site were clearly different from all other rooms
and could be distinguished without an involved or complicated analysis.
These will be called “special” rooms; Southwestern archeologists would
recognize them as kivas (that is, similar to present-day Pueblo ceremonial
rooms). They were immediately separated from the analysis of room
variability for two reasons: (1) they contained a number of peculiar
features not common to the other rooms, including wall niches, benches,
and a peculiarly designed firepit-ventilator combination, and (2) there
were only four of them, which would have made a statistical description
of them difficult to accomplish.’ Two of them were subterranean (the
one in the northwest comer of the plaza and the one beneath Room 41)
with inferred roof entrances. The other two were surface rooms with slab-
lined floors (Rooms 6 and 29). Thus, while there may have been two
types of these special rooms, they did not resemble any of the other rooms
at the site.
   In dealing with the formal variability among other rooms, however,
  5 The four excavated special rooms include surface Rooms 6 and 29, the subter-
ranean room stratigraphically underlying Room 41, and the subterranean room in the
northwest corner of the plaza (Fig. 1). Two additional special rooms were discovered,
but they could only be partially excavated (the ones beneath Rooms 22 and 39). A
possible seventh special room in the southwest corner of the plaza was excavated
(contrary   to map   designation),   but it was   not actually a room;   it was a large,
rectangular prehistoric excavation that may have been intended for use as a special
room but had been abandoned prior to completion.
108                             Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
more difficulty was encountered; their similarities and differences were
by no means clear. Several classes of attributes were selected as likely
measures of these differences:
                   1, Size (floor-area)
                   2. Firepits (presence or absence)
                   3, Mealing bins (presence or absence)
                   4, Ventilators (presence or absence)
                   5. Doorways (presence or absence )
                   6. Height of door sill
                   7. Masonry style
  Size was   recognized as important while the excavation was         still in
progress; some rooms were much larger than others. This size differential
indicated that there were probably at least two major kinds of rooms at
the site, in addition to the special rooms. In order to check the validity of
this bimodal distribution, the floor-area of each excavated room was cal-
culated (in square meters), and the rooms were graphed on an interval
scale of size. The distribution proved to be non-random. There was no
continuum in size from small to large; instead there were two clear groups
of rooms, small and large, with few in between. Approximately half of the
rooms were in the small size-mode, containing less than 6.5 square meters
of floor-area. They ranged in size from 2.5 to 6.5 square meters, with an
average of 5.0 square meters. Most of the large rooms, on the other hand,
ranged from 6.6 to 16.0 square meters, with an average of 9.7 square
meters. The special rooms also fell within this mode. A similar graphic
analysis including the unexcavated rooms at the site yielded almost iden-
tical results; the dividing point between the two modes was shifted to 7.0
square meters. It was possible to do this because nearly all of the rooms
had been located and mapped prior to excavation.
   There was some indication, however, that this size distribution might
actually be considered trimodal. Seven of the rooms (Rooms ], 10, 26, 47,
64, 72, and 91) were larger than most of the rooms in the large size-mode,
ranging from 16.0 to 33.5 square meters in area. Unfortunately, there
were so few of them that a definite third mode could not be demon-
strated. Aside from their large size, they were indistinguishable from the
other rooms in the large-size mode, and I have here considered them as
belonging to the large-room category. Two of them (Rooms 1 and 64)
were excavated in the initial sample. and two more (Rooms 72 and 92)
were excavated later in order to obtain a larger sample of these rooms.
  Having demonstrated the clustered or non-continuous nature of varia-
bility in size, it was desirable to find out whether or not any of the other
attributes (above) were associated with one or another of the recognized
size classes. An examination of the distribution of sandstone, slab-lined
firepits revealed that they were usually found in the large-room category.
In fact, out of a total of 23 such firepits, only one of them occurred in a
small-size room.    This observation was    tested by Chi-square,   with the
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                      109
result that there is less than one chance in a thousand that the association
is not significant (.001 level).
   Mealing bins were also found to be associated with the large-room
category. Thirteen out of fifteen of these bins occurred in large rooms,
and the association was significant at the .05 level (probability of .95).
Some large rooms had two or more mealing bins side by side. A similar
association was discovered with respect to ventilators; ten of the eleven
ventilators were associated with large rooms         (.02 level). Further, the
ventilators, firepits and mealing bins were      associated with one       another
(in large rooms),with a 95 per cent chance of the association being valid.
  The other three attributes (doorways, height of door sill, and masonry
style) were not found associated with either of the room-size modes; they
appeared to vary randomly with respect to large and small rooms. This
suggests, of course, that variability in the locations of these particular
attributes had not been determined by the same behavioral determin-
ancies that were responsible for the tight clustering among the first four
attributes.
   The results of the analysis are clear, however. There were, in addition
to the four special rooms, two other kinds of rooms—large rooms contain-
ing firepits, mealing bins, and ventilators, and small rooms that did not
have such features. While some of the large rooms were extra large, they
were not associated with any peculiar structural features.
  All rooms did not fall neatly into one category or another, however.
There were six cases in which classification was difficult (Rooms 9, 27, 40,
48, 60, and 74; Fig. 1). These rooms exhibited some of the attributes of
both large and small rooms, and they may actually represent functional
overlap. For purposes of analysis, they were placed in the category to
which they seemed most similar; Rooms 40 and 48 were considered to be
in the large-room category, while Rooms 9, 27, 60, and 74 were included
in the small-room category.
   The schematic map (Fig. 2) shows the spatial distributions of these
formally different kinds of rooms. Of all of the rooms excavated, 26 were
large rooms, 24 were small rooms, and 4 were special rooms (Table 1).
Representative photographs of these room-classes are presented in Fig-
ures 3, 4, and 5.

                    Table 1. Room   Numbers      by Category
                                (See Figure 1)


                Large                      Small                 Special
        1; 9, 4—5,. 7) 11, 2;       8, 9, 19, 22, 23, 25,        6, 29,
        21, 24, 30, 31-33,          27, 28, 34, 36, 39,          41
        35—37, 40, 41, 43,          44a, 44b, 49, 51, 54,        Plaza
        48, 53, 62, 64, 69,         60, 61, 65, 67, 68,
        73, 78, 79, 80, 82,         74, Outlier 1 (a, b)
        92, Outlier 2
110                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit




                      77/7 ee      YL A                                a
                                 U1    1/14
                                         ee        oe V//fA          =”




      Figure2.Distribution of room-categories. Black areas represent “large”
              rooms; hatched areas represent “small” rooms; cross-hatched
              areas represent “special” rooms. Blank areas are unexcavated.



                          Explanations of Variability
It is quite clear that variability among rooms at the site must have re-
sulted from the fact that they were designed and built for different pur-
poses, to serve as the loci for different kinds of activities.
   The large rooms, for example, may have been built because they were
needed to accommodate larger groups of people than the small rooms
could accommodate. These may have been the rooms in which families or
households carried on most of their indoor activities, such as eating, work-
 ing, and sleeping. The need for such large areas may also have resulted
 from the fact that certain kinds of activities required large areas for their
 performance, or it may be that several different activities were performed
 in them simultaneously. It may simply be that their large size was deter-
 mined by the fact that they were to be used more frequently than the
 other rooms and it was convenient to have ample space in which to move
 about.
      The size of the small rooms, on the other hand, was certainly deter-
 mined by the fact that they were used in activities not requiring the
 congregation of large groups of people or a great deal of space, and they
 may also have been used infrequently. They would appear to have been
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                       111




                                       Se OS
                                           A el                 Sa
  Figure 3. A typical “large” room. Note slab-lined firepit and mealing bin
            with metate.




                      Figure 4.A typical “small” room.
112                                   Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
most suitable for storage purposes—and perhaps other small-scale activ-
ities on occasion.
  The presence of firepits in the large rooms permits the inference that
the activities performed in them required heat, light, or both. It is logical
that cooking may have been involved, since these firepits are the only
ones that could reasonably have been used in routine cooking activities.’
Heat and light were not of importance to the activities carried out in the
small rooms.
  The presence of mealing bins in the large rooms must certainly indicate
that corn or other food materials were ground in such rooms. It would
thus appear that food preparation (or some of it) was being done in the
large rooms, and this lends support to the inference that the firepits were
used in cooking. There is no indication that such activities were carried
out in the small rooms.
   The presence of ventilators in many of the large rooms indicates that
the activities involved in these rooms        required fresh air or draft. If, as
suggested, these rooms were frequented by relatively large numbers of
people, fresh air might have been needed for comfort. The draft provided
by the ventilators may have served to facilitate burning in the firepits.
The activities carried out in the small rooms obviously did not require
ventilation.
   Although the special rooms (or kivas) were generally about the same
size as those in the large-room category, their peculiar internal structural
features leave no doubt that the activities performed in them were in
some sense special. From their large size, it can be inferred that they were
used by relatively large groups of people (or in several activities); the
firepits suggest a need for heat and light; the ventilators indicate a need
for fresh air or draft. The peculiar construction of these features, how-
ever, suggests that they were not used in the same way as those in any of
the other rooms; and such features as wall niches, benches, and slab-lined
floors support this idea.
   In summary, it may be inferred that the large rooms were occupied by
relatively large groups of people and that there might have been several
different kinds of activities performed in them simultaneously; in any
event, the activities evidently required more space than those carried out
in the small rooms. Heat and/or light were also needed in these rooms, as
well as fresh air and facilities for grinding food materials. All of these
features would be expected to occur in living rooms, or the rooms in
which most household activities were performed. The small rooms, on the
other hand, were evidently not used for these activities but were used
instead for activities that were suitably carried out in small, dark, un-

   ° There were eight large pit-ovens in the plaza, but these ovens would have been
unsuitable for routine cooking; they were very deep (sometimes more than a meter
deep), without draft, and contained    large quantities of dense, fireburned   volcanic
rock. They were almost certainly used in roasting large game animals.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function   113
114                              Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
heated, and unventilated areas—a storage function seems most likely. The
special rooms served an entirely different purpose, perhaps ceremonial.
   Additional inferences about the three different kinds of rooms at
Broken K Pueblo can also be made on the basis of the archeological data.
The large and small rooms, for example, occur in an approximate ratio of
50:50, and they almost appear to occur in pairs throughout the site. It is
thus logical to infer that each household (or social unit of some kind)
occupied at least one pair of these rooms, and performed two different
sets of activities in them. Further, each such social unit appears to have
been a self-contained unit, each of which was carrying on the same gen-
eral sets of activities.
   The special rooms are also of interest here. Since only six of them were
discovered in the random sample (four excavated), it can be predicted
that not more than eight or nine of them existed at the site. Regardless of
whether or not they were all used simultaneously, it is reasonable to infer
that several of the units discussed above were participating in the activi-
ties performed in them. This ratio of special rooms to other kinds of
rooms clearly indicates the possibility of some form of institutional link-
ages among the basic social segments of the population of Broken K.


                      Analogies to    Modern Pueblos
At this point, it is useful to examine ethnographic data to find out
whether or not the modern western Pueblo villages have analogous kinds
of rooms. The attributes of the modern rooms that are relevant to such
analogies are, of course, the same kinds of attributes that were found
useful in measuring variability among the prehistoric rooms—namely,
room-size and the presence or absence of firepits, mealing bins, and venti-
lators. If the functions of the modem rooms are in fact similar to the
functions ot the prehistoric rooms, they ought to have some of the same
kinds of attributes.
  This in fact proved to be the case; both the Hopi and Zufi have large
rooms, small rooms and special rooms (kivas) (Mindeleff, 1891, pp. 65,
102; Stevenson,   1904; Forde, 1931; E. Beaglehole, 1937; Titiev, 1944, p.
197). The large rooms contain a firepit (stove), mealing facilities, and
ventilators or windows (Mindeleff, 1891, and personal observation). It is
true, of course, that these features do not always look similar to their
supposed prehistoric analogues, but they are certainly functionally sim-
ilar.
   The small rooms in the western Pueblo villages usually do not contain
such features. Some of them do, however, have small holes excavated into
their floors, and some contain bins or boxes of various sorts (Stevenson,
1904, pp. 292-93, 352; E. Beaglehole, 1937, pp. 43-45; Forde, 1931, pp:
393—94). I have myself observed such boxes in some of the smaller Hopi
rooms, and there are occasionally mealing facilities in them as well. At
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                   115
Zufi, there are sometimes even firepits in these rooms, although they are
a different style from those in the large rooms (Stevenson, 1904, pp:
292—93, 352). Nonetheless, the small rooms in western Pueblo villages
contain fewer internal structural features than do the large rooms; they
usually lack firepits and mealing bins, and they are usually poorly venti-
lated (Mindeleff, 1891; Donaldson,     1893). As I recall, they are less well
lighted than the large rooms.
  The third major type of pueblo room, the kiva, also appears in many
ways similar to its suspected analogue at Broken K Pueblo. It is well
known that among the Hopi, at least, these rooms contain such features as
wall niches, a bench     or platform   along one   side, and a host of other
peculiarities including the construction     of the firepits and ventilators
(Mindeleff,   1891;   Donaldson,   1893, p. 55; Parsons,   1936, pp. 719-22;
Titiev, personal communication).       Although    the Zufii do not, strictly
speaking, have “kivas,” they do have large living rooms that also serve as
ceremonial rooms. In addition to being distinguished by their large size,
they contain a special type of fireplace and a trap-door entrance (Min-
deleff, 1891, p. 112).
  There is one additional kind of room found in present-day pueblos that
should be mentioned here. There are among the Hopi a few rooms in
each village called “clanhouses.” These rooms are distinguished primarily
by being larger than other kinds of rooms (Eggan, 1950, pp. 62, 89-90,
178; Parsons, 1936, p. xxxii). Although the functions of these rooms will
be considered later, it is important to note the possibility that they are
analogous to the seven extra large rooms at Broken K Pueblo.
   The evidence thus far indicates that the variations in rooms at Broken
K are analogous to the variations in rooms found in modern pueblos—
large rooms with firepits and mealing bins (including extra-large rooms),
small rooms lacking certain features, and special rooms containing a set of
peculiar features of their own. The fact that these detailed analogies can
be established suggests that the analogous rooms had similar functions.
Had there been a great deal of functional change between a.v. 1300 and
the historic present, we would expect to find that there had also been
changes in the kinds of rooms being utilized in performing the functions.
The similarities between the suspected analogues are so great that they
almost certainly cannot be coincidental.
   There is an additional analogue that would appear to clinch the case. In
addition to the fact that the formal properties of the prehistoric and
historic rooms are similar, the relative proportions of the room-types are
similar. The reader will recall that at Broken K Pueblo the ratio of large
rooms to small rooms was almost 50:50, and there were very few special
rooms or extra-large rooms. These proportions are evidently about the
same in the modern Pueblo villages. While there are great numbers of
large and small rooms, with a ratio close to 50:50, there are very few kivas
or clanhouses (Mindeleff, 1891; Eggan, 1950; Parsons, 1936; and personal
116                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
observation). With regard to kivas, Steward (1937, pp. 96-99) has ob-
served that there is now only about one kiva for every hundred rooms in
the pueblos; at Broken K the ratio was more like 1:20 (which corresponds
nicely with Steward’s Pueblo III ratio, 1:18). The general similarities in
room-type ratios between Broken K Pueblo and the historic pueblos are
again, too close to be coincidental. Further, the large and small rooms in
the historic pueblos generally occur in pairs, just as appears to be the case
at Broken K. If large-scale functional changes had occurred, the probabil-
ity is very great that neither the ratios among room-types nor the paired
nature of their distribution would have remained so nearly the same.
   Given all of these analogies, it seems reasonable to state the proposition
that the variability in rooms at the site has the same behavioral context as
does the variability in modern pueblo rooms; the respective room-types
are functional equivalents. It would not, however, be profitable to ter-
minate the analysis at this point, as is so often done; the proposition must
first be tested.

                           Testing the Proposition
The testing of this proposition requires additional data, and these data
must be independent of those categories of data that have been used thus
far in measuring formal variability among rooms. It would be neither
logical nor useful to define rooms on the basis of size and internal fea-
tures, and then use this same data in demonstrating that they were func-
tionally similar to modern Hopi or Zufi rooms; such a procedure would
amount to testing the proposition with the same data used in generating
it.
      The procedure used here involved, first of all, an examination   of the
ethnographic literature to find out what kinds of activities are carried out
in the different kinds of present-day pueblo rooms,      and what kinds of
artifacts and other materials might be expected to occur in the respective
room-types as a result of these activities; and secondly, an examination of
the archeological evidence to find out whether or not similar artifact
clusters occurred in the supposedly analogous rooms at Broken K. If the
proposition of functional equivalence is correct, the large, small, and
special rooms at the site should contain similar cultural materials to the
small, large, and special rooms in the modern pueblos (or materials useful
in the same kinds of functions ). Such a finding would, in fact, confirm the
proposition.

ETHNOGRAPHIC       DATA

The three major kinds of rooms found in modern Pueblo villages are
habitation rooms (or living rooms), storage rooms, and ceremonial rooms.
Each household or lineage segment occupies a group of rooms including
at least one habitation room and one or more storage rooms (Mindeleff,
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                      117
1891, pp. 65, 102; E. Beaglehole,    1937, p. 5; Titiev, 1944, p. 197). The
habitation room corresponds to the large-room category mentioned
above; in addition to being the largest, it is also the nucleus of the house-
hold (P. Beaglehole, 1935, p. 42). It is, in fact, the “general living room,
where the entire household works, eats and sleeps, and where guests are
entertained” (Stevenson, 1904, pp. 292—93). There is every indication
that this room serves as the center of almost all the indoor activities that
are of importance in maintaining a household, including a wide variety of
crafts or manufacturing activities (although the specific kinds of manu-
facturing activities are apparently not reported).
   One of the activities performed in these rooms is that of processing or
preparing food prior to cooking. The mealing bin, in conjunction with the
metate and mano, is used by the women for grinding corn, beans, squash,
and other plant materials (including seeds) into flour for use in the diet
(Mindeleff, 1891, pp. 211-12). There are often two or three metates in
each habitation room, and they may vary in the coarseness of their grind-
ing surfaces, depending on the stages of grinding for which they are used
(Mindeleff, 1891, p. 212). In addition to preparing domestic crops for
consumption, the Hopi and Zuni are known to process the seeds, stems,
flowers, and leaves of a variety of wild plants (Stevenson, 1909; Whiting,
1939). It also seems likely that the terminal phases of the butchering
process are carried out in these rooms.
   Cooking is also done in the habitation rooms; it is done on the fire-
places, and the task is usually performed by women (Eggan, personal
communication).Although the Hopi occasionally cook in other kinds of
rooms, and the Zufi in special cooking rooms, most of it is done in
habitation rooms (Cushing, 1920, pp. 295-96; Eggan, personal com-
munication).The containers used in cooking are now nearly identical to
our modern commercial hardware, but not many years ago the western
Pueblos were using simple, undecorated ceramic vessels for this purpose
(Donaldson, 1893, p. 127; Parsons, 1936, p. 1190).
   There is also good evidence that the moder Pueblo peoples take their
meals in the habitation rooms (Stevenson, 1904, pp. 292-93). Food is
frequently served in bowls (Cushing, 1920, pp. 296, 313; Brainard, 1935,
p. 267; E. Beaglehole, 1937, pp. 57—65; Roberts, 1956, p. 15), and these
bowls often have smudged or darkened interiors (Alfonso Ortiz, San Juan
Pueblo, personal communication ).
   Another function of these rooms is the storage and use of water. Water
is, of course, important in preparing and cooking food, and it is necessary
to have a supply for drinking as well. Both the Hopi and Zuni use large
decorated jars or “ollas” in the transportation and storage of water
(Brainard, 1935, p. 72; Parsons, 1936, p. 614; E. Beaglehole, 1937, pp. 57,
72), and these are generally kept in the habitation rooms        ( Mindeleff,
1891, pp. 109-110).
  The habitation rooms must certainly have a number of other functions,
118                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
but evidence of them is not apparent in the literature. The functions of
storage rooms are reported in somewhat more detail. The storage rooms
are small, and their primary function is the storage of food crops (Minde-
leff, 1891, pp. 143—44; Cushing, 1920, pp. 167, 171—73, 179). The most
important crops stored are corn, squash, beans, fruit and cotton (E. Bea-
glehole, 1937, pp. 43-44). Among the Hopi, corn is usually dried, and
the cobs are stored in stacks on the floor. Beans are stored in sacks
(formerly pots), and sometimes in small holes dug into the floors of the
rooms. Squash is cut into strips, dried, and hung from the rafters. Seed
com for the next season’s planting is also hung from the rafters, while
reserve squash seeds are kept in clay jars or boxes    (E. Beaglehole, 1937,
pp. 43-45; Forde, 1931, pp. 393-94). The Hopi also store jerked meat
in their storage rooms.
   The Zufi use their storage rooms in much the same fashion (Stevenson,
1904, p. 352). In fact, the similarities between the Hopi and Zuni, both in
terms of the crops that are stored and the manner in which it is done, are
striking. It is notable, also, that both groups are known to have made
extensive use of large storage jars in these rooms (Bunzel, 1929, p. 41;
Cushing, 1920, p. 208).
   In addition to food, a great variety of other materials are also stored.
The Zufi, for example, store their ceremonial paraphernalia in these
rooms. In fact, Stevenson reports that “A Zuni storage room . .. contains a
promiscuous mass of material ranging from objects of the most sacred
character to those of little or no value” (1904, p. 352). A personal exami-
nation of several Hopi storage rooms indicates that this statement applies
to them as well.
   Although these small rooms are used primarily for storage among both
groups, they are occasionally ‘involved in other kinds of activities; they
may serve as workrooms, kitchens and bedrooms (Roberts, 1956, pp. 11,
45—46, 80—81; Eggan, personal communication). While these usages
may not be everyday occurrences, it is clear that the storerooms may be
multi-functional. It is likely, in fact, that such rooms are at times involved
in a number of activities that are more commonly carried out in the living
rooms.
  The activities carried on in the ceremonial rooms or kivas are largely
different, of course, from those performed in other kinds of rooms. These
rooms serve as the centers of ritual activity, and access to them is usually
restricted to males (Mindeleff, 1891, pp. 130, 134; Titiev, 1944, p. 103).
The ritual activities involve the use of artifacts and other materials that
are usually not found in non-ceremonial rooms; these may include idols or
fetishes, for example (Donaldson, 1893, p. 55). The Hopi have specific
types of ceramic vessels (and perhaps other kinds of vessels) that are
reserved for use in ritual activities (Titiev, 1944, p. 16), and the Zufii
have sacred vessels on which ritually important designs are painted
(Bunzel, 1929, pp. 23-24). Presumably, such vessels are frequently used
in ceremonial rooms.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                   119
   Plant materials are also brought into the ceremonial rooms and used in
ritual activity; the most important ones are the domesticates: corn, beans,
and squash (Parsons, 1936, pp. 595, 608). Often, in fact, entire plants of
these types are brought into the kivas, and they are even germinated in
these rooms (Parsons, 1936, pp. 188, 287, 623, 690; Titiev, 1944, p. 166;
Forde, 1931, p- 398). This is not surprising of course, since corn, beans,
and squash are the economic mainstays of the Pueblos. In addition to
these crops, however,     a wide variety of wild plant materials           are often
introduced into the kivas (cf. Stevenson, 1909; Whiting, 1939).
  Beyond their ritual functions, and probably just as important, is the fact
that kivas also serve as male clubhouses           and craft centers     (Mindeleff,
1891, p. 130). The men do their weaving in these rooms (Mindeleff, 1891,
p- 129; Parsons, 1936, pp. 33, 134, 188, 202), and they carry on a variety
of leisure-time activities (Parsons, 1936, p. xliii). In addition to relaxa-
tion and manufacturing activities, the men sometimes eat and sleep in
these rooms—although no cooking is done in them (Mindeleff, 1891, p.
130; Parsons, 1936, pp. 605, 607). Meetings of various kinds are also held
in kivas, and decisions of public concern are made there.
   While this concludes the discussion of the primary functional character-
istics of the three major pueblo room-types, it will also be worthwhile to
consider the functions of the clanhouses. As already mentioned, these are
simply large habitation rooms. Although there are no recognized clan-
houses at Zuni (Kroeber, 1917, pp. 91, 118—19), the Hopi villages usually
have several of them. Each clan in a village has one, and it is regarded as
the “home” of that clan in the village. It is here that the headwoman of
the clan usually lives, and where clan meetings are held. The ritual para-
phernalia used in clan-controlled ceremonies are stored in the clanhouses,
and sometimes certain rituals are carried out in these rooms (cf. Titiev,
1944, p. 103; Eggan, 1950, pp. 62, 89-90, 178).
   It has already been pointed out that modern pueblo households are
composed of pairs (or small groups) of rooms, each having at least one
habitation room and one storage room. It is also important to note that
this household unit is the basic economic unit in pueblo villages. Although
households do indeed cooperate with one another on a large scale, they
are basically self-contained units, and each of them carries on the same
general kinds of activities in its respective rooms          (E. Beaglehole, 1936,
1937). The kivas, however, are shared, and the membership of each kiva-
group is drawn from a number of households, some of which belong to
different   lineages   (Stevenson,   1904,   pp.   413-21;    Kroeber,    1917, pp.
151—54, 161; Hawley, 1937, p. 515; Eggan, 1950, pp. 52, 117, 203; 1964,
pp. 181—82).

EXPECTATIONS
Given this discussion of -the major activities that are carried out in dif-
ferent kinds of rooms among the Pueblos today, it is possible to make
some specific statements concerning the kinds of artifacts and other cul-
120                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
tural materials that can be expected to occur in the rooms at Broken K
Pueblo—if indeed they were functionally similar to modern pueblo
rooms. These expectations may be stated in the form of a series of limited
propositions:

   1. If the large rooms were all-purpose living rooms, they ought to
contain larger numbers and higher densities of most categories of cultural
remains than either the small rooms or the special rooms. If the small
rooms were storage rooms, they should have the lowest densities of most
materials, with the exception of food crops; and the special rooms should
fall somewhere in between.
   2. The large rooms should contain a wider variety of materials than are
found in the other room-types, since the largest number of different kinds
of activities were presumably performed in them.
   3. The large rooms should contain evidence of the processing or prepar-
ing of food prior to cooking, independent of the mealing bins. They
should contain most of the metates, manos, and other tools usable in food-
processing; and they might be expected to contain some of the foodstuffs
that had been processed, possibly including seeds or pollen in the basins
of the mealing bins, and animal bones representing the remains of meat
preparation (butchering). While the small rooms may also be expected to
contain the remains of food materials, neither they nor the special rooms
should contain evidence of food-processing.
   4, The large rooms should contain evidence of cooking, in addition to
the firepits. They might contain the burned or charred remains of various
kinds of foods, and they might be expected to have the largest numbers of
plain or textured (unpainted) utility vessels (some of which should ex-
hibit evidence of having been, placed on the fire). The other rooms, on
the other hand, should contain little or no such evidence.
   5. The large rooms should contain evidence that eating was done in
them. In addition to having charred food remains (which may indicate
cooking as well), they might be expected to contain the fragments of
bowls that had been used in serving food—particularly bowls with
smudged interiors.
   6. The large rooms would be expected to contain evidence that water
was stored in them. They should have more large, narrow-necked, deco-
rated jars than the other rooms at the site.
   7. The large rooms should contain evidence of manufacturing or craft
activities; this should include the tools useful in such activities, as well as
the debris that resulted.
   8. The small rooms, in addition to containing only a small number and
variety of artifacts and manufacturing debris, should contain reasonably
large quantities of the remains of stored food crops—especially corn and
squash (since beans do not preserve well). This evidence should be in the
form of corn cobs, seeds, or pollen.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                   121
   9. The small rooms can be expected to contain evidence of some of the
ethnographically recorded storage techniques, although most of the traces
of these techniques would almost certainly not have been preserved.
These rooms     can, however, be expected to contain more       large undeco-
rated jars than do the other rooms, since the ethnographic evidence indi-
cates that such jars are often used in storing various kinds of materials.
  10. The small rooms should contain evidence that materials other than
food crops were stored in them—this might include ceremonial parapher-
nalia, tools, and even non-dietary plant remains     (in the form of seeds or
pollen).
   11. The small rooms can be expected to contain the remains of manu-
facturing or other non-storage activites; but since they were probably not
used frequently for such activities, they should not yield large quantities
of such remains.
  12. The special rooms should contain evidence of ritual activities, inde-
pendent of the peculiar structural features noted. They might, for ex-
ample, contain the remains of idols, fetishes, or other presumably cere-
monially related materials. They might also be expected to contain special
types of pottery, and they should      contain   large quantities   of seeds or
pollen of the domestic crops, corn and squash. They may even yield a
variety of wild plants that are used for ritual purposes in the present-day
pueblo kivas.
  13. The special rooms should exhibit evidence of having been used in
manufacturing or craft activities, and some of these activities could be
expected to be different from those carried on in the large and small
rooms. There should be evidence of weaving in these rooms, for example,
and perhaps the remains of manufacturing chert hunting implements.
  14. The special rooms ought to exhibit evidence that a certain amount
of eating (but not cooking) had been done in them. This would be
indicated by the presence of food remains, similar to those expected in the
large rooms, but probably not in the same quantities. Serving bowls
would also be expected.
   15. If the seven extra-large rooms at the site were indeed clanhouses,
one might expect to find some of the remains of ritual paraphernalia that
had been stored in them.
   16. It can be expected that the three major kinds of rooms at the site
did not all have the same context with regard to the sexual division of
labor. The special rooms should contain cultural items associated with
male activities primarily, while the large and small rooms should contain
both male- and female-associated items.

TESTING

In examining the archeological data to test the above propositions, I have
dealt with them in the order of their presentation in the last section.
122                                  Variability in a Single Occupational Unit

                     Table 2. Distribution of Artifact Types

                     MeanNo.per   MeanNo.per   Mean No.per           Dominant
Artifact Type        Large Room   Small Room   SpecialRoom   Total   Room-type
Projectile Points         92          08            50          27   i,     P
Arrowshaft Tools          .88          alll         .00         25   ib
Antler Flakers            .08          .08          25           5          12
Saws                      .28          .04          00           8   if
Graver-Burins             .20         .20           .00         10   Las
Flake Knives            1.70          23            00          48   1B
Bifacial Knives           20          .07           .00          7   if
Utilized Flakes         2.40         1.00         2.00          96   Peesaee
Blades                    16          16            .00          8   iG is
Cores                     .92          23         eb0e          35   jf     iz
 Scrapers               3.00          84          3.00*        108   L      P
Choppers                2.60          44          4,70*        96    L      P
Axes                      32          .00          00            8   L
Mauls                     28          sia          .00          10   1
Hammerstones            3.70          .69         2.00*        118   1B     12
Metates                 1.10          15            20          32   L
Manos                   6.60         1.00           OIs        192   ib
Worked Slabs              88          ml            15          29   L      i
Worked Sherds           1.50           lS           Oe          42   Vi,
Bone Awls               1.60           oy           25          48   L
Bone Rings and
  Ring Material          1.00         alli         25           30   1%;
“Ornamental” Items        .96         19           50           31   1      1B
L = large room; S = small room; P = special room
*All from a single special room (room beneath Room 41)


   There can be no doubt that the first two propositions are confirmed;
the large rooms contained not only the largest numbers and highest densi-
ties of most cultural materials at the site, but also the widest variety of
materials. The distribution of artifacts (Table 2) is a case in point. Notice
that 21 out of 22 artifact types occurred in high frequencies in the large
rooms, while only three types were associated with small rooms, and nine
with the special rooms. Further, 11 out of the 22 types occurrred in the
large rooms to the virtual exclusion of the other room-types, showing that
the inhabitants of the village had discarded about 50 per cent of their non-
perishable artifacts in these rooms. There were no types strongly dom-
inant in the small rooms, and only one (antler-flakers) was of primary
importance in the special rooms. There were eight types, however, which
were common in both large and special rooms, and two types which were
common in large rooms and small rooms. Only one type (utilized flakes)
was clearly common in all three kinds of rooms.
  These data demonstrate that the non-perishable tool kits used in each
type of room were as follows:
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                          123
       Large Rooms: All types, except antler-flakers
       Small Rooms:   Utilized flakes, blades and graver-burins
        Special Rooms:     Projectile points, antler-flakers, utilized flakes,
             cores, choppers, scrapers, hammerstones, worked slabs, and
             ornamental items
It is thus clear that in addition to having the greatest numbers of artifacts,
the large rooms had the greatest variety of them.
   The large rooms also contained most of the lithic waste at the site
(Table 3). A total of 5,868 unutilized chert chips were recovered during
the excavation, representing all stages in the manufacture of chert tools. It
was found that 17 out of 23 large rooms analyzed had an average of 127
chips per floor (13 per square meter), and an overall average of 98 chips
per floor. The small rooms, on the other hand, averaged only 30 chips per
floor, and 17 out of 24 of them had only 10 chips (2 per square meter).
The special rooms generally had 8 to 14 chips each, although one of them
(the room beneath Room 41) had 98. This evidence clearly demonstrates
that lithic waste was primarily associated with large rooms, and it lends
support to both proposition 1 and proposition 2.

                Table 3. Distribution of Non-Artifact Materials

                     Mean No. per         Mean No. per            Mean No. per
Item                 Large Room            Small Room             Special Room
Lithic Waste             98.0                 30.0                    37.0
Animal Bone             120.0                 26.0                    29.0
Seeds                     9.3                  4.2                     2.5
Pollen Grains            22.0                 51.0                    17.0
   (economic )



   Further support is found in the differential distribution of pottery den-
sity; there were many more sherds in the large rooms and special rooms
than in the small rooms. There were generally more than sixty sherds in
the large rooms and special rooms, and many fewer than this in the small
rooms. After the frequency of sherds in each of the rooms had been
converted to a density figure, it was found that the large rooms and
special rooms usually had more than three sherds per square meter of
floor area, while the small rooms had fewer than this (Chi-square, .01
level).
   While this supports proposition 1, the distribution of individual pottery-
types lends support to the second proposition. The factor analysis of
pottery types (which yielded non-random clusters of covarying types)
revealed that there was a larger variety of different kinds of pottery in the
large rooms than in either of the other two kinds of rooms. The pottery-
type factors are given in Table 4. Four of these seven factors (factors ], 2,
124   Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
a   ear              ee
                       Table 4. Pottery-Type Factors
rn

      Factor
     Number            Pottery Types                            Vessel Forms
         1             Patterned Corrugated                     Jars
                       Pinto Polychrome                         Bowls
                       Brown Indented Corrugated                Jars
        2              Brown Plain Corrugated
                          (Smudged Interior)                    Bowls
                       Tularosa Black-on-White                  Jars, Bowls
        3              Snowflake Black-on-White
                          (Snowflake Variety)                   Jars, Bowls
        4              Brown Plain Corrugated                   Jars
                       Brown Indented Corrugated                Jars
         5             Brown Indented Corrugated
                          (Smudged Interior)                    Bowls
                       McDonald Indented Corrugated             Bowls
                       Snowflake Black-on-White
                         (Hay Hollow Variety)                   Bowls, Jars
         6             McDonald Plain Corrugated                Bowls
                       St. Johns Polychrome                     Bowls
         1             St. Johns Black-on-Red                   Bowls
     Bowl and jar forms are given in order of frequency.


3, and 5) occurred primarily in the large room category.’ Table 5 shows
that nine out of thirteen pottery-types represented in these factors were
strongly associated with these rooms, while only two were associated
strongly with the small rooms and six with the special rooms. These
associations were tested by Chi-square (.05 level). There was clearly a
wider variety of pottery types in the large rooms.
   The distribution of animal bone at the site was also of interest with
respect to the first two propositions (see Table 3). A total of 3,681 bones
were found on the floors of rooms; of these, 2,895 were in large rooms,
671 were in small rooms, and 115 were in special rooms. The large rooms
averaged 120 bones each, while the small rooms averaged only 26 each;
the special rooms averaged 29 each. In fact, 77 per cent of the animal
bones found on floors at the site came from large rooms, only 18.3 per
cent from      small rooms,   and only 3.1 per cent from         special rooms.    A
comparison of the rooms in terms of the density of bone revealed that the
large rooms contained more than 2 bones per square meter (usually much
more), and the small rooms and special rooms had less than this (Chi-
square, .001).
  Similar tests were performed to find out whether any individual species

  "Using a multiple regression analysis, Freeman    and Brown   (1964)   demonstrated
that different clusters of pottery types occured in different rooms at Carter Ranch
Site, a slightly earlier pueblo in the same valley.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function              125
or genus of animal bone distributed in some other way. That is, were
there particular kinds of animals that were significantly represented in
small rooms or special rooms? The result was negative. All of the animal
bones followed the same pattern of distribution as did the lumped bone
counts."
   Most of the plant remains in the form of seeds were also found in the
large rooms (see Table 3). It was discovered that over twice as many
seeds (including charred com) were in the large rooms as in the small
ones; most of these were found in the basins of mealing bins. Out of a
total of 352 seeds (not including the seeds in a fecal sample from Room
31—33), there were 233 in large rooms,            109 in small rooms, and 10 in
special rooms. The average numbers of seeds for these rooms were 9.3,
4.2, and 2.5, respectively. Furthermore, of the twenty rooms in which
seeds were found, fourteen of them were large rooms, five were small
rooms, and one was a special room (Room 6). The association of seeds
with the large-room category was significant at the .01 level, and it may
thus be considered culturally significant.
   Having considered the major categories of cultural materials, it is clear
that both propositions 1 and 2 are confirmed; the large rooms not only
contained the largest quantities of most materials, but also the widest
variety. They contained the largest numbers of different kinds of artifacts
and pottery-types, as well as most of the lithic waste, animal bone, and
seeds. They were living rooms par excellence.
   The third proposition was that these rooms ought to exhibit evidence of
food processing prior to cooking, while the other rooms should not. This,
too, is confirmed. Food-processing activities are indicated by the fact that
most of the metates and manos occurred in large rooms (see Table 2).
There were, on the average, over seven times as many metates in large
rooms   as in smal] ones, and over four times as many              as in the special
rooms; there were six times as many manos in the large rooms as in the
small ones, and twenty six times as many as in the special rooms. In terms
of density (average number per square meter of floor area), these distri-
butions are as follows:

                                   Large        Small        Special
                                  Rooms         Rooms        Rooms
                 Metates           5 |           03           03
                 Manos             86            .20          03

   Further, it was pointed out that most of the seeds found at the site were

  8 The animal bone found in the fills of rooms did not follow this pattern. It seems
to have been distributed in a random    manner with respect to the different kinds of
rooms, and it was thus of no use to this analysis. This is a clear demonstration of the
fact that the floors of rooms must be kept separate from the fills if we are to learn
very much about the functions of rooms. Fill material may often reflect random
distribution simply because it can be largely a result of indiscriminate trash dumping.
126                                Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
from the basins   of mealing  bins;  this clearly indicates that seeds were
being processed in the large rooms. Out of twelve different types of seeds
found in mealing bins, seven of them are frequently eaten by the Hopi
and Zuni. These include Amaranthus (pigweed), Chenopodium ( goose-
foot family), Cucurbita (squash), Cycloloma (goosefoot family), Opun-
tia (prickly pear cactus), Juniperus (juniper), and Zea (corn) (Steven-
son, 1909; Whiting, 1939).
   Pollen samples collected from the basins of mealing bins yielded pollen
from sixteen different kinds of plants, at least nine of which are eaten by
the modern Pueblo peoples (Stevenson, 1909; Whiting, 1939). These in-
clude Cheno-ams (Chenopods and Amaranths), Cleome (bee weed),
Compositae (two types, low-spine and high-spine, including Artemisia),
Cucurbita (squash), Gramineae (grasses), Juniperus (juniper), Opuntia
(prickly pear cactus), Pinus (probably P. edulis, pinyon pine), and Zea
(corn).
   It is noteworthy in this connection that all of the above plants were
present in a fecal sample from Room 31—33, so the evidence is even
stronger that they were being prepared as food.
   Vegetal foods were not the only foods prepared in the large rooms,
however. Judging from the fact that 77 per cent of the animal bone was
found in these rooms, it is clear that butchering, or particular stages in the
butchering process, was being carried on in them. A large but unquan-
tified number of these bones had butchering marks on them. And beyond
this, the tools most reasonably associated with butchering were found
primarily in large rooms      (saws, flake knives, bifacial knives, and chop-
pers; cf. Table 2). There can be no doubt that food processing prior to
cooking was a major activity in these rooms and not in the others.
   There is also good evidence that cooking was done in these rooms
(proposition 4). This is not only indicated by the large amounts of animal
bone and seeds present in these rooms, but also, and more importantly, by
the fact that most of the burned bone and charrred corn cobs were found
in the large rooms. Out of a total of 179 fragments of burned bone, nearly
all were in these rooms (Chi-square, .001). And out of 37 charred corn
cobs, 28 of them were in large rooms (Chi-square, .001).
   Further, it was suggested that unpainted utility vessels could be ex-
pected to be found in these rooms; and this proved to be the case (Table
5). The large rooms contained two such vessel types, Indented Corrugated
and Patterned Corrugated (factor 1). Both types were also represented in
the special rooms, together with Brown Plain Corrugated (factor 4). Thus
it is evident that the so-called utility wares were well represented in both
large rooms and special rooms, but not in small rooms. Although no
   * The reader will notice that five of these plants were not represented by seeds in
the mealing bins. Why they should be represented by pollen alone is not clear, since it
is usually the seeds of the plants that are ground today. It may be, of course, that
flowers were ground for various non-dietary purposes, or that certain kinds of seeds
were not preserved.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                   127
systematic record was kept concerning the distribution of sherds exhibit-
ing evidence of exterior burning (and thus cooking), it was clear that
most such sherds did occur in the large rooms. Considering all of this
evidence, proposition 4 seems reasonably well confirmed.

                     Table 5. Distribution of Pottery Types
             (Room Categories in Which Pottery Types Are Dominant, as
                          Determined by Factor Analysis)

      Pottery Type                             Large      Small     Special
      Brown Plain Corrugated
        (Smudged Interior) (B)                    X
      Brown Indented Corrugated
        (Smudged Interior) (B)
      McDonald Indented Corrugated (B)
      Tularosa Black-on-White (J, B)
      Snowflake Black-on-White
        (Hay Hollow Variety) (B, J)
     Brown Indented Corrugated (J)
     Patterned Corrugated (J)
     Snowflake Black-on-White
          (Snowflake Variety) (J, B,)
      Pinto Polychrome (B)                       a
                                                 a
                                                 i
      Brown Plain Corrugated (J)
      St. Johns Black-on-Red (B)                                        rs
                                                                        Mr
                                                                        rod
      McDonald Corrugated (B)
      St. Johns Polychrome (B)                              vata
      B = bowl; J = jar

   The evidence expected under proposition 5 was also found. The idea
that eating was being done in the large rooms is supported by the fact
that most of the charred bone and corn cobs were found in these rooms,
 and by the fact that there was no evidence of dietary remains in the other
 rooms. It is also supported by the presence of ceramic vessels that would
have been useful in serving food (that is, bowls; cf. Table 5). And, as
expected, many of the bowls (three out of four types) had smudged
interiors. These include Brown Plain Corrugated, smudged interior; Brown
Indented Corrugated, smudged interior; and McDonald Indented Cor-
rugated.
   There was also good evidence of water storage in the large rooms
 (proposition 6). As mentioned, one would expect water to be stored in
large, narrow-necked jars or ollas, and that these would be decorated or
painted vessels (as among the historic pueblos). Such jars would be
particularly necessary at Broken K Pueblo because the nearest source of
water was probably not less than 300 yards from the village and some
kind of transportation and storage vessel would have been required. An
examination of the different kinds of large, painted olla-type jars at the site
revealed that most of them were found in the large rooms. This was
128                              Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
shown in the factor analysis of pottery-types (Table 5). Tularosa Black-
on-white, Snowflake Black-on-white (Snowflake variety), and Snowflake
black-on-white (Hay Hollow variety) were the only such types entering
into the factors, and they belong in factors that were clearly associated
with the large rooms. While it is true that Snowflake Black-on-white
(Snowflake variety.) jars were also found in special rooms, this may sim-
ply mean that water was stored in these rooms too.
   The large rooms also contained the expected evidence of manufactur-
ing or craft activities (proposition 7). One of these activities was the
manufacture of chert implements. Like so many of the materials re-
covered from the site, the implements which seem to be related to chert
tool manufacture were far more common in the large rooms than any-
where else (except in one of the special rooms). These materials include
hammerstones, cores, lithic waste, and antler-flakers (see Table 2). Some
of this chert knapping activity probably involved the manufacture of
hunting implements, since “arrowshaft tools” and projectile points also
occurred predominantly in the large rooms (Table 2).
   Certain stages in the process of pottery-making may also have been
carried out in these rooms. The evidence for this is that most of the
worked sherds were in large rooms (Table 2), and it is likely that they
were used in scraping pottery prior to firing (Haury, 1940, p. 119). Out
of a total of 42 worked sherds found on the floors of rooms, there were
only four in the small rooms, and none in the special rooms.
   Another manufacturing activity that may have been carried on in the
large rooms is the making of ground and pecked stone implements such as
metates and manos. The evidence for this is that most of the hammer-
stones were found in these rooms (Table 2). In addition to being used in
chert knapping, hammerstones are also used in roughening the grinding
surfaces of metates and manos (Rinaldo, 1964, p. 73).
  The manufacture of ornamental items may also have been carried out
in these rooms. Most ornamental items, including bone rings, occurred in
the large rooms (Table 2). Further, it was found that the bone material
from which the rings were cut was primarily in these rooms.
  The fact that bone awls occurred almost exclusively in the large rooms
(Table 2) also indicates that craft activities were being performed. Al-
though bone awls may be multi-functional, it is reasonable to infer that
they were being used in a manufacturing activity of some kind.
  In short, there can be no doubt that proposition 7 is confirmed;        in
addition to the various manufacturing activities that are demonstrated to
have occurred in the large rooms at the site, there must have been many
others. This is indicated by the already established fact that almost all of
the recovered artifacts were found in significant numbers in these rooms.
  The small rooms also yielded a great deal of the expected evidence. In
addition to having only small quantities of most materials, they yielded
good evidence that they had been used for storing food crops (proposi-
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                               129
tion 8); this evidence was largely palynological. The pollen of economic
plants was much more abundant on the floors of the small rooms than
on those of either of the other room types (see Table 3). Most of the
pollen samples from small rooms contained more than 43 grains of eco-
nomic pollen each, while the large rooms generally had between 0 and 42
grains. A Fisher Exact Test revealed that there is less than one chance in a
thousand that this distribution is in error (.001 level). A separate test was
performed using the frequencies of Zea and Cucurbita alone, with exactly
the same results. The special rooms had surprisingly small quantities of
economic pollen.
  This great density of economic pollen in the small rooms clearly indi-
cates that crops were being stored in these rooms. It is difficult to imagine
any alternative interpretation, because there is no evidence indicating
that these crops were processed, cooked, or eaten in such rooms.
   There is a logical argument in support of this, too. One would expect
that when corn and squash were brought in from the fields for storage, a
certain amount of pollen would have been carried in with them—either in
the form of the flowers themselves, or simply by clinging to the produce.
Then, as the crops were being stacked in these rooms, some of the pollen
would fall onto the floor. And, finally, as the crops began to dry out, any
flowers or pollen that had been introduced might also fall to the floor,
depositing large amounts of pollen. By the time the crops were needed as
food, much        of the pollen would      presumably     have   been    deposited on
storage room floors, and very little would find its way into the living
rooms. Although this argument is speculative, it is certainly a reasonable
explanation of the pollen distribution (Richard H. Hevly, Department of
Botany, Northern Arizona University, personal communication). In any
event,   the fact that the small rooms          contained   most   of the economic
pollen is, in itself, sufficient evidence for inferring that they were used for
the storage of food.
   It was also expected that these rooms would yield some evidence of the
storage techniques used (proposition 9). In this case, however, the unex-
pected occurred. The small rooms, instead of containing significant num-
bers of large textured storage jars, were characterized primarily by the
presence of bowls. The only pottery-type factor of importance in the
small rooms was factor 6 (McDonald Plain Corrugated and St. John
Polychrome), and the vessel forms are both bowls (Table 4). This was
so surprising that it was decided to ignore (temporarily )the results of the
factor analysis, and reexamine the raw frequencies of the various pottery
types by room. This exercise, however, yielded virtually the same results.
While large unpainted jars (sherds) did occur in the small rooms, their
frequencies were much lower than in either the large or special rooms.
  1° Economic plants are defined here as those for which there is evidence that they
were introduced into the ‘site by man rather than by natural agencies. They include
Zea, Cucurbita,    Cleome, Opuntia, and several others (Hevly, 1964. )
130                                  Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
The average number of sherds per room-type of each of the three types of
large undecorated jars is given as follows:
                                            Large        Small       Special
                                            Rooms        Rooms       Rooms
      Brown Indented Corrugated              57.4         14.0        39.5
      Brown Plain Corrugated                  2.9            9         3.0
      Patterned Corrugated                    2.8            a)        2.5
In terms of density (no. per sq. m.), the results are similar:
                                            Large        Small       Special
                                            Rooms        Rooms       Rooms
      Brown Indented Corrugated              5.92         2.80        4.07
      Brown Plain Corrugated                  .30          18          .22,
      Patterned Corrugated                    .29          .06          .26
Thus, while the palynological evidence supports the idea that the small
rooms were storage rooms, the pottery-type evidence does not. Proposi-
tion 9 is not confirmed.
   Proposition 10 is also difficult to confirm. If materials other than food
crops had been stored in the small rooms, there was little macroscopic
evidence of it. To be sure, a number of different kinds of artifacts were
represented in these rooms (Table 2), but it is unlikely that many of them
were being stored (see below). Perhaps most important is the fact that of
29 different types of pollen found at the site, nearly all of them were
found to some degree in the storage rooms (Hill and Hevly, 1968). Judg-
ing from the ethnobotanical evidence (Stevenson, 1909; Whiting, 1939),
many of these pollen types do not represent plants that were eaten by the
inhabitants of the site, and it is thus not likely that they were being stored
as food crops. While this evidence tends to confirm proposition 10, it does
not in any sense constitute proof.
   There is good data, however, to support the idea that certain activi-
ties besides storage were carried out in small rooms; this is indicated by
the artifact content of the rooms. It will be recalled that there were only
three types of artifacts that were common in these rooms, relative to their
frequencies of occurrence in the other rooms (graver-burins, blades and
utilized flakes; cf. Table 2), and these occurred in small quantities. At the
same time, however, almost all of the artifact types were present to some
degree in at least a few of the small rooms, and some             of them   (for
example, manos, hammerstones and scrapers )occurred in noticeable quan-
tities. While these artifacts do not serve to distinguish the small rooms
from the other rooms, they do permit the inference that activities other
than storage were occasionally performed in these rooms. The possibility
that these materials were all being stored is contradicted by the presence
of an average of thirty pieces of lithic waste per small room. One would
expect lithic waste to represent the by-product of chert tool manufacture.
  Thus it is likely that the small rooms were multi-functional, as expected.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                  131
The archeological evidence, given the state of preservation at the site,
indicates that food crops were being stored and that certain non-storage
activities were being carried out; most of the latter, however, were prob-
ably activities that were more commonly carried out in the large rooms or
special rooms.
  The special rooms also conform to our expectations (proposition 12).
Although there were no idols, fetishes, or other materials of that nature
recovered, these rooms did contain a peculiar combination of pottery
types. The dominant pottery-type factors in the special rooms were as
follows (in order of importance; cf. Table 4):
                Special Rooms                             Factors
                Room 6                                     7,4
                Room 29                                    1,4
                Room beneath Room 41                       a, 0, t
                Room in N.W. corner of plaza               cages
Thus, out of a total of seven factors, four of them were commonly found
in the special rooms (factors 1, 3 4, and 7). Although none of them were
found in all of the special rooms, they clearly represent the major pottery
types that were used in these rooms (Table 5). Factors 2 and 5, which
were strongly represented in the large rooms, were not important in the
special rooms; and factor 6, the small room factor, was also weakly repre-
sented.
  Some interesting support for the idea that factors 1, 3, 4, and 7 were
composed of ceremonial or ritual pottery types is found in an archeolog-
ical context at another site in the same valley (Carter Ranch Site; cf.
Longacre, 1963, 1964). Longacre discovered that at Carter Ranch Site
there was a constellation of five pottery types that was largely peculiar to
ceremonial-mortuary contexts, and he was able to make the following
statement:
   Thus we can say with great probability, that these ceramic types were used
   together in ceremonial activities—the others were not. We can go one step
   further and suggest that when these types are found in non-random high
   frequency on the floor of a cultural unit, that particular unit must be classed
   as a ceremonial one (1963, p. 95).

Although his “ceremonial” types differ somewhat from the equivalent
constellation at Broken K Pueblo, there are striking similarities. The two
constellations are given in Table 6. The first three types listed were char-
acteristic of kivas (special rooms) at both sites; the fourth type is also the
same, except that it had a smudged interior and a different shape at
Carter Ranch Site. The other types differ between the sites. The only
major difference, however, is that the two smudged-interior types at Car-
ter Ranch Site were not characteristic of the special rooms at Broken K; in
their place we have a black-on-white and a polychrome type.
   If these special rooms are in fact analogous to kivas, it is likely that the
first three or four of these pottery types represent ceremonial types com-
132                                    Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
mon to this area of the Southwest. They may be found in kivas (and
perhaps cemeteries )at other pueblo sites in the area.
   EEC
   n   LO TC LCE                                                          DA   LT A
en

             Table 6. Ceremonial-Mortuary Pottery Types

       Broken K Pueblo                             Carter Ranch Site
       St. Johns Black-on-Red                      St. Johns Black-on-Red
       Patterned Corrugated                        Patterned Corrugated
       Brown Plain Corrugated                      Brown Plain Corrugated
       Brown Indented Corrugated                   Brown Indented Corrugated
                                                      (Smudged Interior)
       Snowflake Black-on-White                    Brown Plain Corrugated
         (Snowflake Variety)                         (Smudged Interior)
       Pinto Polychrome

  There is some additional evidence, however, that the special rooms had
a ceremonial function, and this evidence is palynological. The pollen
content of the special rooms was in many ways similar to that of the
habitation rooms (Hill and Hevly, 1968). A major difference, however,
lay in the fact that the special rooms had greater concentrations of the
pollen of Ephedra (Mormon tea) and Eriogonum (buckwheat). There
was more pollen of these two types in the special rooms than the average
amounts of these types in the other rooms at the site. Both of these plants
have historically had ceremonial and medicinal uses among the Hopi and
Zuni Indians      (Stevenson,     1909; Whiting,    1939). Their presence      in the
special rooms lends support to the idea that these rooms were indeed
ceremonial rooms.
   Perhaps most interesting is the fact that certain pollen types that were
expected to occur in high amounts in the special rooms were present in
extremely low amounts. These are the domesticates: corn and squash.
Given the fact that the pollen of these plants (as well as whole plants.)
is extensively used in present-day Pueblo kivas, it is difficult to explain
their small amounts in the special rooms at Broken K. It is possible, of
course, that these domesticates were not as important ritually or econom-
ically in the past as they are today (cf. Hill, 1965, 1966).
   Nonetheless,     proposition    12 seems   reasonably well confirmed.         The
special rooms did contain a special set of pottery types, and they con-
tained significant quantities of two pollen types that may have been used
ceremonially.
   It was also expected, however, that these rooms would exhibit evidence
of having been used in manufacturing or craft activities (proposition
13)—and there can be no doubt that this was the case. In the first place,
two of these rooms had obvious loom-holes in their floors, indicating that
weaving was being done in them. No such holes were found elsewhere in
the site. And second, they contained significant quantities of chert-
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                       133
knapping tools, including hammerstones, cores, and antler-flakers (Table
2); and lithic waste was present.
   It was also proposed that these rooms might be expected to yield evi-
dence that eating (but not cooking) had occasionally been done in them.
Evidence that eating was done is found in the fact that the special rooms
had an average of 29 animal bones each, and this is slightly more than
was found in the small rooms. In addition, three of the six pottery types
found in these rooms were represented by bowl forms which would have
been useful in serving food (Table 5). While this evidence tends to
confirm the idea that eating was sometimes done in these rooms, there is
a small amount of evidence indicating that cooking was not done. The
fact that there were no charred com cobs or seeds in these rooms, and
only one of them had bummed bones (two fragments), suggests that cook-
ing could not have been a frequent occurrence. It should be noted, how-
ever, that there were three types of large, unpainted jars associated with
these rooms that would have been usable for cooking; these include
Brown Plain Corrugated, Brown Indented Corrugated and Patterned Cor-
rugated; (cf. Table 5). Unfortunately, the pottery in the special rooms
was not examined for evidence of exterior burning, which would be ex-
pected if any of it had been used in cooking.
  Nonetheless,    proposition   14 can be considered confirmed;     there was
evidence of eating in the special rooms, and the density of food remains
indicates that this activity was not performed in such rooms very fre-
quently.
  Proposition    15, however,   is definitely not confirmed.   The extra-large
rooms at the site yielded no evidence that they were in any way different
from the other large rooms. If ceremonial paraphernalia had been kept in
them, it was either removed upon abandonment, or simply not preserved.
A closer study of present-day Pueblo clanhouses might suggest other
kinds of data to look’ for in the larger prehistoric rooms, but this must
remain a concer for the future.
  The final proposition was that the special rooms at the site would
contain cultural items associated primarily with male activities, while the
large and small rooms would contain both male- and female-associated
items. In attempting to confirm this proposition it has, of course, been
necessary to deal only with those items that could reasonably be assigned
a context with regard to the sexual division of labor. These include the
following:
                 Male-Associated           Female-Associated
                     Artifacts                  Artifacts
                 Projectile points         Metates
                 Arrowshaft tools          Manos
                 Antler-flakers            Worked Sherds
                 Cores .
                 Hammerstones
134                              Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
An examination of Table 2 shows that the proposition is confirmed. The
three female-associated items were found predominantly in the large
rooms, and not in the special rooms; the male-associated items (except for
arrowshaft tools) were strongly represented in both large and special
rooms; both sets of items were found to some degree in the small rooms—
although rarely in significant quantities. The important point, however, is
that female-associated items were not significantly present in the special
rooms; among all four of these rooms there was only one metate, one
mano, and one worked sherd. This lends strong support to the idea that
these rooms were generally restricted to males, as was seen to be the case
among the present-day western Pueblos.
  In summary, it is clear that twelve of the sixteen propositions are un-
equivocally confirmed (1—8, 11, 13, 14, and 16); two of them (10 and
12) are at least partially confirmed; and only two of them were not
confirmed (9 and 15). It is thus demonstrated that the three major room
types at Broken K Pueblo were the general functional equivalents of the
three major kinds of rooms    in present-day Pueblo villages; they may
legitimately be called habitation, storage, and ceremonial rooms (or
kivas).The primary functional characteristics of these rooms are summa-
rized in Table 7. If the rooms were not functional equivalents of the
modern room types, it is highly unlikely that so many of the expectations
in terms of content would have been confirmed.



                  Table 7. Functions of the Room Types

        Habitation            Storage                    Ceremonial
        Food Processing       Storage of Plant           Ceremonies
                              Foods
        Cooking                                          Manufacturing
                              Storage of Non-
        Eating                Food Materials             Eating
                              (probably )                (occasionally)
        Water Storage
                              Manufacturing
        Manufacturing         (occasionally )



  It has not been possible, however, to demonstrate that the seven extra-
large rooms at the site were functionally equivalent to the modern clan-
houses. It could not be shown by this analysis that they were different
from the other habitation rooms, even in terms of floor area; they appear
to have been nothing more than large living rooms. Nonetheless, they
may have been clanhouses,     and a more         detailed study of present-day
clanhouses may suggest other evidence that can be looked for in prehis-
toric pueblos to document the existence of such rooms.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function
                                                                          135
                        Summary and Discussion
During the excavation of Broken K Pueblo, it was noticed that there were
differences among the rooms, particularly with regard to size. To explain
this variability in behavioral or functional terms, however, it was first
necessary to describe the differences among the rooms more rigorously. In
addition to discovering the attributes that would provide accurate
measures of these differences, it was important to determine the extent to
which clustering could be demonstrated among the attributes. Although
seven different attributes were chosen for study, the ones that proved
most useful included size (floor area) and the presence or absence of
firepits, mealing bins, and ventilators.   A series of simple but powerful
statistical tests of association were employed in demonstrating that there
were two clearly distinguishable kinds of rooms (large and small rooms),
in addition to the already separated special rooms. The large rooms were
distinguished by having more than 6.5 square meters of floor area (some-
times much more), and by the fact that they contained slab-lined firepits,
mealing bins and ventilators; the small rooms had less than 6.5 square
meters of floor area, and did not contain such features. The special rooms
had a peculiar constellation of features all their own.
  A series of logical explanations for this variability among rooms was
then presented; it was obvious that this variability had resulted from the
fact that the rooms had been built to house different kinds of activities. It
was inferred that the large rooms had been designed for relatively large
groups of people, or for activities that required a relatively large space for
their performance. These activities must have required heat and/or light,
as well as fresh air and facilities for grinding food materials; they gave
every appearance of being living rooms. The small rooms, however, were
dark, unheated, and unventilated, and it seemed likely that they had been
storage rooms. The special rooms were inferred to have had an entirely
different function than any of the other rooms, perhaps ceremonial. The
scattered and paired nature of the spatial distribution of both large and
small rooms permitted the inference that each household had occupied at
least one pair of rooms (large and small), and that each such unit had
performed similar sets of activities in their rooms. Because there were
only a small number of special rooms, it was inferred that each of them
had been shared by a number of family or household units.
   An examination of the ethnographic evidence revealed a series of posi-
tive analogies between the nature of structural patterning at Broken K
and that in the Hopi and Zufi villages. It was found that the present-day
villages also contain   large, small, and special rooms,    and the internal
structural features of these rooms are generally the same as the features in
their supposed analogues at the site. And further, the different kinds of
rooms occurred in very. similar relative proportions in both cases, and the
large and small rooms tended to occur in pairs. The historic analogies
136                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
were so good, in fact, that they could hardly have been coincidental; on
this basis it was proposed that the three major kinds of rooms discovered
at Broken K Pueblo were in fact the functional equivalents of their formal
counterparts in present-day Pueblo villages. It also seemed possible that
the extra-large rooms at the site were functionally equivalent to the large
Hopi living rooms that serve as clanhouses.
   The next step was to test this proposition of functional equivalence; and
this required some additional (and independent) data. It was clear that if
the proposition was in fact true, the same general kinds of artifacts and
other cultural materials would be found in the three room types at Broken
K as are found in their supposed historic counterparts—or at least it could
be expected that evidence would be found at the site to document the
existence of the same general kinds of activities in these respective rooms.
   Upon examining the ethnographic evidence, it was found that the large
rooms in Hopi and Zufii villages are indeed living rooms, the small! ones
are storage rooms, and the special rooms serve as both ceremonial centers
and as clubhouses or lounging areas for the men. Although there is some
functional overlap among these kinds of rooms, it was found that they are
each used in distinctive sets of activities; and distinctive sets of cultural
materials occur in them as a result of these activities. The large rooms are
used in the greatest number of indoor family activities, especially those of
food processing, cooking, and eating. In addition, a great many manufac-
turing activities occur in these rooms, and water is stored and used in
them. The most important function of the storage rooms, on the other
hand, is the storage of food crops, especially corn, beans, and squash.
They are also used to store a number of other things, and they are occa-
sionally even involved in manufacturing activities, as well as some of the
other activities that are usually carried out in the living rooms. The spec-
ial rooms, in addition to being the centers of ritual activity, are used in a
wide variety of manufacturing and other secular activities (including
weaving). The extra-large rooms, or clanhouses, are occupied by the
headwomen of the different clans in a village and, in addition to being
ordinary living rooms, they serve as centers for clan meetings and the
storage of ritual paraphernalia.
   Given this discussion of the various kinds of activities that are com-
monly carried out in these different kinds of rooms,      it was possible to
point out some of the kinds of artifacts and other materials that could be
expected to occur in the different rooms at Broken K Pueblo. This was
presented in the form of a list of sixteen propositions or “expectations.” An
examination of the archeological data confirmed most of these proposi-
tions and, as was pointed out, we are justified in asserting that the three
major room    types at Broken K Pueblo      really do represent habitation,
storage, and ceremonial rooms. Whether or not the extra-large rooms
were clanhouses is still not known.
  There is no doubt, of course, that the activity-structure at Broken K
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                          187
remained stable during the 130 years in which the site was occupied. This
is demonstrated by the fact that there were no major differences in either
form or content among the rooms that had been constructed at different
time periods.
   Further, it is clear that the basic aspects of activity-organization have
not been significantly altered since a.p. 1300; they are virtually the same
among the modern Pueblos as they were then. In addition to the fact that
both the prehistoric and historic rooms are similar in terms of form and
function, the relative frequencies and spatial patterning among the rooms
has remained remarkably stable. It is almost certain that Broken K Pueblo
was composed of a number of households (perhaps about 25 of them),
each occupying at least one habitation room and one storage room, and
each carrying on the same fundamental sets of activities. This stability in
activity-structure holds true even though villages have gotten larger in
size, and have undergone changes in overall ground plan since a.p. 1300.
Further, it is likely that this stability extends at least as far back in time as
A.D. 800 or 900, the approximate period when surface masonry pueblos
were first being constructed in the Southwest.
  Nonetheless, while the general outlines of stability are evident, there
may also have been a few minor changes in activity-structure since A.D.
1300. This is suggested by the fact that not all of the propositions that
were tested were confirmed. Propositions 9 and 15 are particularly inter-
esting in this respect. Under proposition 9, it was expected that the stor-
age rooms at Broken K would contain great numbers of large undeco-
rated storage jars; this was not the case, and we may infer that the
inhabitants of the site were utilizing somewhat different storage tech-
niques than are employed by historic western Pueblo peoples. Proposition
10, on the other hand, included the prediction that large quantities of the
pollen or seeds of corn and squash would be found in the kivas; this, too,
proved not to be the case; it may be that these domesticates were not as
important ritually (or even economically) as they are among the present-
day Pueblo peoples ( Hill, 1964, 1966).
   In any event, the propositions that were not confirmed are just as
important as the ones that were (L R. Binford, 1967). In addition to pro-
viding evidence of culture-change, they provide new information that can-
not be obtained from ethnographic materials. They raise new questions,
and provide information which can serve as a basis for generating addi-
tional testable propositions. For example, one set of propositions, which
can be generated solely on the basis of the archeological data, is sug-
gested by the lack of pollen from domestic crops in the kivas:

   1. There was a shift in the physical or biological environment during
the time period in which the site was occupied.
   2. This environmental shift created conditions inimical to agriculture,
promoting reduced crop yields.
138                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
  3. Reduced crop yields forced the inhabitants of the site to rely heavily
on wild food crops, both economically and ritually.

While there are certainly other explanatory propositions that may pertain
in this case, these particular ones are clearly testable. We can predict that
if these propositions are correct, there ought to be independent evidence
in the environmental and archeological records to confirm them. We can
enumerate the kinds of evidence that could be expected under these
conditions, and then proceed to collect the relevant data to test them—
just as has been done in this paper with respect to the proposed functions
of rooms. As a matter of fact, these propositions have already been tested,
with marked success, using data derived from Broken K Pueblo and other
sites in east-central Arizona (Hill, 1965).
  In addition to the fact that new propositions can be generated on the
basis of those propositions that were    not confirmed,    they can also be
generated on the basis of information gained in the process of confirming
the others. It was suggested, for example, that the apparently paired
groups of rooms at ‘the site probably represent the loci of individual
household units. This proposition can be tested, of course, by examining
the ethnographic evidence to discover the kinds of stylistic differences
that distinguish present-day pueblo households and then examining the
archeological data in an effort to confirm the presence of similar stylistic
variation. One would not even think of gathering data relevant to such a
problem unless the problem had been in mind prior to excavation. It is
evident, however, that if residence units that are larger than households
can be identified using stylistic variability in various kinds of materials
(Longacre,   1963, 1964; Hill, 1965,    1966; Martin,   Longacre,   and Hill,
1967), then it ought to be possible to isolate the loci of individual house-
holds as well.
   The number of testable propositions that can be generated with respect
to past human behavior is virtually endless. The major conclusion to be
drawn is that by using this approach of generating and testing proposi-
tions it should be possible to expand our knowledge of the past almost
indefinitely. There is no need to rely solely on ethnographic data in
making inferences about the past. Although ethnographic evidence can
profitably be used to generate propositions, as has been done here, it is
equally feasible to use archeological data in the same way. Actually, it
matters little what kind of information is used; if the propositions are
testable (and of some scientific importance), they are useful to the ad-
vancement of knowledge.
   It cannot be stressed strongly enough, however, that our propositions
must be tested with data that is independent of the data used in formula-
ting them. The most common approach to making inferences about the
past can be illustrated with an example of the way in which the functions
of prehistoric pueblo rooms are usually inferred:
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                           139
   1. The premise is stated that certain rooms look like living rooms be-
cause they contain firepits and mealing bins.
  2. Ethnographic data indicate that present-day pueblo living rooms
also contain these features.
   3. It is then proposed that since the prehistoric rooms have these fea-
tures, they must in fact be functionally the same as the historically re-
corded living rooms.

This is reasonable, of course, as far as it goes; but the analysis frequently
stops at this point, and the proposition (number 3 in this case) is repre-
sented as fact. In essence, the proposition is generated using both ethno-
graphic and archeological evidence, but it is left untested; there is little
attempt to find independent evidence that would either support or refute
it. This situation is common in all of the social sciences, and the problem
has been clearly stated by a noted philosopher of science:
      The most important feature about a hypothesis or proposition is that it is a
   mere trial idea. . . . Unfortunately, in many fields, especially on the border
   lines of science, hypotheses are often accepted without adequate tests. Plau-
   sibility is not a substitute for evidence, however great may be the emotional
   wish to believe. . . . The difficulty of testing hypotheses in the social
   sciences has led to an abbreviation of the scientific method in which this
   step is simply omitted. Plausible hypotheses are merely set down as facts
   without further ado (Wilson, 1952, pp. 26-27).
I have attempted to illustrate that we need not stop with the statement of
propositions; it is nearly always possible to find independent data with
which to test them.
   It is of further importance to note in this connection that when proposi-
tions are properly tested we are provided with measures of the degree to
which they are accurate. Such measures are not available when we simply
use ethnographic data to interpret the past, and the reason for this is
clear. If, for example, I had not tested the proposition of the functional
equivalence of room types at Broken K Pueblo with those among the
modern pueblos, there would have been no determination of the degree
to which the prehistoric rooms actually differ from the historic ones. The
discovery that the people of Broken K had different storage techniques
would not have been made, nor would it have been seen that corn and
squash were not frequently used in kiva rituals at the site. In applying
ethnographic evidence directly, I would simply have been asserting that
the prehistoric rooms (and activities) were the same as those that have
been recorded ethnographically. In short, there would have been no ex-
pansion of our knowledge of the past; we would simply have demon-
strated an ability to read the ethnographic literature.
  The difference in storage technique between Broken K and the modern
pueblos is probably the best illustration of this point. This incompatibility
with the ethnographic evidence suggests not only that certain changes
140                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
have occurred since A.p. 1300, but also that it is incorrect to assume that
large undecorated jars are always storage jars; they apparently had a
different function at Broken K Pueblo, and the same situation might be
found in other Southwestern pueblos. Whether this is true or not remains
to be seen, but it certainly warrants further investigation. Even as it
stands, this discovery represents an advance in knowledge that would not
have been forthcoming had the site been interpreted using ethnographic
evidence alone.
   It is evident, then, that archeology can contribute information of its
own: propositions can be generated and tested, and a great many things
can be learned that have not previously been known or speculated about
before. In addition to making use of available ethnographic evidence, it is
possible to discover new information that will be of use to ethnographers
and social anthropologists. This general methodology of generating and
testing propositions   is, of course,   not restricted to use in the American
Southwest; it is universally applicable.
  The substantive conclusions presented in this paper are not, of course,
wholly new; investigators have frequently been able to identify different
kinds of rooms in prehistoric pueblo sites. It is clear, however, that the
functional equivalence of prehistoric and historic room types has not
previously been demonstrated. Functional equivalence has been proposed
(and believed), on the basis of the fact that there are obvious formal
similarities; but the proposition has not been adequately tested.
   Still, I do not pretend to have presented many substantive conclusions
that have not already been believed for a number of years. I have used
this particular Southwestern example as a vehicle to illustrate what I
think is an important methodalogical approach in archeology. The sub-
stantive material was chosen because it is familiar to most archeologists
and is not in itself controversial.


                                  References

BEAGLEHOLE, Ernest. 1936. Hopi hunting and hunting ritual. Yale University
  Publications in Anthropology, no. 4. New Haven: Yale University Press.
——. 1937. Notes on Hopi economic life. Yale University Publications           in
  Anthropology, no. 15. New Haven: Yale University Press.
BEAGLEHOLE, PEarRL. 1935. Census data from two Hopi villages. American
  Anthropologist, 37(1) Part 1: 41—54.,
Brnrorp, Lewis R. 1967. Smudge pits and hide smoking: the use of analogy in
   archaeological reasoning. American Antiquity, 32(1): 1-12.
BrarnarpD, Marcarer. 1935. The Hopi Indian family: a study of the changes
   represented in its present structure and functions. Unpublished Ph.D. disser-
   tation, University of Chicago.
BuNZEL,   RutuH L. 1929. The Pueblo potter: a study of creative imagination in
  primitive art. New York: Columbia University Press.
 Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                                 141
 Cocuran, WiiuiaM G. 1952. The X? test of goodness of fit. Annals of Mathe-
   matical Statistics, 23; 315—45.
 Cusuine, F. H. 1920. Zuni breadstuff. Indian Notes and Monographs, vol. 8.
   New York: Museum of the American Indian.
 Deetz, JAMes D. F. 1960. An archaeological approach to kinship change in
    eighteenth century Arikara culture. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard
    University,
         . 1965. The dynamics of stylistic change in Arikara ceramics.            Illinois
    Studies in Anthropology, no. 4. Urbana: University of Illinois.
  Donapson, THomas. 1893. Moqui Pueblo Indians of Arizona and New Mex-
    ico. Eleventh census of the United States, extra census bulletin. Washington,
    D.C.; U.S. Government Printing Office.
  Eccan, Frep. 1950. Social organization of the western Pueblos. Chicago: Uni-
    versity of Chicago Press.
       . 1964. Alliance and descent in western Pueblo society. In Robert A.
    Manners     (Ed.), Process and pattern in culture. Chicago: Aldine Publishing
    Company.
  Fisher, R. A. 1938. Statistical methods for research workers.         Edinburgh and
    London: Oliver and Boyd.
  Forve, C. Daryetv.     1931. Hopi agriculture and land ownership. Journal of the
    Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 61: 357—405.
  FREEMAN, LesLie G. Jr., and James A. Brown. 1964. Statistical analysis of
    Carter Ranch pottery. In Paul S. Martin et al. (Eds.), Chapters in the
    prehistory of eastern Arizona, II. Fieldiana: Anthropology, 55: 126—54.
  FRUCHTER, BENJAMIN. 1954. Introduction to factor analysis. Princeton, N.J.:
    D. van Nostrand.
  Haury, Emit W. 1940. Excavations in the Forestdale Valley, east-central Ari-
    zona.    University of Arizona   Bulletin,   11(4)    (Social Science   Bulletin, no.
    12).
  Hawtey, F. M. 1937. Pueblo social organization as a lead to Pueblo history.
    American Anthropologist, 39(3), Part 1: 504—22.
  Heyy, RicHarp Hotes. 1964. Pollen analysis of Quaternary achaeological
    and Lacustrine     sediments from the Colorado Plateau.         Unpublished Ph.D.
     dissertation, University of Arizona.
  Hitt, James N. 1965. Broken K: a prehistoric society in eastern               Arizona.
    Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.
       . 1966. A prehistoric community in eastern Arizona. Southwestern Journal
    of Anthropology, 22(1): 9-30.
  Hix,      James N., and Ricwarp H. Hevty.          1968. Pollen at Broken K Pueblo:
    some new interpretations. American Antiquity (In Press).
  Kroeser, A. L. 1917. Zuni kin and clan. Anthropological Papers of the Ameri-
    can     Museum   of Natural   History, vol. 28    (Part II). New   York:   American
    Museum of Natural History.
  LoncacrE, Witt1AM A. 1963.       Archaeology as anthropology: a case study.
.   Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.
  —. 1964. Archaeology as anthropology: a case study. Science, 144 (3625) :
    1454-55.
  Martin, Paut S., Wrtt1AM A. Loncacre, and James N. Hix. 1967. Chapters
    in the prehistory of eastern Arizona, Ill, Fieldiana: Anthropology, Vol. 57.
 MinveterF, Victor. 1891. A Study of Pueblo architecture, Fusayan and
   Cibola. Eighth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 1886—
   1887. Washington, D.C:: U.S. Government Printing Office.
142                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
Parsons, E. C. 1936. Hopi journal of Alexander M. Stephen. Columbia Uni-
  versity Contributions   to Anthropology,   Vols. 23 and 24. New    York:   Co-
  lumbia University Press.
RINALpDo, JoHN B. 1964. Artifacts. In Paul S. Martin et al. (Eds.), Chapters in
  the prehistory of eastern Arizona, II. Fieldiana: Anthropology, 55: 63—109.
Roserts, JoHN M. 1956. Zuni daily life. Monograph No. 2, Notebook No. 3,
  Lincoln: Laboratory of Anthropology, University of Nebraska.
SCHOENWETTER, JAMES. 1962. The pollen analysis of eighteen archaeological
  sites in Arizona and New Mexico. In Paul S. Martin et al. (Eds.). Chapters in
  the prehistory of eastern Arizona, I. Fieldiana: Anthropology, 53: 168—209.
Sears, WiLL1AM   H. 1961. The study of social and religious systems in North
  American archaeology. Current Anthropology, 2(3) : 223—46.
SIEGEL, SIDNEY. 1956. Nonparametric statistics for the behavioral sciences.
   New York: McGraw-Hill.
SPAULDING, ALBERT C. 1953. Statistical techniques for the discovery of artifact
   types. American Antiquity, 18(4): 305-13.
STEVENSON, Matitpa Coxe. 1904. The Zufi Indians: their mythology, esoteric
  fraternities, and ceremonies. Twenty-Third Annual Report of the Bureau of
  American Ethnology. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
     . 1909. Ethnobotany of the Zufi Indians. Thirtieth Annual Report of
  the Bureau of American Ethnology. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
  Printing Office.
STEWARD, JULIAN H. 1937. Ecological aspects of Southwestern society. Anthro-
  pos, 32: 87—104.
Titiev, Miscua. 1944. Old Oraibi: a study of the Hopi Indians of Third Mesa.
   Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology,
  22(1). Cambridge: Peabody Museum.
WaurTinc, Atrrep F. 1939. Ethnobotany of the Hopi. Museum           of Northern
  Arizona Bulletin, No. 15. Flagstaff: Museum of Northern Arizona.
Witson, E. Bricut, Jr. 1952. An introduction to scientific research.         New
  York: McGraw-Hill.
EIGHT
                                                     GEORGE     L. COWGILL
ee



                                              Computer Analysis
                                           of Archeological Data
                                 from Teotihuacan, Mexico




For the past several years, René Millon of the University of Rochester and
his associates have been engaged in the detailed mapping and intensive
archeological survey of the entire urban area of Teotihuacan, a great
prehispanic city covering more than eight square miles in the Valley of
Mexico   (Millon,   1964). There have, of course, been many       excavations
and restorations of specific structures and localities at Teotihuacan during
the past eighty years or so, but this is the first attempt to deal in a
systematic and thorough way with the city as a whole. Records are being
accumulated on all features detectable from the surface and on analyses
of surface collections for each of some 5,000 separate tracts; leading to an
enormous mass of detailed information.
   The past few years have also seen rapidly growing use of computers for
handling archeological data; especially in the use of multivariate statisti-
cal techniques which are too laborious to be feasible without computers.
So far as I know, none of these computer studies have attempted to deal
with a site as rich or as complex as Teotihuacan; they have all dealt with
the much smaller settlements of food collectors or with towns or villages
of food producers: This is not to say that studies of smaller sites have been
any less important either for their contributions to anthropological theory
or to computer technique; I merely wish to emphasize that the size and
complexity of Teotihuacan present problems and opportunities           some-
what different than those which characterized these earlier studies.
                                     143
144                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
  Since the spring of 1965, Millon and I have been collaborating in a pilot
study of computer analysis of his Teotihuacan data, working with a few
hundred tracts from those which have already been recorded." We have
received valuable assistance from other members of the mapping project,
especially from Bruce Drewitt, James Bennyhoff, Matthew Wallrath, and
James Dow.
   One major aim-of our computer work is to help us understand Teoti-
huacan better; in particular, to produce richer and better-substantiated
reconstructions of the city as a going concern during each phase of its
history. Here, instead of turning to the ethnographic literature on hunting
and gathering or on horticultural people for enlightenment or hypotheses,
one turns mainly to what is known of the broadly defined category of
“pre-industrial cities” (Sjoberg, 1960; Kraeling and Adams, 1960; Braid-
wood and Willey, 1962). Topics that particularly interest us include the
number and characteristics of the recognizable social classes in the city,
the extent to which different classes were sharply or rigidly defined, and
the kinds of craft specialties practiced. We would like to know the uses
and social functions of various kinds of artifacts and structures. We would
like to know what kinds of people lived in each district or neighborhood,
and what kinds of activities were carried out where. How was the city
organized and administered, and on what levels of centralization or de-
centralization were various ritual, political, and economic              activities and
services carried out? What kinds of changes and continuities through time
can be seen during the six centuries or so (roughly a.p. 100 to 700) that
the city flourished?
   Clearly, much can be established about these topics without computer
analysis of the survey data and, equally clearly, we do not expect that we
can use a computer to answer every question we would like to ask about
Teotihuacan. We do expect that we can establish some important findings
which it would have been difficult or impossible to demonstrate without
the aid of computer methods.
   One ultimate objective, then, is to learn more about Teotihuacan per se,
both for its own sake and as an important instance of an early urban
society to be compared with other examples in the Old and New Worlds.
At the same time, we find ourselves developing new concepts and tech-
niques for computer analysis which will be quite generally useful for
other bodies of archeological data. It is mainly some of these new con-
cepts and techniques that I wish to discuss in this paper.
   * Our computer work has been supported in part by the National Science Founda-
tion (Grant GS916) and in part by the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological
Research (Grant 1781). Brandeis University acted as the sponsoring institution and
provided important facilities and services, including access to an IBM 1620 computer
which, while too limited in capacity to handle many of our problems, has proved very
useful for some preliminary operations. The data themselves have been provided by
the Teotihuacan Mapping Project, directed by Millon, in part using University of
Rochester facilities. We are most grateful to all these institutions for their support and
assistance.
Cowgill Archeological Data from Teotihuacan                       145
  One of the most exciting archeological uses for computers is in the
generation of better taxonomies and other systems of ordering and sum-
marizing data on individual specimens and on assemblages of specimens;
this is closely related to the field of storage and retrieval of data on
specimens and assemblages. Each specimen is treated as a “case” charac-
terized by some particular observed value or state for each of many
variables or “dimensions” (the latter term was introduced and discussed
by Spaulding [1953, 1960]; the terms are synonymous). We have not
been pursuing this approach because an excellent classification and chro-
nology of Teotihuacan material is already available, thanks largely to
Bennyhoff; because fragmentary surface material is not nearly as good for
this as would be more complete excavated specimens; and above all
because we have more than enough to occupy us in working on other
equally exciting problems.
  Our conceptual framework is one in which tracts of the city, rather than
specimens, are taken as units or “cases,” and each tract is characterized by
many variables, which include characteristics of features detectable from
the surface and counts of artifacts of each category collected. It should be
pointed out very plainly that it is not feasible to encode for machine
processing everything recorded for every tract in the form of notes, draw-
ings, and photographs, nor is it necessary—or even, in my opinion, desir-
able. Things which are unique to a single site or a very small number of
sites are best apprehended and evaluated by more conventional methods;
and the costs of a larger and more complicated data code that would
attempt to provide for their description are not offset by any advantages
of machine processing. We do, however, want to avoid leaving out any-
thing which might later prove useful, and in this pilot study we have been
following the rule “When in doubt, include.” This has resulted in a set of
variables which requires seven punch cards, of eighty columns each, to
record the data from each tract. One of our objectives is to find out which
variables seem too unprofitable to justify their inclusion in the final full
analysis of the data. I should also mention that for any specific problem,
not all variables will be relevant. In some cases the computer can be
instructed to look at only some specified list of relevant variables, but in
other cases, especially in using previously written programs with built-in
limitations on the format of the input data, it will probably be easier to
run our original data through a simple program which recodes it, deleting
some variables, simplifying others, and sometimes creating new variables
which are functions of two or more of the original variables. This recoded
data can then be used as the input for other programs.
  What we aim to create with our present seven-card code is essentially
an “archival” record of all features which we think may be relevant for
any problems we may want to investigate by machine. Building up the
archive will be a relatively laborious job, but once it is done, a great many
recodings and simplifications of this data for specific problems will be
146                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
possible quickly and cheaply by machine,         without   need to return     to
further hand encoding of data.
   Any two tracts can be compared by noting their similarity or dissimilar-
ity for each variable considered relevant for any specific problem, and
there are a number of different mathematical measures designed to sum-
marize overall resemblance (many of which are reviewed by Sokal and
Sneath, 1963). Once a matrix of similarity or correlation coefficients for
all pairs of tracts has been obtained, multivariate techniques, including
factor analysis and various clustering methods can be used to generate
clusters and hierarchies of clusters of relatively similar tracts. This is a “Q-
technique” approach (Tugby, 1965, p. 8). Alternatively, we can also
evaluate the similarity in the distribution patterns of various pairs of
artifact categories or other variables, which is “R-technique,” and gen-
erate clusters and hierarchies of clusters of artifacts or other features with
relatively similar patterns of distribution.
   We aim to explore various methods of generating clusters and to com-
pare their consistency, intelligibility, and economy. At least to begin with,
we plan to make extensive use of computer programs contained in The
Multivariate Statistical Analyser, a package of mulitvariate programs de-
veloped by Kenneth Jones of Harvard University for use on the IBM 7094
(Jones, 1964). These appear to be at least as good as any other programs
of this kind available, and have the very great additional advantage that
they are already in routine use on computers in the Boston area, and that
Jones is readily available for assistance in using them.
   The general idea, of course, is that tracts which tum out to be in the
same cluster are importantly similar to one another, and presumably were
used by much the same kind of people for much the same purposes.
Artifact categories and other features which cluster together have highly
similar patterns of distribution, and presumably these similarities are not
accidental. Beyond this, it has to be stressed that clusters which emerge
are important data, but their interpretation in cultural terms may not be
self-evident. We see machine results as an aid to, not a substitute for,
human judgments based on a combination of controlled intuition, thor-
ough familiarity with the data, knowledge of relevant archeological and
ethnographic literature, and respect for the nature and limitations of the
evidence.
  I should mention that we have several additional kinds of computer
operations in mind; notably the production of quick but not too crude
maps or visual displays of the distributions of artifact categories, architec-
tural features, or clusters of any sort. We expect that such maps will be
valuable in guiding hypotheses, and at times they may answer some ques-
tions quite directly.
  Much of our work to date has been less concerned with these ultimate
objectives than with some essential preliminaries, chiefly in assessment of
the adequacy of the data and in some conceptual innovations we have
developed for data coding.
Cowgill Archeological Data from Teotihuacan                               147
  At the outset I had some distinct misgivings about the reliability we
could expect from surface collections, and I began by looking into the
extent that different workers collecting at different times and different
workers analyzing the collections at different times do in fact produce
comparable results. For four sites near the eastern edge of the city, collec-
tions had been made and analyzed separately in 1962 and 1963. Five
hundred and twenty sherds were collected in 1962, and 372 in 1963,
which is 72 per cent of the 1962 total, a reduction which may be due
wholly or partially to depletion from the previous collecting. Sherds had
been classified into nine phases, running from late Preclassic to Aztec. A
Chi-square analysis showed that for seven of the nine phases agreements
between 1962 and 1963 were very good. In fact, for six phases the dis-
agreement was considerably less than one might have expected from
unavoidable   sampling error. There was a greater discrepancy for one
phase, Tlamimilolpa, and far less Mazapan phase material in 1963 than
one would have expected. Nevertheless, excluding Mazapan and compar-
ing the other eight phases, differences    between   1962 and 1963 are not
significant at the 5 per cent level. It seems probable that the Mazapan
anomaly is due to shifting criteria for the recognition of that phase.
  In the earlier work, less emphasis was placed on obsidian than later,
and this is reflected by a pronounced increase in the 1963 proportion of
obsidian. This complicates things but it does not mean that early collec-
tions cannot be compared with later ones. It means that date of collection
must be taken into account as an important variable, and obsidian counts
in early collections must be multiplied by a suitable factor, perhaps best
determined by co-variance analysis.
  Another check on our data was made by comparing the 126 Miccaotli
phase sherds from these four sites at the eastern edge of the city with 586
sherds collected from 24 sites near the western edge of the city that were
assigned to Miccaotli by a different analyst. The comparison was made on
the basis of nine major ceramic categories. Here the agreements were all
good, and mostly amazingly good.
   Much more work remains to be done on checking the reliability and
validity of collections; in particular we have to find out more about the
effects of varying surface cover and varying degrees of site alteration.
But, from what has been done so far, the variations         due to different
workers have been far smaller than I had expected. We also have at least
a few indications that the effects of site alterations may also be unexpect-
edly small. Most important is that we have quite full data on present
conditions of sites, and can do a great deal by way of assessment of these
effects and correction for any that are large enough to warrant it.
   The remarkably good agreement between proportions of Miccaotli ce-
ramic categories at the eastern and western edges of the city calls for
comment. It implies not only uniformity in collecting practices, but great
similarity in what is actually in the sites, which in turn suggests consider-
able social similarity in these widely separated districts. This has to be
148                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
qualified in several ways for the moment. First, this comparison takes no
account of possible difference in non-ceramic features, nor of possible
internal variability within each district. Second, it is not very conclusive
for some rare categories in the smaller eastern sample. For example, six
censer fragments were expected there, but only three were found. This
discrepancy could easily be due to accidents in sampling. However, if the
same proportions hold when a larger sample is studied, so that we find
only thirty censer fragments where we would expect sixty, the difference
would then be highly significant, and would point to real differences in
the activities in the two districts. In other words, against a background of
close similarity in the proportions of common ceramic categories, there
may yet prove to be important contrasts between these two districts in the
abundance of certain rare categories. Finally, it will be of great interest to
see how both of these marginal districts compare with more central dis-
tricts, which could prove to be very different indeed.
   A somewhat different problem relating to adequacy of data derives
from the fact that specimens of rare categories are quite likely to be
collected from only a fraction of the sites in which they are really present.
One might suppose that all that is needed to correct for this is to include a
large number of sites in one’s sample. Actually, our mathematical investi-
gation shows that the expected absolute value of the correlation between
any easily missed category and any other category becomes lower than
the “true” value that would be found if the category were never missed,
and increasing the number of sites only increases the reliability of this
reduced correlation. This means that we can take individual sites as
“cases” only when comparing common or not easily missed categories;
while for scarcer categories we must pool sites and get a more “coarse-
grained” picture of their associations. By experimenting with different
criteria for pooling sites, a great deal of useful information can still be
extracted from scarce categories, however. An important topic for further
work will be improving criteria for deciding how “fine-grained” our treat-
ment of any specific rare category can be before correlations are seriously
reduced.
  Possibly the knottiest conceptual problem we have had to solve in
developing our data code concerns our units of analysis. I have so far
spoken rather easily of tracts or sites as if what I meant were self-evident,
but in fact it is not. Consider a case where four mounds are arranged
around the sides of a plaza as part of a clearly interrelated complex.
Certainly separate collections will have been made from each mound and
from the plaza itself, and frequently there are separate collections from
different parts of a single large mound or plaza. For some problems, we
may want to compare collections from different parts of a single mound,
treating each collection as a separate case. For other problems we want to
treat each whole mound as a single case; while for yet other problems we
want to compare the complex as a whole with other complexes, treating
Cowgill Archeological Data from Teotihuacan                                       149
the entire complex as one case or unit. It can be seen that there is no
single unit suitable for all problems.
  After some effort, we have developed a scheme based on the concepts
of collection tract, site, complex, macrocomplex, and neighborhood.
  The elementary indivisible building block or atom of the scheme is the
collection   tract, which   is whatever    actual physical tract was      collected
from and described as a unit by the field workers. A site is a minimal
distinguishable structural unit, such as a mound or an apparent residential
unit. Often a collection tract corresponds to a single site, but often for
various reasons one site was divided into two or more collection tracts.
Many sites are not clearly linked to any others, but in other cases several
sites form part of an interrelated        architectural   complex.   Sometimes,    in
turn, several complexes appear to be interrelated as elements of a larger
macrocomplex. If there are any meaningful macromacrocomplexes, they
are too rare to be useful for computer work. A final concept is the neigh-
borhood, which simply refers to the features that are physically close to a
given collection tract, whether there is any obvious relationship between
them or not. The neighborhood and the complex are quite different con-
cepts, since there may be closely neighboring sites which are not part of
the same complex, or sites belonging to one complex that are not espec-
ially close neighbors.
  Each collection record pertains primarily to the specific collection tract
from which the collection comes, and most of the data encoded for it are
about precisely that tract—features observed on it and counts of material
collected from it. But we also provide for data about the relationship of
the collection tract to a site, about the site itself, about the complex (if
any) that the site belongs to, about the macrocomplex (if any) that the
complex belongs to, and about features in the neighborhood of the collec-
tion tract. Any or all of these kinds of data may be needed as relevant
information about the context of a collection tract, and, starting with the
record of any collection tract, they must be readily accessible, even when
individual collection tracts are the units of analysis.
   When sites, complexes, macrocomplexes, or neighborhoods are the units
of analysis, we need a way for the computer to select all relevant collec-
tion tracts and summarize for itself the data from all of them. To do this
for neighborhoods, we have encoded the position of the approximate
center of each collection tract relative to the mapping project’s central
datum point, and this enables the machine to select all collection records
within any specified radius of a given tract, or within any specified dis-
tance in any specified direction. To get data on all tracts of a given site,
complex, or macrocomplex,      we can construct a loop in which each tract
record specifies the name of one other tract belonging to the same unit.
That is, tract A lists tract B, tract B lists C, and C lists A, so that one can
start at any given point in the loop and complete the whole circuit.
Within any given loop all tracts belonging as well to the same complex or
150                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
the same site can be identified, also. Once one has all tracts of a given site
or complex or macrocomplex linked together in this fashion, it is really
only necessary to encode data on the site as a whole for one collection
tract of the site, or data on the complex as a whole for one collection
tract of the whole complex, since we can get quickly from any collection
tract record of the complex to any other.
   Finally, even though the aim of our work is to enable us to make new
interpretations    of the data that would    not otherwise    be possible, it is
extremely helpful to have available the various interpretations which sug-
gest themselves in the field or in the course of encoding the data. We are
calling all these interpretations “preliminary” in order to emphasize their
distinctness from interpretations made         after computer    analysis. They
range from some that strike us as inescapable conclusions, to others that
are not much more than informed hunches. We have provided for ratings
of our confidence in them and for alternative interpretations in ambig-
uous cases. One use to be made of these preliminary interpretations is in
looking at all units interpreted as representing structures of a certain type
or as having a certain function, and finding out all the ways in which they
contrast   as a group,   with all other units.    Or, we   can   see   how   much
variation there is among units interpreted as belonging to some specific
category. Also, clusters can be generated without regard to preliminary
interpretations,   and one can then observe the extent to which any result-
ing clusters coincide with any categories based on preliminary interpreta-
tions. In all these examples, of course, we must be constantly aware that
insofar as some observed features point to specific preliminary interpreta-
tions, the logic involved is partly circular, and attention must be focused
on unexpected associations or lacks of associations that turn up.

                                  References
Braipwoop, R. J., and G. R. Witiey (Eds.). 1962. Courses toward urban life.
  Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Jones, Kennetu. 1964. The multivariate statistical analyser. Cambridge: Har-
   vard Computing Center, Harvard University.
Krae.inc, C. H., and R. M. Apams (Eds.). 1960. City invincible. Chicago:
  University of Chicago Press.
Mitton, RENE. 1964. The Teotihuacan mapping project. American Antiquity,
  29(3): 345—52.
SJOBERG, GipEon.     1960. The Preindustrial city. Glencoe, Illinois: The Free
  Press.
SoxaL, R. R., and Sneatu, P. H. A. 1963. Principles of numerical taxonomy.
  San Francisco and London: W. H. Freeman.
SPAULDING, A. C. 1953. Statistical techniques for the discovery of artifact types.
  American Antiquity, 18 (4): 305-13.
——. 1960. The dimensions of archaeology. In Gertrude R. Dole and Robert
  L. Carneiro (Eds.), Essays in the science of culture: in honor of Leslie A.
  White. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.
Tucspy, Donap. 1965. Archaeological objectives and statistical methods:             a
   frontier in archaeology. American Antiquity, 31(1): 1-16.
NINE                              WILLIAM    A. LONGACRE    AND JAMES E, AYRES




                                             Archeological Lessons
                                     from an Apache Wickiup




During the summer of 1965, an abandoned Apache living site was investi-
gated as a part of research undertaken by the University of Arizona
Archaeological Field School. The site appeared to have been deserted
quite recently. The former occupants left behind a considerable quantity
of cultural materials that seemed to have been only slightly disturbed.
The patterned distribution of cultural items and features suggested that
the site had a structure which might reflect aspects of the behavior and
organization of the people who occupied it. To test this proposition, we
tried to make deductions concerning the nature of activities carried out at
the site. An Apache informant was used to check the validity of our
interpretations.
   Our first step in the investigation was to delimit the area of occupation
and to describe the distribution and types of features and artifacts found.
A general map of the site and a plan of the wickiup floor were drawn.
Photos were taken of all features. While describing the features and arti-
facts, deductions were made concerning their use. Later, these interpreta-
tions were checked by consulting the female Apache informant. We made
every effort to phrase our questions as objectively as possible so as not to
   1 Paper presented at the Annual Meeting, Society for American Archeology, Reno,
Nevada, May, 1966. We thank Dr. Harry T. Getty, Department of , Anthropology,
University of Arizona, who made several valuable comments on this paper; Larry D.
Agenbroad who made the site map; and Bev Lea Teasley and Lorraine Williams, field
school students, who aided in.the field work.

                                      151
152                                                Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
elicit answers she might have thought we wanted. We let her explain in
her own words the use of the features and artifacts.
   The living site is located in the northeast part of the Fort Apache
Indian Reservation in the rugged, forested country south of the Mogollon
Rim. It lies on the north side of the westernmost branch of Spring Creek,
which follows a southerly course to join the Salt River. This area is in-
cluded in the physiographic province known as the transition zone—trans-
itional between the plateau to the north and the mountain region to the
south.
   The camp lies at an elevation of about 5750 feet on a structural terrace
formed by differential erosion. Seventy feet below lies Spring Creek
which flows only part of the year. A spring, located about 200 yards to the
west of the site and slightly above Spring Creek, has a permanent flow. It
occurs in an area where sandstone and shale are interbedded with the
shale acting as a water-confining layer. The artesian spring is caused by a
fracture which intersects an aquifer. The presence of this spring is prob-
ably the primary reason for the location of the Apache camp.
  There is moderately dense vegetation, including shaggy-bark and alli-
gator-bark juniper, pifion, and yellow pine, as well as live oak, yucca, bear
grass and squaw bush.




                                                                  APACHE
                                                                  WickiuP




                                                                    DOOR        AS oO”
                                                                              WOODEN
            PREPARED     va                                                    BOX
            SLEEPING
            AREAS
                                              ee                                       HEARTH @ FRYING PANS

                       [        /
   RAMADA                                      HORT! ")                       ASH      j
            TooL                             Lee we
            CLUSTER     =
                       CAN   OVER HEARTH                               BUSH

                                            (ARIZ. P; 14: 20)
                                              SCALE I"22M

                               COHEARTH




                                           Figure 1. Site plan.
Longacre/Ayres         Lessons from an Apache Wickiup                   153
  The immediate vicinity of the site revealed a long record of human
occupation. The wickiup was constructed beside the remains of one of the
buildings of a ranch built around the turn of the century. An older wicki-
up was discovered nearer the spring. The ranch was established on top of
trash from a small thirteenth-century pueblo, which in turn was erected
on a preceramic lithic site.
   The campsite may be divided into three major units—the wickiup at
the north end, a ramada at the south end about forty feet from the
wickiup, and the space in between         (Fig. 1). Many of the social and
economic activities of the occupants appear to have taken place out-of-
doors. Hearths, a tool cluster, and piles of ash, as well as other features
attest to this fact.
  A variety of tools and features appeared on the floor of the wickiup
(Fig. 2). At the rear of the dwelling was a thick layer of pine needles
placed in a shallow depression and surrounded by boards and poles.
About one-third of the floor space was taken by this feature.
  In the center of the floor we found a hearth covered by a small wash
tub. On one side of the hearth lay a fan-shaped bundle of turkey feathers,
and on the other side an enameled pail.
   There were several tin cans of various sizes on the floor along the south
wall, some of which showed unmistakable signs of having been used in a
hearth. A denim sack containing pots and pans was hanging on a trimmed
branch. A gallon-sized tin can with a homemade handle of wire, several
cans full of nails, a wooden box, a piece of burlap sack, a one-hand mano,
and a small slab metate were also found along the south wall.
  Several pieces of wood, a piece of window screen, an enameled basin, a
large milk can cover, a piece of plastic sheeting, and a bread wrapper
were found in the northeast corner of the wickiup. Also, on the north side
of the floor we found a wallet containing a paper on which was written a
man’s name. This was the only definitely male-associated item we discov-
ered on the site.
  Two plastic Clorox bottles were suspended by means of wire hooks
from the walls.
  At the south end of the site is a shade which was cut out of the center
of a clump of juniper and pine. This forms a shelter that is the functional
equivalent of a ramada and for which no formal construction was needed.
The area was scraped clean of debris to form the floor. No tools and
features were located in this structure. Other tools and features were
located between the ramada and the wickiup; they clustered in two units,
one around the ramada and one around the wickiup.
  Just outside the ramada was a group of objects: the cover from a
wooden Winchester cartridge case, a bundle of twigs, and a stick with a
flattened tin can fastened to one end. North of the ramada, and in the
same clump of trees, we found two scooped-out rectangular depressions
filled with small pieces of juniper branches. We found a hearth covered
154         Variability in a Single Occupational Unit




                                                 (wes)
                                                                                           yod


                                                 seyjooy




                                                           Yod peyounuz 3   wysoq ysDm 4
                                                                                           veo



                                                 Aoqeny
                                                                                           wl

                                                 0                                              Gay
                                                                                                Ss  yous
                                                                                                    joo,
                                                                                                    “1
                                                                                                qs0ey
                                                                                                YOM
                                                                                                Jeno




                                          wooo




                       Wis,2 21V9S


                      (OZ vid ‘ZiMv)


                    Wd    YOOTd dNINOIM




             Ail.
      TWA
      907




                                                                                                           dmyory
                                                                                                           ‘unjd
                                                                                                           soozf
                                                                                                           aanary
                                                                                                           “go
Longacre/Ayres Lessons from an Apache Wickiup                             155
by half a five-gallon can in the same area, and there was a small stick
lying partially under it; to the east of this was another, larger hearth.
  To the northwest of this area was a long pole supported on one end by
a tree and on the other by a forked stick. Located northeast of the pole
was a pile of ash.
  At the entrance to the wickiup stood a large wooden-box open on one
side, and behind the box was      a small, shallow pit. To the east of the
entrance lay a hearth with two frying pans and nearby was a large pile of
ash. In a bush beside the ash pile, eight bundles of twigs were found.
   The wickiup appears to be similar in size and shape to other wickiups
in the area (Gerald, 1958; Shaeffer, 1958; Tuohy, 1960). The materials
used in its construction are traditional except for the use of corrugated
metal sheeting as an outside cover instead of bear grass (Shaeffer, 1958,
pp. 17-18). The wickiup is built against one of the earlier ranch build-
ings and the wall of this structure forms one side of the wickiup. The
remainder of the construction is similar to other Cibecue wickiups.
   The size and nature of the site suggested that a small social unit had
occupied it, probably a household consisting of a nuclear family. The well-
built structure suggested that the occupation was not temporary, and the
presence of the ramada indicated that at least part of the occupation was
during warm weather.
   The site is characterized by a series of discrete activity areas. The camp
may be divided into three gross sections: (1) the wickiup itself, (2) the
ramada, and (3) the spaces in front of the wickiup and near the ramada.
The analysis of the features and the distribution of tools and other cul-
tural items suggested that the nature of the activities and tasks carried out
in these three areas was differentiated. The density of features and cul-
tural items indicated that the wickiup and the outside activity area were
used more intensively than was the featureless ramada where no cultural
items were found.
   A number of clues pointed to the specific nature of the activities carried
out in these three sections of the site. The outside area contained three
hearths, all of different types, as well as several ash dumps. In addition,
there was a grouping of tools located near the ramada found in a cluster
in an area about two feet in diameter. Also, near the ramada were two
prepared sleeping areas adjacent to one another, but with different orien-
tations. Near these sleeping areas were the pole and forked stick de-
scribed above. The outside area lacked features and tools associated with
storage and food preparation (for example, grinding tools).
   The gross inferences from this array of tools and features suggested
that the nature of out-of-doors activities included several forms of cook-
ery, and a specific task associated with the cluster of tools. There was also
an area for sleeping during pleasant weather. Except for the sleeping
area, all these activity areas seemed to reflect female-task performance.
  Three   kinds of cookery were     inferred from the different types of
156                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
hearths and their associated artifacts. There was a fairly small circular
hearth located in front of the wickiup with associated frying pans. We
inferred that this specific area was used primarily for fry-pan cookery.
Near the ramada was a larger hearth covered by half a metal can; this
appeared to be either an oven or some sort of a grill. There was a stick in
place in the ashes with a charred tip that apparently was used to adjust
the coals. A larger irregular hearth was located more peripherally; there
were no associated containers. We inferred a roasting or broiling function
for this feature.
  The cluster of tools near the ramada presented us with a problem.
Because they were found together, we inferred that they were used in a
single task, but we were unable to suggest the exact nature of the task.
Had we been more familiar with Apache ethnography at the time of this
investigation, the functional nature of this tool grouping would have been
clear.
   The two sleeping areas suggested that there was segregation in sleep-
ing. The obvious division in a nuclear family unit would be between
adults and children. We were unable to suggest the functional nature of
the pole and forked stick adjacent to the sleeping area.
  The absence of tools and features in the ramada indicated that certain
types of activities were at least not carried out in this structure. Neither
food preparation nor cookery was indicated. It probably was the scene of
light tasks involving portable equipment and relaxation in the shade.
   The wickiup itself reflected a much greater complexity of activities.
The nature of features and equipment suggested the following: sleeping,
storage, cookery, and food preparation. The location and nature of fea-
tures and the associated tool clusters on the wickiup floor permitted some
specific inferences regarding the nature of these activities.
   The sleeping area was located at the rear of the structure and was well
defined. The presence of the exterior sleeping areas suggested that the
wickiup was used for sleeping when the weather was inclement.
  The hearth in the wickiup was fairly large and was covered with an
inverted wash tub. There was some sooting on the interior of the tub
which we could not explain. The tub did not appear to be related to
cookery of any sort.
  There were several well-defined storage areas. One, near the doorway,
was reserved for fuel. Along the south wall was a cluster of containers
used in cookery. At another spot along the same wall was a wooden box
which probably served as a storage facility. Pots and pans and plastic
Clorox bottles, probably for water storage, were suspended from various
hooks in the walls.
  A cluster of tools occurring along the south wall was used in food
preparation; these included grinding tools and an associated piece of
burlap.
  From this array we made the following inferences:        (1) The range of
Longacre/Ayres Lessons from an Apache Wickiup                        157
activities carried out inside the wickiup was more varied than those un-
dertaken elsewhere on the site. (2) The structure served as the primary
storage facility for the social unit. (3) The wickiup was used for sleeping
only in bad weather. (4) Some cookery and food preparation were car-
ried out inside the structure. (5) The nature of the vessels inside the
structure suggested a form of cooking involving boiling rather than fry-
ing, raising the possibility that this form of cookery may have been local-
ized inside the wickiup. (6) There is also the possibility that activities of
food preparation were localized inside the structure.
   The spatial array of cultural items and features inside the wickiup was
highly structured. This non-random distribution reflected a formal parti-
tioning of space inside the wickiup in terms of specific activities. Tools
and equipment used in specific tasks were segregated and occurred in
clusters. There were well-defined use areas including storage, sleeping,
cooking, and food preparation. The nature of task performance localized
inside the wickiup appeared to be female-related, cookery and food prep-
aration in particular.
   Some summary remarks are in order at this point. The size and nature
of the site suggested it was occupied by a single nuclear family: a hus-
band, his wife, and unmarried children. The nature of activity areas and
tools reflecting specific task performance appeared to be female-related.
This indicated a strong sexual division of labor and that the primary
activities carried out at the camp were female activities. The only tool
noted at the site that might reflect male task performance was an axe
head, but this is a tool used by females in firewood collection as well.
  The nature of construction suggested a degree of permanence for the
occupation, but the lack of any evidence for agriculture cast some doubt
on this appraisal. There were no tools noted that might have functioned
in farming; there were no indications of agricultural plots either near the
site or down near the spring and creek. Also, single Apache families do
not generally live in isolated camps    (Goodwin,    1942, pp. 123—25). The
common pattern among the Western Apache is family clusters. A great
deal of sharing and cooperation necessitates spatial proximity of related
families. There is a great deal of pooling of labor in agricultural endeav-
ors; activities carried out by individuals are generally rare occurrences.
The only exception to this is the temporary exploitation of seasonally
available resources by family units (Goodwin, 1942, pp. 155-56). Histor-
ically, this included such activities as the exploitation of seasonally avail-
able wild plant resources.
  All these factors suggested that although the camp was somewhat per-
manent in construction, it might have been seasonally occupied. The lack
of male-related task performance reflected at the site suggests that the
specific function of the site was as a temporary camp for logistic support
of a nuclear family with the male member carrying out some sort of
seasonal exploitative activity elsewhere.
158                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
   To assess the validity of our inferences, we consulted an Apache infor-
mant, a female living at Grasshopper. She was most generous with her
help and agreed to visit the site with us. As it turned out, this was
fortunate as the women knew the family who had built and occupied the
site and, in fact, had visited the family at the camp when it was in use.
With her help, we were able to record a great deal of specific data
regarding the localization of task performance and the specific function of
areas, facilities and tools.
   The site was occupied by a single Apache family from Cibecue, a
husband and wife and two young children. The site was utilized from the
fall of 1962 through the spring of 1963. Thus the site had been abandoned
for more than two years before we began our investigation. The camp
was established to serve as a base of operations while the husband cut
and shaped juniper posts to sell during the following year.
  Most of the general inferences we made were essentially correct, and
the nature of the use of the sections of the camp was accurately inferred.
Many of our specific inferences were also correct. Our suggestions con-
cerning the localization of different forms of cookery as reflected in the
feature analysis and the association of certain types of containers were
accurate. The segregation of the exterior sleeping areas was in terms of
the adults and their children. The primary storage facility was the wicki-
up.
   Several problems were solved with the help of our informant. The pole
and forked stick served as a framework on which to hang bedding to air.
The cluster of tools located near the ramada was utilized in a single
activity. The wife is well known for her pitch-lined water bottles which
she makes during the winter, and the tools were used in the construction
of water bottles. The wooden box top served as a platform, the spatulate
tool was used to apply the pitch, and the bundle of shoots was simply a
package of raw materials. The bottles are built from squawbush rods. The
other tool clusters observed are also related to specific tasks. The mano,
metate, and burlap form a single cluster; the burlap is used to catch the
meal as it is ground. The can over the hearth near the ramada served as a
grill on which the woman cooked tortillas. The tub inverted over the
wickiup hearth was simply a safety device. The structure is not windproof
and when it is left for any period of time the tub is used to cover the live
coals to prevent them from spreading and causing a fire. The hearth in
front of the wickiup was used primarily for fry-pan cooking of bread. The
ash piles were dumps for disposal of ashes. No specific function could be
determined for the large box outside the wickiup or for the pit.
   The implications of this investigation are fairly obvious. What we have
done is define the structure of a habitation site in some detail and relate
this structure to the organization and behavior of the social group that
produced it. We conclude that this experiment has been successful in that
(1) we were able to define the material structure and (2) we were able
Longacre/Ayres Lessons from an Apache Wickiup                            159
to demonstrate the relations between this structure and the social unit and
its behavior.
   This suggests that the archeologist might well want to define and de-
scribe the material structure of an archeological site as a necessary step in
inferring the structure and behavior of extinct social groups. It would
seem to us that the material structure might be defined quantitatively,
permitting the mutual variation among all types of data to be measured.
Thus the archeologist might well attempt to assess the mutual variation
among pottery styles and container types, stone and bone tools, types of
features and structures to strengthen his inferences regarding behavior
and organization of extinct social groups. We contrast this suggestion
with the standard description of such archeological data in separate chap-
ters of a monograph with little or no attempt at relating these different
kinds of data in a systematic way.
  It is the primary conclusion of this admittedly crude study that archeo-
logists can go far beyond the statements contained in the standard sum-
mary chapters in reports, placing sites into a regional chronology and a
general cultural context.


                                 References

GeraLp,   Rex E. 1958. Two   wickiups on the San Carlos   Indian Reservation,
  Arizona. The Kiva, 23(3): 5—11.
Goopwin, GRENVILLE. 1942. The social organization of the Western Apache.
  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
SHAEFFER, MARGARET W. M. 1958. The construction of a wickiup on the Fort
  Apache Indian Reservation. The Kiva, 24(2): 14—20.
Tvony, Donatp R. 1960. Two more wickiups on the San Carlos Indian Reser-
  vation. The Kiva, 26(2): 27—30.
            C—O"                                                   .               i            ait       .

                             SPOR aie
                 PY          pares oth becy@leomy
                                        aes,              ‘se              <i
            ~daetaiel FAs oo(open -acrennaeriaal merle &
                 y=            Yon                    Swat We                                                                  a                  a.                                 ahd
             Paowe »                    taut ier                   nee At lee                             Dew ea                                  aie
                 Tat, eee                                                          ee


                                            hap           tee Sd KEM                            AA be
                                                aT                                                            +e               ¢)       een,                    4! tiple
                        te M8                                 yew ge                       iy cpm artad ewmnataialt                                                                       ran

                                                 oes               ct       ed         =,                                               agra) 4ee
                 g dr) vAvibe Ws Ieilinte”                                                      Onl jae;                                @ (nee                                       Cae

                                                                                   e                                  eile                    a          6      =        rage        a     :

                                                                           >                              7                                             17a                    ant        a
        J                                                                                                                                                                       7               7
                                                                                   =                          nag                                                    a
        7                      ai        Maer                                                       cipi                                                                            =O
        ‘

    7            aerate!                A       (od                a1      =           W        ey dij Oe

    a              :                     LAP                                                                  ah!
                 wan                Awe                                            a

a                      ie               pad                                ea          ae                         B
~                      ey,      > “a>                 _            S        ) ee oe                 ee                                                                    aw
                                                              oy       olel (40 saa teed                              ivy                Nina            sit               =
             y   papal o       hea,          r

                                    |                     ee                                                          oy tee a Me al
                                                                                                                                 LASTS
                                                      |                                         p                     aa                           vont doen
                                                                                                                            Listen                                   oa
                                                                                                                      ;                   a              Apia    4       ees)

                           a
                                                                                       7                                   om » Crt ay (Ua ae                         a
                                                                                                                  ’                 i             ti    Joey      tes shee Ah: ;

                                                                                                              :                     ot                          >) =a
                                                                                            i       aay           2         oh                         a) sm pore,         ee            DV, ST

                                                                                           %                           -        argh                     :       + why                   fo,
                                                                                           fs       oe)               i                 era              7      a) “oniiag vs Whig


                        i}                                                                                                      paleo itive                                TEM Koll MG
                                                                               -                                          Sie       |         i         Si      gis      vy              ie

                                                                       :                            MOA                                   Cree dabei
                                                                                                          ing             bP        Ly ee
                                                                                                    2     a               de            pk Oe eae

                                                          A                Be                   ee
                                                  ;                    1) ae aanine                                                               a                  a
TEN
                                                    BOBBY    JO   WILLIAMS
~s



                                            Establishing Cultural
                               Heterogeneities in Settlement
                  Patterns: An Ethnographic Example




This paper began as a straightforward, brief ethnography of residence
patterns among bands of a hunting-gathering group, the Birhor living on
the Chota Nagpur plateau of southern Bihar, India. It was hoped that
from the ethnographic data certain descriptive generalizations might be
advanced which would be of use to the archeologist in making inferences
about prehistoric cultures.
   The possible generalizations entertained suffered, from the archeolo-
gist’s point of view, from the fact that their confirmation on archeological
data alone would require greater control in the observation and measure-
ment of cultural variables than is presently provided in archeological
method.   On the other hand, the archeologist      has at his disposal data
which in some ways are a more direct reflection of the culture of a people
than are those of the ethnographer.       I suggest this because the ethno-
grapher returns with data which are largely weighted in the direction of
verbal behavior   only; retrospective historical accounts,   informants’   de-
scriptions, explanations and rationalizations concerning their way of life.
Some of this verbal material is after-the-fact discussion of ecologically
influenced cultural regularity and may obscure as well as reveal certain
relationships.
   The ability of the archeologist to test generalizations about culture
depends to a large extent on his ability to detect minor cultural differ-
                                    161
162                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
ences from this non-verbal data. The traditional approach to this problem
has been that of distinguishing patterns—that is, setting up typologies of
artifactual material, residence patterns, etc.—but the establishment of
typologies, by its nature, obscures finer cultural differences. In this paper
I would like to suggest a technique which will detect fairly fine or minor
cultural differences prior to the establishment of typologies.
   To make this thought less elliptical, let me cite a possible example. A
current problem in theories on primitive society concerns the prevalence
of the patrilocal exogamous band on Radcliffe-Brown’s model of the Aus-
tralian horde. The critics of the view that this form of organization was
very widespread among hunters point to the many ethnographically
known exceptions. Proponents of the model suggest that most of these
exceptions are due, directly or indirectly, to European contact (cf. Ser-
vice, 1962). Since discussion must usually stalemate at this point, I sug-
gest that it is the archeologist who must provide the crucial data. Let us
postulate, as I do, that pre-agricultural hunting society was in most cir-
cumstances a territorially localized, multi-family, unilineal descent group
whose size variation was fairly closely bounded. If such bands are line-
ages, the recruitment or the ideological charter for membership involves
reckoning of descent relationship. The latter can be carried out in either
of two ways. First, this reckoning may be through kinship terminology
without the use of proper names, as was found to be the case among the
Birhor and has frequently been reported for hunting societies. On the
other hand this reckoning may be true genealogical recitation.
  The former system is much more rapidly adjustable to demographic
realities than the latter, and lineage bands so chartered in ideology should
be able to gain or lose account of membership so as to maintain op-
timum size more readily than the latter. The archeological hypothesis
then might be that the coefficient of variation in household number per
camp in Paleolithic society would be smaller than in ethnographically
known, true genealogically based lineages.
   Some of the difficulties in testing this are apparent as soon as the
hypothesis is stated. An outstanding difficulty is in deciding whether
house patterns which appear in the same horizon represent a single
group, the same group occupying the site consecutively, or two or more
groups occupying the site concurrently.
   Solving such problems would be essential prior to dealing with the
illustrative hypothesis posed above, just as it is essential to many other
problems which archeologists hope to handle. The approach thus far to
such problems is in the development of dating techniques for finer and
finer control of the time variable. In this case it might be possible through
palynology to establish that the houses were occupied at the same season.
It might eventually be possible to show, through minor shifts in direction
of magnetic flux detectable in the hearths, that a space of years separated
certain houses. These and other dating improvements constitute possibili-
ties but they will never answer the question which we shall address, was
Williams Cultural Heterogeneities in Settlement Patterns                                         163
the site occupied concurrently by more than one band?
   This is part of the general problem of detecting minor cultural hetero-
geneities within a site. I would like to suggest                            a method which can in
some cases detect small cultural differences when no spatial or temporal
heterogeneity is detectable. The method will be explicated, then illus-
trated with data of the kind easily recoverable by the archeologist on a
single Birhor campsite occupied contemporaneously by four Birhor bands
during the dry season and wet season of 1961.


                                         The Method
Let us designate the nominal categories in two dichotomous variables in a
population as A and A
              Band B.
If A and A have relative frequencies in the population of p and q, respec-
tively, and B and B have relative frequencies of r and s, respectively, then
independence means that the joint distribution of the two variables will
give cell frequencies
                                                   A                  A
                            B                   pr                    qr

                            B            | Sp                         Sq

If these dichotomies represent presence-absence, then the category “one
present or the other present, but not both” (p/a) has the frequency pr +
sq, the category “both present” (p/p) has frequency pr, and a/a has
frquency sq.
  Now assume we have M populations of equal size. If all M populations
were identical with respect to these variables, we could treat the overall
group as a single population and we would find
                                                M
                Freq. p/p          1/M          QUbiti                     = pF
                                 M
                Freq. p/a = 1/M ))  (spit qai)= 56 + 97
                                i=1

                                               M
                Freq. a/a = 1/M                >) Si:                      =3q
                                               i=1


Considering first the a/a category, it can be shown that

                                <A                                   EY     Dm
                     1/MMY De sasq = 39 9 == (TE)
                                              (—) Ce
                                                  (—)
                                                                     SM                           k
             only   when    ‘ASy     =   S52   =       3   2.   ==

                                                                           conditions of homogenity.
                     and     1     =     @=°°°                  =    Cn
164                                     Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
If either of these conditions does not hold, then

                                 Dost    <     Ds DA,
                                  M              M
We can specify the magnitude of the inequality in the following manner:
By definition of co-variance,
                                        M
                         o,, = 1/M > Gp)                      (gr —@)
                                         M
                             =    1/M   >) siqi      — §G
                                        i=1

                therefore     1/M 54;          a         in    oper

This says that the frequency of the category a/a is 1/M = s,q: = sq when
the overall sample is homogeneous.
   When the overall sample is heterogeneous in the frequency of one or
the other variable such that some s; ¥ s; or p: ~ p;, then the frequency of
the category a/a is 1/M 2s.q: = sq + Ow. That is, heterogeneity inflates
this category even though the variables are randomly distributed within
the subpopulations.
  Using the same line of reasoning, we can show that the category p/p
has frequency
                  = p7 when homogeneous
                  = p7 + o,, when heterogeneous.
  Further, it can be shown that         Sy =       Tyg    AS follows:

                Sy, = 1/M Ddopr - pi                                       Soap
                                                                              ie 7
             G4 = 1/M Disq — 59                                       q=1-—p
                   a1)      M Di    (laste     os             Daal se        Pall peas),
      which reduces to      og     i/M Ypr—pr=                        Sh
  The above holds for the case where the M subpopulations are ot un-
equal size but, in this case, the means p, q, 7, § must be weighted means.
  To summarize, we have said that heterogeneity among the subpopula-
tions with respect to one or more variables will inflate both the p/p and
a/a classes by equal amounts. And since the relative frequencies

                            b/b + p/a
                                    + a/a = 1
                            Freq. p/p = pr+              o,

                            Freq. p/a = Sp + pf — 26,,
                            Freq. a/a = §¢+ Gy.
   This means that when we have a priori knowledge or reason to believe
Williams Cultural Heterogeneities in Settlement Patterns                                 165
that two variables are independently distributed we can test for cultural
heterogeneity by means of a simple test of association such as x’.

                       An Ethnographic Example
Figure | illustrates an area known as Panch Pera (the five trees) which is
a rise of ground near the Mohana River near the village of Kanosar,
Hazaribagh District, Bihar. Four Birhor bands were camped at Panch
Pera during the dry season and most of the following wet season of 1961.
The location of the bands relative to one another is shown in Figure 1 as
well as the placement of individual leaf huts.




                       Camp of Bano A                  ’
                       1s LOCATED ON                 4°
                       &   CENTRAL   ELEVATED      be)
                       KNOLL




                                                Pancw       Pera     Camp  196!
                                                   Four       Bimvnor Banos
                                                           Binar, Inna
                                                           Oca    Fear
                                        Se
                                        o tc 4 +e © ©0© 0                MO   60   180




                                            Figure 1.


  The site is chosen as an illustration not because these bands were well
known to the author—they were not—but because it is a case of four
bands coming together at one site at one point in time. The four bands
166                                        Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
share the same general culture and in some detail. They are socially
distant enough from one another, however, to be able to exchange daugh-
ters in marriage. A stated Birhor rule is that one does not marry relatives.
In other words, these bands share the same culture but are more or less
autonomous social units among whom we might expect minor differences
in cultural practices.
   In this case there is no problem in seeing that four bands were present
as this is reflected in spatial aggregation; sociometric relations between
families and between bands are always reflected in spacing of the houses
among the Birhor. But for the sake of the argument being presented, we
shall assume we cannot tell from house location whether one band or
more than one band is present. The problem is to see if we can detect
cultural heterogeneity, suggesting the presence of more than one group in
the sample, on the basis of archeologically observable nominal-scale vari-
ables.
   The most easily observable features which we can dichotomize and
which refer to house patterns after the structure is no longer standing are:
 (a) whether the diameter of the floor was larger or smaller than some
central figure; (b) whether or nota fire-pit was located inside the house;

Table 1. Houses in Birhor Camp                  Table 2. Houses in Birhor Camp
                   Area A                                         Area B

House                Over-   Fire-              House               Over-     Fire-
 No.    Diameter      size    pit    Burned      No.    Diameter    size       pit    Burned
  1      10/2’       _        _        +          ib     10/917          —     =        +
  2      12/0”       4+       —        +          2      108”            —     —        ao
  3      12/9’ (N-S),+        +        4          3      97107           _     +        +
         10/0”                                    eh
         (E-W),                                   5      6’10’”      =         -        _
  t      1 leees       +      --       +          6      14/4” (N-S),+         —        +
                       a      —        —                  9/2/’      ‘
  5       9/4/”

  6      INe 4         +      —        +                 (E-W),          a     —        +
  #      10/0”         —      a        —          y       7/6”

  8      12/3”        ae      ar       +          8      10’4”           =     a        +
  o      10/5”        ++      —        =          9      10/0”           om    Ls       ae
 10      SZ            +      _        —         10     HOMO             +     +        +
 i        Sa           =      +        _         iit     108”            ak    ==       at
 12      710”          =      =        =         12       Al             2     a        r
 13      10’6”         +      _—       ue:       13     10/11”           =     Be       4
 14      12/977        +      _        =
 15        9/6”        -      —        ae
 16      10/3”         +      --       ak
 17       F277         —      --       os
 18      NO            —      —        —
 19        OZ          _      —        =
 20      Sy ALI        =      —        —
 Zl      oO            _      _        —
Williams Cultural Heterogeneities in Settlement Patterns                               167

Table 3. Houses in Birhor Camp                 Table 4. Houses in Birhor Camp
                    Area C                                          Area D

House                 Over-   Fire-            House                  Over-   Fire-
 No.     Diameter      size    pit    Burned    No.      Diameter      size    pit — Burned
  1       15/8”         +      +        —        i       12/10”         +      —       =
           (N-S),                                2         iS lle       _      —       =
          10°3”                                  3        10/4”         +      --      ~
          (E-W)                                  4         9/5’         —      —       —
  2       Yig:          -       _       ~        5        106”          +      —       =
  3       12/3”         +       +       _           6     12/3”         —      —       =
  4       10/2”         _      -        _                  (N-S),
  5       12/0”                —        —                   76”
  6       Li"           +      ae       =                  (E-W)
           (N-S),                                7         9/9”         —      _       =
            86”                                  8         oT           —      a       =
           (E-W)                                 9        1/5”          +n             —_
  7        yi           a      -        -       10         we           _      _       _—
                                                i         10’8”         +      =       =
                                                12         Q/5”"        =      —       —


                                                13        10'S?         =      =       =
                                                14        9/10”         —      =       se
                                                15         rt a         —      =       =
                                                16        12/0”         +      ee      —


(c) whether         or not the house was burned by the occupants on their
departure. A number of other features could have been recorded and
used but these will be sufficient.
   The observations on individual houses in the separate bands are given
as Tables 1 through 4. Some Birhor now use a “new” house form which is
rectangular in outline but the Panch Pera bands, being conservative in a
number     of ways,      stick to the older, beehive-shaped            hut which     has a
circular floor plan and can, therefore, be characterized by a single diam-
eter. Five houses, however, were pronouncedly oblong and the mean of
the maximum and minimum diameters was used for comparability to
other houses. Since these houses were occupied in the wet season, some
had an outer drainage trench and all had an inner bank of dirt at the wall.
Diameters were taken from the outer edge of this inner bank.
   Let us now make the assumption that the three variables tabulated are
distributed independently within bands. In this case, being an ethno-
graphic example, we can test to see if the assumption was justified. Below
are listed 2 x 2 matrices, one set for each band, which show the distribu-
tion of the variables, taken two at a time, within that band. Figures are
too small to utilize a Chi-square approximation. Therefore Fisher’s Exact
Test was applied and the value of P underneath each matrix represents
the probability that the least frequent cell could be that small or smaller
due to chance alone.                                 .
168                                      Variability in a Single Occupational Unit

Band A
           burned                          firepit                               firepit




oversize                     burned                                oversize




Band B
           burned                          firepit                                firepit
                                            +    —                                +        —
i)                                                                    o
3                            iS                                    3       +       amt      ed
x3                           S
                                 3                                    es
                                                                      3
                                                                                         omer 3 ha
                                                                                   Ta       ots
                                                                               P=-38

Band C
           burned                                                                 firepit
                                                                                   _       —_



rS                               8=                                Ney             3               4
Fe                                                                    rs
=                                =                                    S =           Ose        Silas
                                                                                    Peas         | ae
                                                                               Pris

Band D
                                                                                  firepit
                                                                                   +        —




oversize                         burned                               oversize
                                                                                   2 14
            P=1                            Aa                                    P=.82
     If we set a level of significance at            a =   .05, this level is hardly ap-
proached in any of the above. Upon inspection of the above matrices,
we can find some hint of directionality only in Band A. In this band
we find a non-significant, but consistent in all three comparisons, excess
of p/p and a/a. Considering all three variables simultaneously for Band
A, we       find P=.35.   This        is the only band        which       shows        consistent
Williams Cultural Heterogeneities in Settlement Patterns         169
deviations from randomness and the effect is insufficient to account
for any significant deviation in the overall sample.
   Now let us consider what happens when we merge bands. This will
first be done for two variables at a time as shown below.

Merged Frequencies
             burned                        firepit                         firepit


8                                 y                               g
s                                  S                              re
=                                  ~                              NN
i)                                Pa}                             ~)



       x =      0.36                     y=     3a                       Veet
      Oe       Pt:70                    Os 6 P26210                    (OSS
                                                                         FP ay10


     These    three 2 x 2 matrices       represent    the situation    as it would    be
tabulated by the archeologist. The minor differences that clearly differ-
entiate bands as shown in Tables A—D are not discernable as there
is, in the situation supposed, no a priori way to assign houses to
particular bands. In the first comparison, oversize versus burned,
there is no evidence of association and therefore no evidence of
between-group heterogeneity. In the remaining two comparisons there
is an obvious effect of heterogeneity. By combining the latter two ’
values we find

                      x = 64        iN               Re      em aah

     In other words, on        the basis of the last two       comparisons,    we    can
reject the null hypothesis of homogeneity. The house floors present do
not represent the variability within a single social unit but reflect
at least minor cultural differentiation among units. It must be noted
that this method does not distinguish social units and, therefore, does
not give an indication of the number of such units present. It does say
that more than one unit was present.
   In résumé, a method has been presented                 for a simple test of minor
cultural heterogeneities in archeological material. The method involves
the assumption of the independent distribution of two or more variables
within units. The finding of an excess of cases in the p/p and a/a cate-
gories, tested by x’, is an indication of the presence of heterogeneity.
This method -was tested against a known ethnographic situation among
hunters. The existence of small cultural differences (that is, band iden-
tity) is confirmed by this method using house-pattern data even when
data on spatial heterogeneities in the settlement pattern are suppressed.
170                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit

                                 Discussion
Although the test data used in the foregoing concern settlement patterns
only, it must be stressed that the method has quite general applications.
Indeed there is no reason that the method can not be applied to skeletal
material. It could be possible to detect the presence of more than one
breeding population within'a region by the use of traits known to be
uncorrelated in living populations—for example, the frequency of shovel-
ling in I’ and size progression between M’ and M’.
  For cultural data, the method’s primary weakness will be found to be
the necessary assumption of independence of the variables within social
units, within tool traditions, or within any unit of postulated homogene-
ity. The case used to illustrate the point is trivial only in the sense that the
differences utilized are so minor as to be assignable no social significance
and of a nature such as is not normally noticed by the ethnographer. But
this can also be argued as a strength of the method—to be able to pick up
cultural heterogeneities of fairly fine scale in archeological data.


                                 References

SERVICE, E.. R. 1962. Primitive social organization. New York: Random House.
                                                                    PART UI




                                     Investigating Variability
                               in the Archeological Record:
             Variability among Occupational Units




In the previous section we emphasized the study of variability within a
single occupation unit. In this section we shift to a different compara-
tive framework, one in which a number of archeological components (or
their attributes) are studied, and explanations are sought for observed
differences and similarities. The assumption underlying the discussion of
single-site variability was that the occupational episodes were of suffi-
ciently short duration to allow for systemic stability for the period repre-
sented by the archeological remains. If the remains suggested occupations
of considerable duration, or showed internal variability which contra-
dicted the assumption    of stability, then the examples   would   be more
appropriately discussed in this section.
   The assumption underlying the analyses in this section is that observed
differences between occupation units are to be attributed either to change
within a system or to systemic independence for the units under study.
Where we can justify this assumption, our explanations for observed dif-
ferences take the form of arguments regarding processes which operated
in the past to determine changes and to promote diversification among
cultural systems.
   In formulating explanations, we are constantly faced with a dual prob-
lem. On the one hand, archeological observations must be shown to be
relevant to conditions -which existed in the past; this is a problem of

                                    171
172                                 Variability among Occupational Units
archeological theory. On the other hand, once we have documented the
operation of cultural or ecological processes in the past, we seek to de-
velop arguments regarding the relevance of certain variables to these
processes; the concern here is with general anthropological or ecological
theory.
  An example of the first problem—the relevance of archeological obser-
vations to past conditions—can be seen when we note that much of the
variability among occupation units (between-site variability) may de-
rive from spatial differentiation in activities which may have varied sea-
sonally or with respect to other periodic events within a stable system of
adaptation (see Winters, 1963; Binford and Binford, 1966; Thompson,
1939). There is also the possibility that directional changes through time
may not always indicate systematic cultural change or replacements; they
may well be due to successional phenomena—that is, to changes pro-
duced in the site itself by an earlier occupation which then limits the
nature of succeeding occupations     (for example, see Binford, Binford,
Whallon, and Hardin, 1966). Other sources of variability can be simple
sampling error (L. R. Binford, 1965), cultural drift (L. R. Binford, 1963),
or from a particular form of sampling bias produced by data collection
techniques (Deetz and Dethlefsen, 1965). These different sources and
kinds of variation between occupation units make it absolutely essential
that we develop significant arguments of relevance and means for veri-
fication.
   The papers in this section range along a scale from an almost exclusive
concern with explaining archeological observations per se to an equally
exclusive theoretical concern. The papers by Whallon and Winters at-
tempt to develop techniques for measurement and arguments of rele-
vance for archeological observations. Winters proceeds to tests of confi-
dence for his propositions by recourse to ethnohistorical data, a proce-
dure we have seen used in the previous section by Williams and Longacre
and Ayres.
  The papers by Hole, Flannery and Coe, Struever, and L. R. Binford
exemplify archeological concern with documenting and trying to explain
change in or diversification among cultural systems. Here the appropriate
analytical framework is ecological, and interest centers on the recognition,
isolation, and measurement of variables external to the cultural system
under study. The ecological relationships between components of the
cultural system and the biophysical or sociocultural variables of the sys-
tem’s environment become the focus of investigation. In these presenta-
tions the emphasis has shifted from arguments of relevance for archeolog-
ical observations among variables of the extinct systems to an emphasis on
arguments   of relevance for ecological or sociocultural relationships in
explaining culture change. The papers have a secondary concern with
operationalizing the measurement of variables using archeological data.
  The four papers in question (Hole, Flannery and Coe, Struever, and L.
R. Binford) are themselves arranged in a general progression from lesser
Variability among Occupational Units                                           173
to greater theoretical concern. Hole asks a question of the archeological
record from the Near East which has not been thoroughly explored previ-
ously. The only available information consists of observations made with
very different problems in mind. At such an initial stage of investigation,
Hole proceeded by perusing the data on the culture history of the period
under study. He then offers a substantive inventory of observations he
considers relevant to what is known of forms of ethnographically docu-
mented social organization for societies analogous to those represented
archeologically. His principal concern is with the relevance of the record
insofar as it can document certain variables he considers significant in the
past organizations and relevant to discussions of change.
   Flannery and Coe are more explicitly involved with theoretical argu-
ments which elucidate the relevance of the variable of “microenviron-
mental heterogeneity” to observed differences in socioeconomic organiza-
tion of a number of independent cultural systems. They explore the prob-
lem of how to operationalize measurement of this critical variable as well
as others postulated to co-vary with it.
   Struever documents a series of marked changes in human adaptations
to a particular geographical zone. He is particularly concerned with docu-
menting the nature of the ecological relationships between the local en-
vironment and the occupants of the habitat. He justifies this emphasis by
arguing that culture is man’s extrasomatic means of adaptation and that
changes in culture must be viewed as changes in the adaptive niche
occupied by a cultural system. This is another example of archeological
investigation of variables justified as relevant through a theoretical argu-
ment on the nature of. culture. Struever concludes by stating that he has
not explained the observed adaptive change; he has, however, been
highly successful in explicating the nature of the successive niches occu-
pied by populations in the region. The next step in this intellectual feed-
back system will undoubtedly be the construction of explanatory models
for the documented changes of niche; such explanatory models and the
design for testing them are based on evolutionary theory—the framework
for understanding structural changes through time.
  The final paper (L. R. Binford) is almost exclusively concerned with
the nature of cultural systems of adaptation and the conditions under
which such systems might be disrupted, producing a situation in which
evolutionary change would occur. This paper discusses at the theoretical
level the problem which Struever’s analysis introduced—under what con-
ditions do “maximizing adaptations” occur.


                                    References

BinrorpD, Lewis R. 1963. Red ocher caches from the Michigan area: a possible
  case   of cultural   drift.   Southwestern   Journal   of Anthropology,   19(1):
  89—108.
174                                     Variability among Occupational Units
     . 1964. Considerations of archaeological research design. American An-
  tiquity, 29(4): 425—41.
Binrorp, Lewis R., and Satty R. Binrorp. 1966. A preliminary analysis of
  functional variability in the Mousterian of Levallois facies. American An-
  thropologist, 68(2) Part 2: 238—95.
Binrorp,   Lewis   R., SALLy   R. Brnrorp,    ROBERT   WHALLON,   and   MARGARET
  Harpvin. 1966. Archaeology at Hatchery West. Southern Illinois University
  Museum, Archaeological Salvage Report no. 25.
DEETZ, JAMES, and Epwin DETHLEFSEN.          1965. The Doppler effect and archae-
  ology: a consideration of the spatial aspects of seriation. Southwestern Jour-
  nal of Anthropology, 21(3): 196—206.
TuHompson, DonaLp F. 1939. The seasonal factor in human culture, illustrated
  from the life of a contemporary nomadic group. Proceedings of the Prehis-
  toric Society (London), no. 10, pp. 209—221.
WinTERS, Howarp D. 1963. An archaeological survey of the Wabash Valley in
  Illinois. Ilinois State Museum Reports of Investigations, No. 19.
ELEVEN                                                 HOWARD      D. WINTERS




                       Ualue Systems and Trade Cycles
                                                 of the Late Archaic
                                                       in the Midwest




This paper is a composite of two papers delivered at the 1964 and 1965
meetings of the Society for American Archaeology at the University of
North Carolina and the University of Illinois. It represents an attempt to
develop the techniques for interpreting economic data from the analysis
of the artifactual material of prehistoric societies. The data used are
derived   from   published   reports   on sites of the Indian   Knoll   Culture,
namely Indian Knoll (Webb, 1946), Carlson Annis (Webb, 1950a), Read
(Webb, 1950b), Ward and Kirkland (Webb and Haag, 1940), Chigger-
ville (Webb and Haag, 1939), and Barrett and Butterfield (Webb and
Haag, 1947).
   I should like to acknowledge my indebtedness to Professor Webb for
the help that the foregoing monographs have provided both in present
and past research efforts. Although in many respects, the publications
may prove frustrating when attempts are made to use them for current
problems, the vast quantities of information contained in them remain
invaluable and stand as      a monument      to Professor Webb’s   genius. It is
perhaps overly easy today to see how a more adequate presentation might
have been accomplished,       but we    should   all ponder whether     our own
efforts will have the same utility after two or three decades as his have.
   Although ten carbon-14 dates are available for Carlson Annis (six
dates) and Indian Knoll (four dates )—(Johnson, 1951; Libby, 1952), the
                                       175
176                                  Variability among Occupational Units
Indian Knoll Culture can hardly be said to be dated adequately. Dating
was by the solid carbon method, with its potential sources of error, and
shell was used for two of the Carlson Annis samples, Furthermore,          at
Carlson Annis there is a case of dates that are the direct reverse of the
stratigraphic position of the samples dated. But a number of dates on
antler suggest a temporal position for the two sites within the third mil-
lennium B.c. Our own guess based upon the rate of accumulation for
similar shell middens in the Wabash Valley (Winters, 1968) would be
that the time span of the Indian Knoll Culture should be on the order of
ca. 2500 to ca. 2000 B.c.
   It should be remembered also that the sites are not single component
middens. Earlier Archaic, and even Paleo-Indian, materials are present, as
well as Woodland and Mississippian artifacts. But quantitatively, the
other components are minor in the massive concentration of artifacts
assignable to the Indian Knoll Culture. Most of the Woodland and Missis-
sippian manifestations are superficial and suggest little more than utiliza-
tion of the sites as camps or farmsteads. And only at Butterfield is there
earlier Archaic material present in sufficient quantity to pose a serious
statistical problem. (Our data for the latter site should be treated with
considerable circumspection since it has not been possible to sort many of
the earlier Archaic artifacts from the Indian Knoll artifacts in the pub-
lished report.)
   The origins of the study go back to an earlier analysis undertaken by
the author to secure comparative material from the Green River sites on
the nature of the settlement systems in that area. Tentatively it was
concluded that a settlement system of the Riverton type (Winters, 1963,
1968) was also operative in the Green River area. Thus, the sites are no
longer viewed as discrete units by the author, but as elements in three
settlement system units of the Indian Knoll Culture. The first of these,
termed the Ward Unit, is known from a settlement, the Ward Site, a base
camp, the Barrett Site, a specialized collecting camp, and Kirkland, a
hunting camp; the second, termed the Read Unit, is known from Read, a
settlement, and Carlson Annis, a base camp; the third, termed the Chig-
gerville Unit, from Chiggerville, a settlement, and Indian Knoll, a base
camp.
  It was noted during the quantification of data for the interpretation of
the settlement system of the Indian Knoll Culture that conch shell seemed
to follow a cyclical pattern of appearance and disappearance at Carlson
Annis, Read, and Indian Knoll, the three sites for which adequate quanti-
tative data were available for these artifacts. Subsequently, it was decided
to investigate this regularity of patterning somewhat further to see how it
correlated with variations in population and utilitarian items. These vari-
ous units of raw data will be introduced as we develop the major themes
of this paper: difference in “value” of categories of artifacts, variations in
sex and age association of certain artifacts of “special value,” preliminary
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                  Nhe
conclusions   about the meaning      of differentials   in the distribution of
wealth, cyclical fluctuations in imported raw materials, and observations
on the possibilities of a trade network within which the Indian Knoll
Culture was an element.
   Utilizing burial tables and summary artifact tables, we were able to
assemble data basic to our analyses on the following subjects:
  1. Sex linkage of artifacts, derived by listing associations with only
those burials definitely identified as to sex.
   2. The vertical distribution patterns of artifacts that were associated
only with burials, or artifacts that had only insignificant quantitative
expression apart from the latter context.
   3. Proportions of each artifact in burial or midden association.
   4. Association of artifacts by age groups.
   5. A rough estimate of population fluctuation through plotting of buri-
als by 6-in. levels, a procedure that will be discussed in greater detail
later.
   First of all, we shall consider the contexts of particular functional cate-
gories of artifacts, as they relate to burial or midden association (Table
1). One group consisting of general utility implements, weapons, fabricat-
ing and processing tools, domestic implements, and woodworking tools
was present with burials only in low percentages of the total recovered at
the site, often being only 1 to 2 per cent of the total and rarely exceeding
10 per cent of the total.
   A few anomalies exist within the group, of course. As a general rule,
one can say that the earlier the excavation and reporting of the site, the
grosser the level of the anomalies. There seems to have been an improve-
ment in excavation techniques as time went on, and there were certainly
greatly improved standards of reporting. In defense of any implication of
inadequacy within the foregoing, it should be realized that the rather
curious figures for hammerstones at Barrett, Butterfield, and Kirkland
might well be duplicated in excavations and publications in 1966. There
are any number of archeologists, including a sprinkling of eminent fig-
ures, who are still unable to distinguish a mano from a hammerstone
unless the shaping and wear are too obvious to be ignored, and who solve
their laboratory storage problems by returning from the field with the
few selected hammerstones or manos that have struck their fancy.
   As examples of the anomalies, the following are noted: At Barrett 50
per cent of the total sample of two grooved mauls was in burial associa-
tion, a not very impressive statistical determination when we compare the
data for Carlson Annis and Indian Knoll where none of the respective
samples of 129 mauls and 11 mauls were found in burial context. And
similar observations pertain where other high percentages of 50 per cent
or more occur for items such as hammerstones (Kirkland—two speci-
mens), abrading stones. (Barrett—two; Butterfield—one), whetstones
(Ward—one;   Indian Knoll—three); reamers    (Carlson Annis—one).
                                                                                                              s1owleey ‘ST
                                                     dN          dN
                                                                                                      sIosIouy Uopoy ‘TT
                                                     xX          x
                                                                                                      SIOSIOUT I9Aveg ‘OT
                                                     xX          xX
                                                     xX          xX                                     spstyO Tepey '6
                                                     xX          x                                               SIF “8
                                                     xX          xX                                            soe “L
                                                                                                                  SMV ‘9
                                                     x           xX
                                                                 dN
                                                                                            so[poon pure surg seddop *g
                                                     dN
                                                                                                            +se3n0y ‘Pp
                                                     dN          dN
                                                                                                                  (A “€
                                                                                                          souo}s}ou
                                                     dN          0
                                                                                                     souo}s SUIPeIqy “
                                                     dN         0'00T
                                                     0          9G                                            siMd 1
                                                                                             Bupssav01g pup duyvowqny
                                                     dN          0                                        sproxpur[AD *6
                                                     xX          x                                          syooysty *8
                                                     x           xX                                   soppueH PepY *L
                                                     xX          x                                      syooH PepY "9
                                                     xX          x                                  TPS SAM BeRY 'S
                                                                  0d                               au07s ‘SAM PERV ‘FP
      OTT
      eT                                             x           x                                     yay “sq ‘fora '¢
                                                                                                      auog “s}q ‘lorg ‘S
             0                                       xX          xX
                                                    6G          9°6                                  yoyO “Iq ‘ford T
          60                                                                                                   _ suodva
                                                                00%                 se               4SOUO}SIOUIUILHY “PF
                                                     00S
          0 60                                                                                        s[NeJ, PeAoosy *¢
                                            0
                                              dN      dN         dN                  dN
                                                                                     8G                      siodei9g *G
                               70           L‘0       0         TG
  Oe 80
                                                                                                               SOATUY *T
                               a                     Lot        Esl         VG
                                      peo
                                                                                                          hyyun wsauaxy
                      0                     0
youy unpuy ayrasassiyo        s1uuy                punyy   =pjarfsazing   YaLwg
                                                                                  M PID
                            uosj1DD
                                      ee            eS     SS           SS          rh
ee               ee       ee
                                      uounoossy joung ur syovfysy fo adDzuaowad ‘T 2190.1
ite i
e     ee e
                                     )
                                     panurzudy
                                     (foaj12a0
                                                                                                                               BPATO ‘sprog ‘p
                                                                                KMPM OM


    0'00T            0';O00T
                     dN                                                                        KM                           RyeuIsiey ‘speag ‘¢
                         dN                                                                                                   eso[houy ‘speeg °%
                           8°66
                           c'6                                                                 Kx                                 Set] pen “1
                          0°00T
                          ¥'86
                                                                                                                                            “1124S
                                                                                                                                                 suidireyy
                                                                                                                                                 *¢
                           ILS
                           dN                                                                  KX                                    sjuepuag ‘fF
            0          é                                                        KK                                                                  “¢
                                                                                                                                                    ‘sautuery
                                                                                                                                                    ‘Flog
                       0°00T
                                                                                               KKK
                       0'00T                                                                                                      osiq] ‘sprog °Z
            0          é                                                        mK                                             Ivpnqny, ‘speag ‘T
            0        dN                                                                                                                     :auog
                                                                                                                                     sjuepue ‘fF
     0'0F            dN                                                                                                        PIOUNID ‘sprog "¢
                           dN                                                                                              [80D jeuueyD ‘sprog ‘g
                    L’99
     OTs
                                                                                                                                        sprog ‘T
     L96           dN                                                                                                                       :auoys
                                                                                                                                                     SLNANVNUC
                                                                                                                                         sodig "p
           4         dN                                                                                                           sdny youon ‘¢
                     d
   0°00T
                                                                                                                                        soMeY “S
   0'00T             dN                                                                                                                  sayy ‘T
   0'00T             dN                                                                                                                [p1uowalayn
                                                                                                                                          SOXY 'T
      Lt              0                                                                                                             BUIyLONpoo MA
                                                                                                                                                    *¢
                                                                                                                                                    _souoysde'T,,
                                                 TT 0 0
      ST             dN                                                       8'F         0                                                      *Z
                                                                                                                                                 Souo}s]NN
      eg             0                                                      dN            dN         fOr
                                      suuy
                                                                                                                                                 ‘T
                                                                                                                                                 sepsed
                                                          uospi0g
      OT
      unrpuy ouy
aypasadaiy
                      0
                                 9
                                                                    pooy    0             oe               ya.iog PID M,                 INSAULOG
                                                                       playuoung puny
                                                                        =
ee cee Set ee e
                                                                                                s[00} SuppIoMpoom 9q Aypenjoe Aeur pu ‘sapdueyoor poddryo s.qqaM 0 puodsai109+
                                                                                                                                                     sourut Auvul sapnpour ATpa}qnopuy) »
                                                                                                                                                                    eyep snonsiquiy = ¢
                                                                                                                                                ureyz20un uoyeAiasoid yo Aoenbepy = X
                                                                                                                                                                       yuasaid oN = IN
                                                                                           dN             dN                     dN                                            sprog€
                                                                                                                      0001
                                                                                                                         0'00T

    dN          dN                                                                                                                                                          syuvpuad °%
                                                                                           dN             dN                               dN
                                                            dN dN
   0'00T        dN                                                                                                                                                               sivg ‘|
   0'00T        dN                                                                         dN             dN                          dN
                                                                                                                                                                                 :waddog
                                                                                 dN        xX              xX                                                                  SRezde h
   00S          dN                                                                                                                                                                :LapyqUuy
                                                                                                                          dN
                dN                                          dN                   dN        x               xX                                                         dyouoy ‘ssury “ET
                         u0sjDD




   0'00L                                                                                                                                                              dyqouoy ‘sostq *ZT
                                                                         dN                x               xX        0'00T
   0'00T        dN
                                                                                                                    dN                                             youor ‘eyjaumnjoD ‘TT
                                                                                                           xX
                                                                                 dN dN
                                                            dN                             x
                            swuuy 0°00T o-o0t 0'00T 0°00T




   0'O00T       dN
                                                                                                                    dN                                              youon ‘ssnjdieq ‘OT
                                                                                           x               X
                                                                      0°00T
   0'00T       0'00T
                                                                                                                                 dN                                 youon ‘sya3105 *6
   0'00T       0'00T                                        dN                             x               x
                                                                                                                     0'00T                                         youon ‘syuepueg *g
                                                                                           x               xX
                                                                         dN dN
   0'O0T       0'O0T
                                                                                                                    dN                                       youon feorneyds ‘sprog ‘2,
                                                            dN                             x               xX
                                                                    ped 0'00T

   0'O00T       dN
                                                                                                                     gL8                                      youon ienqny, ‘sprog "9
    o'86       0'00T                                                                       xX              x
                dN                                          dN            dN               x               xX        0001                                                [reed ‘sprog ‘¢
    0';O0T
ouN uprpuy anrasadsiyD                                                                   puny4y     =pjayjszauing                dN                                      (‘p.auoo ‘says )
                                                                                                                YaLwwg
                                                                                                                                                           (panuyuogj—'T 21901 )
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                    181
These may be compared to such sites as Carlson Annis with 222 hammer-
stones, and Indian Knoll with 316 abrading stones and 78 reamers, none
of which were in burial association.
   There are curiously high percentages for beaver and rodent incisors at
Read and Indian Knoll, and an equally curious dearth of such items at the
other sites, with the data for Barrett and Ward inadequate for reliable
interpretation of the occurrence of incisors. Of course, there were only
three such items at Read, in contrast to the 28 recovered from Indian
Knoll. But Webb (1946, p. 298) points out that “except for having a sharp
cutting edge [these artifacts] show no evidence of having been worked.”
Only very careful checking would have identified the incisors as artifacts
if they had occurred in the midden. A check of the faunal analysis for
Indian Knoll by Skaggs (in Webb, 1946, pp. 334—39) failed to disclose
any mention of beaver incisors in the midden, although beaver mandibles
are mentioned. But there is a remarkable lacuna in the reporting of teeth
in the list, for that matter, with the sole exception being two cottontail
rabbit teeth. In the light of our own experience with Midwestern shell
middens, the bone sample seems to be rather unusual.
  Stone atlatl weights, prized by collectors for their workmanship and
often exotic materials, seem to display extreme variability, with per-
centages ranging from zero for the two at Kirkland to 57.1 per cent for
the fourteen at Barrett. Other components of atlatls also show similar
wide   swings   in their proportional   representation   in burial   association,
with ataltl hooks, for example, having a range from 11.8 to 100 per cent,
and atlatl handles, from 21.4 to 100 per cent. But again, the very high
percentages correlate with the rarity of the item at the site, with those
sites having atlatl components in abundance consistently showing much
lower percentages.
   We cannot even begin to explain the variability of the items pertaining
to the atlatl. Utilization of exotic raw materials does not seem to be
involved, since the limestones, sandstones, and various igneous rocks are
common to the Midwest. A few examples may have been manufactured
from materials not immediately available in the lower Ohio Valley area,
but these are in a decided minority. At this point, it can only be suggested
that atlatl components vary sufficiently from other items in the first cate-
gory to consider the possibility that they might better be considered as a
special subcategory.
   Finally, there are two categories, shell atlat] weights and copper pins,
awls and needles, which, with the exception of a copper aw] at Carlson
Annis, are never found outside of burial association. We suspect that the
important variable here is the raw material involved, not the basic func-
tion of the artifact. In both cases, the imported copper and conch shell
may have added an intrinsic value to these items beyond their basic
utilitarian properties. If this be the case, these exceptional items within
the functional categories of general utility tools, weapons, and fabricating
182                                Variability among Occupational Units
and processing tools should be considered for our present purposes with
the Class III artifacts to be discussed below, not with the Class I artifacts
where their functional counterparts appear.
   A second group consisted of items which we have argued elsewhere
(Winters, 1968) to be of the sort properly included in the category of
ceremonial equipment, that is, flutes, rattles, and pipes, all of whica, with
the exception of conch shell cups, were made from local raw materials
and in the pattern of localized Midwestern styles. To these may be added
cups made from imported conch shell, which we consider ceremonial
items because of the special contexts in which they occur in late Archaic,
Woodland, and even historic times. (We have excluded computations for
medicine bags since those not in burial association are represented by
animal bones which would in all likelihood have simply been included
with the faunal sample recovered from the midden.)        Items in this cate-
gory generally occur only in burial association, and rarely fall below 75
per cent of the specimens recovered at any site.
  A third group consisted of items which have been termed ornaments. In
terms of proportional representation with burials, there are at least two
subdivisions, one consisting of ommaments manufactured from bone and
the other of items manufactured from imported raw materials such as
copper and conch shell. A third subdivision might be created for stone
ornaments, but the data on raw materials are inadequate for analyzing
the types or sources of raw materials. In other respects, these stone items
show much the same percentage as that of the subdivision for ornaments
of imported raw materials, although the former tend to be somewhat lower.
   While ornaments in general occur in rather higher frequencies in burial
association than the artifacts of the first group, antler and bone ornaments
such as tubular beads, disc beads, pendants, and hairpins tend to occur
more frequently in the midden than in burial association. An unexplained
exception to this observation is found in the case of perforated canine
pendants.
  Both conch shell and copper stand in marked contrast to the preceding
subdivision. Normally, burial association is 100 per cent with only 13 per
cent of the 52 recorded observations (Table 1) falling below 98 per cent.
There would seem to be decided differential in the mode of disposition of
ornaments. There may be many factors leading to differences in disposi-
tion of tubular bone beads and tubular shell beads, or bone disc beads
and shell disc beads, but there still remains the simple fact that beads
made of local raw materials tend to be disposed of rather casually, while
those that are made of imported raw materials tend to occur in special
context and only rarely in the midden debris.
   Furthermore, to emphasize the point, with the exception of atlatl
weights there was no diversion of imported marine shell for the manufac-
ture of utilitarian artifacts, quite unlike sites of the Florida area adjacent
to the sources of much of the marine shell. Rouse (1951) in his publica-
tion on the survey of the Indian River in Florida, an area which he notes
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic               183
has less variety of shell artifacts than southern Florida, records chopping
tools, which   constitute   the majority of shell artifacts,   including    celts,
gouges, chisels, and picks. The use of Busycon as a hammer                 is also
recorded. Along with these, of course, there occurs an assortment of cups,
dippers, beads, and pendants.
  One obvious objection to the previous observations is that sampling
error may be a significant factor. The sites in question are shell middens,
and they were not excavated with the best recovery techniques. While
admitting that the sample does not conform to present-day standards, we
do not feel that it is necessarily unrepresentative, for the following reasons:
  1. Our own experience with Midwestern shell middens has been that
such middens     consist only in small part of actual shell accumulations,
which occur as lenses in the conglomeration of black soil, rock, and other
midden debris. In this respect, some observations of Webb are pertinent:
Of Indian Knoll itself he says, “While the site here is a shell ‘mound,’ shell
is by no means     the major constituent in the accumulation”      (1946). Or
again, “It will be remembered       that, at Indian Knoll, there was       a very
considerable midden deposit, but relatively a small amount of shell in the
midden”    (Webb    and Haag,    1940). Of Kirkland,    “Mussell   shells were
extremely rare and only noted by occasional fragments” (Webb and
Haag, 1940). Of Chiggerville, “Near the bottom of the heap there was
quite uniformly a stratum of concentrated shell. Between the shell lenses
there was black earth mixed with shell, which contained the usual refuse
material of a shell midden” (Webb and Haag, 1939). In connection with
Ward and Kirkland, “in Kentucky some shell-mound people lived on shell
mounds    but others having the same or similar cultural status lived in
villages [Ward and Kirkland]       quite removed from any shell accumula-
tion” (Webb and Haag, 1940). Of Barrett, “The midden material con-
sisted of many stones, scattered mussel shells, and worked and unworked
flint, and polished stone material” (Webb and Haag, 1947). And finally,
Butterfield, although classed as a shell midden, is described. in these
terms: “A result of this condition of extreme porosity and acid soil was the
poor preservation of human skeletons and other bone material.” But a few
lines later is the notation that “the presence of large quantities of mussel
shells in the midden suggest that there must have been a shoals here prior
to the damming of the river” (Webb and Haag, 1947). We do not know
quite how to reconcile these two statements, since if there were large
quantities of mussel shell present, the soil should not have been very acid.
   But one is left with the total impression that, while the quantity of shell
varied in the middens, at no site was there simply a dense homogeneous
mass of river mussels in which other shell artifacts might well disappear,
particularly since the material was double shoveled for at least some of
the sites in checking for artifacts. We should grant that small shell arti-
facts might be overlooked with such techniques, but we doubt very much
that the larger items would have been missed so consistently if they were
actually present in the middens.
184                                   Variability among Occupational Units
   Nor can we invoke differential preservation from soil factors to account
for the distribution pattern. With the exception of Butterfield, the state-
ment on which is ambiguous, soil conditions should have been ideal for
the preservation of both bone and shell, and the sites are indeed notable
for the quantities of bone artifacts which have been recovered from them.
While the sites vary considerably in the number and types of shell arti-
facts, such variability is perhaps best explained by the function of the site
within the settlement system, and hence quantitative and qualitative dif-
ferences in the activities associated therewith, than to preservation factors
per se.
   We feel that there is some reason, then, for postulating that the preced-
ing categories, with modifications, represent sets of artifacts that express
broad differences in their values based in part upon the functions to
which they were related in the Indian Knoll society, and in part upon the
raw materials from which they were manufactured.
   Using ethnographic parallels, we might then restate the categories in
terms of a value system for the Indian Knoll Culture:
   Class I. Items of personal equipment with value expressible only in
terms of the functional worth to the owner. This would include most
items classifiable as general utility tools, weapons, fabricating and process-
ing tools, and domestic implements, and ornaments manufactured from
locally available raw materials.
  Class II. Items   of personal equipment      but of a ceremonial     nature.
These items would generally have had no direct exchange value but
would possess an intrinsic value stemming mainly from their symbolic
nature. This would include artifacts generally classified as ceremonial
equipment, and any other artifacts which by context should be separated
from their normal class affiliations and considered as ceremonial equip-
ment.
   Class III. Items of equipment with special value. This would include
those items occurring in special, segregated context that are manufactured
from rare and/or imported raw materials; consists primarily of certain
classes of ornaments, but in the Indian Knoll Culture can also include
ceremonial and utilitarian artifacts manufactured from imported marine
shells and copper. A contemporary analogy for the latter case might be
found in gift shops that provide for the man who has everything items
such as gold toothpicks, gem-studded can openers, and a host of other
impedimenta the prices of which obscure the lowly, utilitarian function
of the artifact itself. The foregoing observation should not be taken as
meaning that the utilitarian function of the item was of no consequence.
Copper awls, for example, might be desirable because of their superiority
over their counterparts manufactured from other raw materials.
   It might be germane at this point to pause and consider the question of
why marine shell and copper have rarely been considered in archeological
reporting in any systematic way as items that may well have been associ-
ated with special value. An immediate factor has been the rather casual,
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic             185
and probably ethnocentric, manner in which some archeologists tend to
regard items such as shell beads and other small “trinkets.” For example,
in respect to the Indian Knoll sites themselves, the following revealing
comments were made in the discussion of burial associations:
     Relatively few [burials at Indian Knoll] had artifacts placed with them at
  burial (275 out of 879), and if one excludes burials having only beads (88
  burials), which are worn as body decorations and in part Attached to cloth-
   ing, there remain only 187 burials having artifacts which might be con-
  sidered as having been placed in the graves intentionally, from a desire to
  make a burial offering (Webb, 1946).

  In respect to Carlson Annis:

   Of the 390 burials only 215 had any artifacts of any kind in association. Of
   these, 158 had only shell beads, gorgets, awls, clothes pins, or hairpins, or
   other artifacts which were worn as personal adornments, and which may be
   regarded as part of the ordinary clothing of the deceased. These were worn
   buried with the dead as a matter of course and with no intention to make a
   burial offering (Webb, 1950).

  There would seem to be an a priori assumption that ornaments are
inevitably some sort of equivalent of ten-cent-store baubles. In respect to
dise and tubular shell beads, most archeologists have tended to follow the
position taken by Speck (1919) and others that wampum              as a limited
medium of exchange can be explained by European influence.
   Speck assumes an evolution in both function and form for shell beads.
Of form he states, “the Indians . . . were not capable of drilling the finest
tubular beads until they had acquired metal drills from Europeans”
(1919, p. 6). He concludes that the disc shaped beads must have been the
earlier type. Of function, “Deducing from the material presented a possi-
bility or two concerning the state of development through which
wampum must have passed, it seems reasonable to suppose that wampum
of the disc type was originally used in simple lengths or strings function-
ing primarily as a means    of ornamentation,    then as instruments of cere-
mony, negotiation, and as mnemonic documents. The substitution of cy-
lindrical beads assuredly came later as an improvement”          (1919, p. 22).
There is a certain ambivalence,     however,    in Speck’s discussions of disc
beads throughout his monograph, and at times he seems to imply that
these beads may have been items of special value prior to the historic
period, as one might gather from the preceding quotation.
  If such an interpretation were tenable, one might well view skeptically
any claims that prehistoric tubular and dise shell beads, or other artifacts
of exotic shell, could be interpreted as having any sort of special value
attached thereto. But Slotkin and Schmitt (1949) in their reexamination
of the evidence relevant to wampum have demonstrated that stylistically
wampum can be traced from the late Archaic of some three to four
millennia ago through subsequent Woodland and Mississippian manifesta-
tions into historic times, and that the evidence from early documentary
186                                   Variability among Occupational Units
sources points to wampum’s having been used in eastern north America
at the time of European contact as a limited medium of exchange for such
diverse purposes as bride price, remuneration for special services, com-
pensation for injury, and in ritual gift exchange.
  Having established that there is substantial basis for postulating au-
tocthonous systems of limited media of exchange in eastern North Ameri-
ca in early historic times, and the fact that in late Archaic times there
were classes of artifacts that sort contextually according to their functions,
the raw materials from which they were made, and the remoteness of the
sources of those materials, it would be interesting to compare the contexts
of artifacts from sites pertaining to the cultures cited by Slotkin and
Schmitt in their wampum study with those of the Indian Knoll Culture to
see to what extent the contexts of historic artifact categories and raw
materials correspond to or differ from those of the Archaic sites. Unfor- .
tunately, historic sites with both large midden excavations and burial
samples are unavailable in the literature for the critical areas of the
Northeast and the Atlantic coastal areas, and we shall turn instead to the
Hardin Site (Hanson, 1966), an early historic component of the Fort
Ancient Culture located on the Ohio River in Kentucky. The bulk of the
midden materials at the Hardin Site can be assigned to the aforemen-
tioned culture, although the presence of eighteen sherds of Watson cord-
marked and Watson plain, which tended to be concentrated in a small
area of the site (Hanson, 1966, p. 109), along with some fifty stemmed
and notched projectile points (Hanson, 1966, Fig. 50) indicate minor
utilization of the area by earlier Woodland and Archaic groups. Both the
paucity of the earlier artifacts and the diversity of their types point to
little more than utilization of the area for small and temporary encamp-
ments over a period of several thousand years. Hence, we doubt that
debris from the earlier occupations could appreciably affect the reliability
of our sample and, of course, none of the material specifically assignable
to the earlier components has been included in the calculation of percent-
ages. Moreover, unless special preservation factors were present, we
should be very surprised if any of the burials or artifacts made from
organic materials could pertain to the Archaic occupations of this open
site, particularly since there seems to be no indication of shell midden
zones or lenses assignable to an Archaic occupation.
   Hanson assigns the site to the Shawnee and estimates the dates of
occupancy as ranging from 1500 to 1675 a.p. Limited contact with a
distribution network involving European trade goods is shown by the
presence of brass artifacts, but Hanson (1966, p. 175) argues convinc-
ingly that “The European brass fragments and artifacts found at the
Hardin Village Site were probably the result of trade with other Indians,
who acted as intermediaries, rather than directly with Europeans.” Thus
we assume that the traditional precontact values of the Fort Ancient
people still prevailed during the period of occupancy of the Hardin Site,
since little evidence exists for any profound change in the way of life of
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                                 187
the village inhabitants during their residence at the Hardin Site, with
their indirect contacts with the outer world of the European settlers being
expressed only in the appearance of a few ornaments of brass.
   When the contexts of the artifacts from midden and burial association
at the Hardin Site are listed (Table 2), the parallels between the historic
site and the prehistoric Archaic sites are remarkable. But again we must
note that there is some ambiguity as to the source of the raw materials for
the shell artifacts. Some are clearly of marine origin as specified in the
text (Marginella beads, large barrel-shaped beads, rectangular gorgets,
engraved shell gorgets, pear-shaped gorgets, conch columella pendants),
others appear from the illustrations to be local riverine mollusks (“hoes,”
spoons, and possibly the shell scrapers),while still a third group cannot
be identified specifically as to source from either the text or the illustra-
tions (disc beads, small barrel-shaped beads, circular gorgets, diamond-
shaped gorgets, three-holed gorgets, imitation claw pendants, tear-shaped
pendants,     rectangular       pendants,    and an    engraved     mollusk).     Many,    or
most, of the last group may well be marine shell, however, since we have
rarely seen examples of such ornaments in the Midwest that were manu-
factured from local mollusks, and we shall assume for the present that the
Hardin Site artifacts correspond to the Midwestern norms.

                Table 2.    Context of Artifacts at the Hardin Site
                                                       Percentage   Percentage    Percentage
General Utility Tools                       Quantity   | Midden      Pits, etc.     Burials
Chert Scrapers                                297          89            4             fl
Scrapers, Shell                                  3        67           =             33
Leaf-shaped Knives                             19         74             5           21
Trianguloid Knives                              9         56            ll           33
Circular Knives                                 3        100           —_            —
Lunate Knives                                   %,       100           —             —
Hammerstones                                   15         60           13            27
Disc Choppers                                   6        100           —             _
Weapons
Projectile points:
  Fine Triangular                             702         83               6         11
  Crude Triangular                            228         87               6          7
  “Tear-shaped”                                 8        100           _—            _
  Antler                                       42         81            12            4
Bone Fishhooks                                  8         62            13           25
Fabricating and Processing Equipment
Bipointed Drills                               42         88               5          a
Flaring Based Drills                           17         83               6         11
Stone Picks                                     1        100           —             —
Sandstone Saw                                   il       100           —             —
                                               29 |       87           10             3
Whetstones
Splinter Awls                                  64         75           1l            14
Turkey Bone Awls            ;                  32         78             9           13

                                                                       (Continued overleaf)
188                                      Variability among Occupational Units
         (Table 2.—Continued)
                                                Percentage   Percentage    Percentage
Fabricating and Processing         Quantity     | Midden      Pits, etc.    Burials
 Equipment
Deer Bone Awls                           18        83           17            —
Antler Chisels                           19        90            5             '5,
Antler Punches                           22        ae            5            18
Bone Punches and Needles                 12        92           —_             8
Racoon Penis Bone Punches                 5        40           20            40
Bone Flakers                              6        67            a            33
Gouges or Beamers                       143        90             6            4
Antler Scrapers                           8        62            13           25
Pottery Spindle Whorls?                 196       100           —             —
Sherd Pottery Smoothers                 145       100           _—            —
Pottery Anvil                             il      100           oe            —_
Domestic Equipment
“Anvils” (pitted manos)                  11        64            18           18
Grinding Stones                           5        40            40           20
Shell Spoons                             25        —             88           12
Pottery Pestles                          42       100            —            =
Pottery Spoon                             1       100            =            ==
Pottery Cup                               1       100            —            _
Woodworking Equipment
Celts                                    65        86                5         9
Beaver Incisor Chisels                    3       100            —            —
Digging Equipment
Stone Hoes                                4        25            25           50
Shell Hoes                                2)       50            —            50
ORNAMENTS
Bone:
  Pendants                                6         50           —            50
  Drilled Dog or Wolf Teeth         :    66        36            14           50
  Drilled Bear Teeth                     ili}      82            18           —
  Drilled Elk Teeth                        il      —_            —           100
  Beads (tubular, bone)                 211        74            10           16
  Beads (barrel-shaped)                 147        30              1          69
  Collar                                   1      100            —_           oo
  Pins                                     9       Shy           oy           56
Pottery:
   Pendants                                I      100            —            —_
   Ear Plug                                il      —_           100           —
Ground Stone:
  Pendants                                9         78           22           —_
  Gorgets                                 2         50           —            50
Shell:
  Pendants      (claw)                   54           a          —            93
  Pendants      (geometric )              3        100           —            —
  Conch Columella Pendant                1          =            —_           100
  Gorgets (plain, mask, and engraved)  60             3          —             97
  Beads (barrel shaped)               214           —            =            100
  Disk Beads                          765             x          —_—         99.6
  Marginella Beads                    336             x          —           99.7
  Engraved Mollusk                       1         100           —             a
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                                   189
         ( Table 2.—Continued )
                                                      Percentage   Percentage    Percentage
Copper:                                    Quantity   | Midden      Pits, etc.     Burials
  Pendants                                       1        _—           —            100
  Beads (rolled)                              120           2          —             98
  Beads (flattened)                              5        20           —             80
  Bracelets                                     2         —            —           100
  Tubes                                         9         22           —             78
Brass:
  Beads    (rolled)                            28        a            —            100
  Beads    (flattened)                         22        —            —            100
   Bracelets                                     1       —            —_           100
   Tubes                                        4        —            —            100
  Coils                                         9        —                x             x
  Wire Fragments                                2       100           —             _—
Ceremonial Equipment
Stone    Pipes                                 23        Ti           —_            23
Pottery Pipes                                   5       100           —             ==
Bone Rasps                                      2        50           50            —
Whistles     or Flutes                          1        89           iol           —-
Pottery Rattles                                 1       100           —             oe
Pottery Effigies                                3       100           —             —
Skull Cap Ladle                                 1        a           100            —
Recreational Equipment
Discoidals                                      4        75           —             25
Drilled Deer Toes                               2       100           —             —
Bone Gaming Pieces                           113         wil          12            107

Miscellaneous
Stone Balls                                     1       100           —_—           ——
Altered Concretions                             2       100           —             _
Drilled Terrapin Carapace                       1       100           _             _—
Unworked Copper Scrap                           1       100           —             _
Pottery Balls                                   1       100           —             —
Pottery Rings                                   1       100           —             —
x = Quantities not specifically assigned



  As Table 2 shows, items that correspond to our previously defined Class
I artifacts rarely occur in any numbers outside of the general midden,
while Class III artifacts, which are limited at this particular Fort Ancient
site entirely to ornaments, rarely appear in other than burial context.
Hanson is led to remark of shell artifacts in general that “Of a total of
1,464 shell artifacts, 35.1 percent of the nonceramic artifacts, only sixteen
came from the general midden. Significantly, nearly all were for decora-
tive purposes” (1966, pp. 155-56). Once more, a remarkable dichotomy
in context can be shown to exist between artifacts of imported marine
shell and more obviously utilitarian objects such as the 702 fine
triangular points (83 per cent in the midden, 11 per cent with burial),
the 297 chert scrapers (89 per cent in the midden, 7 per cent with burials Ds
190                               Variability among Occupational Units
and the 145-pottery smoothers (100 per cent in the midden). And, as in
the Indian Knoll Culture sites, a considerable contrast also exists within
the category of ornaments between those of local raw materials such as
bone, pottery, and stone and those made from exotic raw materials,
whether they be marine shell, copper, or brass. Or one might note the
contrast between the contexts of mussel shell spoons (12 per cent in
burial association) and those of marine shell pendants, gorgets, and
beads, which for most types range from 93 per cent to 100 per cent in
burial association.
  There   are,   as   one   might   anticipate,   anomalies   and    inconsistencies
within some of the categories of raw materials. For example, one should
note the high frequency of the 147 barrel-shaped bone beads in burial
association (69 per cent) and the midden linkage of the three geometric
shell pendants (100 per cent) or the two pieces of brass wire (100 per
cent). Notably, as with the geometric shell pendants and the brass wire,
many of the anomalies involve artifacts that are rare or unique at the site,
thus making it difficult to assess whether we are dealing with chance or
accidental disposition of the artifacts rather than with the patterned social
behavior inferrable from the artifacts represented both by large numbers
and wide distribution within the site.
   While the contextual patterns of Class I and Class III artifacts are very
similar for both the Indian Knoll Culture and Hardin                sites, there is a
considerable divergence in respect to Class II artifacts. Consistently at the
Hardin Site, pipes, rasps, flutes, rattles, etc., appear predominantly in the
midden, although among these items, only pipes could be considered as
anything other than exceedingly rare. We shall not even attempt to de-
cide whether the disparities arise from a faulty assignment of artifacts to
the category of ceremonial in this site of the Fort Ancient Culture, a shift
from ceremonial to more secular associations of such items, or sampling
errors that might arise from special disposition of ceremonial equipment
beyond the village peripheries or, even, the possibility that such equip-
ment might be associated only with the larger and more specialized Fort
Ancient towns and villages. (At this point, one might raise the question as
to where such known items of historic Shawnee ceremonial equipment as
turtle shell rattles are in this putatively Shawnee site. Was this musical
instrument with its millennia-old record in eastern North America [Winter,
1968] an innovation among the Shawnee within the historic period, or is
sampling error a factor, or should the evidence be reviewed for the as-
signment of the Fort Ancient Culture village to the Shawnee?) The prob-
lems raised by the contextual disparities between the two cultures in
respect to Class II (ceremonial) artifacts go far beyond the purposes of
the present analysis, however. Suffice it to say that for the categories that
do concern us the parallels between the proveniences of artifacts manu-
factured from local raw materials and from exotic, imported raw materi-
als are such that they suggest similar attitudes towards these commodities
on the part of the late Archaic Indian Knoll Culture and the proto-historic
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic         191
and historic Fort Ancient Culture, although we cannot infer any direct
continuity in such attitudes during the intervening centuries of Woodland
occupations in the Kentucky area of the Ohio Valley.
   Obviously, though, the interpretations of Slotkin and Schmitt on the
context of marine shell, copper, and brass in sites of the Fort Ancient
Culture cannot be used to verify our own conclusions about the value of
marine shell and copper in the Indian Knoll Culture. All that can be said
is that our interpretations do not conflict with data from the early historic
period prior to the time that acculturation had seriously modified the use
of wampum as a limited medium of exchange, or with historic records
that report marine shell as an item of considerable value.
   Nor do we go so far as to propose that assignment of special value to
marine shell in the Indian Knoll Culture carries with it an implication of
usage as a medium of exchange, although we should not be particularly
surprised had it served such a function. All too frequently, the Archaic
peoples, who were greatly diversified culturally through space and time,
are treated as though they were a homogeneous array of hunters and
gatherers, and as though they were idiots savants capable only of chang-
ing styles of artifacts, producing an occasional nicely ground piece of
stone, continuously foraging for a precarious and uncertain subsistence,
and in general doing little beyond surviving as noble and unspoiled primi-
tives. The complex technology and way of life of both the Indian Knoll
and Riverton Cultures belie such an interpretation, and we should be very
much surprised if the level of complexity was not close to that of succeed-
ing eastern cultures prior to the advent of cultures of the Mississippian
Pattern.
  But to move from pejorative declamation to more productive considera-
tions, if we   are correct   in our assumptions   about the special value of
marine shell imported from Florida and coastal areas of the Southeast and
copper from the Great Lakes area, there remains the problem of establish-
ing techniques for estimating the comparative values of the various cate-
gories of artifacts. One way would be to construct a rough scale of values
for shell and copper artifacts in terms of the amounts of raw material
contained therein. Such a scale is defective, of course, in that we have no
way at present of estimating the accretion of value that may result from
the expenditure of labor in the manufacturing process or of ascertaining
the value that may accrue through such factors as the associations and
ownership of the specimen. And in historic exchange systems, such as the
kula ring, the value of a particular shell item depended in no small part
on the history and associations of the shell item in its exchange circuit.
Nor have we worked out experimentally the precise quantities of various
artifacts that could be manufactured from shells of different size, so that
our ranking will be rather more subjective than it should be.
   Another problem has been adequate identification of the raw materials
used in the manufacture of the many shell artifacts listed in Table 3.
For example, Webb states in his discussion of small disc beads that
192                                          Variability among Occupational Units
“Seemingly large conchs were cut into strips of the desired width. These
in turn were cut into squares, and then these squares were drilled, cen-
trally. From these, the disc beads were formed” (1946, p. 137). But there
is no way of ascertaining whether all such beads were manufactured from
conch, or whether local mussel shell was used for some. Webb’s statement
on composite shell atlatl wieghts also leads to difficulties in the interpre-
tation: “composite shell weights made of bivalve shells, or sections of
conch shells, were worked into prismoidal forms having straight edges, or
convex edges like the varied stone forms” (1950a, p. 89). But actual
identification for individual composite weights is rare. For better or
worse, we shall treat disc-shell beads as derivative from conch, and shall
drop composite shell weights from our analysis as an item too surrounded
by ambiguity.
  For some items, such as shell discs and rings there is rarely any infor-
mation one way or the other, and these will also be omitted from the
analysis.

  Table 3. Large Shell Artifacts in Sites of the Indian Knoll Culture

                     Artifact                 Depth in Feet             Context
      Barrett:
      Marine gastropod gorgets (4)                15          YA, Male burial 1
      Marine gastropod gorgets (4)                1.5         YA, Male burial 44
      Drilled conch rectangle                     3.1         YA, Male burial 47
      Tubular shell beads (3)                     3.9         YA, Male burial 77
      Marine gastropod gorgets (4)                1.8         YA, Male burial 100
      Marine gastropod gorgets (4)                1.6         YA, Male burial 116
      Tubular conch columella beads    (6)        2.2         C, Female? burial 136
      Conch columella (32)              ‘         nS          Ad., Male burial 156
      Conch shell pendant 4                       2.3         il        ?   burial 157
      Tubular shell beads (2)                     lee         YA, Male burial 215
      Broken conch shell (cup?)                   1.6         Th     ?  burial 372
      Conch shell cup                             ail         YA, Male burial 381
      Shell (unident.) pendants (2)               DAS}        YA, Female burial 216
      Ward:
      Shell atlatl weight > *                       2         A, Male burial 118
      Tubular shell beads b (2)                     P         A, Female burial 163
      Conch gorget                                  ?         A, Female burial 188
      Shell (unident.)   disc *                     P         A, Female burial 234
      Conch gorget                                  P         C,    ?       burial 383
      Kirkland:
      Conch gorgets (2) ¢                           ie        A, Female burial 12
      Conch pendant                                 g         A, Female burial 12
      Carlson Annis:
      Triangular conch pendants (3)               2.4         Ad.,    ?    burial 44
      Tubular shell beads 4 (X)                   6.3         Te        burials59
      Tubular shell beads (X)                     all         Ce? Se burialstioil
      Conch pendants (5)                          3.0         YA, Male burial 146
      Tubular shell beads (2)                     5.5         C, Male? burial 177
      Perforated shell (unident.) disc d *        5.5         C, Male? burial 177
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                                193
     ( Table 3.—Continued )
                    Artifact             Depth in Feet        Context
   Shell (unident.) pendant                  5.5       C, Male? burial 177
   Tubular shell beads (X)                             Ad.,    ? burial 190
   Tubular shell beads (X)                             I, Male burial 220
   Conch dise (2)                                      I, Male? burial 229
   Shell (unident.) pendants (2)                       I, Male? burial 229
   Conch ear plugs (2)                                 I, Male? burial 229
   Tubular shell beads (X)                             C, Female? burial 230
   Conch pendants (X)                                  Ad.       ?          burial 236
   Conch dise pendant                                  Ad.,          ?
                                                                   burial 236
   Tubular conch bead                                  YA, Male burial 256
   Shell ear plugs (2)                                 Ad.,   ? burial 274
   Conch ear plugs (2)                                 i      ? burial 290
   Shell (unident.) discs (2) *                        ii     ? burial 290
   Shell (unident.) atlatl weight *                    Es        ?         burial 290
   Conch pendants (5)                                  ie        ?         burial 309
   Conch shell (bead?)                                 The    ?  burial 309
   Conch (Fasciolaria gigantea) cup                    Ad.,   ? burial 335
   Conch ear plugs (2)                                 Ce      ? burial 341
   Shell (unident.) pendant                            AD.,    ? burial 350
   Shell (unident.) pendants (2)                       C, Female burial 360
    Conch ear plug (1)                                 ACs         Duras.
   Conch   pendant                                     Ad.,    ?   burial 385

   Read:
   Tubular shell beads ¢ (6)                           YA, Male burial 1
   Conch section ( gorget?)                            iF     ? burial 24
   Conch gorgets      (3)                              SA, Male burial 66
   Conch gorget                                        J.        ?         burial 70
   Chiggerville:
   Conch ear plugs (2)                                 ug.       ?         burial 58
   Conch gorget                                        1;        ?         burial 60
   Conch composite atlatl weight *                     qT;       ?         burial 60
   Conch gorget                                        I,        ? burial 61
   Shell (unident.) pendantf                           I      ?   burial 76
   Tubular shell beads (9)                             C, Male? burial 30
   Conch gorgets (2)                                   J, Male           burial 25
   Shell (unident.) pendants (6)                       A, Female burial 43
   Shell (unident.) rings (11)               OL        Ad., Female burial 47
   Conch   gorget                                      A, Male burial 63
   Tubular shell beads (80)                            A, Female burial 79
   Shell (unident.) pendant                       vt
                                                  Uy
                                                  Vw
                                                  Vv
                                                  UU   A, Female burial 73

   Indian Knoll:
   Shell (unident.) pendant                            I, Male? burial 33
   Conch pendants (2)                                  YA, Male burial 55
   Shell (unident. ) atlatl weight *                   Y, Female burial 56
   Shell (unident. ) atlatl weight *        wp L
                                             DA
                                              Go
                                              00
                                              Hy       Y, Male burial 58
   Shell (unident.) pendant                            SA, Male burial 123
   Marine shell atlatl weight *                        MA, Male burial 218
   Shell (unident.) pendants (4)                       Ad., Male burial 236
   Conch (Busycon perversum) container      0bp
                                             by
                                            WO
                                            to bu      Ad., Male burial 236

                                                        (Continued overleaf)
     194                                   Variability among Occupational Units
     (Table 3.—Continued )
                   Artifact                  Depth in Feet        Context
   Tubular shell beads (38)                      3.0       YA, Female burial 237
   Conch cup                                     3.0      YA, Female burial 237
   Fasciolaria gigantea (Kiener)   shell         3.0      YA, Female burial 237
   Curved shell (unident. ) pendants             4,1      I, Female? burial 257
    Conch (Busycon perversum) cup                8.3      YA, Male burial 310
   Tubular shell beads (14)                      2.0      Ad., Female burial 315
   Conch pendants (3)                            2.0      Ad., Female burial 315
   Conch pendant                                 2.1      I, Male? burial 337
    Shell (unident.) pendants (4)                Sis      I, Male? burial 339
   Conch   shell                                 ol        C, Female? burial 354
   Conch pendants (4)                            2.1      Ad., Male burial 395
   Curved shell (unident.) ornament              1.9      Nb, Male? burial 434
   Conch shells (cups?) (2)                      2.9      G, Male burial 439
   Shell (unident.) pendants (2)                 6.8      I, Female? burial 445
   Tubular shell beads (2)                       6.8      I, Female? burial 445
   Shell (unident.) rings (3) *                  6.8      I, Female? burial 445
   Tubular conch beads (2)                       3.2      C, Male? burial 503
    Conch pendant                                rail     I,   Female? burial 512
    Conch pendant                                4.6       C, Female burial 515
    Conch earplugs (2)                           4.6      C, Female burial 515
    Tubular shell beads (4)                      4.7      I, Male? burial 517
    Composite shell (unident.) atlatl weight *   6.0      YA, Female burial 560
    Composite shell (unident.) atlatl weight *   6.7      YA, Male burial 561
    Shell (unident.) ornaments (gorgets?) (2) 7.7         YA, Male burial 561
    Tubular shell beads (51)                  Salk        C, Female? burial 571
    Shell (unident. )rings (12) *             Sed         C, Female? burial 571
    Tusk shaped shell (unident. )
       ornaments (2)                             5.6       YA, Male burial 575
    Shell (unident. ) strip pendants (2)         4.9       I, Female? burial 579
    Conch strips (2)                     :       5.0       I, Male burial, 610
    Conch shell squares (33)                     5.0       I, Male burial, 610
    Large conch sections (2)                     5.0       I, Male burial, 610
    Curved shell (unident.) pendants (2)         Sys)      YA, Male burial 661
    Conch pendants (3)                           4.3       YA, Male burial 687
    Shell (unident.) pendants (2)                6.0       YA, Female burial 696
    End whorl (conch?) pendant                   15        YA, Male burial 697
    Tubular shell beads (3)                      Suri      YA, Female burial 708
    Tubular shell beads (6)                      oe        Nb, Female? burial 721
    Shell (unident.) pendants (2)                BS)       Nb, Male? burial 729
    Tubular shell beads (7)                      2.9       Nb, Male? burial 734
    Curved shell (unident.) pendants (2)         4.3       YA, Male burial 744
    Shell (unident.) disc, perforated *          Bil       YA, Female burial 761
    Conch gorgets (4)                            2.2       I, Female? burial 767
    Conch gorgets (4)                         3.4          Ad., Male burial 769
    Tusk shaped shell (unident.) pendants (1) 2.2          YA, Male burial 827
    Composite shell (unident. ) shell
       atlatl weight *                        7.6          YA, Male burial 853

    * Used only as specified in text.
    a. The list on p. 20 (Webb and Haag, 1947) notes five pendants from five burials
and a pair of tooth-like shell pendants from a single part Their trait list on p. 42
lists six long, slender conch pendants. One pendant is listed for Burial 157, and
apparently the pair of tooth-like pendants are the pair listed for Burial 216. This
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                             195
leaves four conch pendants from four burials unaccounted for, and the possibility that
a sixth was found in the midden.
  b. Tabulation of burial artifacts on p. 84 (Webb and Haag, 1940) also lists shell
atlatl weight for Burial 438. No mention is made of this item in the description of the
burial on p. 438, and only one shell atlatl weight is listed in the trait list on p. 104.
Note also that the same trait list gives five tubular shell beads, but no tubular bone
beads. Two tubular shell beads are noted in the burial list, along with two tubular
bone beads ( Burial 406). It is possible that these should have been shell beads.
  c. Three conch gorgets are mentioned in the trait list on p. 104 (Webb and Haag,
1940), so there may be an additional gorget from the midden or some other context.
  d. As usual, there are inconsistencies in counts of artifacts with burials at the site.
The trait list on p. 305 (Webb, 1950a) lists two large conch shell discs and one
perforated conch shell disc. The burial list has a conch disc pendant (Burial 236), a
perforated shell disc (Burial 177), two conch discs (Burial 229), and two shell discs
(Burial 290). And the same trait list on p. 304 mentions 16 strings of short tubular
shell beads and three strings of long tubular shell beads. Of these, only seven could be
located in the burial listings. Probably the others were recorded simply as shell beads
in the burial tabulations.                                                              ;
   e. Twenty-one tubular shell beads are listed in burial association in the trait list on
p- 383 (Webb, 1950b), but only the six with Burial 1 can be identified as such on the
burial tabulation sheets.
   f. All eight of the pendants from the site were in burial association. The three
triangular pendants and three tusk shaped pendants illustrated in Fig. 15 (Webb and
Haag, 1939) are marine shell (ibid., p. 25). So, at least six of the eight pendants with
the burials must be of marine shell.
   g. As with the other sites, there are many discrepancies in the tabulations and
descriptions of artifacts for the Indian Knoll Site. They are too numerous to record
here. Wherever possible, we have corrected errors in the burial description. For
example, the description of Burial 721 (Webb,     1946, p. 196) does not include the six
tubular beads that are illustrated in Fig. 23C and mentioned in the description of the
illustration on p. 207. In the case of Burial 237, the description mentions only cut
conch shell, but illustrated in Fig. 25B is a conch shell cup and in Fig. 30 a Fascio-
laria gigantea (Kiener) shell, both of which are mentioned on p. 213 in the discussion
of the illustrated artifacts from Burial 237. Many similar corrections were made by
checking all references that we could find to a particular burial.

   In the case of other items, where adequate identification is not pro-
vided in the trait lists or burial tabulations, internal textual evidence is
sufficient to warrant the assumption of marine shell as the raw material.
For example, tubular shell beads are very rarely given adequate classifica-
tion. But Webb (1946) states that, “these were made from the columella
of large conch shells.” Similar statements pertaining to perforated or
notched strip pendants, curved pendants, and tooth-shaped pendants
both in the Indian Knoll (Webb, 1946) and Chiggerville (Webb and
Haag, 1939) reports permit a similar assumption about the use of marine
shells as raw material. In the latter report, Webb and Haag comment
that, “The shell artifacts are, with very few exceptions, made from sec-
tions of marine conchs.” There are also supplementary indentifications in
figure descriptions, artifact analyses, and discussions of individual burials.
   Other difficulties have arisen from discrepancies in quantitative data
and the use of two or more referrents for a single type of artifact in
various reports. For “conch” shell, we have tried to resolve some of the
quantitative discrepancies by internal analysis of the textual material,
where illustrations, detailed discussions of features, or of particular cate-
196                                  Variability among Occupational Units
gories of artifacts have permitted resolution of the problem in one way or
another. Insofar as possible, we have also tried to standardize terminology
after having checked illustrations and descriptions of the artifacts in ques-
tion. Hence, in Table 3 the reader will not always find an item designated
by the term given to it in the original burial description. There remains a
residue of conflicting quantitative statements that could not be resolved,
and many of these are noted in notes appended to Table 3. Some items in
the table could not be used simply because of vague description or frag-
mentary condition of the artifacts; for example, Burials 354 and 439 at
Indian Knoll simply have the notation “conch shell.” It is impossible to
decide whether these are whole shells, cups, or smaller artifacts.
   Nor has it been possible to use marine shells such as Marginella and
Olivella, which are rare in sites of the Indian Knoll Culture, being re-
ported only for Carlson Annis and Indian Knoll. Of the fourteen strings of
Marginella reported for Carlson Annis (Webb, 1950a, p. 304), it has been
possible to identify only ten strings in burial association (Burials 59, res
103, 130, 155, 230, 233, 234, 266, and 362), and for none of these is the
quantity given. Of the four groups reported for Indian Knoll (Webb,
1946, p. 235), only the one group of Marginella apicina (Menke) in
association with Burial 571 is mentioned. While data are provided for the
one string of Olivella beads at Indian Knoll (Burial 1), no indication is
given in the Carlson Annis report as to which burials were associated with
the three strings of Olivella mentioned.
   One item of interest that was noted during the checking of the data on
the associations of Marginella and Olivella is that none of them has been
reported with adults. At Carlson Annis, Marginella beads were found
with one newborn, two infants, three children, three juveniles, and one
adolescent, while at Indian Knoll, the association is with a child. The one
record for Olivella at Indian Knoll is with a newbom. It would be inter-
esting to see if this pattern is borne out by the other unreported strings in
burial context. (In passing, another shell item, not of marine origin,
should be mentioned as a possible item of trade and special value at the
Indian Knoll site. This was a group of beads made from Lithasia obovata
[Say], riverine snail species having as its present-day habitat rivers of the
Tennessee region. The necklace was in association with an infant—an
interesting parallel to our previous observations on Olivella and Margi-
nella.)
   But at best, the following attempt at interpreting the distribution of
items of special value in the Indian Knoll Culture must be understood as
an exercise in method, rather than any definitive statement on the subject
of the context and quantitative occurrence of imported marine shell
within the culture. Such can be accomplished only with thorough re-
analysis of the original collections made by Webb and his associates.
   Our attention will perforce be centered upon the shells loosely desig-
nated as conchs by archeologists, including whelks such as Busycon per-
versum and band shells such as Fasciolaria gigantea (Kiener), for which.
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic          197
abundant specific identification or good presumptive evidence is avail-
able. For such shells and their derivatives, the following rough scale of
ranking by arbitrary points is proposed:
      150 points—Whole shells
      100 points—Shell cups and atlatl weights
       50 points—Shell gorgets and rectangles
       25 points—Shell pendants, earplugs, tusk-shaped ornaments, discs
       10 points—Tubular shell beads and shell rings
        5 points—Unmodified columella
        ? points—Disc shell beads

Of course some items such as gorgets vary from examples that are simply
cut to shape, the edges ground off, and perforated for suspension, to rare
examples that are engraved with geometric motifs. The latter might have
greater value than the former, but we are unable to allow for variables of
this type. And, ultimately, we are unable to decide upon a relative point-
ranking for disc shell beads, since these have a range from small to large,
and are not usually so distinguished in the burial tabulations. Considera-
tion of the ranking of disc beads in our arbitrary scale must await clarifi-
cation of the size range and quantitative disposition of these beads.
   One might also question the appropriateness of assigning the same
values to derivatives of both Busycon perversum and Fasciolaria gigantea,
in view of the disparities in size. This issue will be avoided for the present
on the pragmatic grounds that the application of our value scale will not
be affected to a significant degree by such a potential variable, there
being only two examples of Fasciolaria, one with an adult female at
Indian Knoll, the other with an adolescent of unknown sex at Carlson
Annis.
     Our first application of the scale will be to an analysis of burials which
have been definitely identified as to sex, with the results as given in Table
4.
     The range for males was from 10 to 200 units of shell, with an average
of 98 units. For females, from 20 to 800 units, with an average of 185
units. The average for females is distorted, however, by the two burials
with extraordinary value ratings; if these were not included, the average
would be only 79 for females. Thus, while females could be associated
with quantities of marine shell far in excess of any male, as a rule they
were less frequently provided with marine shell and, in terms of the
arbitrary value units, on a scale somewhat        less than that of males. For
example, of the 503 burials definitely identifiable as to sex (children and
adults) at Indian Knoll, 14 of the 283 males (4.9 per cent) had large
marine shell items in association, while 5 of the 220 females (2.3 per
cent) were so accompanied. (If one were to assume that all the items
from Indian Knoll were marine shell in Table 3, the respective figures
would be 17 [6.0 per cent] for males and 8 [3.6 per cent] for females.)
Or in respect to disc shell beads which have not been used in our previous
198                                         Variability among Occupational Units

            Table 4. Distribution of Shell Items, Value-scaled

                 MALES                                         FEMALES
                 Burial     Age     Value                       Burial   Age     Value
 Site             No.       Group   Units      Site               No.    Group   Units
 Barrett             il      YA      200       Ward                163      A      20
 Barrett            44       YA      200       Ward                188     A       50
 Barrett            47       YA       50       Kirkland             12     A      125
 Barrett           100       YA      200       Carlson Annis       360     Cc      50
 Barrett           116       YA      200       Chiggerville         43     A      150
 Barrett           156       Ad.     160       Chiggerville         79     A      800
 Barrett           381       YA      100       Chiggerville         73     A       25
 Barrett            att      YA       30       Indian Knoll        237    YA      630
 Barrett           215       YA       20       Indian Knoll        315    Ad.     215
 Carlson Annis     146       YA      [2S       Indian Knoll        SIS     CG      75
 Carlson Annis     256       YA        10      Indian Knoll        696    YA       50
 Read                 1      YA       60       Indian Knoll        708    YA       30
 Read               66       SA      150                                  Total 2,220
 Chiggerville        25        J     100
 Chiggerville        63       A       50
 Indian Knoll        55      YA"      50
 Indian Knoll       123      SA       25
 Indian Knoll       236      Ad.     200
 Indian Knoll       310      YA      100
 Indian Knoll       395      Ad.     100
 Indian Knoll       439       (G     200?
 Indian Knoll       561      YA      100?
 Indian Knoll       bytes    YA        50
 Indian Knoll       661      YA        50
 Indian Knoll       687      YA       75
 Indian Knoll       697      YA     3 DES
 Indian Knoll       744      YA        50
 Indian Knoll       769      Ad.     200
 Indian Knoll       827      YA       25
                             Total 2,855


computations, at Indian Knoll 48 of the 283 males (16.6 per cent) were
associated with these artifacts, contrasting with the 26 females out of 229
(11.8 per cent).
   There are also distinctions between the sexes (children and adults) in
other respects. Again using only burials definitely identified as to sex,
males tend to be associated with the largest items such as gorgets (27 of
the 30) and cups (3+ of the 4+). Males are also exclusively linked to
items such as conch columella and tusk-shaped pendants, while the items
unique to older females include conch earplugs and shell discs. A prepon-
derance of the tubular shell beads (137 of the 149) also occurred with
female burials. The only items divided about equally between the sexes
were the triangular and strip pendants, with 19 of the 35 associated with
males.
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic              199
   Similar procedures can be adopted for creating an arbitrary value scale
for copper artifacts. However, since there is no way of correlating the
marine shell and copper scales, the ranking units for copper will be desig-
nated as C-units.
                       200 C-units—Expanded-center gorgets
                       100 C-units—Small ornaments
                        50 C-units—Awls, pins, and needles
                        25 C-units—Large copper beads
                        10 C-units—Small copper beads
The arbitrariness of the scale must again be emphasized, since the neces-
sary research for determining actual quantities of copper in the artifacts
and the amount of labor involved in their manufacture has not been
performed.
   Before continuing our discussion of copper artifacts from the sites of
the Indian Knoll Culture, we must pause to examine problems recently
raised by Rolingson and Schwartz (1966) in their discussion of copper in
Kentucky sites. First of all, let us mark the notable differences between
the types of copper artifacts associated with the Indian Knoll sites and
those of northern cultures such as Old Copper and Frontenac. At the
latter sites, utilitarian implements predominate, while at the former, orna-
ments constitute 69 per cent of the thirteen copper artifacts from sites
along the Green River. (The percentage may be even higher if the two
pins from Barrett are actually ornaments rather than items of utilitarian
function. )Even in the nearby drainage of the Tradewater River, where
sites such as Morris (Rolingson and Schwartz, 1966) and Parrish (Roling-
son and Schwartz, 1966; Webb, 1951) produce copper, the emphasis on
ornaments is noticeable, with three copper gorgets and three sheet copper
fragments having been reported from Morris and a copper pin from
Parrish. Although the relationship of these latter very multi-component
sites to the Indian Knoll Culture    is obscure, the occurrence   of the ex-
panded-center copper gorgets at the Morris Site on the Tradewater River
and the Barrett and Indian Knoll sites on the Green River is interesting,
since to the best of our knowledge this copper artifact is unknown outside
of the lower Ohio Valley and its environs. In addition to these and other
examples reported by Rolingson and Schwartz (1966) for that area, an-
other gorget of the same style is present in the Peithmann Collection in
The Museum of Southern Illinois University. Little is known about the
provenience of this specimen, a surface find, but it is from the drainage of
the Big Muddy River, a tributary of the Mississippi, which joins that river
not far above its confluence with the Ohio. Thus, the copper artifacts that
we are discussing consist of items that relate primarily to the supra-subsis-
tence sphere and include a gorget type that is very limited spatially in its
distribution.
   Rolingson and Schwartz remark on the restricted distribution pattern,
200                                   Variability among Occupational Units
but conclude that a local origin for the gorgets is doubtful. The objects
suggest sufficient leisure for their manufacture, leisure time which should
also be evident in other ways at the sites. The context in which ceremon-
ial copper objects are found in Middle Woodland also suggests differenti-
ations in social rank, again not otherwise manifest in the Green River
region. Copper, in an unworked      state, available through trade, has not
been found in western Kentucky sites. These factors, then, suggest that
the copper gorgets were trade items (1966, p. 90).
  The final conclusion does not necessarily follow. First of all, there is no
anthropological principle which permits the interpretation of the type and
degree of cultural productivity as a direct function of leisure time. A
successful Tiwi elder may produce elaborate grave posts and intricately
crafted songs and dances, but these and the remaining assignments of his
leisure time will produce little and leave less to mark the choices that he
has made in such expenditures for supra-subsistence activities. Within the
statement of the authors there is a reflection of the myth current among
archeologists that leisure time is not available in quantity to primitive
hunters and gatherers, and the corollary that once leisure time is available
to human groups, an inexorable advance toward the complex behavior of
the urbanized elements of the Old World oikoumene is inevitable. The
essential difference between hunters and gatherers and sedentary cultiva-
tors is in the pattern of availability of the leisure time, not its presence or
absence. Thus, hunters and gatherers may have their leisure available in
smaller, less predictable, discontinuous units than would be the case in
sedentary societies, but we suspect that there would have been quite a
sufficiency of leisure time to the Indian Knoll craftsmen in their richly
endowed environment for producing some dozen or so copper artifacts,
without, however, expecting them to use their leisure time in a much
more extravagant fashion than the craftsmen of the Old Copper Culture,
who may be lauded for their industriousness in hammering copper, but
who seem to have lacked any spectacular initiative in other areas of
cultural florescence.
   In respect to the second proposition in the argument of the authors,
both the relevance and the documentation are obscure. That is, the posit-
ing of differences of social rank for individuals in Middle Woodland
societies elsewhere, and the lack thereof for individuals in the Archaic
Green River societies in general upon the basis of artifact associations
depends upon gratuitous assumptions. Both Woodland burials in the
Midwest and late Archaic burials in the Green River Valley differ widely
in the quantity and quality of grave goods (including copper artifacts)
that are associated with individual burials. If the assumption is to be
made that copious quantities and/or particular types of grave goods indi-
cate social ranking in Woodland cultures, then the same assumption must
be extended to Archaic cultures. But since no rigorous criteria have been
defined for evaluating from archeological data the significance of differ-
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                  201
entials deriving from statuses within an egalitarian system and differenti-
als deriving from statuses within a ranked system, it would be best to
drop the entire subject until archeologists are prepared to cope with it
effectively and objectively.
   Anent the third proposition in the statement, if raw copper is a valued
and rare import, it is not particularly surprising that it is missing as an
element of the Kentucky middens. The quantity of raw diamonds in the
New York City dumps probably does not warrant the screening of these
cultural residues.
  Finally, we must comment on the context of copper at both the Morris
and Parrish sites, since the artifacts were recovered from general midden
situations rather than special contexts, and assignment to a specific cul-
ture is difficult. Does the variation in context at these sites invalidate our
conclusions about the special context of copper in sites of the Indian
Knoll Culture? First of all we shall observe that neither site is particularly
notable for the number of burials removed, there being 28 at Morris and
133 at Parrish, and preservation of burials and artifacts made from or-
ganic materials was not at all good at Parrish. In view of the very consid-
erable inventory of lithic Archaic artifacts at each site, there would seem
to be a deficiency of burials if the numbers present in sites of the Indian
Knoll Culture, where preservation of bone and other organic materials is
good, are any indication. Nor is it possible to tell how many of the twenty-
eight burials at Morris belong with the sizeable Woodland and Mississip-
pian occupations. We conclude that the evidence is such that the context
of copper in the Tradewater River sites neither confirms nor denies our
assignment of special value to copper, since the chances for inadequate
preservation and later disturbance of Archaic burials at Morris and Par-
rish are such that it is impossible to reach any conclusion as to whether
the copper was or was not originally present in special context.
   Of considerable importance is the observation by Rolingson and
Schwartz (1966) that the Archaic associations of at least the expanded-
center copper gorget with Burial 1 at the Barrett Site are clear. We shall
add that the depths of other burials with copper artifacts at Barrett (for
example, Burial 43) and Indian Knoll (for example, Burial 248) and the
sparseness of later components at these sites would also point to the
probability that these burials pertain to one of the Archaic components at
these sites. However, Rolingson and Schwartz conclude from the similar-
ities of the Archaic copper gorgets to counterparts in stone in Early and
Middle Woodland cultures, the absence        of similar ornaments in other
Archaic sites in eastern North America,      and the lack of experimental
prototypes in the sites of the Green River Valley, that the gorgets are
“potentially Woodland objects in Archaic burials ... [and that] .”. . an
Archaic economy may have continued to live in the Green River region of
Kentucky after the development of a Woodland subsistence in surround-
ing areas” (1966, p. 91). For a number of reasons, we are disinclined to
202                                 Variability among Occupational Units
accept the content of this analysis. First of all, we are not particularly
impressed with the similarity of the copper gorgets to the expanded-
center stone gorgets of the Adena or Scioto Traditions. As a second point,
it is questionable that experimental prototypes would be necessary. That
is, precisely how much skill is needed to hammer and anneal copper into
a simple geometric shape once the basic technique is known, particularly
given both the possibility of infinite re-hammering on initially unsatisfac-
tory attempts and the fact that Indian Knoll craftsmen were accustomed
to handling reasonably sophisticated geometric shapes in stone and shell?
(Or, for that matter, one might ask where are the prototypes of the stone-
expanded center gorgets of the Adena Tradition, if prototypes are an
important consideration—or the prototypes of most prehistoric styles in
eastern North America, Archaic or Woodland?) As a third point, while
the association of the expanded-center copper gorget can be demon-
strated for the Archaic Indian Knoll Culture, no such association can be
shown for any Early or Middle Woodland culture in the Midwest or any
other part of eastern North America. We should be forced to conclude
that if they were being manufactured by Woodland groups, they were
being produced as export items to satisfy the tastes in copper artifacts of
their still culturally “Archaic” neighbors. And, finally, no matter how poor
the dating of the Indian Knoll sites may be, there are certainly no carbon-
14 dates from high or low in the middens that point to contemporaneity
of the Indian Knoll Culture with the advent or subsequent duration of
any of the known Woodland cultures of the Midwest. Our conclusions are
that the expanded-center gorgets (and possibly the other copper artifacts
as well) were made by the Archaic craftsmen of the second or third
millennium B.c. for the use of their Archaic contemporaries, and that they
were produced in the environs of the lower Ohio Valley.
  To return to our basic theme, it must be observed that the dearth of
copper artifacts in the Indian Knoll sites (see Table 10) precludes the
formation of any very definite conclusions about the context of copper
within the Indian Knoll population. Only three individuals are identified
as to sex, all from Barrett, where males are associated with copper oma-
ments having a total rating of 300 C-units and a single female with a
needle rating at 50 C-units. Men may have had control of the bulk of the
copper, particularly ornaments, while women      may have been limited to
lesser quantities and utilitarian implements, but the foregoing data are
definitely inadequate for reaching a firm conclusion.
  Another   type of data    can   be treated   somewhat   more   extensively,
namely the age groups with which copper appeared (see Table 5).
Fifty per cent of all copper artifacts are seen to belong with the non-
productive, pre-adolescent portion of the population, as well as 45 per
cent of the value units. It seems unlikely that the association with the
former group can be on the basis of personal activities or contributions to
the welfare of the group through economic endeavors on an adequate
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                                          203
e       a     re
 Table 5. Copper Artifact Appearance
eSa a

             Age Group                  No. of Items       C-units                Type
           New born (0)                      0                 0           _
           Infants (2)                       3               300           Omaments
           Children     (2)                  2               200            Ormaments
           Adolescents (1)                   1                50            Utility tools
           Adults     (5)                    4               550            Ornaments and
                                                                            Utility tools


scale. A more likely explanation would be that the association reflects
ascribed status, whether that status be engendered by psychological fac-
tors, sociological factors or a combination of the two.
   A similar examination of age groups for large marine shell artifacts
gives the results shown in Table 6.

                                      Table 6. Shell Appearance

  Age Group                 No. of Items     Value Units                           Types
Newborn (4)                      16               205        Pendants, tubular beads
Infants (21)                     80+             1410+       Pendants, tubular beads, discs,
                                                                   earplugs, gorgets, atlatl
                                                                   weights, cups?
Children     (13)                89+             1420+        Pendants, tubular beads, gorgets,
                                                                   earplugs, cups?
Adolescents     (12)             76+             1270+       Pendants, tubular beads, gorgets,
                                                               earplugs, discs, columella, cups
Adults (34)                     195              3975        Pendants, tubular beads, gorgets,
                                                                   atlatl weights, whole shells,
                                                                cups


Again, the pre-adolescent group is seen to be associated with a very
sizeable quantity of marine shell, having had placed with them some 40.6
per cent of the total items, or 36.6 per cent of the value units attributed to
the shell items. Actually, the percentages are low, since minimal counts
and value units are used for four infants, one child, and two adolescents,
the exact counts not being given, and three juveniles associated with four
items and 150-point value units are not included because of the inade-
quacy of age-group assignment.
  The types of artifacts associated with the various age groups tend to be
very similar, although earplugs tend to occur predominantly with infants
and children, ten of the thirteen examples being with this latter group, the
remaining three with adolescents. No examples are known with adults.
On the other hand, conch shell cups may be entirely an adult item, with
the two specimens designated by the inadequate description “conch shell”
    204                                       Variability among Occupational Units
    as possibilities reflecting the association of cups with infants and children.
      Data on disc-shell beads at Indian Knoll, the only site with adequate
    counts for age groups, differ somewhat from the preceding pattern, but
    again show that pre-adolescents were also receiving their share of these
    artifacts.

                      Table 7. Disc-shell Bead Appearance

                              Age                 Age
                            Group in          Group with        Total
                           Population            Beads          Beads
          Age Group       (Percentage)        (Percentage)   (Percentage)    Bead Count*
Newborn      (12)              6.5                21.8            1.6              296
Infants      (46)             24.7                22.0          22.9              4223
Children     (13)              8.9                LET            6.8              1252
Adolescents (14)               6.1                26.9          33.9              6241
Adults       (58)             53.4                IPT           34.6              6366
Total       (143)             99.6               100.7          99.8             18378

“Note the gross disparity between totals derived here from burial associations and the
summary tabulations of artifacts, for Indian Knoll in Webb’s    (1946) report.



      While only a relatively small proportion of each age group was pro-
    vided with disc-shell beads, adolescents and pre-adolescents were more
    frequently so equipped than adults, and about a third of all beads (31.3
    per cent )were with the pre-adolescents.
       All of the quantitative data on copper, large shell artifacts, and disc-
    shell beads point to the same obvious fact. Wealth as expressed in these
    items was being removed constantly from the society through placement
    with members of age groups who during their life span could not have
    contributed effectively to its procurement, hence producing a constant
    deficit that would have to be met through the activities of productive
    members of the society above and beyond their own personal require-
    ments. This point will become more significant when we examine the
    cyclical patterns of shell accumulation and diminution in the last section
    of this paper.
_     For comparative     purposes,     one    might exanvine    the roughly      contem-
    poraneous Frontenac Culture of New York (Ritchie, 1945). Conch shell is
    not particularly plentiful at Frontenac, but some fourteen items of conch
    are recorded with burials at this site, all of which are the burials of
    children, adolescents, or adult females, with shell being conspicuously
    absent from adult male burials. Six of the fourteen shell artifacts (a
    container, a piece of worked shell, and four circular, perforated pend-
    ants) are associated with adult females, one with an adolescent (pend-
    ant), and seven with children (all pendants). In terms of the rating
    system which we have been using, adult females are associated with 215
Winter Archaic Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                 205
of the 415 units at the site, or 51.8 per cent; adolescents with 25 units, or 6
per cent; and children with 175 units, or 42.2 per cent. (There is also an
infant with an oyster shell pendant which has not been included in the
calculations.) Frontenac and Indian Knoll are alike in the proportion of
imported    marine   shell that is provided   for the pre-adolescent   burials,
but are quite different in the apparent exclusion of males from association
with such Beigaben at Frontenac. Of course, such an exclusion does not
mean that males played no role in the control of the resource, since the
public display of the ornaments often may be linked to females, the
procurement and distribution to males, who apparently receive their satis-
factions from the control of wealth, with females serving as the observ-
able symbols of that wealth—a procedure not without parallels in con-
temporary American society.
  Before attempting a final assessment of the significance of the preced-
ing data, it might be well to consider for the Indian Knoll Culture other
types of artifacts in burial context to see if further light can be thrown on
possible similarities and differences in status and role of the respective
sexes.
   To summarize—and disregarding unique artifacts—the only artifacts
solely associated with males definitely identified as to sex were axes,
cannon bone awls, fish hooks, groundhog incisors, antler drifts, flakers,
antler chisels, and animal bones and jaws of several species (raccoon,
weasel,    wolf, deer, squirrel, groundhog,   fishes, snake,   drumfish,   etc.).
Such a list indicates the association of woodworking with males (axes
and, possibly, groundhog incisors); at least one type of fishing (fish-
hooks); certain manufacturing operations (cannon bone awls); flint
working (flakers and antler drifts); and the possession of certain types of
medicine bag contents (animal bones and jaws) assuming that Webb
(1950) was correct in his interpretation of these items.
  Predominantly in male association, but also found with females, were
weapons or components thereof (projectile points, atlatl weights, atlatl
hooks and handles); general utility artifacts (knives, scrapers); fabricat-
ing and processing tools (drills, various types of bone awls); certain
ornaments (bone hairpins); and items of uncertain function such as bone
pins. Generally speaking, men had a greater variety of artifacts in associa-
tion, with particular concentrations of fabricating and processing tools.
  For females, the only definitely linked items were domestic equipment
(nutting stones), certain ornaments     (bone beads), and an item of fabri-
cating and processing equipment (gravers). Pestles (domestic equip-
ment) were predominantly associated with females.
   It should be noted that the overlap in sex association, barring faulty
sexual identification, may be the result of inadequate functional identifi-
cation or misinterpretation of context. All too often all stemmed objects
with pointed blades are classified as projectile points, without distinguish-
ing through preparation and use characteristics those stemmed objects
206                                   Variability among Occupational Units
that are either prepared as knives or have been used as knives. Or, again,
the significance of a pestle may be ambiguous. That is, this item might be
included with a male without implying that the association indicates the
grinding of seeds or other foods on his part. The inclusion of a “mint”
copy might just as well indicate that the association was based upon his
role in the manufacture of these items, or in the instance of a heavily
battered specimen, his utilization of an artifact that has many of the
necessary characteristics of a hammerstone for the latter purpose, rather
than as a grinding implement. In short, our observations on context and
functional characteristics must be far more precise than they have gener-
ally been in the past if we are to use individual classes of artifacts for the
analysis of variation of status and role between the two sexes.
   But even with such possible defects in the data, the preceding differ-
ences point to little more than expectable differences in roles between the
sexes in a hunting and gathering society.
   Another and rather curious associational pattern involves the atlatl. As
Webb (1946, p. 330) points out, a very considerable number of females
are found with atlatl parts. Even using only adults, and those definitely
identified as to sex, ten (seven at Indian Knoll, one at Chiggerville, one at
Ward, and one at Barrett) of the 54 burials so identified with atlatl parts
were those of females. A figure of 18 per cent is rather surprising for an
item of equipment that one would expect to be basically an item of male
equipment in a hunting and gathering society.
  Webb (1946, p. 331) rejects the contention that the atlatl is a purely
ceremonial implement, hence sometimes associated with females because
of their role in ceremonial activities, on the grounds that there are too
many examples showing extensive wear from use, numerous              repaired
atlatl components, and far too many fragmentary remains in the middens.
Of course establishing that the atlatl is a utility implement does not prove
that all atlatls were functionally so identified within the culture, and the
earlier analysis in this paper of the association patterns of the atlatl indi-
cated that there are some peculiarities about the distribution of the atlatl
when contrasted with other utilitarian items. It would be interesting to
learn what the use characteristics of the atlatl parts with females may
have been, and if there are significant differences in respect to those with
males.
   But we join Webb in lacking enthusiasm for the interpretation of the
atlatl as a ceremonial item associated with females. Nor are we quite
willing to evoke a platoon of Amazons, or a succession of Boadiceas
defending the Green River mussel beds against the onslaught of intruders,
although history is legion with militant females who acquitted themselves
well in combat.
  Possibly the association relates to the transfer of the contents of a
corporate estate, and has nothing directly to do with the sex of the indi-
vidual per se. Or perhaps the answer is simply that some women were
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                                 207
hunters of one type of game or another.
   But none of these speculations can be seen as having any particular
merit, there being no evidence permitting substantiation one way or the
other. Of course, re-analysis of the Indian Knoll sites might provide data
suitable for eliminating some possibilities, and favoring others. But at the
moment, all that can be concluded is that the roles of females overlapped
those of males in some way, leading to occasional association with the
former of a weapon that one would expect a priori to be a symbol of male
activities.
  On the other hand, females do show rather high percentages in respect
to certain types of ceremonial equipment and burial practices. For ex-
ample at Indian Knoll, the percentages given in Table 8 were noted,
including in the samples all individuals definitely or tentatively identified
as to sex.


  Table 8. Ceremonial Equipment Appearance and Burial Practices

                                                        Males                 Females
   Ceremonial Equipment:*                          ( Percentage )          (Percentage)
          Medicine bags                                60                       40
        Turtle shell rattles                            50                      50
        Flutes                                          50                      50
   Burial Practices:
        With grave goods                               Oy)                      30.3
        Per cent of all burials with red ocher         37                       63
        Per cent of all burials with dog burials       67                       sk)

 *The rationale for assigning these items      to ceremonial        equipment   has been
 discussed at length in Winters, 1968.


  It seems obvious that females were receiving equal, or even greater
attention than males with respect to certain aspects of burial customs, and
that for some reason they were often associated with just as much cere-
monial equipment as males, with the equipment being identical for each
sex. We refuse to derive any very specific conclusions from such data, our
only purpose at the moment being to furnish some basis for speculating
that the females      of the Indian    Knoll culture were           more    than chattels,
since they shared access with males to certain types of equipment best
related to roles connected with the supernatural, and were accorded at
least as much attention in death as the males, even though an individual
male might surpass any female in total quantity of grave goods.
   The point might be further emphasized by noting in Table 9 the per-
centages of total burials with grave goods for each site, correcting where
possible for intrusive burials. (We are unable to compute percentages of
males and females for this item for the other sites because of lack of
data. )
208                                       Variability among Occupational Units

  Table 9. Burials with Grave Goods as Percentage of Total Burials

                           Sites               Percentage
                           Ward                   12.7
                           Barrett                25,1
                           Butterfield            10.5
                           Kirkland                abil
                           Chiggerville           30.7
                           Indian Knoll           30.8
                           Read                   30.8
                           Carlson Annis          44.6

   The reasons for the variability are undoubtedly complex but may relate
in part to function in the settlement system. The highest percentage are
from settlements and base camps, the lowest, from Kirkland, a hunting
camp. One can speculate that there might have been differential treat-
ment of the dead, depending upon the circumstance and place of death.
That is, if the Indian Knoll sample is at all representative, both males and
females with grave goods represent some small, specially selected seg-
ment of the population, whatever the basis for selection may have been.
Hence, we conclude that some females occupied special statuses of one
sort or another, as did some males, and that there was a considerable
sharing of the artifacts symbolic of those statuses. (A psychological ex-
planation of differentials in grief and the outward expression of that grief
hardly seems adequate to explain the consistently low selection rate for
either sex.)
   Throughout the preceding discussion, the term association has been
used without any implication that the placement of artifacts necessarily
means ownership by the deceased. Ethnohistoric examples point out the
perils attendant upon any such assumption. Lescarbot (in Slotkin and
Schmitt, 1949), states that “after they have laid the dead to rest, every
one makes him a present of the best thing he has. Some cover him with
skins of beavers, of otters, and other beasts: others present him with
bows, arrows, quivers, knives, matachias, and other things.”
  But we do assume that grave goods represent appropriate equipment
for the deceased in terms of the norms of the culture, and thus in general
reflect concepts of a society as they pertain to the statuses and roles of the
two sexes and the various age groups, regardless of the idiosyncratic
behavior of any individual member of the society. And it is with this
interpretation of the significance of grave goods that we now summarize
our conclusions about the distribution patterns of Class III artifacts from
the preceding data, granting that such “conclusions” in the present formu-
lation are very tentative, or even very nebulous, at best: (1) Males are
associated with the largest conch artifacts and, hence, may have con-
trolled the essential raw materials that constituted the “capital” for the
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                     209
manufacture of the various categories of conch artifacts, (2) There was a
continuous flow of such tranformed capital to both females, who as indi-
viduals could possess more wealth than males, and to non-productive, pre-
adolescent members of the society. (Conjectures as to the mechanisms of
such transfers can run the gamut of psychological and sociological expla-
nations, there being no clear indication from the archeological data of
how such distribution was effected.) (3) There was a constant drain of
wealth from the society through burial practices, with a continuing need
for replacement of the items in question, and this drain was accelerated
by the assignment of the special Class III artifacts to the newborn, in-
fants, and children, who were certainly unable to contribute towards a
replenishment of the supply, and probably by the assignment of the same
items to females, whose productivity was along lines other than the pro-
curement and transformation of such basic raw materials as marine shell
and copper. (4) Only a very small proportion of the population was
tangibly associated with the special artifacts, perhaps implying differen-
tials within the society in respect to the distribution of wealth among the
living. Such a statement carries with it no implication that the society was
ranked in rigid divisions, since in other respects the archeological data
suggest that the population was socially homogeneous and without great
differentials in the basic way of life of the individuals composing the
population.
   Moreover, there is a subsidiary observation that may be derived from
the data. Prior to the appearance of cultures such as Indian Knoll, there is
little indication, if any, of specialized craft activities in the Midwest. But
in view of the concentration of shell in the hands of a small segment of
the Indian Knoll population, we might assume that the working of shell
was also concentrated within the same population segment, and that we
have during late Archaic times the beginnings of craft specialization that
apparently became important during Woodland times. The association of
a shell-working kit with burial 610, an infant, indicates that the working
of at least some of the shell was taking place within the Indian Knoll
Culture,    no   matter   how   much   may   have   been   imported   as finished
products.
  Up to this point, a synchronic approach has been followed, with the
intention of interpreting general patterns within the Indian Knoll Culture,
rather than variations within the individual settlement system units or
through time. The inadequacies of the published data prohibit the consid-
eration of inter-unit variation on any adequate level, but it is possible to
consider the problem of change through time within individual sites with
the aid of burial records and the limited reporting of stratigraphic units
from Carlson Annis and Read.
   On the graphs shown as Figures | through 3, the following information
was plotted:
  1. A curve designed ‘to represent population trends based upon the
210                                   Variability among Occupational Units




                                 KnoLtw           Sire,                 OHS




                                  OBSERVED             FREQUENCY
                                 Br     ONE       Foot            LEVELS


                                                Nume@cre     of       BuRizis
                                 o—oO—0                Pee    Levei
                                                Numsee       of       Disc    SHELL
                                  ae                   Bn20s          Pee Lever
                                                NUMBER       OF       LARGE        MeRiINnE
                                  Lee      ad          Sune. r Arripacts Per
                                                       Levew




                                           PERCENTAGE FREQUENCY
                                           Br HA.e  Foor LEVELS


                                            Preecawt       of Jota            iti
                                                E4cH        Levee

       8R
                                            o—e—        Disc SHELL             Beans
                                            @--@--@     CONCH                ARTiFAcTs

      PERCENTAGES




              LS    225   3°35    4   45    5   5556    65        7    75      8    8&5   9
                                  LEVELS




                    Figure I. Indian Knoll Site Burials.
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                                          211




      PeRecenrTracEes




                   25524
                      3 @                   fF (S79)        HOMINIS     (2516   Ns) joN7hs
                                                     LeEvELSs
                         Imncoian             Knorr               Site,         OHS
                          PESCENTAGE     OF   BURIALS                           WITH
                             ASSOCIATIONS   BY   LEVEL
              O-—-@=-@ Bvei4ce       with    Disc    sumii   BSEADSG   &-@--@   % BEADS BY LeveL




      ”



      2yc
      )
      X
    ¢
          :

                   [ets           4. SUSN          TABS:       DWF il) 1215 41441510
                                                     Levers
                             Carrisonwn                 ANNI6G           MounDd
                                  PERCENTAGE    FREQUENCY
                                         By  CEevelW
              O--0—--0   DRILLS     , Ooo   =0 BURIALS,        © --@-@ LARGE    Marine Sri
              @—-@—@     BVKI4..5    WITH   disc    SHELL    BEADS


LAB       ELC.
                         Figure 2. Graphs of studied grave goods.
212                                   Variability among Occupational Units
numbers of burials per 0.5-ft. level. The rationale here was simply that,
other things being equal, the number of burials should be a function of
the population size at any given time. It might be argued that the use of
half-foot levels would lead to a distortion of population figures through
variation in the depth of the burial pits themselves, the actual point of pit
origin not being stated in the reports, only the depth below surface of the
bottom of the pit. We do not consider the foregoing a particularly crucial
problem. Middens of the Midwestern shell mound type tend to build up
through fairly uniform accretion over their expanse, although there may
be more rapid accretion on the marginal slopes where trash seems to have
accumulated in considerable bulk. And Archaic burial pits tend to be both
small and quite shallow. While Webb does not give detailed information
on dimensions of burial pits in his publications, those reported for Indian
Knoll (1946, p. 137) range from 0.5 to 1.2 feet in depth, with diameters
from 2.1 to 3.1 feet. At Ward (1940, p. 89) the depth of only one pit is
mentioned, the figure given being 0.5 ft. The overwhelming predomin-
ance of tightly flexed burials, as opposed to extended burials, is also
commented on by Webb several times. Our own experience with such
burials in shell middens of the Wabash Valley has been that the burial
pits are quite small both in diameter and depth, rarely being larger than
the absolutely minimal cavity needed for jamming the tightly flexed re-
mains into the ground. The illustrations in the various Indian Knoll re-
ports indicate similarly minimal pits. Hence, we doubt that there was any
great variation in pit depths, and shall assume that depths ranging from
0.5 to 1.2 ft. would be quite representative of the pits in general, with
most of them being nearer the latter figure. While the results shown on
the graphs from the plotting of depths of the bottoms of pits cannot be as
satisfactory as curves based upan the depth of pit origin, the amount of
error is probably not sufficient to vitiate the purposes of the graph.
   2. Percentages of total large shell artifacts (Table 3) by 0.5-ft. levels.
   3. The percentages of total disc shell beads, or entire units of beads for
those sites where individual counts are not available, by 0.5-ft. levels.
   4, Percentages of individuals associated with disc shell beads at Carlson
Annis and Indian Knoll per 0.5-ft. level.
   5. As a control device for Carlson Annis and Read, the only sites for
which the necessary information is available, the percentages of the total
of a midden-associated utility artifact by 0.5-ft. levels.
   Initially, we attempted to use one-foot levels, as shown in Fig. 1A. The
resulting graph simply showed normal curves for all items plotted for
Indian Knoll. But, assuming a 500-year span for the accumulation of the
larger Indian Knoll Culture middens, such units would be equivalent to
an approximate time span of a hundred years, an interval that might be
much too great to show more than the grosser types of variation in cul-
tural activities as manifested in artifactual remains, or events of a catas-
trophic nature with long-enduring results. Subsequent graphs using half-
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                 213
foot levels seem to indicate that the foregoing misgivings were correct.
While the curves for population continued to approach normal curves, the
graphs for shell artifacts showed wide swings above and below the popu-
lation curves. Utility artifacts, on the other hand, tended to conform to
the population curve, as in the case of bone awls at Read, or to show a
constant and continuous rise, as in the case of drills at Carlson Annis.
Thus, although the quantitative data used in plotting the frequencies of
shell artifacts are derived from the quantities of shell in association with
the burials used for the population curve, there is a pattern of variation
that does not conform closely to the population curve itself or to the
occurrence of utility artifacts in the middens. In other words, the curves
derived for shell artifacts are not solely the function of fluctuations in the
population occupying the site, but instead appear as a cyclical series of
maxima and minima that may vary in a fashion often directly opposite to
the trend of the population curve.
   The interpretation of the significance of the shell curves is difficult.
Barring the imposition of external factors that would lead to a regularly
recurring reduction in the procurement of shell in the society, a phenome-
non for which we are at present unable to provide even conjectures, the
source of the fluctuations might best be sought within the society itself.
One possibility might be the occurrence of special activities at century
intervals, with an accompanying demand for imported marine shell. But
such a conjecture would demand that two out of three, or three out of
four, generations concern themselves with the preparations or the after-
math of an event carried to its fulfillment by a third or fourth. Within a
semi-sedentary society, operating presumably only on oral tradition, such
repetitive long-range planning does not seem to provide a very satisfac-
tory basis even for conjectural explanation.
   Perhaps a more satisfactory answer can be found in generational pat-
terning. Assuming    a range of constantly present activities with which
marine   shell is associated,   either in connection   with the realms of the
living or of the dead, we might assume a two-generation span of intensive
accumulation of sufficient quantities of marine shell to serve the general
needs of the society, followed by the gradual depletion of the reserves
over a two-generation period to the point that renewed intensive accumu-
lation must begin again. We assume, of course, that some shell was being
procured at all times from foreign sources, whatever the procurement
mechanisms nay have been, but that the variation indicated by the shell
curves reflects the rate of accumulation, not discrete phases of acquisition
and non-acquisition. A complete breaking off of procurement for pro-
tracted intervals would hardly permit a relatively even pattern of contin-
uous variation.
  Another consistent pattern is found in the relative positions of the crests
of the curves for large shell and disc-shell beads, the crest for the latter
tending to lag behind that of the former. Here the explanation may be
214                                    Variability among Occupational Units




                                         PERCENTAGE         OF   TOTAIL
                                          OccURING     BY    LEVEL




                                                     BurRiacs
      )                                              Bone        Awts
      w)
      dhe                                             LarGce  ConcnH
                                                          ARTIFACTS
                                                      Wor TOTaA   SHELL
                                                          NECKLACES
      Z
      i)
      U
       Y
       w)
      Oo




                  [SOS
                    4a om TS ORNS
                            LEVeE\

                           Reap      Swett.     Mipoen


            Figure 3. Read Shell Midden, graph of studied materials.
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic           215
simply that the large shell items were manufactured rather quickly after
the importation of the basic raw materials, there probably being rather
little labor connected with the completion of the finished product, while
the shell beads, the production of which would have necessitated the
expenditure of a considerable amount of labor in their shaping, perforat-
ing, and grinding, were being manufactured over a somewhat longer time
from basic raw materials and perhaps from broken examples of the larger
conch artifacts as these became available.
   A final point to be made about the charts is that as Figures 2A and 2B
show, albeit Figure 2A less clearly, there seems to have been a noticeable
decrease through time in the number of burials associated with disc-shell
beads, primarily necklaces, as the proportional quantities of the beads
themselves rose. In other words, fewer and fewer people seem to have
controlled more and more of the shell beads through time. Control of this
form of wealth may well have been increasingly concentrated in the
hands of a smaller segment of the population—perhaps a prehistoric ex-
ample of the “rich get richer, the poor get poorer” or “he who has gets”
pattern of economic behavior.
   But returning to the problem of the fluctuations in shell procurement, it
might be well to examine how such a system might relate to the world
beyond the narrow confines of the Indian Knoll Culture in the Green
River and Ohio valleys.
   First of all, what are the actual sources of the imported shell? They are
all concentrated     in the southeastern coastal areas of the United            States,
with distribution patterns and other pertinent data as follows according to
Abbott (1954) and other authors:
  Pleuroploca gigantea Kiener' (Fasciolaria gigantea Kiener)—North
Carolina to both sides of Florida. Found in shallow water. Normally
about a foot in length, but may be as large as two feet.
  Prunum apicinum Menke (Marginella apicinum Menke )—North Caro-
lina to Florida, the Gulf States and the West              Indies. A shallow water
species.
   Busycon perversum Linne—Both sides of central Florida. Four to
eight inches in length. Occur in four to ten fathoms of water. Hence
are difficult to obtain, although they may be washed onto beaches by
storms.
  Olivella spp. Species not reported for Indian Knoll sites. Excluding the
West Coast species, the range of the several species in the genus is from
North Carolina to the West Indies, with two species localized to lower
Florida and adjacent islands.
  It is not possible to pinpoint the locus from which the shells derived,
although if they were being obtained from a single source, central Florida
  ‘ Taxonomic   designation in current usage given first, with obsolete form used in the
reports on the Indian Knoll Culture following in parentheses.
216                               Variability among Occupational Units
would have to have been the area, Busycon perversum being obtainable
only within that limited range. But even granting that each species was
obtained from its nearest possible source, none of the species could have
come from locations closer than six hundred miles by the most direct
overland route, and some would have had to have been derived from
sources as far away as 750 miles. Actual transportation routes, whether by
land or water, or both, must have been much longer.
   How then could the shells have been introduced into the sites of the
Indian Knoll Culture? Three major alternatives (and combinations
thereof ) present themselves:
   1. The Indian Knoll peoples (or portions of the population) regularly
left the Green River Valley and moved to coastal areas in the manner of
known historic tribes in their seasonal rounds. The main objection to this
proposal is that so far no sites attributable to the Indian Knoll Culture are
known from the coastal areas, and one might well expect fairly sizeable
middens to have accumulated during the some 500-year span that we
think must be assigned to the Kentucky sites. Furthermore, one might
also expect a rather more abundant range of marine species and other
exotic materials in the Kentucky middens had this pattern of “transhu-
mance” been a characteristic feature of the Indian Knoll cycle.
   2. Trading relationships were maintained with neighboring groups who
in turn received marine shells from their neighbors in a system that ulti-
mately linked the Indian Knoll area with the coastal sources of supply.
There are no basic theoretical objections to such a postulated exchange
system, the minimal requirements being only a supply of items acceptable
between groups for exchange and a basis for continuing reciprocity be-
tween trading partners so that the flow of goods is uninterrupted.
  The existence of such trading systems is very well documented for other
parts of the world. For example, the nomadic tribes of Australia maintain
trade networks that distribute a number of commodities over large areas.
The exchange of goods takes many forms, includes a wide variety of
commodities   and finished products,   and is accompanied     by short-term
and long-term balancing of accounts between the participants in the ex-
change system. Movement of goods is not random, but follows well de-
fined paths, usually along waterhole routes (Berndt and Berndt, 1964).
The system is so effective that Kimberley pearl shell is distributed from
one end of the continent to the other. Notably, in a ceremonial exchange
system such as the merbok,    trading partners in maintaining reciprocity
with each other may have to accept things for which they have no use in
order to keep the orderly flow of goods unimpeded.
   Even in somewhat more sedentary societies, elaborate exchange sys-
tems are maintained in a similar fashion. Uberoi (1962) in his brilliant re-
analysis of the kula ring has this to say, quoting in part from Fortes and
Evans-Pritchard (1940);
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                   217
  The islands of the kula ring are all “societies which lack centralized author-
  ity, administrative machinery, and constituted judicial institutions—in short
  which lack government—and in which there are no sharp differences of rank,
  status, or wealth,” ...The kula islands are all inhabited by small groups of
  people who make their living by use of simple tools. Technically expressed,
  the Massim have a rudimentary technology and a subsistence economy
   (p. 214).
  That the Indian Knoll peoples possessed a settlement system, a subsist-
ence base, and a level of technology sufficient for maintaining an ex-
change system in the fashion of the merbok or the kula ring seems beyond
question. Whether they did so, and how they did so are other questions.
The basic problem seems to be the nature of the commodities available to
the Indian Knoll people for exchange. The Green River area is not partic-
ularly well endowed with natural resources that would lend themselves to
a viable exchange system with their neighbors. Chert is present, but
neighboring areas are well supplied with this raw material and the Indian
Knoll cherts do not seem to have any special characteristics that would
place them in the class of “luxury” cherts. Nor do the various sandstones,
limestones, shells, and animal bones available to the Indian Knoll people
seem to be likely raw materials for exchange.
  A remote possibility is that in the manner of Australian trading part-
ners, the neighbors of the Green River peoples were willing to accept
items such as chert until they could be passed on to other groups in the
trading network. But these latter people in the Midwest and Midsouth
would also have had access to the same raw materials, so that there would
have had to have been a prolonged series of exchanges of relatively
worthless commodities for items of high value. And in the Australian
system, acceptance of an inutile item seems to be based on the knowledge
that it could be rapidly disposed of for some desired and useful item.
   Possibly copper was being passed on by Indian Knoll traders. But the
insignificant quantities in the Green River sites themselves (see Table 10)
hardly support the suggestion that copper could have furnished a basis
for the several centuries during which marine shell was being procured in
considerable quantity. It is possible, of course, that copper was such a
valuable item that a small amount would procure a large amount of shell.
  A final conjecture is that the actual exchange system was based upon
raw materials (pitch might be suggested as one commodity available to
the Indian Knoll peoples from local sources) or upon finished products
that have either gone unrecognized or have not been preserved in the
archeological record.
  Ultimately we reject this second method of procurement as an impor-
tant factor in the importation of shell by the Indian Knoll peoples, al-
though such an arrangement for an exchange involving marine shell from
the Indian Knoll area and copper from the north seems a fairly good
218                                         Variability among Occupational Units
possibility. Our reasons for rejecting it in the case of neighbors to the
south lie in the considerable and repetitive fluctuations in sites of the
Indian Knoll Culture of the imported marine items. The very essence of a
system based upon trading partners is the maintenance of regular and
continuous exchange, and we doubt that satisfactory and regular relation-
ships could have survived over several centuries of widely fluctuating
shifts in demand so evident within the Indian Knoll Culture itelf.
   A third possibility is that there were ties with a redistribution center
which provided raw materials or finished products for a number of inland
groups. Here the assumption would be that Indian Knollers were engaged
in regular trading expeditions, with the intensity of the trading varying
with the current demand. The significant flaw in such a proposal is that
no such centers have as yet been identified for the third millennium B.c.,
although the Indian Knoll] sites may in themselves have functioned as
such centers for the Midwest.



      Table 10. Copper Artifacts in Sites of the Indian Knoll Culture

  Site                         Artifact          Depth in Ft.       Context
  Barrett              Expanded-center gorget         1.5       YA, Male burial 1
  Barrett              Broken ornament               15         YA, Male burial 44
  Barrett              Needle                        1.2        YA, Female burial 6
  Barrett              Pin                           2.8        Ad, Female? burial 43
  Barrett              Pin*                           ie              ?
  Carlson Annis        Bead                           ie           Midden
  Carlson Annis        Double pointed awl             P            Midden
  Indian Knoll         Oval pendants (2)             0.8        I, Male? burial 632
  Indian Knoll         Spiraled end ‘ornament        44         I, Male? burial 248
  Indian Knoll         Ornament                       ,         G       ? burial 64
  Indian Knoll         Expanded center gorget         ?         YA      ? burial 103
  Indian Knoll         Ornament                       i         C       ? burial 185
       *In Webb and Haag (1947, p. 5), five burials with copper artifacts are
       reported, but burial tabulations record only four with copper.



  As a conjecture, since we tend to favor this last proposal, we shall
predict that such focal trading centers did exist, and that when they are
discovered, they will share many characteristics with the Poverty Point
site of the first millennium 8.c. (Ford and Webb, 1956). Poverty Point has
an array of imported raw materials, including copper (Great Lakes
area?), cherts (Midwest, Arkansas, Missouri), steatite and chlorite schists
(North Carolina), crystal quartz, novaculite, magnetite, and hematite
(Arkansas), and sandstone (Mississippi). The various minerals that are
so abundant in the Midwest apparently had a very different sort of value
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic           219
in the lower Mississippi Valley and the Gulf coastal plains where these
resources are lacking.
  Perhaps similar minerals were important in the chertless areas of the
deep South long before Poverty Point became an important focus of
exchange activities. (We doubt that the Poverty Point people could have
obtained their raw materials over any length of time by actual mining
operations in distant areas not under their control, and at least in the
Midwest the areas from which their imported commodities were obtained
were under the control of well-established groups long before the first
millennium 8.c.) If a number of groups were involved with such centers,
the cyclical fluctuations of demand for any one trading group would not
necessarily impair the functioning of the system itself.
   Although we cannot go beyond the level of conjecture in analyzing how
the Indian Knoll procurement system might have functioned, we can be
sure that elements of a trading system existed, having rejected extensive
and continuous population movements       as an adequate explanation, and
that marine shell and copper were being distributed over vast distances
within eastern North America by the third millennium B.c. It remains to be
demonstrated that cherts were an important commodity at that time, and
that they were being distributed to the chertless areas of the South. But if
such movement is demonstrable through future reconnaissance and exca-
vation, a very important contribution will have been made to archeologi-
cal theory, for from the Early Woodland cultures of the first millennium to
Mississippian times, the basic triumvirate of trade items in the Midwest
and adjacent areas consisted of chert, copper, and marine shells, particu-
lar types of the first item even being imported into areas abundantly
supplied with chert. (For example, in early sites of the Havana Tradition
such as Dickson and Pond in Fulton County, Illinois, 25 to 30 per cent of
the cherts were imported from southern Illinois in spite of the fact that
there were abundant supplies at the nearby Avon quarries. )
   But regardless of the nebulous and conjectural nature of the previous
arguments, we wish to emphasize here that there is good evidence that
the vast trade network that links the various regional traditions of the
Hopewellian Interaction Sphere (Caldwell, 1964) has its roots in the
simpler exchange systems of late Archaic cultures such as Indian Knoll,
regardless of whether chert was a component of the system at that early
time or not.
   Let it be emphasized in conclusion that we do not feel that we have
proved anything in the present paper. Our objective has been in the
nature of an exploratory operation in a search of techniques for the sim-
plest sort of interpretation of the economic sphere of prehistoric societies
and to indicate some hypotheses that suggest themselves. Only future
work with data collected specifically for studies with such emphases over
220                                           Variability among Occupational Units
a wide geographic range of contemporaneous cultures can permit analy-
ses refined to the point that they have a reasonably high degree of proba-
bility as to their conclusions.



                                       References

Axssortt, R. Tucker. 1954. American seashells. New York: D. Van Nostrand.
BerNDT, RoLanpD M., and CaTuerine H. Bernpr. 1964. The world of the first
  Australians. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
CaLDWELL, JosePpH R. 1964. Interaction spheres in prehistory. In Joseph R.
  Caldwell and Robert R. Hall (Eds.), Hopewellian studies; Scientific Papers,
  Vol. 12. Springfield: Ilinois State Museum.
Forp, JaMes A., and CLARENCE Wess. 1956. Poverty point. Archaeological
   Papers, 46, Part 1: New York: American Museum of Natural History.
Fortes, M., and E. E. Evans-Prircuarp. 1940.                     African   political systems.
   London, New York: Oxford University Press.
Hanson, Lee H., Jr. 1966. The Hardin Village site. Studies in Anthropology,
   No. 4, Lexington: University of Kentucky Press.
JoHNson, FREDERICK (Assembler). 1951. Radiocarbon dating. Memoir no. 8.
   Salt Lake City: Society for American Archaeology.
Lippy, WILLARD F. 1952. Chicago radiocarbon dates III. Science, 116(3025) :
   673-681.
Morcan, Lewis H. 1851. League of the Ho-De-No-Sau-Nee or Iroquois.
   Rochester, N.Y.: Sage and Bros.
Rircure, WiLi1AM A. 1945. An early site in Cayuga County, New York. Re-
  search Records, no. 7, Rochester. Rochester: Museum of Arts and Sciences.
Rouincson, MarTHA ANN, and Doucias W. ScHwarTz. 1966. Late Paleo-
  Indian and Early Archaic manifestations in western Kentucky                       Studies in
  Anthropology, No. 3. Lexington: University of Kentucky Press.
Rouse, Irvine.    1951. A survey ‘of Indian River archaeology.              Florida Publica-
  tions in Anthropology, No. 44. New Haven: Yale University.
SLOTKIN, J. S., and Kart Scumirr. 1949. Studies of wampum. American
  Anthropologist, 51(2): 223-236.
Speck, Frank G. 1919. The functions of wampum among the eastern Al-
   gonkian, Memoirs, Vol. 6, American Anthropological Association.
Usrrot, J. P. Sincu. 1962. Politics of the Kula Ring. Manchester:                   Manchester
  University Press.
Wess,    W.   S. 1946.     Indian   Knoll.   Reports in Anthropology,          4(3)    Part    1:
  Lexington: University of Kentucky.
      . 1950a.   The     Carlson    Annis    Mound.    Reports    in Anthropology,          7(4):
  Lexington: University of Kentucky.
     . 1950b. The Read shell midden.             Reports in Anthropology,           7(5):    Lex-
  ington: University of Kentucky.
WesB,   W.    S., and    W.   G. Haac.       1939.    The   Chiggerville    Site.   Reports     in
  Anthropology, 4(1): Lexington: University of Kentucky.
     . 1940. Cypress Creek villages. Reports in Anthropology, 4(2): Lexing-
  ton: University of Kentucky.
     . 1947. Archaic sites in McLean County, Kentucky. Reports in Anthro-
  pology, 7(1): Lexington: University of Kentucky.
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                          221
Winters,   H. D.   1963.   An   archaeological   survey   of the Wabash   Valley    in
  Illinois. Reports of Investigations, No. 10. Springfield: Illinois State Mu-
  seum.
     . 1968. The Riverton culture. Springfield: Illinois State Museum.
ee   =)   «=>   le)    ¢

Weatendt
      ad              Oda4 OHS   OA
TWELVE                                             ROBERT    WHALLON,      JR.




                                                        Investigations
                                                of Late Prehistoric
                                             Social Organization
                                              in New York State




One of the important problems of archeology today is the understanding
of the interrelationships between the stylistic behavior of material items
and the structure of the sociocultural systems within which these items
were produced and in which they found their function. Although this
should be a problem of general anthropological interest, it is of particular
concern to archeology, which is dependent for much of its interpretation
on the analysis of style.
   The hypothesis that measurable relationships exist between style and
social organization is founded upon two basic assumptions. The first of
these is that style has many aspects and levels of behavior which may be
analytically distinguished and measured. Many of these aspects of style
are not intuitively obvious, and each aspect of stylistic behavior may
demand a separate and different method of analysis. The second assump-
tion basic to this hypothesis is that the nature of the diffusion of stylistic
ideas and practices, both within and between communities,         will be de-
termined by the nature of interaction among artisans. The aspect of style
concerned, the rate of diffusion, and the directions and limits of diffusion
will be conditioned by the kind, frequency, and channeling of interaction
among the producers of the stylistic material. These patterns of interac-
                                      223
224                                     Variability among Occupational Units
tion either define, or are the result of, the social organization of the
community or region, depending on the theoretical view of social organi-
zation adopted.
   The validity of the first assumption was demonstrated in a series of
rigorous analyses by Kroeber and Richardson (1940). Realizing, thus, the
complex and numerous aspects of behavior of even seemingly simple
stylistic features, Kroeber later discussed the impossibility of giving a
precise and simple definition of style (Kroeber, 1963, chap. 1). The
meaning of style has so many ramifications that an attempt at a compre-
hensive definition must either arrive at a vague, theoretical statement or
become involved in an extensive review of specific usages.
   In developing methods for the analysis of style in archeological mate-
rials, therefore, it has generally proved useful and efficient to adopt a
simple rule of thumb rather than to establish any rigorous definition.
Initial selection of attributes for analysis is made largely intuitively,
though often with consideration of experiences in previous analyses. If
these attributes then exhibit systematic patterns of behavior which can be
related to the influence of social, cultural, or individual factors rather
than to factors of function or of the physical environment, both the at-
tributes and their behavior are considered “stylistic.”
   The second basic assumption behind the hypothesis was first explicitly
developed by Deetz in his study of stylistic behavior in Arikara ceramics
(1965). It was hypothetically predicted that mutual associations among
stylistic attributes would tend to be particularly developed on items pro-
duced by women in a community with a high rate of matrilocal residence.
This pattern of stylistic behavior was theoretically attributed to the chan-
neling of interaction among the female artisans within the lines of these
matrilocal residence groups. Later, Longacre and then Hill utilized prac-
tically the same basic assumptions and hypothesis to predict and interpret
another aspect of stylistic behavior which they demonstrated for the ce-
ramics from two pueblo sites (Longacre, 1964; Longacre and Hill, this
volume).
                             Data from New York
To further develop this approach to the analysis of archeological materi-
als, and to extend the examination of its general validity, several aspects
of stylistic behavior were studied in the ceramics from a series of late
prehistoric sites in New York State." The two latest sites in this series
   *T would like to thank the many people who allowed me access to the collections
and data on which these analyses are. based. Dr. William A. Ritchie and Robert Funk
of the New York State Museum and Science Service were most generous in permitting
me to study materials both from previously published excavations, and from their
current investigations. Charles F. Hayes, III, and Daniel Barber of the Rochester
Museum of Arts and Sciences were very helpful in providing access to data and
collections stored in the museum. Charles F. Wray of West Rush, New York, very
kindly loaned his personal collection of pottery from the Factory Hollow site for the
purposes of this study.
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in New York State                225
were fully developed Iroquois, which allowed an ethnographic control of
interpretation at one end of the series.
   The chronological sequence of these sites is presented in Figure 1. It
will be seen that the majority of the sites fall within the Late Woodland
Owasco period or culture. This is the best-known archeological period in
New York. The documentation of most of these sites is extensive and is
amply discussed and illustrated in several of Ritchie's general publications
(1944, 1951, 1965) in addition to specific site reports. The materials from
these sites have been preserved virtually intact in the Rochester Museum




           FIGURE 1:         Sites and Chronology



                             Factory    Hollow

                             Garoga



                             Kelso               1390   100   (Y-1380)

              TRANSITIONAL
                             Bainbridge

                             Castle Creek        1435         (M-179)
                                                 1196         (M-493)



                                                 1298         (M-762)
                                                 1190         (Y-1174)
                                                 1125         (1-425)

                             Canandaigua         1140

                             Morrow



                             Levanna

                             Maxon - Derby       1100         (Y-1173)
                                                 1100         (M-1077)

                             Round     Top

                             Wickham

                             Carpenter Brook
226                                   Variability among Occupational Units
of Arts and Sciences and the New York State Museum. The quality and
quantity of information on these sites provide an indispensable foundation
for the types of analysis which we have undertaken.
   This chronological sequence is not based on stratigraphic evidence, but
is built on the seriation of pottery types. The Owasco pottery types and
the basis of most of this seriation were established by Ritchie and Mac-
Neish (1949) after long experience on the part of Ritchie in handling
materials of this period. Transitional and Iroquois types were defined by
MacNeish (1952). Some sites have since been added by Ritchie (1965),
and two sites (Morrow and Round Top) have been here inserted from
our analysis of the unpublished materials.
   Chronologies built on seriation may sometimes be deceptive if func-
tional or areal variations are confused with temporal change (cf. Brown
and Freeman, 1964, pp. 166—67; Deetz and Dethlefsen, 1965), but the
rapid typologic change in this roughly 400-year period and the general
agreement of the radiocarbon dates with the seriation lend support to the
argument that temporal change is the primary basis for this arrangement
of sites. It is not our intention to reexamine these previous analyses which
rely heavily on long and detailed experience, and we have accepted this
chronology as a reliable and adequate background for other investigations
of stylistic behavior.
   The discrete stylistic elements exhibited by each well-preserved rim
sherd were recorded for each site in terms of a consistent attribute list.
Actually, two attribute lists were used. One was applicable to all of the
Owasco and transitional ceramics, and although this list could have been
modified for use with the Iroquois pottery, also, it was quicker and easier
to devise a separate list. The use of two unconnected attribute lists was
not inconsistent with our approach, since we were concerned at every
step with stylistic behavior on a within-site level, and not with the tracing
of style elements through time.
   A number of different classes of attributes composed these lists. Certain
morphologically variable features of the sherds were included, such as lip
profile and collar shape. Vessel morphology was represented by lip orien-
tation and neck form. Technique of design execution was maintained
separate from the actual motifs present, and both technique and motif
were recorded in terms of their location on the vessel.
  As mentioned, the different aspects of the behavior of style are not yet
well enough understood to allow us to say in detail what classes of attri-
butes or what particular manner of structuring an attribute list will be
most relevant and appropriate for any given problem and analysis. The
best course therefore seemed to be to base our lists partly on previous
models (for example, Deetz, 1965, pp. 46-49; McPherron, 1963) and
partly on our own a priori judgments as to the significance and usefulness
of various classes of “stylistic” attributes. In subsequent analyses it was
occasionally apparent that these judgments had been mistaken.
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in      New York State            227


       A Stylistic Correlate of Between-Community Interaction
Our analyses began with a reevaluation of Deetz’s (1965) hypotheses and
analytic methods in terms of our data from New York. In the course of
this reevaluation a technique was discovered for exposing an aspect of
stylistic variation, not originally considered by Deetz, which seems to be a
reflection of the intensity of intercommunity contacts.
  The development, through relative isolation, of stylistic variations more
characteristic of individual villages than of a total style horizon or ceramic
type has previously been demonstrated (Cronin, 1962). These findings,
however,   were   based on the comparative     analysis of assemblages   from
several villages. The method we present here derives separate measures of
interaction rate from the analysis of individual assemblages, expresses this
measure as a single coefficient, and uses this coefficient for comparative
purposes. Comparisons between any number of sites are thus greatly
facilitated.
   Deetz predicted that if women      made the pottery, there would be a
greater tendency for attribute associations within an assemblage from a
matrilocal community than within one from a community with any other
rule of residence (Deetz, 1965, p. 2). His demonstration of patterns of
attribute association was based on the use of row and column percentages
from cross-tabulations of selected sets of stylistic attributes. The appro-
priate technique for the demonstration of non-random associations in a
cross-tabulation table, however, is the use of the statistic of Chi-square or
one of its several functions (DuBois, 1965, pp. 52-72, 312—21; Siegel,
1956, pp. 104—111).
   In an ideal, perfectly random case, the row and column percentages in
such a table are exactly the same as the percentages of the column and
row marginal totals. This is the basis on which expected values and prob-
abilities are calculated for these tables. The use of row and column per-
centages of co-occurrence for the analysis of attribute association there-
fore results in an ambiguous situation. Relative numbers of high and low
percentages do not necessarily demonstrate different degrees of non-
random attribute association.
  In fact, a comparison    of Deetz’s results with the results which were
predictable from his own data on the assumption of purely random asso-
ciations among attributes showed an uncomfortably close correspondence
and indicated that there was a strong possibility that another type of
stylistic variation was also being reflected in the analysis.
   It should be noted that these considerations do not disprove Deetz’s
hypotheses or models of stylistic behavior. As will be discussed below,
they proved to be valid and useful in the interpretation of certain of the
analyses of our materials from New York.
  If Deetz’s results, then, can be so closely approximated on the assump-
228                                   Variability among Occupational Units
tion of perfect random association of attributes in his data, we may ask
what other type of stylistic variation might also be reflected in his analy-
sis. There seems to be a real difference between the behavior of materials
from a matrilocal community and that of materials from a non-matrilocal
group. It can readily be seen from the above discussion of the relation-
ships between percentages within cross-tabulation tables and the percent-
ages of the marginal totals that at least one source of this difference may
be in different patterns of marginal percentages. It was necessary to
analyze these patterns separately from other aspects of style to see if they
formed a real and meaningful component of stylistic variation.
  The two contrasting patterns of marginal percentages which might
have accounted for some of the difference between these two situations
may be briefly characterized. The results obtained for the matrilocal situ-
ation indicated that in any class of attributes there was a tendency for a
few individual attributes of that class to be present in high frequencies
and for the other attributes to be relatively few. In contrast, the materials
of the non-matrilocal group tended to have a more equal representation
of all possible attributes within each class. If we imagine a class of attri-
butes in which only three different categories occur, the first situation
might be represented by a percentage distribution of 90 per cent—8 per
cent—2 per cent, and the second pattern by precentages of 45 per cent—
35 per cent—20 per cent.
  This difference has been termed here a difference in stylistic variability
or homogeneity. Complete homogeneity or lack of variability is easily
recognized in any class of attributes as the existence of only one possible
attribute which represents that class on all artifacts; for example, a single,
uniform motif which occurs on the lip surface of all sherds in an assem-
blage. Greater degrees of heterogeneity or variability depend, first, on the
number of attributes present in each class and, second, on the degree to
which all of these alternatives are represented in equal proportions in the
assemblage. The final measure which was devised for this aspect of stylis-
tic behavior takes both of these factors into account.
   Changing stylistic variability was not, however, the type of style behav-
ior hypothetically predicted to coincide with changing patterns of resi-
dence. Reasoning inductively from the nature of this type of stylistic
behavior and from the kinds of other changes correlated with variation of
this aspect of style, in Deetz’s analysis, and in this data from New York,
we would here hypothesize that changes in the degree of stylistic varia-
bility are primarily related to changes in the rate of interaction between
communities in a region.
   Rate of interaction as reflected in this aspect of artifact style is detect-
able only insofar as the inferred interaction affects the persons producing
the artifacts studied. When the artifact class under consideration was
certainly, or very probably, manufactured by members of one sex only,
two components of “interaction” may be distinguished. First, the rate of
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in       New York State             229
actual movement of individuals of that sex between communities, as de-
termined by the rules or customs of post-marital residence, will be a
primary component. This concern with post-marital residence in terms of
the movement of individuals from one village to another is not necessarily
related to the structure of within-village residence groups, which will be
considered later. This primary component would hypothetically be the
factor determining a basically high or low level of stylistic variability.
Superimposed on this basic level of variability will be relatively minor
trends and fluctuations which may be related to differential rates of sim-
ple intercommunication between villages.
   The process by which interaction rate affects the level of stylistic varia-
bility is diffusion, or, perhaps more closely defined, a process of regional
distribution of stylistic elements similar to the distribution of genetic traits
by gene flow: The greater the rates of “flow” within a region, the greater
will be the stylistic variability within individual communities. Stylistic
ideas, motifs, and techniques are all spread within a region by this
mechanism.
   If residence is generally not in the village of the bride, women will
move about among several villages, bringing with them all their charac-
teristic techniques and styles of pottery manufacture. Under this hypothe-
sis, the presence in a community of women who have come from several
different villages at marriage should create a situation of relative hetero-
geneity of style. Conversely, a high rate of village matrilocality should be
characterized by a greater stylistic homogeneity within each village.
   Similarly, greater or lesser rates of simple intercommunication between
villages should hypothetically allow greater or lesser rates of exchange of
ideas, or diffusion by copying. Stylistic variability should be affected
much less strongly by this type of diffusion than by the actual movements
of artisans.
   A central point in this conception of stylistic variability is the relation-
ship between the substantive content of a style and the degree of varia-
bility. We have tried to form a measure of simple variability irrespective
of any consideration of the actual substance of the style. As will be clear
in the course of the description of the results of our analyses, therefore,
there is no relationship at all between the attributes considered in any
case and the measure of variability derived from that case. For this rea-
son, the final coefficients of variability have been termed coefficients of
“basic” stylistic variability. We are able to compare such distinct styles as
early Owasco and Iroquois on the same basis. Considerations of the dif-
ferential frequencies of specific stylistic attributes are important in certain
problems of inferring the nature of regional interaction patterns (Cronin,
1962; Longacre, 1963, p. 83), but are not relevant to the analysis of rates
of interaction.
  In the analyses and interpretations presented below it is assumed that
the pottery from thesé sites in New York was made entirely by women.
230                                    Variability among Occupational Units
The   ethnography    of the Iroquois     and neighboring   groups   shows   a
uniform pattern of female manufacture of pottery, and the continuity of
stylistic development from Owasco through Iroquois periods (cf. Mac-
Neish, 1952; Ritchie, 1961, pp. 32—33;      1965, p. 303) supports the sup-
position that this pattern existed prehistorically also.
  After some preliminary analysis of the Owasco and Iroquois materials,
a satisfactory method of graphically determining the degree of stylistic
variability in any class of attributes was developed. Cumulative percent-
age graphs provided a good representation of this variability. In a cumu-
lative percentage graph, a maximum degree of variability produces a
straight, diagonal line across the graph. Complete homogeneity is indi-
cated by a single, almost vertical line rising to one hundred per cent at the
first attribute. The spacing of other lines between these two extremes,
then, provides a relative measure of variability.
  Five sites, two late Owasco and three post-Owasco, in our sample had
enough collared sherds that percentages of different collar shapes were
meaningful. The range of stylistic variability exhibited for this one attri-
bute class by these five sites is represented by the use of cumulative
graphing in Figure 2. In this figure it can be seen that the order of these
sites from more to less variability in collar shape is the approximate
chronological order. In a number of such cumulative percentage graphs, a
similar trend was noted.
   Several difficulties, however, appeared in the utilization of these graphs
for the definition of the changing degrees of stylistic variability between
sites. It was impossible to make decisions on constant and accurate cri-
teria as to greater or lesser variability between sites when the numbers of
attributes in the class being considered varied to any great extent between
these sites. In other words, degree of slope could not be handled simul-
taneously with a consideration of number of attributes when making
subjective comparisons between graphs. Where slopes varied slightly at
different points along closely spaced lines it was again impossible to rank
the different lines according to relative variability by inspection alone.
These problems were greatly compounded when more than a very few
sites were compared on the same graph. The most serious difficulty with
the use of cumulative graphs, however, was the inability to consider more
than one class of attributes at a time. No form of summary measure for
total assemblages or categories of attribute classes was possible. All of
these difficulties were removed by the use of a coefficient-type measure.
   The use of cumulative graphs provided the foundation for the calcula-
tion of a coefficient of variability. As we have mentioned, maximum
homogeneity and maximum heterogeneity of style form definite limits in
a cumulative graph. All intermediate degrees of variability fall some-
where between these two limits on the graph. Since these graph lines are
not continuous curves, but consist of straight-line segments between
points, the surface area of the graph can be divided into geometric fig-
Whallon        Prehistoric Social Organization in New York State                       931




    ro)re)|


                                                   Kelso
                                                  Garoga
                                                 Factory Hollow
                                               Canandaigua
                                              Castle Creek
     SS

           PURER
           REED
            Oe
             CRO
            SeR
          (2)




     nnoO




          2)

                                             FIGURE 2
                                             CUMULATIVE PERCENTAGE
                                             CURVES FOR ATTRIBUTES
     Ww(2)Pe                                 OF COLLAR SHAPE




     NOfo)




                               Attributes    in Order of Decreasing      Frequency
                          a    a        en        nm   er a tere   ere    mma ten eR
        tpSedeueet
          baste
       (2). Be  RM                 el   eo         CT              as
232                                         Variability among Occupational Units
ures, that is, right triangles and rectangles. The area which would be
included underneath a line representing maximum stylistic variability can
easily be calculated in this manner, and the ratio of this area to the area
included under any intermediate line may thus be used as a convenient
and accurate coefficient measure of the degree of variability represented
by such an intermediate line.
   The methods of deriving coefficients from cumulative percentage
curves have been considerably developed in the field of geography. A
series of applications of these techniques to the study of degrees of popu-
lation concentration is discussed by Wright (1937), who also explains in
detail the mathematical background for the derivation of various types of
coefficients. In our analysis we have used a modification of one of the
geographers coefficients (Wright, 1937, pp. 181-83).
   We have changed the direction of the coefficient so that higher values
of the coefficient represent greater degrees of homogeneity, and we have
utilized a constant maximum area to represent complete heterogeneity of
style. Normally, the degree of variability within an attribute class is calcu-
lated with reference to the maximum area of the graph that would be
covered in a situation of maximum variability for that class. This maxi-
mum area is obviously dependent on the number of attributes included
within that class. In other words, slope of the line, alone, is considered. To
eliminate this dependency on the numbers of attributes present in each
class, and to utilize this information at the same time, we used an arbi-
trary constant of twenty possible attributes per class. This had the effect
of somewhat increasing the coefficient in cases where few attributes
were represented and gradually decreasing it as the number of attributes
in a given line increased. As implied by our previous definitions of hetero-
geneity vs. homogeneity, this was the desired result, and it was incorpo-
rated in the value of the coefficient simultaneously with the measurement
of the relative slope of the line.”
   Coefficients of basic stylistic variability were calculated for each class
of ceramic attributes in the assemblages from every site. A single, total
  ? The formula actually used was:

                              Ga     — oe             2 ae
                                        p iN     1)
C = coefficient of homogeneity                   n, = the number of observed nominal
c = the distance from the x axis to the               categories represented in the cu-
      graph line at each successive point            mulative graph
p =   the total height of the cumulative        N = the total number of nominal cate-
      graph (here = 100.00)                          gories in the set making up the
                                                    scale, (here a constant of 20 was
                                                    used for comparison vs. less at-
                                                    tributes ).                       :
The value of the coefficient varies between 1.00, representing perfect stylistic homo-
genity, and .00, indicating the greatest possible degree of heterogeneity.
Whallon        Prehistoric Social Organization in New York State                                 933



       950— FIGURE 3
          ~—    Coefficients    of basic stylistic variability,               KelsoFactory
          ~     summary      averages for all attributes.                        eset

                                                                                      Garoga
       Paes                        Maxon.                    Bainbridge;
                        .Wickham    Derby

                                       Canandaigua,
          si"
       900—                                            p—! a

          — &
          i, let                  Be        No                Mae             Creek
       875—              Round

          ae                Top        aS


                                                             Chronological      Order
                                                           Early                  Late



  1000— FIGURE 4
          —     Coefficients of basic stylistic
          —     variability, average coefficients
                for techniques     only.                                              Garoga
                                                                       Kelso,——
                                   . Maxon.
                                                                                        Factory
                                    ee
                                                                                        Hollow
                  Wickham

          : a Top                          »Levanna                yl
   950—         Brook
                                                       éCanan-
                                                 a                 Va Creek

                                                            Chronological     Order
                                                          Early                   Late



  1.000 —                    egras BPP       Levanna                                  Factory,
                             Derby,                                                   Hollow
                Carpenter
                Brook                                              Castle
   973 *— Wickham
              ,                        Canandaigua*+-—_
                                                 9      Faia ,Creek
                                                                                Kelso


          :                        FIGURE 5                             \
                                                                             Garoga
                                                                             :
       950—                        Coefficients of basic
   :                               stylistic variability,             Bainbridge
          —     Round Top’         average coefficients for
                                   attributes of vessel
                                   morphology only.
                                                              Chronological     Order    .
                                                              Early              Late ova. %e
234                                    Variability among Occupational Units
coefficient was obtained for whole assemblages by averaging all of the
separate coefficients for the different attribute classes. This total coef-
ficient could be broken down into component parts by similarly finding
the average coefficients for various categories of attribute classes. The
change through time of levels of “basic stylistic variability” could then be
analyzed with simple, clear graphs. These graphs are presented as Figures
3 through 8.
   Brief inspection of these several graphs reveals that there are often
indications of a temporal trend in the level of stylistic variability. This is
true of the graph for total coefficients and for most of the graphs of the
components of this total coefficient. The significance of these apparent
trends can be evaluated by determining the correlation between an order-
ing of sites in terms of the calculated levels of stylistic variability and the
independently established chronological order. The statistic used for this
purpose was Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient, to which a level of
statistical significance may be assigned (Siegel, 1956, pp. 202—213;
DuBois, 1965, pp. 90—92, 228—29). We have used this method to deter-
mine whether the indicated trends are more meaningful than the many
fluctuations observed (Table 1).


Table 1. Correlations between Chronological Order of Sites and Site
    Order Established by Basic Variability of Various Categories
                            of Attributes

           Category of Attributes       Correlation       Significance
           Total Assemblage                 .600                05
           Decorative Techniques            345               N.S,b
           Vessel Morphology                125               N.S.b
           Decorative Motifs                .638               05
           Collar Shape                     TP                N.S.¢
           Lip Profiles                     ol                 01
           a From Siegel, 1956, Appendix, Table p. 284
           & N.S. = Does not reach a .05 level of significance.
           © Too few sites could be included in this category to apply
           this test of significance really meaningfully.


   The results of these evaluations show that there is a definite trend
towards increasing stylistic homogeneity through time. This trend is im-
posed on a generally high level of stylistic homogeneity throughout. The
total coefficients for whole assemblages (Fig. 3) exhibit this trend to a
significant degree. Attributes of decorative technique (Fig. 4) also have a
positive trend in this direction, but it is too weak to be put forward as
significant. In contrast, our attributes of vessel morphology show only a
random temporal fluctuation in variability (Fig. 5 and Table 1). Freed
from these levelling influences, decorative motifs (Fig. 6) and the two
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in New York State                          235


    .750—
         - FIGURE 6
         —     Coefficients of basic stylistic
               variability, average coefficients
   .925—       for motifs only.                                              walleye
         is
                                                                                   e




                                                                  Kelso,

                                                        Bainbridge;

                                                                       Garoga®


                    Wickham
                                                   Canandaigua




                                  Morrow,




   .800—:
        —     Carpenter
        -     Brook


   775—



                                               Chronological      Order
                                              Early                   Late




morphological features which show stylistic variation, that is, lip profile
and collar shape (Fig. 7 and 8), have a marked and significant trend
towards increasing homogeneity of style through time.
   Following the hypothesis we have established as to the meaning of
variation in stylistic variability, the generally high level of homogeneity of
style in all of these sites would seem indicative of a high rate, at least, of
village matrilocality. Even those attributes which show no temporal trend
236                                   Variability among Occupational Units
have high coefficient values. This interpretation is congruent with the
known social organization of the Iroquois and with inferences of basic
Owasco social organization. The existence of female work groups engaged
in horticulture has been interpreted generally (Aberle, 1961, pp. 660—61,
676), and specifically for the Owasco    (Ritchie, 1965, p. 296), as a caus-
ative factor in the development of matrilocal residence. The existence of a
basic pattern of matrilocal residence in Owasco times is further supported
by the Owasco-Iroquois continuity of large, multi-family houses (Ritchie,
1961, p. 35; 1965, p. 296) and by our analysis below of the degrees of
attribute associations in the ceramics of this series of sites.
   The general trend towards a slight increase in stylistic homogeneity
from early Owasco to Iroquois is interpreted as a reflection of a gradually
decreasing rate of social contact between villages. As discussed hypotheti-
cally above, rates of intercommunication are believed to be manifested in
stylistic variability through a process similar to that of “flow” in a genetic
sense. Decreasing variability is thus thought to reflect decreasing com-
munication.
   This interpretation of the trend observed in style behavior is again
congruent with other archeological facts. There are no known fortifica-
tions associated with early Owasco villages. Several sites, such as
Levanna, Round Top, and Maxon Derby, were directly open to attack. In
middle Owasco times, fortifications appear. There are surrounding
ditches at Canandaigua and Morrow and a single palisade at Bates. The
only excavated Owasco cemeteries, those at Canadaigua, contained six
males with projectile points embedded in their bones, and the similarity
between the points imbedded in these bodies and the points found in the
village debris suggests death at the hands of culturally similar enemies. In
late Owasco sites, fortification was increased as evidenced in double and
triple palisade lines at Castle Creek. Kelso, too, has double palisade lines,
and in late prehistoric Iroquois times multiple stockades         were   con-
structed, at least at Garoga, from much larger, heavy posts sunk deeply
into the ground (cf. discussion by Ritchie, 1965, pp. 280, 293).
  There was certainly a relatively large increase in aboriginal population
during the Owasco period. Ritchie’s observations (1965, p. 280) indicate a
progressive development of larger and more numerous villages. It may be
possible to relate the inferred decline in peaceful relations between vil-
lages to the pressure on resources caused by this population expansion. At
some point in the Iroquois period, the formation of the league must have
brought about a reversal in this trend, but this probably post-dates the
latest site in our sample. The probably concomitant movement of Iroquois
towns from their previous defensible positions to lowland, open sites has
been noted (Parker, 1922, p. 128), but in the Seneca area, at least, this
shift did not occur until approximately 1630 (Wray and Schoff, 1953, p-57).
  We have left some      fluctuations in the coefficients of basic stylistic
variability unexplained, but it is quite probable that with fuller data they
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in                New York State                       237


   750—be
                                                                     Kelso,

        .     FIGURE 7 of basic                                                  As
        . . Stylistic variability                                           G
              of collar shape                                                    aroga’. ieee, 6
   925—
                                                          Bainbridge,                  Factory
                                                                                        Hollow



                                               Castle    Creek,



                                    Canandaigua,


                                                         Chronological    Order
                                                       arly                  Late




              FIGURE 8                                               Factory         Hollow.
              Coefficients of basic
              stylistic variability
              of lip profile


                                                                            Garoga.

                                                Castle Creek,            Kelso

                         ~Round Top


                                           Morrow                    * Bainbridge
   .875 —                    Levanna,      A
             Carpenter
       _     Brook
        re                                            _— ‘Bates
                                                   Canandaigua
   350—                         Maxon-Derby




                                                Chronological     Order
                  v                           Early                  Late
                   Wickham
238                                  Variability among Occupational Units
might be related to such factors of regional interaction as relative isola-
tion from, or proximity to major routes of trade or communication. At this
point, however, we turn to another level of social interaction and another
aspect of stylistic behavior.

       A Stylistic Correlate of Within-Village Residence Pattern
Up to this point the validity of Deetz’s original hypothesis has remained
untested. His statistical methods were noted to be ambiguous in the dem-
onstration of his prediction that a greater degee of patterned attribute
association in ceramic material made by women would be characteristic
of style in a highly matrilocal group as compared to groups with any
other pattern of residence. A relevant statistical technique for the analysis
of attribute associations within an assemblage was mentioned, however.
We have applied this technique to our data.
  The statistic is Chi-square, a common and familiar one throughout the
social sciences   (Siegel, 1956, pp. 104-111;   DuBois,   1965, pp. 52—72).
Chi-square is calculated from cross-tabulation tables similar to those used
by Deetz. Cross-tabulations     were prepared, therefore, for all possible
combinations of attribute classes within each assemblage used for this
analysis. Each and every possible pair of individual attributes was thus
represented once in the total set of tables. The amount of tabulations and
computations involved in such an analysis is very large, and could not
have been done at all by hand in the amount of time at our disposal. Even
using a computer for all statistical manipulations as we were, it was
necessary to restrict the sample of sites for this part of the analysis to
seven. These seven were chosen, however, so that the full temporal range
of our original sample was represented, and at least one site was included
from every major archeological phase currently recognized.
  The value of Chi-square with the number of degrees of freedom (based
on the number of attributes in the tabulation) was calculated for each
table. We were not interested here, however, in the associations between
specific attributes. A summary value indicating the total tendency within
the whole assemblage for mutual associations between attributes was
desired.
   It was not possible to consider each table separately and then make an
accurate, summary judgment of the total degree to which attributes
tended to associate within an assemblage. We therefore took advantage of
the additive properties of Chi-square    (DuBois, 1965, pp. 69, 319). Chi-
square and its degrees of freedom are additive if the observations added
are independent. Since, for any site, every pair of attribute classes tabu-
lated produced a series of unique attribute combinations in the table, and
since all of the tables prepared were necessary to provide a complete
cross-tabulaion of all attributes recorded from the ceramics, we may
say that each table provides an independent indication of the total de-
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in New York State            239
gree of attribute association within the whole assemblage.
   Adding in this manner, total values for Chi-square and its degrees of
freedom     were       determined    for each site. These          total values, of course,
became very large. A function of Chi-square was therefore used. This
function is normally distributed, and has a calculable mean and standard
deviation (DuBois, 1965, p. 317). The degree of total attribute association
could thus be expressed in terms of standard deviations from an expected
mean value.
  These summary values for total tendency of attribute association are
plotted in temporal sequence in Figure 9. A very clear trend is apparent
in this aspect of stylistic behavior. Already in Carpenter Brook, the ear-




                       FIGURE 9
                       Index of attribute association
                       within selected assemblages
                       measured in terms of unit normal
                       deviates of added chi-square values.




      w oOo oO




                                                                               Factory e
                                                                                 Hollow
                 AAR
                 Pe
                 Oe
                                              Castle
                                              Creek    e




                         Levanna


                                          .

                                        Canandaigua




                        Carpenter
                   *    Brook


                                                           Chronological   Order
                                                       Early                  Late
240                                     Variability among Occupational Units
liest Owasco site, we obtain a value of five standard deviations from the
expected value. This clearly represents a significant degree of association.
The amount of attribute clustering slowly rises throughout all the pre-
Iroquois assemblages. Then, there is a sharp rise in the value of this
measurement with Garoga, the first Iroquois site. Factory Hollow is not
as high as Garoga, but is higher than any of the non-Iroquois sites.
   This analysis seems to confirm the basic hypothesis behind Deetz’s
predictions of stylistic behavior. We believe that it further adds a refine-
ment in method and interpretation which Deetz was not able to consider.
With the support of other archeological and ethnographic evidence, we
have interpreted the behavior disclosed in Figure 9 as demonstrative of
changes in size and in degree of integration of within-village matrilocal
residence groups.
   The high degrees of attribute association present in the Iroquois assem-
blages are congruent with Deetz’s hypothesis in that matrilineages, resid-
ing together in one or more longhouses, were the basic social units in an
Iroquois village (Goldenweiser, 1913, p. 468; Fenton, 1951, pp. 45—46).
The long, oval houses of the Owasco period and the Oak Hill phase have
also been interpreted as the possible residences of matrilocal, multi-family
social groups, perhaps ancestral to those of the Iroquois (Ritchie, 1961, p.
35; 1965, p. 296). Our results would        indicate that, in contrast   to the
Iroquois matrilineages, the Owasco residence groups were not as strongly
integrated and probably were simple extended families.
  The minor trends in the level of stylistic attribute association seem, on
the other hand, to be possibly related to the size of the residence groups.
In this analysis we selected the largest and best preserved assemblages
from our sample of sites. Unfortunately, these assemblages are not always
from sites for which good settlement pattern data are available, and a
direct comparison between house size and degrees of attribute association
was not possible. The gradual increase in this degree through Owasco
times, nevertheless, is roughly paralleled by a gradual increase for the
same period in the average size of house. The difference in the values
obtained for the two Iroquois sites also parallels a difference in the sizes
of the longhouses at these two sites.
   This aspect of stylistic behavior, like the measurement of basic varia-
bility, shows both major differences in level, and minor trends within
these levels. The former seems related to the degree of integration and
importance of co-resident groups; the latter seems to reflect the average
size of such groups.

                  Summary: Causes for Social         Change
In discussing the changes in intergroup relations inferred from the analy-
sis of stylistic variability, population expansion was mentioned as a pos-
sible causative factor. This in turn appears to be the result of certain
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in New York State                         241
changes in the subsistence base. By considering, also, the probable form
of late prehistoric subsistence economy, the data of Iroquois ethnography,
and the changes in regional interaction indicated by our first analysis,
some possible causes for the social changes inferred from the analysis of
attribute association may be found, and we may hypothesize in more
detail the exact nature of these changes.
  The form of subsistence seems to have been remarkably stable through-
out the period with which we are concerned.               A consideration of the
different types of Owasco sites and of their total artifact assemblages
allows the inference that the organization of economic activities charac-
teristic of the historic Iroquois was present in all essential details in the
early Owasco period (Ritchie, 1961, p. 31; 1965, pp. 275, 296, 300-301).
There seems to have been a slight shift in emphasis from hunting to
agricultural activities between the early and middle Owasco periods, but
the present evidence indicates that the relative emphasis on different
aspects of the economy remained stable from then on. There was, how-
ever,     a gradual   diversification   in the crops raised.   Corn   appears    first,
followed by beans in middle Owasco, and finally by squash in the Oak
Hill phase.
   It seems reasonable to interpret this gradual intensification and diver-
sification of the agricultural base as the primary cause of the increase in
population mentioned above.
  From our second analysis of stylistic behavior, a shift in the size and
importance of the residentially localized segments of the Owasco and
Iroquois villages has been inferred for the Oak Hill—Iroquois period. The
ethnographic sources indicate that one of the important cooperative func-
tions of these segments was agriculture (Stites, 1905, p. 31), and land was
communally       owned     by these or larger segments         (Fenton,     1951, pp.
42-43; Goldenweiser,        1913, p. 467). It might be argued that these social
units in the villages increased in size and integration in response to the
increasing importance of agriculture in the economy. Such an explanation
might not be unreasonable for the increasing size of these groups, but it
does not seem adequate to account for the inferred change in their degree
of integration. If we look at other functions of these groups, we find that
they are most important politically, in terms of the inheritance of sachem-
ships (Fenton, 1951, p. 45; Goldenweiser, 1913, p. 408). They also held
certain religious and ceremonial prerogatives of a minor nature (Golden-
weiser,     1913, p. 467; 1914, p. 368), and they were         apparently the im-
portant social units in the functioning of blood feuds (Snyderman, 1948,
  guy:
s Working backwards from these ethnographic facts, two possible expla-
nations for the Owasco-Iroquois change in the nature of these social
segments     are readily apparent.      There   is, first, the importance    of these
groups in blood-feuding. Blood feuds seem to have been one of the com-
mon reasons for entering the warpath, and the importance of the social
242                                  Variability among Occupational Units
units involved in blood-feuding may have grown in response to the gen-
eral increase in warfare in the region. This may be a partial reason for the
inferred changes, but a second possible explanation is more convincing.
   This second explanation also sees the changes in these subunits of local
communities as part of the social adaptation to the regional demographic
situation, but interprets the function of more rigidly structured descent
groups in terms of status ascription and the provision for specific and
permanent   governmental functionaries.   In proposing this possibility, we
are making an analogy between this pattern of change in social organiza-
tion and the process of development of “statehood” as outlined by Gear-
ing (1962). The differences between these two cases lie in the level of
complexity attained and the way in which power to control war-making
was institutionalized.
   In the development of the Cherokee “state” under intense pressure
from the whites, a leader arose who eventually obtained autocratic au-
thority largely through his importance in the direction of war and control
over the warriors. It is probable that this position of autocratic authority
could never have developed in the Cherokee case except under the heavy
pressure of white attack.
  In New York, under aboriginal conditions, the pressure of war was
probably not so intense. Yet, as warfare increased, an institutionalized
method of control very likely became more and more desirable. The
posession of titles by the descent groups in Iroquois society provided a
method whereby the governing officials formed a relatively permanent
council which was not under the control of the strongest and most active
men of the group, but was composed of older men with reputations for
judgment whose selection was controlled by the women (Goldenweiser,
1913, p. 468). When a title was vacant, a nomination was made by the
women of the appropriate lineage, and this nomination submitted to the
other chiefs for approval. Control of the council over warfare was gen-
erally only advisory (Snyderman,     1948, p. 13), but a final recourse   to
check a war party was available to the women in the form of a direct
order and warning against the expedition (Snyderman, 1948, p. 19).
   Considering the above facts of Iroquois ethnography, we are inclined to
propose the hypothesis that the developments in size and apparent rigid-
ity of structure and integration of the matrilocal (and matrilineal, at
least in the Iroquois sites )segments of local groups to two factors. Their
gradual growth in size seems primarily related to the growing importance
of agriculture. The apparently rapid increase in the importance and inter-
nal integration of these groups, between the Oak Hill phase and Iroquois
phases, seems the result of a change in internal organization which is
possibly related to the development of a local governing council com-
posed of men with permanent, titled positions pertaining to the various
matrilineages of the village.
  The adaptive advantages of this form of government were numerous,
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in New York State                            243
but it did not function at all importantly in agricultural activities. Its
important function lay in the making of decisions regarding the policy of
the group in questions of inter-group relations. Subsumed under this gen-
eral area of responsibility of course, was some degree of regulation of
warfare, which had been becoming a more                   prominent feature of inter-
group contact. These governments of village councils composed of per-
manent, titled “chiefs” opened the way for formal contact between groups
to negotiate and reduce the likelihood of wholesale warfare. Ultimately,
they formed the local basis for the organization of the Iroquois League.


                                     References

ABERLE, Davin F. 1961. Matrilineal descent in cross-cultural perspective. In
  David M. Schneider and Kathleen Gough (Eds.), Matrilineal kinship.
  Berkeley: University of California Press.
Brown,     J. A., and   L. G. Freeman,       Jr. 1964.     A Univac   analysis of sherd
  frequencies from the Carter Ranch Pueblo, eastern Arizona. American Antiq-
  uity, 30: 162—67.
Cronin, ConsTaNce. 1962. An analysis of pottery design elements, indicating
  possible relationships between three decorated types. In Paul S. Martin et al.
   (Eds.), Chapters in the prehistory of eastern Arizona, I. Chicago Natural
  History Museum, Fieldiana, Anthropology, 53: 105—14.
Deetz, JAMeEs. 1965. The dynamics of stylistic change in Arikara ceramics.
  Illinois Studies in Anthropology, No. 4. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
DrEeEtTz, JAMES, and Epwin DETHLEFSEN.         1965. The Doppler effect and archae-
  ology: a consideration of the spatial aspects of seriation. Southwestern Jour-
  nal of Anthropology, 21: 196—206.
DuBois, Pamtre H. 1965. An introduction to psychological statistics. New
  York: Harper and Row.
Fenton,    WiiuiaM      N. 1951. Locality as a basic factor in the development of
  Iroquois social structure. In William N. Fenton (Ed.), Symposium on local
  diversity in Iroquois culture. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin, 149:
  39—54.
GEARING, FRED.     1962. Priests and warriors, social structures for Cherokee poli-
  tics in the 18th century. Memoirs of the American Anthropological Associ-
  ation, No. 93. Menasha.
GOLDENWEISER, ALEXANDER A. 1913. On Iroquois work, 1912. Canada geologi-
  cal survey, summary report for 1912: 464—75.
     . 1914. On Iroquois work, 1913-14.         Canada geological survey, summary
  report for 1913: 365—72.
Kroeber, A. L. 1963. Style and civilizations. Berkeley: University of California
  Press.
Kroeber, A. L., and JANE RicHarpson.         1940. Three centuries of women’s dress
  fashions:   a quantitative     analysis.   University    of California    Publications,
  Anthropological Records 5, No. 2.
Loncacre,     Witi1am     A. 1963. Archaeology      as anthropology:       a case study.
  Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.               ;
     . 1964. Sociological implications of the ceramic analysis. In Paul S.
  Martin et al. (Eds.), Chapters in the prehistory of eastern Arizona, H.
  Chicago Natural History Museum, F ieldiana, Anthropology, 22: 155—70.
244                                     Variability among Occupational Units
MacNgisu, Ricuarp S. 1952. Iroquois pottery types, a technique for the study
  of Iroquois prehistory. National Museum of Canada, Bulletin 124.
McPueErRRON, ALAN. 1963, Programming the IBM 7090 for optimizing taxon-
  omy in archeology. Paper presented at the 62nd annual meeting of the
   American Anthropological Association, Chicago.
Parker, A. C, 1922. The archaeological history of New York, Part I. New York
   State Museum, Bulletins: 235—36.
Ritcuie, Witi1aM A, 1944. The pre-Iroquoian occupations of New York State.
   Rochester, N.Y.: Rochester Museum of Arts and Sciences.
      . 1951. Their mouths are stopped with dust. Archaelogy, 4: 136—44.
      . 1961. Iroquois archaeology and settlement patterns. In William             N.
  Fenton and John Gulick (Eds.), Symposium on Cherokee and Iroquois cul-
  ture. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin, 180: 27—38.
      . 1965. The archaeology of New York State. New York: Natural History
  Press:
RircHiz, WiLL1aAM A., and RicHarp S. MacNeisu. 1949. The pre-Iroquoian
  pottery of New York State. American Antiquity, 15: 97-124.
SIEGEL, SIDNEY. 1956. Nonparametric statistics for the behavioral sciences.
   New York: McGraw-Hill.
SmiTH, Watson. 1962. Schools, pots, and potters. American Anthropologist,
   64: 1165-78.
SNYDERMAN, GEoRGE S. 1948. Behind the tree of peace: a sociological analysis
  of Iroquois warfare. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
STiTEs,   SARA Henry.   1905.   Economics   of the Iroquois. Lancaster,   Pa.:   New
  Era.
Wray, CHARLES F', and Harry L. Scuorr. 1953. A preliminary report on the
  Seneca sequence in western New York, 1550—1685. Pennsylvania Archaeol-
  ogist, 23: 53-63.
Wricnt, J. K. 1937. Some measures of distributions. Annals of the Association
  of American Geographers, 27: 177—211.
THIRTEEN                                                              FRANK     HOLE




                            Evidence of Social Organization
                  from Western Iran, 8000-4000 B.c.




This paper is a trial essay designed to illustrate how archeologists can
make inferences about social organization, rather than a source of basic
data on the prehistory of Iran.‘ I have selectively drawn from a great deal
of unpublished data from recent excavations in the Deh Luran region of
Southwest Iran (Hole and Flannery, 1962; Hole, Flannery, and Neely,
1965) and supplemented this with information derived from surface sur-
veys and published reports concerning sites in southern and eastern
Mesopotamia and the flanking Zagros mountains. Nevertheless the gen-
eral picture is so spotty that I can say relatively little about the particulars
of social organization in western Iran during the later phases of prehis-
tory. What I can do is to show what lines of evidence are available, the
general nature and extent of the data, and finally the inferences that can
be made about social organization in Deh Luran at three “moments”
(liberally interpreted) in time: 8000, 6000, and 4000 B.c.
  There are three principal lines of evidence on which we can draw for
   1T should like to acknowledge help by Barbara Stark in the preparation of the
manuscript. Leo L. Anderson, Development and Resources Corporation, kindly made
facilities available to me in Iran and subsequently furnished me with copies of
unpublished reports that were made for Development and Resources Corporation and
the Khuzistan Water and Power Authority. Much of the success of the excavations in
Deh Luran depended on the hard work of Kent V. Flannery, James A. Neely, all of
our wives, and Hans Helbaek. For permission to work in Iran and for timely help I
should like to acknowledge the services of personnel in the Antiquities Services, Musée
Bastan, Tehran. The field work was supported by a grant from the National Science
Foundation.

                                          245
246                                   Variability among Occupational Units
inferences. First, knowledge of the paleoenvironment and the opportun-
ities and limitations it afforded, given certain technologies and subsis-
tence activities; second, the actual or inferred settlement patterns and
population size; and third, inferences about division of labor, status and
sex differentiation, craft specialization, and trade that can be made from a
study of artifacts.
  In making inferences about the archeological data, I depend largely on
ethnographic analogy, and very little on historical sources. We should
bear in mind, however, that the prehistoric context is that of a historically
unique situation which does not correspond in all particulars to any mod-
em community that we might wish to use in analogy.

                           The Cultural Setting
It is sound practice in reconstructing culture history to treat each area in
its own right; for this reason I deal specifically with sites near Deh Luran.
On the other hand, Deh Luran did not exist in a cultural vacuum. During
each of the three periods under study the people in Deh Luran shared in
technological and social developments that affected a wider area. At a
minimum, the cultural setting during each period included people living
in upper Khuzistan, southwest Iran, the mountain valleys of the Zagros
mountains, and the central plateau of Iran (See Fig. 1). By 4000 3.c. the
cultural context had expanded to include southern Mesopotamia and even
the western fringes of northern Mesopotamia and Anatolia.
   Considering Southwest Asia as a whole, at 8000 B.c. most of the people
were nomadic hunters; in a few places people settled in permanent vil-
lages and began to produce their food by planting crops and herding
animals. By 6000 3.c. there were perhaps hundreds of small villages of
agriculturalists and probably'relatively few people who subsisted solely
by hunting. Shortly after 6000 B.c., when simple techniques of irrigation
had been mastered, people began to settle southern Mesopotamia as agri-
culturalists. After this time, the population increased dramatically, new
areas were colonized, and some villages grew to towns or even cities as
the thresholds of civilization were approached.
   Looking back from the perspective of history, there was a development
of society from simple bands of hunters to class-stratified urbanites. In
view of this, a charting of history in Southwest Asia requires both a
definition of the changing techniques of subsistence and demographic
forms, and a recognition of the emergence of more complex forms of
society. It is to this latter task, as it pertains to a relatively small area of
Southwest Asia, that I address myself in this essay.

                          The Geographic Setting
From all that we have learned so far, the climate during the period in
question was essentially the same as today (Butzer, 1965; Van Zeist and
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 8.c.                                                     247




                                                                               CASPIAN       SEA




                                                       S                       ELBURZ      MOUNTAINS
                                    @ KARIM   SHAHIR   ee                                @ Tehran
                                                            \
             DESERT                                          %
                                                                                                    HIGH
                                                                                                   PLATEAU


                                                                          zy
                                                            Khorramabad    a
                                                        ~        e




      Land     above     1000   m

      PREHISTORIC           SITES
      Modern     Cites

               Kilometers




      Figure 1. Location of geographic                 areas and sites in Mesopotamia                        and
                western Iran.


Wright, 1963). This does not rule out minor fluctuations nor does it mean
that the environment was the same. In fact, we know full well that the
landscape has suffered severe changes for the worse in the 10,000 years
since our reconstruction begins. Ten thousand years of intensive exploita-
tion of the natural resources through farming, grazing and cutting of
timber have reduced much of the area to commercially worthless desert
or rocky, thorn-studded waste lands, but the potential ecological diversity
and wealth of resources              is apparent to the practiced eye even today
(Flannery, 1965).
  Deh Luran is part of the upper Khuzistan steppe, a natural grassland at
the verge of the desert and the Zagros mountains (see Fig. 1). Although
the summer climate ranks with the hottest and driest on earth, this steppe
land is important both for grazing and for dry farming. During the mild
winters up to 15 inches of rain fall, and the formerly parched earth turns
green with vegetation. With irrigation, crop yields can be increased by up
248                                    Variability among Occupational Units
to one-third. Moreover, as long as fresh water can be brought to the earth,
even the desert that stretches south from the steppe land is extraordinarily
productive. In Khuzistan, permanent and seasonal rivers provide water
for domestic and agricultural use and feed the swamps that alternate with
sand dunes and hard-packed desert. Available to hunters on the steppe
were deer, gazelle, onagers, and cattle and in the rivers and swamps pigs,
fish, clams, and migratory birds. Important even in prehistory were the
fabulous reserves of petroleum which oozed to the surface at many places
to provide natural asphalt.
   The mountain slopes and valleys to the north of Khuzistan were an
essential part of the environment of the Deh Luran steppe dwellers.
These upland regions were summer grazing lands for the animals that
wintered in Khuzistan, and throughout history they have served as pas-
tures for the flocks of the transhumant natives. Farming was seldom as
important as grazing in these areas, although at various times settlements
flourished. The mountains were also the source of oak, pistachio, and
almonds, as well as the wild ancestors of wheat, barley, sheep, and goats.
   Farther north and east, on the high central plateau of Iran is another
steppe-land and desert system that was not especially suitable for early
villagers but which was the source of readily available and easily worked
native copper.


                               Lines of Evidence
In this section I shall treat each of the three lines of evidence separately,
period by period. This is a useful way to approach the problem of infer-
ring social organization because it enables us to comprehend relatively
simple factors and to make interpretations from them; we see both the
evidence and the method of arriving at inferences in this way. Recogniz-
ing that this approach fragments the data, I shall synthesize the material
by period in the Summary.

ENVIRONMENT      AND   SUBSISTENCE

The bare facts of environment must be seen in light of subsistence pat-
terns and technology. At 8000 s.c. the natural environment had scarcely
been altered by man. We reconstruct a grassy Deh Luran valley with a
swamp in its lower portion covering about one-fifth of the available land
surface. It was not far from the edge of this swamp that people settled
during Bus Mordeh times, perhaps as the first permanent residents in the
area.
   Our reconstruction of the subsistence (based on studies by Dr. Hans
Helbaek ) shows that the villagers were principally engaged in collecting
wild plant foods such as wild alfalfa, spring milk vetch (Trigonella, a
small pea), canary grass, oat grass, goosefoot, and the fruit of the wild
caper. In addition, the Bus Mordeh folk planted small amounts of emmer
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 8.<c.         249
wheat and two-row hulled barley, both early forms of the modem hybrid
grains. Except for sickles, we see no evidence of special agricultural tools.
If the land was prepared for seed at all it was probably done with a
digging stick, but even without preparation, the mud flats at swamp’s
edge could have received seeds.
  Meat was obtained in two ways, by herding of goats and by hunting.
The former activity probably took at least some of the people seasonally
into the nearby mountains when the summer's heat had desiccated the
grassy vegetation. Since Deh Luran is situated within a few hour’s walk of
the high mountains, transhumance could have been accomplished easily.
Saimarreh,    a large, fertile, but isolated river valley, ideal for seasonal
grazing, lies just 59 km. north of Deh Luran.
   Hunting was probably as important for food as stockbreeding, and it is
just possible that most of the goats were kept for their hair or milk rather
than for meat. Gazelle, onager, wild ox, and pig were the most commonly
hunted beasts, but fish, mussels, and turtles, along with migratory water
fowl, were also taken from the swamp (faunal studies made by Kent V.
Flannery).
  In short, during the Bus Mordeh we are dealing with people who were
exploiting a broad spectrum of their environment for subsistence, and the
domesticates were only one aspect of a diversified subsistence economy.
Although the pattern suggests “incipient agriculture,” we should imagine
the activities were not greatly different from those practiced by hunters in
the same area for tens of thousands of years.
   If we pay attention only to subsistence, I think we would argue that
only a simple social organization is called for. Since flocks were probably
property, however,     it is likely that some   device of inheritance, perhaps
lineages, was used to keep them “in the family.” The amount of farming
does not suggest a need for ownership of land, and there is no activity
that I can imagine that would have required much central direction. At
most, I can imagine simple bands composed of lineages which, by anal-
ogy with hunters today, were probably patrilineal.

  At 6000 B.c. the people of the Mohammad           Jaffar Phase occupied an
area that had been in use for some 2,000 years by farmers and herders.
During this time patterns of cropping, fallowing, and grazing had prob-
ably developed and we see the beginnings of the use of crude stone hoes
to break the soil. Emmer wheat and two-row barley were still virtually
the only crops grown, but the sheer acreage under cultivation had prob-
ably increased. The patterns of exploitation are seen indirectly in the
vegetation.   We    infer that a great deal of the natural vegetation had
already been removed because we find pasture plants like plantain, mal-
low, vetch, oat grass, and canary grass in its place. In particular we find
great amounts      of the mesquite-like, woody, perennial legume, Prosopis,
whose fleshy pods are edible. Intensive grazing alone would probably
250                                  Variability among Occupational Units
have led to these botanical changes, but habits of cropping were also
contributory factors. To supplement agricultural crops, villagers still col-
lected wild rye-grass, goat-face grass, vetchling, and caper.
   Herding was probably more important economically than in the Bus
Mordeh, for now we find both sheep and goats that show in their skele-
tons clear signs of domestication. Nevertheless, hunting was still impor-
tant. In fact, the percentages of bones of domesticates    to wild animals
shows that there are relatively twice as many wild animal bones in the
Mohammad Jaffar as there were in the Bus Mordeh. What this may
suggest is that sheep and goats were being kept for their wool, hair, and
milk rather than for their meat. The same wild animals as before were
hunted and the pattern of exploitation cannot have been much different.
  In summary, we cannot infer very much about social organization just
on the basis of subsistence practices. The patterns must have been much
as they were during the Bus Mordeh Phase: relatively undifferentiated
communities organized into lineages. Men probably did the hunting and
women were responsible for gathering wild plants; the women may also
have done the farming as an extension to their usual food-gathering activ-
ities. Shepherds may have gathered Prosopis pods.

  By 4000 B.c. we see quite different patterns of subsistence. The most
important change was the establishment of simple but systematic irriga-
tion, even in places like Deh Luran where rainfall is usually sufficient to
support crops. Helping to increase the agricultural profits was a fully
modern complex of grains and animals. These included free-threshing
hexaploid wheat, emmer, six-row barley, and a variety of plants of lesser
importance such as peas and lentils. This complex of plants is significant
because it comprises even today the most important crops in the area, a
sign that the Bayat people had attained an optimum adaptation to their
environment.   Flax, another commercially important crop. in later times
was being grown, perhaps more for its oil than for its fibers. Important
additions to the livestock were cattle, soon (if not already) to be used as
draft animals, and dogs skeletally similar to the familiar guard dogs of the
area today. Skeletally modern sheep and goats were present and we infer
from finding evidence of textiles that they may have been kept partly for
their wool and hair.
   In spite of the balanced agricultural complex, hunting continued to be
important, as did the gathering of wild food from the swamp. Perhaps in
subsistence the people were never better off than during the Bayat Phase
when they had fully effective agriculture and stock breeding, and they
could supplement their diet with a variety of wild foods.
  With the new agricultural practices, there was possibly a revision of the
division of labor. As irrigation proved valuable, some men probably la-
bored at making the small canals and tending them (at least seasonally )
instead of spending the bulk of their time in hunting. If more land were
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 8.c.                 251
under cultivation, men were probably also pressed into duty at harvest
time. If draft animals were used to pull plows, we should be even more
confident that man’s role as hunter was beginning to lessen in importance
relative to farming.
   Unfortunately we have no evidence for either beer-making or the use of
milk for yoghurt or cheese, but all of these products could have been
developed by this time. One supposes that women, as today, were respon-
sible for the dairy products. This also goes for bread, which had probably
replaced gruel as a staple when bread wheat became available.
  Although our data suggest prosperity, we have not found any signs in
Deh Luran that the people stored food. On the other hand, given the
environment, one should be very much surprised to find that sufficient
resources existed for year-round maintenance on a hand-to-mouth basis.
If nothing else, the potential of irrigation farming suggests that there
must have been seasonal surpluses.
   Assuming agricultural surpluses, we can go farther with our inferences
by following the arguments made by Sahlins in his study of social stratifi-
cation in Polynesia (Sahlins, 1958). There, where social stratification is
related to production, the greater the surpluses the greater the degree of
stratification. Sahlins maintains this will be true so long as there is a
redistributional system.
  Still assuming surpluses, the question is, how were they depleted? In
Polynesia they were eaten and distributed at feasts or displayed until they
rotted. But there are other ways of disposing of them. The Indians of the
Northwest Coast destroyed their property, and we know from both arche-
ology and historical sources that food was used as offerings in temples in
Mesopotamia. The destruction of surpluses seems especially appropriate
where they are annual and predictable, but where annual surpluses may
be more doubtful, perhaps sacrifices or offerings are the more reasonable
disposition. Looking at southern Mesopotamia, we know that temples
were   centers for redistributing the economy’s   surpluses   (Hole, 1966).
After they were received in the temple warehouses, the surpluses were
partly distributed to support craft specialists, some of whom made goods
for use by the upper stratum of society.
   Before this chain of inferences goes too far, let me say that if we look
only at Deh Luran, there is no evidence for actual redistribution, but if
the Deh Luranis were keeping pace with neighboring areas, by 4000 B.c.
they were channeling some of their surpluses into temple centers. In fact,
the available evidence suggests that Deh Luran was not as far advanced
in social organization as southern Mesopotamia. This leaves us with the
probability that, as a minimum,     in all three periods dissemination    of
surpluses took the form of periodic slaughter of livestock for feasts on
ceremonial occasions.
  In summary,   during the Bayat Phase, subsistence patterns allow us to
infer a social organization of only the same complexity as earlier: a line-
252                                     Variability among Occupational Units
age organization and perhaps landholding bands.              On the other hand,
there are hints that the division of labor may have changed, principally to
draw men more actively into food production. There is no reason to
believe that much central authority was required to manage the simple
irrigation for which we have evidence.

SETTLEMENT   PATTERNS

Our second line of evidence is settlement patterns and population size.
Our data here are woefully meager in some respects and fairly rich in
others. They consist of a handful of test excavations coupled with exten-
sive surface surveys in west Iran and adjacent Iraq. We are particularly
short in excavations. Archeologists working in the American Southwest or
the Great Plains are accustomed to digging whole villages or at least
significant portions of them; in the Near East where mounds may be tens
of meters high and acres in extent containing remains of houses built of
sun-dried   mud,   one   seldom   digs a site extensively.    And   even   in sites
where large areas have been exposed, the subtle traces of architecture
have often gone unrecognized.
  Archeologists often base inferences about social organization on settle-
ment patterns (Wauchope, 1956, pp. 129—57; Willey, 1956). This is true
both where whole settlements can be stripped to show the layout of a
village and the relationship of different structures within it, and where
areas have been surveyed extensively enough to show the distribution of
sites. No site in west Iran has been entirely laid bare; therefore, I can only
make inference about the size of population in particular villages. How-
ever, since survey data are relatively fuller, I can make inferences about
the sizes and types of sites in each period and also—from the location of
villages—some inferences about subsistence practices.
   Inferring social organization directly from the size of a population is a
little known and relatively untested procedure but it is suggestive and
should not be ignored when we are grasping at inferential straws anyway.
Some years ago Raoul Naroll (1956) published a paper in which he relat-
ed population size to social organization and craft specialization. His rea-
soning was based on sociological studies which suggested that the admin-
istrative component of a society will increase in proportion to the size
of the society. In other words, as the number of people increases and
therefore also the potential relationships among them inevitably increase,
the structures for supervising these additional relationships will also
increase. By structures I refer to families, lineages, clans, sodalities,
councils, and the like. When Naroll tested this proposition with a sample
of primitive societies he found it to be true. For example, he found that
authoritative officials are necessary when the size of the group exceeds
500; 1,000 people require policing. I think most of us would also intuitively
recognize the validity of the proposition for our modern society (cf. Par-
kinson’s Law). At the present time, even though we cannot test the
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 8.c.             953
hypothesis with our own data, we shall consider it true and see where its
implications lead.
  The method I use to arrive at an estimate of the population of a village
requires some explanation. My data on the sizes of villages are derived
mainly from surface survey, admittedly a risky procedure when sites were
occupied for more than one period, but at least a maximum size is thereby
established. I then use an index to arrive at a possible range in the size of
the population. The index is based on the area of the village and the
estimated number of people who would have lived there. I use demo-
graphic data from two sources, a survey by Frankfort (1950) of modern
Mesopotamian towns and a survey by Gremliza (1962) of villages in
Khuzistan. Frankfort found roughly twenty houses per acre and between
six and ten persons per house. From this he deduced that there are
between 120 and 200 persons per acre in a modern town. Gremliza found
twelve houses per acre and about four or five persons per room, about
55 people per acre, less than half Frankfort’s findings. Frankfort’s data
are derived from cities where non-agricultural people live densely packed
into crowded quarters, a situation not to be expected in rural areas or in
prehistoric villages. For this reason, I shall use an index of twelve to
fifteen houses per acre and four to six persons per room in calculating my
estimates of population.
   In this section I shall depart somewhat from my previous presentation
and include data from areas outside Deh Luran so as to get a notion of
orders of magnitude.

   The Bus Mordeh settlement in Deh Luran is unique in the immediate
vicinity and we know of no others in Southwest Iran. This may be due to
the nature of the surveys and the fact that the small settlements of this
age are likely buried under subsequent accumulations of silt. The nearest
possibly comparable site is in the Kermanshah Valley, well into the moun-
tains at an elevation of about 4,500 feet. The preliminary report on work
in this valley suggests that Asiab was a camp of hunters (Braidwood,
1960; Braidwood, Howe, and Reed, 1961). In this same valley system
was also found a handful of preceramic open sites that are probably
comparable to Asiab. Zawi Chemi Shanidar (Solecki, 1964) in the moun-
tains of northeast Iraq at an elevation of about 2200 feet seems to have
been a camp of herders, and Karim Shahir (Braidwood and Howe, 1960,
pp. 52-54), also in northeast Iraq, may have been a hunters’ or herders’
camp. The latter two sites showed only the most tenuous evidence of
architecture, but Asiab had a large ovoid depression that may have been
some form of pit house.
  When we take later periods into consideration, the evidence seems to
show a relatively small population throughout the Zagros. All of the sites
are themselves small and they are widely scattered with respect to one
another. The Bus Mordeh settlement was probably not much larger than
254                                 Variability among Occupational Units
an acre, from which we would infer a population of between 50 and 100
persons.
   Basing our reconstruction of social organization on the distribution of
sites, each settlement must have been a separate band, perhaps holding
rights to certain territories. Since the Bus Mordeh village was relatively
permanent, even though it may have been used only seasonally, we
should expect that houses were regarded as forms of property to be
inherited in the family line. The size of the population would not suggest
any organizational groups beyond the family or lineage.
  Architectural evidence from various sites shows a variety of types of
dwellings;   in the Bus Mordeh   itself, there are very small rooms       con-
structed of slabs of clay, laid like bricks. The rooms, measuring some 2 by
 % meters, may have been for storage or pens rather than dwellings, but
of this we have no direct evidence. At the moment, the most we can say is
that we have absolutely no evidence for the differentiation of functions or
status on the basis of architecture.

  For the Mohammad       Jaffar Phase, we   can   draw   on substantial   data
from surrounding areas. In Deh Luran itself there may be one more site
of this age although this cannot be certain from our survey data alone. As
we noted before, negative demographic data must be used with caution.
It appears, however, that for Deh Luran, the population was not greatly
larger than previously. We do have better information for the excavated
Mohammad Jaffar village’s size, however; it could have been as large as
three acres in extent and may have contained 145 to 270 people.
   Additionally, we can bring to bear survey data from a nearby area of
Khuzistan, where Adams    (1962) found some 34 sites of an age immedi-
ately successive to the Mohammad Jaffar. Perhaps of greater interest than
the number of sites is the fact that they were all between two and five
acres in extent. This suggests a maximum size to allow for villages of
Mohammad Jaffar age, and accords well with our estimate of the Mo-
hammad Jaffar settlement in Deh Luran. Neither do these inferences
contradict data we have from other Mohammad Jaffar age sites (Jarmo,
Sarab, and Guran) excavated in the Zagros mountains.
   Using my index, a typical settlement contained between 100 and 450
persons. Although the absolute size of the population in Deh Luran is still
not very large, there may well have been more organizational units than
previously. Using Naroll’s results for what they are worth, we calculate
about five organizational types in a typical village. Translating this into
actual offices, there may have been a village council, made up of heads of
lineages, administering the largest of the villages.
   To supplement these data we have two other excavations in west Iran.
Guran in the Hulilan mountain valley is a fully settled village, apparently
with substantial houses and year-round occupation (Mortensen, 1963).
The picture here is very much like what we find in the Mohammad Jaffar
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 B.c.                 255
settlement. The site of Sarab, not far from Guran, is another case, how-
ever (Braidwood, 1960). There we did not find evidence for substantial
architecture nor for prolonged settlement. It appears to have been a
summer camp used by herders whose parent village, if any, might well
have been like Guran or Mohammad Jaffar.
  Some years ago, Braidwood’s teams surveyed the large Mahi-Dasht and
Kermanshah valleys and found about sixteen sites of Mohammad Jaffar
age (Braidwood,     1960). The distribution of these sites can only be de-
scribed as scattered, from which I infer that each village retained the
surrounding lands for farming and grazing. In other words, I suspect
some sort of corporate ownership of a territory large enough to support
the major subsistence activities. The major problem with this reconstruc-
tion is that we do not really know which of the settlements may have
been permanent and which were camps like Sarab. In view of the height
of many of the sites, I find it hard to believe that at least some of them
were not permanent villages with substantial structures suitable for year-
round occupation.
  It is probably significant that we did not find settlements of this age in
many valleys as we surveyed western Iran (Hole, 1962). We only found
them where there was a complex of good soil, sufficient rainfall for dry
farming, and plenty of surface water.     In many areas the earliest sites
pertain to the final period of our interest. From this we infer that during
Mohammad Jaffar times the population was not very great, and that
transhumant herding was more important in many areas than farming.
   With regard to the internal differentiation of villages, we are again
troubled by lack of architectural details. We have no evidence for build-
ings that show unusual function and certainly none that would indicate
differentiation of status.
   Settlement data thus lead us to the conclusion that the Mohammad
Jaffar people were living in autonomous villages composed of self-suf-
ficient, socially equal people.

  If we include data from outside Deh Luran, evidence for the Bayat
Phase, around 4000 s.c., is fuller. For this period we can use data from
Khuzistan and the Diyala plain where surface surveys (Adams, 1962,
1965) have yielded extensive information about settlement patterns and
land use. Our work in Deh Luran shows similar results but on a much
smaller scale. In brief, we find a large increase in the number     of sites;
three-fold would not be out of order for Khuzistan generally. In the
Diyala region east of Baghdad, where no earlier settlements were found,
there were 22 sites of this period. According to Adams, the Diyala was
settled by farmers moving out of southern Mesopotamia, a fact suggesting
that the density of settlement in the south was becoming uncomfortable
(cf, Buringh, 1957). That the people settled where rainfall could still be
used to advantage when supplemented with limited irrigation may indi-
256                                Variability among Occupational Units
cate that irrigation techniques had not yet developed very far, or that
population pressure was not severe.
   Such clustering of sites as we can discern is around shallow basins
where water would have stood, or along the edges of braided, meander-
ing streams. There is very little evidence in the distribution of sites that
cooperative irrigation projects were undertaken. In fact, Adams says that
the typical sites in the Diyala region are 10 to 20 km. apart, a distribution
that hardly suggests political or economic integration.
   We can hardly deny a large population increase between 6000 B.c. and
4000 B.c., but we see a curious thing; most of the additional population
settled in uniformly small villages. It looks as if there were an upper limit
to the size of a village that people preferred and when it was reached, a
group of people budded off to settle a new village on virgin lands.
  According to Adams’ Khuzistan data (Adams, 1962), most of the vil-
lages were two to five acres, but by 4000 B.c. a few settlements ap-
proached the size of towns—nine to twelve acres. In these we should
expect to find a population up to 800 persons, a sufficient concentration
to require some    organized authority—at least a village council.        From
settlement alone we can infer little more, for in west Iran we do not have
excavations that reveal buildings of sacred or public function nor build-
ings that might have housed an elite class. Unfortunately where we do
have towns with temples and presumably a priestly organization to run
them, we do not know the size of the population, the details of subsis-
tence, or the range of crafts that were practiced. Eridu in southern Meso-
potamia is said to have been about twenty acres in extent, but a large part
of that was taken up by the temples and subsequent settlements (Lloyd,
1948). Eridu may have been the largest settlement in the world for its
time, and we know of nothing in, west Iran comparable to it.
  In the Deh Luran valley for this period we are still faced with a lack of
evidence in architecture or settlement patterns for status differentiation
and occupational specialization. The increased size of the population still
does not suggest any particular pressure on the land. We should be sur-
prised as a consequence if we have anything more than self-sufficient,
autonomous villages in the economic sense, although surely marriage ties
must have linked the settlements with reciprocal obligations between
families.

ARTIFACTS

Our third line of evidence is inference drawn from the occurrence             of
artifacts in archeological sites. Study of these artifacts can reveal trade
items and their sources, evidence of craft specialization, perhaps sex or
status symbols, and ceremonial objects.
  During the Bus Mordeh Phase we have, in the presence of obsidian and
cowrie   shells, limited   but positive   evidence   of trade.   The   obsidian,
amounting to less than 1 per cent of the total chipped stone, probably
came from eastern Turkey, and the cowrie shells, used for beads, came
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 B.c.                    957
from the Persian Gulf. In the case of shells we should imagine that they
were passed on during sporadic and unpredictable times of contact be-
tween the Deh Luranis and peoples to the south. But obsidian may be a
different case. In view of the fact that this material occurs in all sites of
Mohammad Jaffar Phase agriculturalists in the Zagros, in some cases in
amounts up to 40 per cent of the total flint, I should think some sort of
regular trade must have been carried out. Deh Luran on the lowland
steppe appears to be out of the main stream of this trade, however. If we
seek a mechanism for ensuring continuous trade, we can probably find it
in the seasonal gathering of shepherds in mountain valleys along the route
where most of the obsidian seems to have been distributed. No merchants
or markets are implied by this trade.
   Other hints of similar interaction with peoples of the mountains can be
found in the presence in Deh Luran of emmer wheat and two-row barley,
both native to the mountains and therefore imports to Deh Luran. Al-
though I see no reason to think that the Bus Mordeh villagers were not
themselves cultivating these grains, the possibility remains that they could
have traded for them with the mountain folk.
   The artifacts give us no reason to think that the division of labor was not
that commonly found among hunting peoples: men hunt and women
gather and prepare wild plant food. Herding was probably done by men
and boys, farming by women. Proficiency in crafts, but not necessarily
much specialization, is seen in the flint chipping and manufacture of
stone bowls, matting and basketry, and ornaments.
   Some clues to the ritual or ceremonial activities of these people are
given by the presence of phallic objects and animal figurines. Both classes
of object could well have had magical significance, and I think it is
noteworthy that the figurines were of goats, the only domesticated ani-
mals kept by the villagers.There is no hint that there were notions of
formal religion or that there were even special religious practitioners.
Rather, I am inclined to see in these data a do-it-yourself magic of the
sort commonly found among primitive people today. This, of course,
would not necessarily preclude the presence of part-time shamans or
magicians.
  There are no artifacts that would contradict the impression that the Bus
Mordeh   society was   egalitarian.   We   find beads,   pendants,   and labrets
scattered throughout the deposits, but unfortunately we found no burials.
In view of what we find in the Bayat Phase, perhaps the mere presence of
oraments is significant—an indication that they were available to anyone
who chose to wear them.
  Taking into consideration the artifacts we have mentioned, the overrid-
ing impression is that the Bus Mordeh society was relatively undifferenti-
ated and egalitarian.

  There is slighty fullér evidence for the Mohammad          Jaffar Phase. Ob-
sidian was still being obtained, but at this time it comprised about 2 per
258                                   Variability among Occupational Units
cent of the total chipped stone, perhaps an indication that the line of
supply had become more dependable. In addition to obsidian, there are
beads of turquoise whose source seems to have been the northeast part of
Iran and, again, cowrie shells from the Persian Gulf. Also present is a
small amount of native copper hammered, cut, and rolled into shape
 (Smith, 1965). This material came from the Iranian plateau, probably
near the site of Sialk. A single seed of a lentil is the only evidence for new
mountain plants appearing in this phase.
   Perhaps significant in regard to trade and/or transhumance is the fact
that during our surveys in the Khorramabad Valley, we found sherds of a
type made by the Mohammad Jaffar villagers. These sherds were found
in caves, sites that had been used as shepherds’ camps. There were no
contemporary villages in the Khorramabad Valley. Along with the indige-
nous sherds in Deh Luran, we also turned up a few pieces of pottery that
seem to be imports, but we are at a loss to specify their origin. We should
imagine that they came from the south which is archeological terra incog-
nita at this period.
  Trade   items thus show    somewhat    wider   contacts   at this period, al-
though the amount of this evidence is not overwhelming. There is no
reason to think that any of these artifacts could not have been procured
through exchange by shepherds coming in contact seasonally with other
peoples.
  The division of labor was      probably essentially as before,     since the
major activities had not changed greatly. The only additional craft that
would require any new skills was pottery making and that, as Matson
(1965) has pointed out, can easily be viewed as a simple extension of the
housewife’s chores.
  Turning to the ritual or ceremonial practices, we have the continued
use of figurines and phallic symbols, but now, rather than animals, we
find crude human figurines and a great many stylized “figurines” that
might have been humans. Significantly, perhaps, we do not continue to
find goat figurines although goat herding was at least as important as
earlier. Still, nothing in these data suggests a basically different ceremon-
ial orientation from what we found in the Bus Mordeh.
   Some burials show an elaboration of personal ornamentation but no
unequivocal signs of rank or status. All the skeletons that we have found
were wearing beads and some of them had labrets and bell-shaped pubic
coverings. About all I would hazard at the present time is that there was
some sexual differentiation in apparel. The fact that turquoise beads oc-
curred with the burials suggests that the material was not overly expen-
sive and that rights to property of this sort were personal. From the
artifacts I infer that the Mohammad Jaffar people could indulge small
luxuries and cater to their individual whims in matters of dress, but I
cannot see any signs of rank or status differentiation.

  In some ways the Bayat people look colorless compared with the Mo-
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 8.c.               259
hammad Jaffar folk, for there are many fewer types of artifacts and
virtually no ornaments.
   The making of flint tools was much less important and less than 1 per
cent of the total chipped stone was obsidian. A recent analysis of some of
this obsidian indicates that it may have an Anatolian origin (Renfrew,
personal communication; Cann and Renfrew, 1964). Interestingly
enough, however, there is some evidence—in the type of stone and in the
technique of chipping—that finished flint blades were also imported, per-
haps a sign that the local craftsmen had given up the art of fine flint
chipping. A few copper pins from the Iranian plateau occur in these
contexts but not in sufficient numbers to suggest regular trade. Rare
sherds turn up that look as if they were derived from northwest Iraq or
Turkey, but the bulk of the “foreign” sherds seem to have their closest
links with southern Mesopotamia and Khuzistan. What we see, generally
speaking, is the opening up for the first time of contacts with the west as
well as with the Zagros mountain region. Unfortunately, we cannot spec-
ify the mechanics of exchange between these regions.
   When new methods for using the land had been invented, farming
became much more important economically and men were probably
drawn more and more into agricultural labor. The few burials we found
had grinding stones in association, probably a sign that the women looked
forward to an eternity of labor preparing food. Craft specialization is best
seen in the making of pottery, which, by this time, was done largely with
the wheel and fired to high temperatures. The wares are well-made,
standardized in style and design, and show considerable functional differ-
entiation. Storage vessels, drinking cups, cooking pots, and dishes are well
represented. However, there is no evidence that pottery was manufac-
tured for trade or export; I should think that women continued to pro-
duce it largely for their own families.
  The burials were remarkable for their lack of ornamentation, consider-
ing what we had found in the earlier phase. Perhaps this negative evi-
dence is significant in the sense either that ornaments could not be ob-
tained or, as seems more likely, that decoration was reserved for special
persons. Unfortunately, except for a few labrets scattered through the
deposits, we find no evidence that anyone was decorated. On the other
hand, we did find seals, which are usually interpreted as signs of individ-
ual ownership and this could be taken as a sign of burgeoning status
differentiation. What I refer to here is a difference between the producers
and those who organized and directed production and distributed the
surpluses.
  When we turn to evidence for ritual or ceremonial activities, curiously
enough, we find none; there are no figurines or phallic symbols. Consid-
ering data from other regions, I wonder if we are not justified in assuming
that religious practices have taken a different bent. I wonder whether the
personal, do-it-yourself magic of earlier times had not been replaced by a
less personal, more   formal   ritual presided over by trained. attendants.
260                              Variability among Occupational Units
Since we know, for example at Eridu, that contemporary peoples were
making offerings and sacrifices at temples, it does not seem wholly out of
the question that the Bayat folk may have been doing likewise. Obviously
we need far more     data than we   have, preferably positive rather than
negative.
  A study of the artifacts found in the Bayat Phase leads me to wonder if
there are not some status differences among persons and perhaps even
special offices. Otherwise I see a community of prosperous farmers most
of whom are equal to one another, although perhaps not as rich in arti-
facts or ornaments as in earlier times.


                                 Summary

BUS MORDEH PHASE, ABOUT 8000 B.c.
The Bus Mordeh villagers exploited a wide spectrum of their environment
as they practiced their diversified subsistence activities. In terms of eco-
nomic importance it would be hard to decide which activity contributed
the most, but we do know that they herded goats, planted emmer wheat
and two-row barley, engaged in extensive collecting of wild plant food,
hunted the wild ungulates of the plain—ox, onager, gazelle, and deer—
and obtained fish, clams, turtles, and migratory birds from the swamps.
 We know that the people resided in Deh Luran during the winter but we
 infer that they moved seasonally into the mountains with their herds
 when the hot dry summer began and the crops were harvested. We
 cannot imagine a much better example of what one might call “incipient
 agriculture.”
    The subsistence activities suggest that the people probably divided
 their labor much as modern hunting peoples do—the men hunted and the
 women collected and prepared plant food. Children and old people might
 have been employed in herding or collecting.
_ The Bus Mordeh folk lived in a small village, of no more than 200
 persons and probably half that many. Their small houses were of mud.
 There is no indication from our excavation in this settlement of rooms of
 diversified function or that any persons enjoyed larger or better built
 dwellings.
    Sites of this age are rare in the Near East and we can only conclude that
the population was fairly small. It seems likely, in view of the permanence
of the settlement, that the Bus Mordeh people held traditional rights to
the land surrounding the site but there is no reason to suspect that indi-
viduals held rights to certain fields. In fact, the agriculture was probably
so rudimentary and land so relatively available that ownership of fields
would not have been an issue.
   On the other hand, in the fact that there were houses of some perman-
ence and flocks of goats, I wonder if there might not have been some
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 8.c.                 261
corporate ownership of these tangible assets. One could easily imagine
that a lineage organization would be sufficient to keep such property in
the family. If there were lineages, I should expect them to have been
patrilineal by analogy with most hunting peoples today.
   The people engaged in a minor amount of trade for obsidian and
cowrie shells but this was not of an amount or economic consequence to
suggest that markets or commerce might have been a factor.
   Figurines of goats and phallic symbols suggest some sort of magical
practices but not the sort that would require any professional practition-
ers. Neither are there crafts that we should think complex enough to have
required full-time craftsmen.
    In all, I should think that family units were essentially self-sufficient
and that the most embracive social organization was the lineage. The
people were probably egalitarian with the major subdivisions of labor
based on sex and age.

MOHAMMAD JAFFAR PHASE, 6000 B.c.
At 6000 B.c. the people exploited the same broad spectrum of their envi-
ronment as before, but there is some evidence that their system of crop-
ping, fallowing, and grazing was beginning to have deleterious effects on
the landscape. We see this especially in the occurrence of the edible
Prosopis plant, a woody legume that favors a landscape from which the
natural vegetation has been removed either by repeated cropping or ex-
tended grazing. The agricultural techniques show some signs of innova-
tion; crude hoes were used to break up clods and more land was probably
under cultivation. Along with the farming, however, was the continuation
of herding, now of both sheep and goats. The probable pattern of trans-
humance into the mountains during the summer is underscored by our
finding Deh Luran type pottery in Khorramabad. These sherds were
found in caves that had been used by shepherds before people settled
down there as farmers.
   Hunting was at least as important as before and men must have spent a
large portion of their time in this pursuit. If this is the case, women were
probably doing most of the farming along with their other activities in
collecting wild foods.
   From our surveys we see some increase in population generally, al-
though we are not sure there was more than one village in the Deh Luran
Valley. At a maximum, the Mohammad Jaffar village covered three acres
and contained 270 people. This size of settlement seems to be typical of
the times and was not greatly surpassed until later. There is no evidence
that population pressure was a factor in social relations. In fact, where we
have good survey data, as for instance in the Kermanshah Valley, we find
that the sites are scattered. From this I infer that each village retained
rights to enough land surrounding it to ensure a comfortable subsistence.
Mountainous terrain for grazing was probably open to whomever wished
262                                   Variability among Occupational Units
to use it, although traditional territories must have been recognized.
   It would be interesting in this regard to know what became of the
hunters that used to live in the mountains. Did they give up the chase and
become farmers, or were they exterminated by herders whose flocks were
subjected to depredations by human hunters?
   Trade in obsidian and cowrie shells continued and, at least in the
former commodity, increased. Perhaps this reflects the additional links in
the chain that would have resulted from a larger population. Interestingly
enough, during this period we find both copper and turquoise, products
of the Iranian plateau. Although this suggests wider contacts, we are still
not dealing with regular trade, and certainly not with commerce.
   Excavations have not revealed any unusual building that would indi-
cate either public functions or status differentiation. The adornment of
burials shows that people wore many kinds of ornaments, but since all the
burials show this, we cannot see ornamentation as anything special. In a
few cases it looks as if we can distinguish men by their ornaments, but the
data are still too scarce to push very far.
   The only new craft is the making of pottery, a not very difficult recom-
bination of arts that had long been practiced by women. We do not see
any specialization here.
   A slightly different focus of magic or religion is suggested by figurines.
We still find phallic pieces, but instead of goats we now have human
figurines, some of them highly stylized. Although perhaps the focus has
changed, the essentially non-specialized nature of these practices is still
indicated.
   Viewing the phase generally, I see population being added in small-
village increments, none of which is large enough to require much gov-
ernment. I should think that each village was probably composed of
several lineages and, when necessary, group activities were presided over
by elders. The picture is that of the self-sufficient egalitarian community.

BAYAT PHASE, ABOUT 4000 B.c.
By 4000 3.c. subsistence patterns had changed considerably and with
them the general productivity had risen. Free-threshing hexaploid wheat
and six-row barley were the principal crops, and these were grown with
the aid of a simple system of irrigation on land that was prepared with
stone hoes. Along with sheep and goats, we also find the Bayat people
keeping cattle and using guard dogs. Some hunting and gathering was
also practiced, although wild cattle had evidently disappeared by this
time.
   Considering the more effective subsistence practices, I wonder whether
men were not drawn into agriculture much more than in earlier phases.
Setting up the irrigated plots, breaking the soil and harvesting the larger
areas under cultivation may have required the services of men. Women’s
tasks probably increased. They were no doubt engaged in preparing the
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 B.c.                 263
food and in gathering wild plants, but with the coming of bread wheats,
they would also have had to grind flour and make bread and perhaps
beer. Moreover, once the Deh Luranis had cattle, I should be surprised if
cheese and yoghurt were not being used. Textiles and spindle whorls
attest to the art of weaving, and sheep were probably being kept more for
their wool than for their meat. By this time women may have had enough
to do around the house without going out to till the soil.
   Although we do not find evidence of storage, the potential for produc-
ing considerable agricultural surpluses existed. Wherever there are sur-
pluses it is usual to dispose of them in a way that will enhance the
prestige of the giver or the good of the community. In early historic times
in Mesopotamia the preferred method of disposing of surplus was to
redistribute it through the temple both in the form of offerings and as a
means of supporting the temple and its officials. Since we have no evi-
dence yet of contemporary temples in Deh Luran, the specific disposition
of any possible surpluses will have to remain a question.
  I judge from surveys that at least a three-fold increase in population,
added in small-village increments, occurred in the 2,000 years following
the Mohammad Jaffar Phase. Most of the settlements were between two
and five acres but a few were between nine and twelve acres. These
latter, found in Khuzistan, were towns in which up to 800 people lived.
The size of these groups is certainly sufficient to allow, if not absolutely
require, additional governmental or regulatory groups on the order of
sodalities and councils. In Deh Luran itself we find only a few other
relatively small villages that may have been linked by marriage ties, but I
see no reason why they should have been linked governmentally.
  During the Bayat Phase, for the first time, there is contact with lands to
the west. Some of the sherds and obsidian look as if they had come from
Anatolia, other sherds as if from Mesopotamia.       Continued contacts with
the mountain and interior portions of Iran is indicated by the presence of
obsidian, and flint blades were probably being imported. If this is true,
the people were resorting to trade to supply a necessary tool.
   A greater degree of craft specialization than earlier is seen in the
making of pottery which by now was well-fired, wheeled, standardized,
and displayed a wide range of functions. Although the pots were well
made, I see no reason      to think that they were    imported; indeed they
display locally specific designs.
  A curious fact is the lack of ornaments in the Bayat deposits. Although
there were   scattered occurrences   of labrets and “studs,” there were no
beads and pendants. The few burials were interred without equipment,
except for grinding stones, a fact that gives us some idea about the peo-
ples’ notions of the role of women    in the after-life. On the other hand,
although “jewelry” is not present, we do find seals, engraved stones that
were used to make individual signs of ownership when pressed into wet
clay. This suggests that.some notion of property existed and that there
264                                    Variability among Occupational Units
may have been persons who had accumulated more than others. In con-
nection with this, I wonder if ornaments were not reserved for persons of
status.
   Finally, we can consider religious or magical beliefs. We found no phal-
lic objects, and only one fragment of a figurine, in this or any of the
phases intervening betwween the Mohammad Jaffar and Bayat Phases.
This suggests a different focus of expression and I wonder, by analogy
with other areas, if religion had become less personal and directed mainly
by semi-professional priests toward the pantheon of gods who controlled
natural events and, ultimately, agricultural productivity.
   In summary,   from the evidence in Deh Luran, I see little more com-
plexity of society than in the previous phase, but I should think that the
former divisions of labor between the sexes may have changed somewhat.
Each community was certainly self-sufficient economically and there is no
indication of any inter-village cooperation. The larger communities of this
time were likely directed by a council of elders and, to judge from certain
negative evidence, sumptuary goods may have been reserved for persons
of unusual status, a cut above the typical villager.
   It should be apparent from this brief summary that our data from Deh
Luran and surrounding areas are far too skimpy to allow many detailed
inferences about social organization. Still, I think we can see avenues to
pursue in future seasons of excavation that will lead to much more precise
insights into the nature of the society that for the first time in culture
history was called upon to adapt itself to agriculture and then to urban-
ism and finally to civilization.


                                 References

Apams, R. M., Jr. 1962. Agriculture and urban life in early southwestern Iran.
  Science, 136: 109—122.
     . 1965. Land behind Baghdad. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Braipwoop, R. J. 1960. Seeking the world’s first farmers in Persian Kurdistan.
  Illustrated London News, 237: 695—97.
Braipwoop, R. J., and B. Howe. 1960. Prehistoric investigations in Iraqi
  Kurdistan. Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, No. 31. Chicago: Uni-
  versity of Chicago Press.
Braipwoop, R. J., B. Howe, and C. A. Reep. 1961. The Iranian prehistoric
   project. Science, 133: 2008—2010.
Burincu, P. 1957. Living conditions in the lower Mesopotamian plain in
  ancient times. Sumer, 13: 30—46.
Butzer, Kart W. 1965. Physical conditions in eastern Europe, western Asia
  and Egypt. In Cambridge Ancient History, vol. 1, chap. 2. Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
Cann, J. R., and Cotin RENFREw. 1964. The characterization of obsidian and
  its application to the Mediterranean region. Proceedings of the Prehistoric
  Society, 30: 111-33. (This gives an example of the method, although data
  from Deh Luran are not included.)
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 x.c.                         265
FLANNERY, K. V. 1965. The ecology of early food production in Mesopotamia.
  Science, 147: 1247—56.
FRANKFORT, Henri. 1950 Town           planning   in ancient    Mesopotamia.     Town
  Planning Review, 21: 98—115.
Gremuiza, F. G. L. 1962. Ecology of endemic diseases in the Dez irrigation
  pilot area. (A report to the Khuzistan Water and Power Authority and Plan
  Organization, Government of Iran.) New York: Development and Resources
  Corporation. (Unpublished. )
Hore, Frank. 1962. Archeological survey and excavation in Iran, 1961.
  Science, 137: 524—26.
——.    1966 Investigating the origins of Mesopotamian civilization. Science,
  153 (3736): 605—611.
Ho.e, FRANK, and K. V. FLANNERY. 1962. Excavations at Ali Kosh, Iran, 1961.
  Iranica Antiqua, 2: 97-148.
Ho.e, Frank, K. V. FLANNeERy, and J. A. Neety.        1965. Early agriculture and
  animal husbandry in Deh Luran, Iran. Current Anthropology, 6: 105-106
Lioyp, Seron. 1948. The oldest city of Sumeria: Establishing the origins of
  Eridu. Illustrated London News, 213: 303—305.
Matson, F. R. 1965. Ceramic ecology: An approach to the study of the early
  cultures of the Near     East.   In F. R. Matson    (Ed.), Ceramics       and man.
  Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
MorTENSEN,   PepER.   1963. Excavations   at Tepe Guran,      Luristan.   Acta Arche-
  ologica, 34: 110—21.
NarROLL,   Raout.   1956. A preliminary index of social development.        American
  Anthropologist, 58: 687-715.
Sanins, M. D. 1958. Social stratification in Polynesia. Seattle: University of
  Washington Press.
SmirH, C. S. 1965. Metallographic study of early artifacts made from native
  copper. Paper presented at XI International Congress of the History of
  Science, Poland (mimeographed).
Sotecki, R. L. 1964. Zawi Chemi Shanidar, a post-Pleistocene village site in
  northern Iraq. Report of the Sixth International Congress on the Quaternary,
   Warsaw, 1961, 4: 405—412.
Van Zeist, W., and H. E. Wricut, Jr. 1963. Preliminary pollen studies at
   Lake Zeribar, Zagros mountains, southwestern Iran. Science, 140: 65—67.
Wavucnoper, Rosert (Ed.). 1956. Functional and evolutionary implications of
  community patterning. In Seminars in Archaelogy: 1955, Memoir No. 11,
  Society for American Archaeology.
Wutey, G. R. (Ed.). 1956. Prehistoric settlement patterns in the New World.
  New York: Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research.
FOURTEEN                                  KENT V. FLANNERY        AND MICHAEL       D. COE




                                       Social and Economic Systems
                                        in Formative Mesoamerica




Between 1500 and 800 s.c., Mesoamerica made the transition from semi-
sedentary food-collecting and primitive cultivation to the threshold of
early state formation. From central Mexico to northern Honduras, this
half-millennium was characterized by stable villages of pole-and-thatch or
wattle-and-daub houses, sometimes accompanied (by the end of the per-
iod) by mounds which enclosed high-status burials or served as platforms
for temples. At the start of this period, known as the Early Formative, a
social type previously unrecorded for North America came into being: the
sedentary village farming community.’
  A number of authors have already speculated on the social organization
which may have characterized the Formative village. All see it as being
on a “tribal” level of complexity, with some principal of clanship, presum-
ably based on descent, as the organizing factor in society. Pita Chan
(1955, p. 39), Wolf (1959, p. 57), and MacNeish (1964, p. 536) have all
tentatively suggested that descent may have been matrilineal.’ From the
comments by Willey, Ekholm, and Millon (1964, p. 456), we suspect they
  1 Although we accept full responsibility for the content of this paper, we wish to
thank Robert McC. Adams, Marshall D. Sahlins, Saul H. Reisenberg, and Stephen F.
Borhegyi for constructive criticism and suggestions. Nancy H. Flannery prepared all
the accompanying illustrations.
   * Matrilineality seems extremely unlikely to us, as it is practically unknown any-
where in Mesoamerica, least of all among the marginal groups like the Cora-Huichol,
Tarahumara, etc. who might conceivably have maintained some. vestiges of the pre-
civilized sociopolitical institutions of the region. So far as we know, all unilateral clan
systems in the area are patrilineal.

                                             267
268                                   Variability among Occupational Units
would reconstruct it as bilateral or patrilineal, The bases for these prev-
ious speculations have been certain aspects of material culture (like fe-
male figurines),or ethnographic data taken from codices or colonial doc-
uments, or ethnographic analogies drawn from cultures believed to be on
the same level of development as the Formative cultures of Mesoamerica.
We agree that ethnographic analogy is a useful tool, but that, as Clark
(1952) suggests, it must not be done indiscriminately: some reasonable
methodology must be applied.
  An excellent discussion of such methodology was presented by Sapir
(1916) half a century ago. Sapir was attempting to derive chronology
from the available ethnographic data on the American Indian. It is our
hope eventually to be able to put some ethnography into the available
chronology of the prehistoric American Indian.
  There are a number of methodologies through which one could ap-
proach a reconstruction of social organization in Formative Mesoamerica.
It could be attempted through studying the social systems of contempo-
rary or near-contemporary peoples on the margins of Mesoamerica, whose
way of life may bear some resemblance to that of the Formative. The
Cora-Huichol, Tepehuan, Lenca, Jicaque, and Tarahumara come to mind,
but with the exception of the latter group, they are poorly documented.
Alternatively, one could study the “internal marginals” in Mesoamerica,
like the Huave or Sierra Mixe, who may have participated only to a
limited extent in the “Classic” or “Post-Classic” civilizations of that region.
One problem is that it is extremely difficult, in the case of all these
“marginal” peoples, to sort out the cultural elements which diffused to
them at a late time level. Nor do we know to what degree they actually
represent “survivals” of a Formative way of life; though their technology
may in some ways hark back to that period, there is little guarantee that
their social organization has remained the same.
   Still another method has been applied in recent years with increasing
frequency. This is to examine the sociopolitical system of an area in the
ethnographic present in an attempt to isolate the ecological and economic
systems with which it is interrelated. This approach argues that sociopolit-
ical systems can be seen to function as adaptive mechanisms, and that
certain forms of society may be seen to occur repeatedly with certain
types of economy or exploitive production. This being the case, tentative
analogies can be drawn between peoples in like ecological situations using
like means of production. As pointed out by Clark (1952, p. 3), this can
be a dangerous game if the cultures involved are “far removed in time
and space” and with “no continuity of tradition” between them. It is made
correspondingly safer the closer the two societies lie in time and space,
and the closer their cultural relationship.
   One way of reconstructing the exploitive systems of Formative cultures
in various ecological areas is through a study of settlement patterns, com-
bined with examination of the plant and animal remains from archeologi-
Flannery/Coe Social and Economic Systems in Mesoamerica                269
cal sites. We attempted this in a paper (Coe and Flannery, 1964a), at the
close of which we advanced some theories about the possible conditions
under which the settled communities characteristic of the Mesoamerican
Formative first appeared. These theories had to do with the number and
spacing of the resource areas (or “microenvironments”) exploited by
communities which were either sedentary or well on their way to seden-
tism. Since the publication of that paper, a number of colleagues have
drawn to our attention some interesting parallels between our comments
on the exploitation of different resource areas in Mesoamerica, and Sah-
lins’ comments on the exploitation of different resource areas in Polynesia
(Sahlins, 1958). In this paper we would like to examine those parallels a
bit further, and to suggest how Sahlins’ approach enables us, using our
1964 paper as a take-off point, to present two models for consideration
with regard to the social organization of Formative communities. That
these models have at least a degree of historical reality will be shown by
their applicability to documented Classic and Post-Classic cultures in
Mesoamerica.


               The “Microenvironment Reduction” Process
In our 1964 paper we compared and contrasted the economies           of the
Early Formative period in the arid highland valley of Tehuacan, Mexico
(MacNeish, 1964), and the wet tropical Pacific coast of Guatemala where
we had excavated in 1962. Both areas had Formative villages in the
second millennium B.c., but we inferred from archeological data that the
Guatemalan coast had a higher density of stable villages with a larger and
more sedentary population. It was our suspicion that this had come about
(at least partially) because the early farmers of the Guatemalan coast
had supplemented their highly productive maize crop mainly with the
products of a single resource area: the lagoon and estuary system. Our
excavations produced mineralized corn cobs of Nal-Tel/Chapalote type as
well as cultivated avocados, but these domesticates were heavily supple-
mented with marine catfish, red snapper, gar, snook, crabs, oysters, mus-
sels, marsh clams, and other products of the estuary system. Products of
other resource areas were lacking; the Early Formative villagers of the
Guatemalan coast seemed to have remained stable and sedentary year-
round in a single “microenvironment” out of the eight we defined for that
part of the coast.
  In contrast to this, the early villagers at Tehuacan   exploited a whole
range of different resource areas, no one of which could be counted on
for sustenance throughout the year. There were mountain woodlands,
whose acorns and wild avocados ripened in September; cactus forests on
the lower mountain talus, whose fruits (like prickly pear) were available
in April; alluvial valley floors, where the rainy-season com farming was
done, and where the mesquite trees bore edible pods in July; and so on
270                                   Variability among Occupational Units
through several environmental zones. Long after villages of wattle-and-
daub houses appeared, MacNeish’s data (1964) showed extensive forays
into distant resource areas to supplement agriculture with wild products;
and these forays mitigated against fully sedentary life. Our 1964 article
concluded that a “reduction in the number and spacing of the microenvir-
onments needed for exploitation by a given community” was one factor,
at least, in early settled life.
   Unfortunately, we presented this in somewhat oversimplified form, a
situation we hope partially to correct here. First of all, there are many
methods of “microenvironment reduction” other than the one chosen by
the farmer-fishers of the coastal lowlands.     Second    (and here is where
Sahlins’ data may be relevant), the method chosen can have quite pro-
found effects on both the basic economy and the sociopolitical organiza-
tion of the Formative group in question. We would like to begin by
distinguishing two basic means by which “microenvironment reduction”
can be accomplished,     and two   different   kinds   of societies   which   can
result. Later we will refer to the ethnographic literature to see if there is
any indication that such societies ever existed in Mesoamerica.
   Figure 1 gives our first theoretical model. Let us suppose, for example,
that a pioneer band of Mesoamerican Indians arrives for the first time in
an ecological zone which contains four clear-cut microenvironments: a
tidewater lagoon, an oak woodland, a talus area of maguey and prickly
pear, and an alluvial plain. The band plants its corn on the alluvial plain
and supplements its harvest with wild resources gathered in the various
resource areas (Fig. la). At least two possibilities for settled life are open
to them.
   The first (Fig. 1b) results in what animal ecologists call a “contagious
distribution.” This term is used, among other things, to describe “aggrega-
tions on suitable but limited substrate” (Allee et al., 1949, p. 393). Here
the choice made by the band is to concentrate all its exploitive effort on
the one resource area which it deems most productive, largely ignoring
the others. In the case of our hypothetical band, let us suppose that they
settle on the edge of the tidewater lagoon, farming the surrounding flats
while developing a highly productive fishing technology. Villages begin
to appear along the shore of the lagoon; settlement is permanent there,
with the oak woodland and maguey/ prickly-pear habitats left vacant. As
daughter communities segment or “bud off,” they stay within the same
resource area, simply moving a convenient distance downshore from the
parent community. When the number of villages has reached, let us say,
eight, all eight will be concentrated in the lagoon microenvironment.
   The second type of “microenvironment reduction” involves a more bal-
anced distribution of settlement through all habitats—even those which,
taken alone, could not support a self-sufficient village. The point is that
self-sufficiency is not achieved (or even desired), because permanent
settlement is possible through cooperative specialization. A single village
 Flannery/Coe     Social and Economic Systems in Mesoamerica                           o71




                                     WITH Se Ses
                                    MAGUEY ANOPS EGA

                                                 LAGOON   -
                                              ESTUARY           %

                          &<                SYSTEM             a
                                                               ins“py
                         &   6                                      cA e
                      wo
                      oo                                             % %vA
                    & 2               a. Pioneer settlement             *,%




             b.. Contagious’ distribution                 c.Dispersed   distribution
                                 Figure 1. Theoretical models.


does not attempt to exploit all resource areas; each exploits the habitat in
which it is settled, and exchanges its products for those of other habitats.
To modify our hypothetical case, let us now imagine our eight villages
distributed two-to-a-resource-area (as in Fig. lc). The villagers in the oak
woodland zone hunt deer and collect acorns, trading nuts and dried meat
to the lagoon-side villages in exchange for fish and maize, or to the talus
slope area in exchange for cactus fruits, maguey fiber and pulque, and so
forth. Each village has reduced the number of microenvironments it must
exploit to one, yet it shares in the products of all zones. This is the kind of
situation which Sanders (1956) has already called “symbiosis.”
  What are the evidences that such choices were actually made in Forma-
272                                  Variability among Occupational Units
tive Mesoamerica? We offer Figure 2 as a sample. These are not theoret-
ical models, but actual settlement pattern maps showing Formative sites
known for identical time periods (1500 to 200 s.c.) on the Guatemalan
coast (Fig. 2a) and in the Tehuacan Valley (Fig. 2b). The Guatemalan
coastal map is probably as close as anyone will come to finding truly
“contagious” distribution of sites; although future survey will undoubtedly
recover additional villages upstream in the tropical forest, nearly all sites
we found (especially in the Early Formative) cluster along the estuary
system. In the Tehuacén Valley, MacNeish’s survey showed a complex
settlement system involving villages with temples, villages without tem-
ples, and seasonal camps    (MacNeish,   1964, Fig. 6). These were distri-
buted through a number of resource areas, with temple villages mainly on
the central alluvial plain.


                            Economic Systems
Certain obvious economic differences go hand in hand with these two
distinct modes of microenvironment reduction. In the case of the “contag-
iously distributed” villages on the Guatemalan coast, each household had
access to all means of production utilized in the area, and the exploitive
tasks performed by any one community were probably “carbon copies” of
the tasks performed by every other community. Probably there was little
movement of products from house to house or from village to village; at
least, faunal remains suggest little dependence on resources which would
not have been available to all villages (Coe and Flannery, 1964a). Nor
would there have been seasonal differences in surpluses between villages.
When the fish are running, all villages have fish; when the corn is ripe, all
villages have corn. Under such conditions, any “trade” is usually limited
to balanced reciprocity.
   In the “symbiotic” situation, the reverse is true. There are great differ-
ences between communities regarding access to specific resources and
performance of specific tasks, as can be imagined in the Tehuacan situa-
tion. When acorns are ripe, cactus fruits are not. When cactus fruits are
ripe, maize is not. Products move between households and between vil-
lages, and members of the same kin group may perform drastically dif-
ferent exploitive tasks should they happen to live in different resource
areas. We know for a fact that basic subsistence products and raw mate-
rials were on the move all over the highlands of Mexico in the Formative:
examples that come to mind include obsidian, as well as tropical products
traded into temperate parts of the Tehuacdn Valley, like cotton and za-
potes (MacNeish, 1964, and personal communication).Obsidian reached
the Early Formative villages of the Guatemalan coast in very tiny
amounts despite the presence of extensive natural deposits in the adjacent
highlands (Coe and Flannery, 1964b).
  Reciprocal exchanges between villages soon cease to be the most ef-
Flannery/Coe   Social and Economic Systems in                    Mesoamerica   273


                            DON         rT       mi        es?        ,
                        *     preety   Sy! S   SERS   O¢   ‘     oO       c
                              Sa | Ha      whe             NES




                                  PHPPFONP
                                        THD AY
                                  CONGLOMERATE © §& §




                      Figure 2. Settlement patterns.
274                                  Variability among Occupational Units
ficient method of exchange under the conditions described for the Mexi-
can highlands. Under a reciprocal system, the villages farthest from the
obsidian fields would have to wait until handfuls of obsidian had slowly
been traded from village to village along the route; perishable products
like zapotes would not last out such a trip. One solution to this was the
famous market system of the Mexican highlands. Still another, with an
even greater potential for the support of an aristoi and full-time religious
functionaries, is what Polanyi (1957) calls a “redistributive” system.
Through such a system, all resource areas channel their products direct to
a single local accumulative center from which goods can then be redis-
tributed to the scattered network of surrounding villages. The surpluses
accumulated in this local center support civic activities not seen in the
satellite villages; compare the pattern MacNeish (1964, Fig. 6) gives for
“temple towns” and their surrounding villages during the Santa Maria
Phase in the Tehuacan Valley.


                              Social Systems
Now, one might legitimately ask, so what? What difference could these
alternative settlement and economic systems make in the social organiza-
tion of Formative Mesoamerica? It is here that we feel Sahlins’ Polynesian
data can usefully be called into play.
  In his study of social stratification in Polynesia, Sahlins (1958) distin-
guished two basic types of sociopolitical organization, and these seem to
be associated with differences in resource exploitation very like those we
have just finished describing. The first type of social organization was the
“descent line,” or simple “unilateral exogamous clan” of Kirchhoff (1959).
These we might describe as corporate groups united by actual (or fiction-
alized) common descent through the male or female line; all members of
a given lineage being regarded as equals. The second type of social organ-
ization was the ramified system, “ramage,” or “conical clan” of Kirchhoff
(1959), which is not really a clan at all. The basic difference between this
and the preceding type of organization is that it is based not on unilateral
descent but on primogeniture; individuals are ranked in status according
to their distance from the direct line of descent from an ancestor at the
apex of the ramified system. (For a more detailed description of these
systems, see Kirchhoff, 1959; Sahlins, 1958).
  The distribution of these two social types in Polynesia was such that
Sahlins concluded that “the two systems, the ramified and the descent-
line, may represent differing adaptations related to variations in ecologi-
cal conditions. In particular, the distribution of natural resources, i.e., of
the zones of exploitation, may have been a factor prejudicing the devel-
opment of ramified or descent-line systems” (Sahlins, 1958, p- 201).
  Inspection of Sahlins’ data shows that unilateral exogamous clans were
almost inevitably associated with a settlement pattern of our “contagious”
Flannery/Coe Social and Economic Systems in Mesoamerica          275
type and an exploitive economy aimed at a relatively small number of
resource zones; that is, in situations analogous to our Guatemalan coastal
example. Ramified systems, on the other hand, occurred in areas where
the settlement pattern more closely resembled the Mexican highland type,
with balanced distribution through a number of strategic resource areas
and an economy involving redistribution. According to Sahlins, these dif-
ferences were related to the segmentation process, the “budding off” of
new villages, which (in Polynesia as in Mesoamerica) differed greatly
depending on the exploitive pattern. Stated in simplest terms:
  connection between segmented households would tend to be maintained if, in
  the process of segmentation, the new household was apt to move into a new
  resource area and thus specialize in a particular type of strategic production.
  Maintenance of ties would result in the growth of interconnected ramages
  and a hierarchy for purposes of effecting equitable distribution of goods, by
  both reciprocal and redistributive methods.    If, on the other hand, a new
  household moved into an area identical in exploitable opportunities to that
  in which the parent household was situated, connection between the two
  would weaken and dissolve and descent-line systems result (Sahlins, 1958,
  p- 215).

   Let us compare for a moment the highland Mexican settlement pattern
and that of the analogous “high island” peoples examined by Sahlins. If
exploitive and segmentary factors do indeed prejudice the development of
sociopolitical systems, the most effective type of organization for the re-
distributive economy of the highland “symbiotic” areas would have been
a ramified system. Our Formative highland peoples should have had an
organization based not on participation in an equalitarian descent group,
but on a great branching network of individuals of varying rank. Such a
system would perhaps involve a paramount chief responsible for the main
centers of accumulation and redistribution, and a carefully-kept system of
genealogies designed to establish at all times the complex levels of rank
within the society. Based on the functioning of such a system elsewhere,
we might tentatively construct a hypothetical model for its function in
highland Formative Mesoamerica (see Fig. 3).
   Here the branches of the ramified system serve as channels or “con-
veyor belts” along which goods flow to and from the redistributive cen-
ter: the head of each ramage is responsible for all the goods produced by
all households whose status derives from their relationship with him; he in
turn deals with the persons from whom he derives his inherited status.
Groups producing products of the oak woodland channel them to their
subchief, who relays them to the redistributive center; the same is done
with the products of the lagoon-side villages and the maguey-producing
areas. The paramount chief insures redistribution of all products in an
equitable manner down the same chain of command. The system can be
expanded indefinitely into any number of environmental zones, even ones
which would not support individual communities on a basis of self-suf-
276                                                   Variability among Occupational Units
ficiency. Near-total exploitation of a diverse environmental area results,
maintaining the system as well as producing surpluses which can be used
in ways which ritually reinforce the status of the chiefs and sub-chiefs.
Elaborate genealogies controlled the ranking system in Polynesia and
reified the paramount chief by tracing his direct ancestors back to mythi-
cal culture heroes or dieties.


                                        Ethnographic Data
The model given in Figure 3 is admittedly no more than hypothetical
with regard to the Formative symbiotic areas of highland Mesoamerica. It
worked in regions far removed in time and space; but, as Clark has
stressed, we must demonstrate its presence in Mesoamerica itself before it
attains the status of an acceptable hypothesis. Actually, although the de-
tails are not identical, one can find in the ethnographic literature of the
southern Mexican highlands, evidence of social systems analogous to
those of Sahlins’ ramified, status-conscious Polynesians. And interestingly




                                                        i
                                          MYTHICAL          ANCESTOR
       <—-- = Accumulation                              1
       <—— =Redistribution                            ty
                                                PAST CHIEF




       Deceased
      itt)                      Cee     eee     eee         CeCe   eee   eeeeererereee   Serre rr   errr   ery
       Living
                                  -——      —~                      —~——---   ~~




                siecscronecsee”
                    ey   fs J     :              L
                                                 TWLiv anne uur!

                    Figure 3. Hypothetical model for symbiotic areas.
Flannery/Coe Social and Economic Systems in Mesoamerica            277
enough, these peoples occur in the very areas where we assume a “sym-
biotic” economy, with redistribution and regional market systems.
   One reference which comes immediately to mind is the study by Dahl-
gren de Jordan (1954) on the Mixtecs of Oaxaca, based on colonial
documents and on Alfonso Caso’s studies of the Pre-Columbian codices of
the Mixteca. After a few abortive attempts to fit the Mixtecs into one or
another category of unilateral clan, Dahlgren (1954, p. 150) concluded
that the codices, at least, “excluded the existence of exogamous unilateral
clans, patrilineal as well as matrilineal.” None of the ancient sources
suggest unilateral descent or inheritance of property. The term Dahlgren
eventually settled on was “ambilateral clans with endogamous tendencies”
(1954, p. 151). In point of fact, her description is one of a ramified
system with status based on primogeniture.
   The Mixtecs could have been lifted, with slight modification, directly
out of Sahlins’ study. They kept elaborate genealogies of their royal
lineages—like those of Tilantongo and Teozacualco—many of which have
come down to us in the form of codices. The same term was used for
paternal and maternal uncles, and for paternal and maternal aunts. There
were marriages between cross-cousins, parallel-cousins, and even (among
the aristoi) between brother and sister. Marriage was not rigorously
exogamic, but rather rigorously “cacique con cacica y principal con prin-
cipala”, according to rank within the system. The caciques of Tilantongo,
Tlaxiaco, Achiutla, and Teposcolula are described as having been “her-
manos,” and among the direct descendants of the Mixtec ruler “Eight
Deer” alone there were four cases of brother-sister marriage. In the em-
pire of the Mixteca the distinctions of rank were inherited and extreme:
those of high birth were civil and spiritual leaders and below them spread
a complex hierarchy of caciques, principales, macehuales, and even slaves
—slaves who did not form a separate caste, but were ultimately related to
the rest of Mixtec society (Dahlgren, 1954, pp. 145-62).
   That the Mixtecs were hardly unique is suggested by codices from
other parts of the Mexican highlands which show genealogies distinguish-
ing direct-line descent versus collateral relatives. We in no way claim that
these social systems were identical to those of the highly stratified Poly-
nesians. We conclude, however, that there is in highland Mexico        (south
of the Aztec area) a suggestion of ramified systems rather than unilateral
exogamous clans—and, moreover, that such organization occurs in areas
which had (so far as we can infer from archeological data) a balanced,
“symbiotic” settlement pattern dispersed through a number of different
strategic resource areas. It therefore seems to us reasonable to postulate
that the Formative villagers of highland regions like the Tehuacan Valley
(Fig. 2b) had a ramified type of organization, albeit in a somewhat less
elaborately developed form.
   What about the lowland Formative villagers, with their “contagious”
settlement pattern,   their reciprocal economy,   and their essentially “one-
278                                   Variability among Occupational Units
resource-zone” economy? Theoretically, they should have had a unilateral
exogamous clan system in the Formative, with equalitarian lineages and
little status differentiation. This seems to us a not unreasonable picture to
paint for the Guatemalan Pacific coast, and perhaps much of the Maya
lowlands, at 1500 B.c. However, by Late Formative times the Guatemalan
coast was the scene of the highly complex Izapa-style ceremonial centers
 (Stirling, 1943; Coe, 1963, p. 34), and the Maya region had emerged as a
nuclear area. This poses certain theoretical problems which we will now
discuss.
   According to Kirchhoff, the distinction between the exogamous unilat-
eral clan and the ramified system of organization is not merely typologi-
cal: the ramified system is a virtual prerequisite for all higher forms of
social organization. “The form of kinship organization which the unilateral-
exogamous principal of clanship creates appears definitely as a blind
alley, and more than that; at a certain stage of economic and general
cultural evolution as an obstacle to further development” (Kirchhoff,
1959, p. 265). This is because the corporate, equalitarian nature of the
unilateral lineage, while it creates solidarity, does not provide the distinc-
tions of inequality which are a necessary precursor of stratified society.
The ramified system, whose very principle is rooted in differences of
rank, provides the basis out of which social classes can emerge. And the
individual ramages which are its building blocks can proliferate indefi-
nitely, while the gulf between slave and paramount chief continues to
widen. According to the Kirchhoff hypothesis, it is no surprise that high-
land Mesoamerica, with its ramified system, reached a level of civiliza-
tion. But the Maya empire comes as a great surprise, and it is here that
we would like to suggest a slight modification in theory. We propose that
the lowland civilizations of Mesoamerica could, and did, arise out of an
Early Formative unilateral-exogamous clan system.
   One of us (Coe, 1961) has already argued that the Petén Maya did in
fact exploit one relatively homogeneous environmental zone, with no re-
gional differences in crop cycles or exploitive techniques, and a segmenta-
tion pattern which presumably resembled that of our “contagious” For-
mative villages: new   communities   remained    in the same   resource   area.
And in fact, the Maya did have unilateral exogamous clans—patrilineal
ones—or “double unilineal descent,” with the patrilineage being the most
important in terms of land inheritance, governmental position, and exo-
gamic marriage (Coe, 1965, p. 104; Roys, 1940, p. 38). But far from being
in a “blind alley,” the Maya reached a level of civilization, with carefully
kept royal genealogies and enormous status differences, accumulation and
redistribution of surpluses, and a truly pyramidal society. This suggests
some rethinking of the potential of the unilateral exogamous clan system.
   For one possible explanation of what happened in lowland Mesoamer-
ica, two quotations from Fried may be relevant. “In all egalitarian eco-
nomies . . . there is also a germ of redistribution. It receives its simplest
Flannery/Coe    Social and Economic Systems in Mesoamerica               279
expression in the family but can grow no more complex than the pooling
and redisbursing of stored food for an extended family . . .” (1960, p.
716). This is the situation we picture along the lagoon and estuary sys-
tems of the coastal lowlands in the Early Formative.
   The move from egalitarian to rank society is essentially the shift from an
   economy dominated by reciprocity to one having redistribution as a major
   device. That being the case, one must look for the causes of ranking... in
   the conditions which enable the redistributive economy to emerge from
   its position of latency ...to dominate a network of kin groups which ex-
   tend beyond the boundaries of anything known on the reciprocal level
   (Fried, 1960, p. 719).
Our settlement pattern surveys indicate that this had indeed happened by
Late Formative times on the Guatemalan coast: major agricultural ac-
tivity had shifted inland to the piedmont in the vicinity of the Izapan
ceremonial centers, leaving specialized salt-making communities behind
to exploit the lagoon-estuary area (Coe and Flannery, 1967). Moreover,
there is clear evidence that our coastal farmer-fishers were now linked into
the diversified economic network of the adjacent highland area, with its
specialized exploitive communities    (like obsidian knapperies: see Shook
and Proskouriakoff, 1956, p. 96).
  However, we would like to suggest that the lowland Maya provide one
example of the way in which a redistributive economy and a stratified
society can grow out of patrilineal exogamous clans, even in a region
where only one “resource area” is exploited, if services are substituted for
products. Our model for this situation is indicated in Figure 4. The maize
produced by the patrilineages engaged in farming is channeled into the
regional center not for redistribution to food-producing lineages in other
resource areas, but to lineages dealing in services: stone-masons, archi-
tects, lapidaries, priests, bureaucrats,   and all the craft specialists who
went into the making of the Maya empire. These lineages reciprocated by
channeling into the redistributive center not products, but services. A
kind of stratified society can be built up by ranking the patrilineages
involved in these various activities (Fig. 5). The patrilineage directing all
this, from whom the caciques were recruited, as pointed out by Roys
(1957, p. 4), became reified to the point where it justified its lofty posi-
tion by claiming descent from the gods. So stratified was the society that
although individual patrilineages practiced exogamy, they married only
with members of equally highly-ranked patrilineages. Four classes—
nobles, commoners, serfs, and slaves—could be recognized at the time of
European contact (Roys, 1940). Proskouriakoff (1961) has indicated that
many inscriptions of the Classic Maya were the genealogies of ruling
patrilineages; Kelley (1962) believes he has detected such a royal patri-
lineage in the monuments of Quirigua and Copan. It seems not unreason-
able to suppose that this stratified society grew out of a Formative pat-
tern of patrilineal exogamous clans, a supposition which is lent support by
280                                  Variability among Occupational Units
the fact that the historic Maya did continue to practice strict patrilineal
exogamy—in contrast to the ramified Mixtecs, with their brother-sister
marriages.




       Deceased




                RULING      CRAFTSMEN          CORN   FARMERS
             PATRILINEAGE       :
                     Figure 4. Lowland Mayan model.




                       Figure 5. Patrilineage ranking.
Flannery/Coe Social and Economic Systems in Mesoamerica                  281
                               Conclusions
Since we cannot step into a time-machine,     there is much we can never
know about the social organization of Formative Mesoamerica. We be-
lieve that on the basis of settlement patterns we can detect two basic
types of exploitive systems: the “contagious” of the coastal lowlands and
the “symbiotic” of the highlands. There is ethnographic evidence that the
lowland area had exogamous patrilineal clans at time of European con-
tact, while the southern highlands had a ramified type of organization.
This would tend to support Sahlins’ theories of a functional correlation
between, on the one hand, the “contagious” segmentation process and
unilateral-exogamous organization and, on the other hand, between rami-
fied organization and a symbiotic economic pattern with redistribution.
We would therefore like to suggest a tentative methodology for Meso-
american archeologists who are interested in reconstructions of Pre-
Columbian social organization.
   1. Settlement pattern surveys aimed at showing whether the distribu-
tion of sites is “contagious” or a “balanced dispersal” with regard to re-
source areas.
   2. The recovery of plant and animal foods in an effort to define specif-
ically the products relied on, and the resource areas from which they
come,   with such a study’s implications for the nature    of the economy:
whether balanced reciprocity or redistribution dominates.
  3. The investigation of house and even room patterns within villages
where possible, searching for clues such as Longacre (1964) and Hill
(1965) have found, regarding the residence of corporate groups within
the community itself.
   4, Excavation of cemeteries such as reported by Longacre (1964) in an
effort to determine degree of ranking, whether inherited or acquired, and
the degree of status between members of adjacent dwellings and adjacent
communities.
  5. Utilization of ethnographic data from areas closely associated in time
and space, where possible, with the prehistoric community.
   6. Last, a search for correlations such as Sahlins attempted between
residence patterns, economy, and social systems. This is the most difficult
step, and the one which leaves us most open to error. But it is only
through taking this step that we may enable ourselves, some day, to
reconstruct in detail the processes that shaped        early Mesoamerican
civilization.
                          Postscript, 1968
This article was written in 1965. In the intervening years, further research
by Flannery, Coe, and Sahlins (independently), plus cogent criticisms by
Roy A. Rappaport and Ben Finney, render untenable part of the scheme
presented here. Redistribution is indeed an efficient means of exploiting a
varied environment, but it now seems unlikely that it is functionally related
to stratification or “ranking” of the kind seen in rampages. Our new data
282                                         Variability among Occupational Units
suggest that stratification is more closely linked to preferential access to the
most highly productive of the local resource areas. In the case of the
Valley of Oaxaca       (where     Flannery is now    working),     the critical area is a
narrow belt of river land which can produce two to three crops a year if
irrigated. On the Gulf Coast (where Coe is now working), the key zone
is the natural levee of the Coatzacoalcos River. Hereditary control of these
zones    by caciques    (today)     or high-status   lineages    (prehistorically)   seems
more important in the origins of stratification than redistribution. It is hoped
that future research in Mesoamerica will clarify the extent to which redistri-
bution is a tangentially related or a completely independent variable.


                                       References

ALLEE, W. C., ALFRED E. EMERSON,           ORLANDO     Park, THOMAS      Park and KARL
  P. Scumipt. 1949. Principles of animal ecology. Philadelphia: W. B. Saun-
   ders.
Cor, MicuareL D. 1961. Social typology and the tropical forest civilizations.
   Comparative Studies in Society and History, vol. 4, No. 1.
     . 1963. Cultural development in Southeastern Mesoamerica In Betty J.
  Meggers and Clifford Evans (Eds.), Aboriginal cultural development in
  Latin America: an interpretative review. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collec-
  tions, 146(1): 27—44.
     . 1965. A model of ancient community structure in the Maya lowlands.
  Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 21(2): 27-114.
Cor,     MicuareL   D., and Kenr     V. FLANNERY.     1964a.     Microenvironments     and
  Mesoamerican prehistory. Science, 143 (3607): 650—54.
     . 1964b. The Pre-Columbian obsidian             industry    of El Chayal,       Guate-
  mala. American Antiquity, 30(1): 43—49.
        . Early cultures and human ecology in South Coastal Guatemala. Smith-
  sonian Contributions to Anthropology, Vol. 3. Washington, D.C.: Smith-
  sonian Press.                ‘
Ciark, J. G. D. 1952. Prehistoric Europe: the economic basis. New York:
  Philosophical Library.
DAHLGREN DE JORDAN, Barsro. 1954. La Mixteca: Su cultura e historia prehis-
   panicas. Coleccién cultura Mexicana, No. 11. Mexico, D.F.: Imprenta Uni-
   versitaria.
Friep, Morton H. 1960. On the evolution of social stratification and the
   state. In Stanley Diamond (Ed.), Culture in history: essays in honor of Paul
   Radin. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hit, James N. 1965. The Broken K Site. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
   University of Chicago.
Keiitey, Davi H. 1963. Glyphic evidence for a dynastic sequence at Qui-
   riqua, Guatemala. American Antiquity, 27 (3): 323—35.
KrrcHHorF, Paut. 1959. The principle of clanship in human society. Reprinted
  in Morton H. Fried (Ed.), Readings in anthropology, Vol. 2. New York:
  Thomas Y. Crowell. (Originally published in Davidson Journal of Anthro-
  pology, Vol. 1, 1955.)
Loncacre, WiLL1AM A. 1964. Archaelogy as anthropology: a case study. Sci-
   ence, 144(3625): 1454-55.
MacNeErsH, Ricuarp S. 1964. Ancient Mesoamerican civilization. Science, 143
   (3606) :531—37.
Flannery/Coe Social and Economic Systems in Mesoamerica                     283
Pina CuAn, Roman. 1955. Las culturas precldsicas de la cuenca de Mexico.
   Mexico, D. F.: Fondo de Cultura Economica.
PoLany1, Karu,   1957. The economy      as instituted process. In Karl Polanyi,
  Conrad M. Arensberg, and Harry W. Pearson        (Eds.), Trade and market in
  the early empires: economies in history and theory. Glencoe, Ill.: The Free
  Press.
ProskourRIAkoFF, TATIANA. 1961. The lords of the Maya realm. Expedition, 4:
  14-21,
Roys, Ratpn L. 1940. Personal names of the Maya of Yucatan.        Contributions
  to American Anthropology and History, No. 31. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie
  Institution of Washington.
——-.   1957. The political geography of the Yucatan Maya. Publications, No.
  613. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Institution of Washington.
SAHLINS, MarsHALi D. 1958. Social stratification in Polynesia. Seattle: Univer-
   sity of Washington Press.
SANDERS, WiLL1AM T. 1956. The central Mexican symbiotic region: a study in
  prehistoric settlement patterns. In Gordon R. Willey (Ed.), Prehistoric set-
  tlement patterns in the New World. New York: Wenner-Gren Foundation
  for Anthropological Research.
Sapir, Epwarp. 1916. Time perspective in aboriginal American culture, a
   study in method. Geological Survey, Memoir No. 90, Anthropological Series,
  No. 13. Ottawa: Canada Dept. Of Mines.
SHook, Epwin M., and TATIANA ProskourIAKOFF. 1956. Settlement patterns in
   Meso-America and the sequence in the Guatemalan highlands. In Gordon R.
  Willey (Ed.), Prehistoric settlement patterns in the New World. New York:
   Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research.
STIRLING, MATTHEW W. 1943. Stone monuments of southern Mexico. Bureau
  of American Ethnology, Bulletin, No. 138. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
  Institution.
Witter, Gorpon     R., Gorpon     F. ExHoim,   and René   F. Mitton.   1964. The
  patterns of farming life and civilization. In Robert C. West   (Ed.), Natural
  environment and early cultures. Handbook of Middle American Indians, Vol.
  1 (Robert Wauchope, Gen. Ed.). Austin: University of Texas Press.
Wo tr, Eric R. 1959. Sons of the shaking earth. Chicago: University of Chi-
  cago Press.
FIFTEEN                                                STUART    STRUEVER




                                                            Woodland
                            Subsistence-Settlement Systems
                                 in the Lower Illinois Valley




This paper analyzes material remains to arrive at an interpretation of the
structure of segmentation   of two prehistoric cultural systems; that is, it
investigates how the structure of material remains reflects the manner in
which a social unit segments to exploit its biophysical environment. It is
not a study of social organization in the sense that it analyzes material
remains to arrive at the behavioral attributes of a social system (that is,
the mechanisms for maintaining social integration, such as descent rules,
post-marital residence patterns, etc.), but rather it is an attempt to sketch
the morphology of two subsistence-settlement systems—to point up the
kinds, quantities, and spatial configurations of material items that repre-
sent the skeleton of an extinct system for exploiting, processing, and stor-
ing food and other resources. This paper also attempts to compare these
two sequentially related systems, to describe the important differences
between them, and at least to broach the problem of explaining the
observable changes between the earlier and later systems.

             Premises: Archeological Research Objectives
                       and the Nature of Culture
Archeology as conceived here attempts to describe and, more particularly,
to explain the total range of cultural similarities and cultural differences
                                   285
286                                    Variability among Occupational Units
observable in space and through time (L. R. Binford, 1962, p. 217). An
evolutionary perspective is appropriate to the explanation of these simi-
larities and differences. More efficient, therefore more differentiated, cul-
tural forms replace less efficient ones, and higher levels of integration
replace lower ones in the history of culture change. Structural diversity of
cultures is expected consistent with widely varying social and natural en-
vironments, and culture history bespeaks of increasing diversity through
time. The latter reflects higher levels of adaptive specificity as cultures
become more closely geared to differing environments. Rates of cultural
evolution are not uniform: they change with shifting selective pressures
and vary with the adaptive requirements of diverse environments.
   Culture is viewed as a system of functionally interdependent parts in
which change in one aspect is related in specifiable ways to changes in
others. Explanations for change in a cultural system require understand-
ing of these linkages. Cultural variations in space are seen in terms of the
differing adaptive requirements of specific environments; accordingly,
varying ecological potentialities are linked to different exploitative eco-
nomies and the latter, in turn, to differing integrative requirements and
therefore to different forms of social structure, etc.
  The job of archeology is to demonstrate correlations of structural ele-
ments within, and co-variation of elements between, cultural units
through time and space. Archeology seeks, first, to reconstruct historical
sequences of cultural systems with focus on the linkages between vari-
ables involved in the structural modification of these systems through
time. And secondly, through controlled comparative studies between
sequences it seeks to elucidate the functional relationships pertaining be-
tween these variables.
  L. R. Binford (1962) suggests that material culture and the material by-
products of living relate in a systematic way to the structure of the total
culture. Archeology—and social anthropology alike—are faced with the
task of correlating the structure of material elements of a cultural system
with the structure of behavioral attributes of that same system. The struc-
ture of material remains is observable in terms of the qualitative and
quantitative representation and spatial configurations of all classes of
debris.
  Recently, there have been several efforts to excavate and analyze pre-
historic sites with the express purpose of describing this structure of ma-
terial remains (for example, Binford and Binford, 1966). Winters (1966)
has given us a detailed description of the structure of a Late Archaic
subsistence-settlement system in the Wabash Valley. However, there still
does not exist a sequence of structurally defined cultural systems for any
region. Only when such information becomes available can hypotheses be
developed that elucidate the functional relationships between variables in
the history of systemic change.
   Many archeologists who accept these premises and the research aims
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                                 287
stemming from them, consider subsistence and settlement the most acces-
sible aspects of the extinct culture.’ The literature is replete with intuitive
assessments of archeological complexes with respect to the problem of
subsistence and settlement, but descriptions based on the qualitive-quan-
titative—spatial relationships pertaining within and between classes of
artifacts, features, food debris, and other material remains are scarce.
   Once the archeologist accepts the premise that the material culture of
the extinct system will reveal a structured set of relationships, just as
social anthropology has demonstrated these relationships in the behav-
ioral aspects of cultural systems, he then takes as his problem the analysis
of this structure within the universe of the site, the region, and so on.
Within the site this structure might manifest itself in the definition of
activity areas (for example, cooking locality) and areas of social distinc-
tion (for example, locus of a kin-defined residence unit). Each of these
will have a formal definition based on the correlations of material cultural
elements. A cooking locality might be defined in terms of one or more
tool kits or activity sets, themselves defined on the basis of the spatial
clustering of certain artifact types (for example, pestles and slab grinding
stones ), kinds of life-maintenance by-products (for example, fire residues
and plant remains), and structural feature types (for example, hearths
and earth ovens). In addition, each activity area can be expected to have
spatial extension,    since activities tend to be localized and to a degree
spatially segregated within the area of a community. The analysis of kind,
number, and distribution of material elements recovered from an arche-
ological site, therefore, enables the archeologist to define tool kits, activity
sets, and—it is hoped—activity areas. These, in turn, are the building
blocks upon which settlement types are defined. All sites in which a
particular configuration of exploitative and maintenance activities were
carried out will disclose a similar structure of material elements and thus
become examples of a single settlement type.
  If focus shifts to a regional universe, the structure of an extinct settle-
ment system should be reflected in the kind, number, and distribution of
settlement types, each defined as indicated above. Since the biophysical
environment is itself structured, and since culture is an adaptive system,
its articulation with the environment should be reflected in the different-
ial geographic distribution of settlement types.
   The applicability of the foregoing concepts (1) for developing hypoth-
eses to explain observed      cultural variations    in time and space,      (2) for
planning an archeological research design appropriate to testing these
hypotheses, and (3) for devising effective methods of excavation and
   ‘ Many of the ideas presented here are the outgrowth of continuous discussion over
the past five years involving James Brown, Lewis and Sally Binford, Joseph Caldwell,
Melvin Fowler, Robert Whallon, Howard Winters, myself, and others. To Lewis Bin-
ford’s work in sharpening the concepts of culture and culture change as these pertain
to archeological objectives,.I am particularly indebted. This paper was presented at
the 1965 American Anthropological Association Meetings, Denver.
288                                  Variability among Occupational Units
approaches to analysis that maximize the interpretive potential of the
recovered data is best illustrated by describing them in the context of a
specific archeological program.


      Middle Woodland Period Culture Change in the Great Lakes-
            Riverine Area: Problem and Explanatory Model
Archeological work in the major river valleys south of the western Great
Lakes highlights a period of extensive cultural change during the final
centuries before Christ. These events, indicating a shift to higher levels of
cultural complexity, mark the advent of what has been described as
Hopewell Culture. (See Caldwell and Hall [1964] for recent statements
on Hopewell).
  The nature of the recognized culture change is threefold: (1) a rapid
and marked increase in population; (2) development of complex cere-
monial-mortuary activity reflecting increased status differentiation; and
(3) an extension and intensification of “interaction” between cultural
groups scattered over much of eastern United States. This interaction
involved movement of exotic raw materials (for example, obsidian) and
selected artifact styles (for example, zoomorphic effigy pipes) often be-
tween widely separated localities. Importantly, this synchronous emerg-
ence of style-sharing and raw material exchange over a wide area, of
mortuary practices which reflect increasing status differentiation, and of
rapid population expansion was confined to certain localities within the
Illinois, Mississippi, and a few other major valleys within the Great Lakes
—Riverine area. Contemporary cultural groups located outside these val-
leys apparently participated little or not at all in this interaction, and—
more importantly—lack of evidence for both a population increase and
the distinctive Hopewellian mortuary forms suggests they remained on a
lower level of complexity (cf. Struever, 1965a).
   In short, the archeological record for the Hopewellian manifestation
during the Middle Woodland period suggests that the three developments
in the culture change were interrelated aspects of a single phenomenon
largely restricted to a few river valleys. The problem poses itself: are
these in fact interdependent phenomena? If so, what model of systemic
change best explains the available evidence for this episode of cultural
development?
  I began an attempt to answer these questions by assuming that eco-
nomic change was an initiating factor; this inference was based upon the
apparent correlation of known Hopewellian mound groups in the western
Great Lakes with several important ecological variables, including tem-
perature clines, major waterfowl migration routes, and variants of a par-
ticular river valley ecosystem (Struever, 1964, pp. 98-99). It was further
hypothesized that the degree to which Woodland groups in different
locales underwent a shift to a higher level of complexity was closley
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                   289
related to whether or not (and if so, to what degree) they experienced
these still unknown adaptive changes.


                 The Illinois Valley Archeological Program
In 1959 I began a continuing program of site survey and excavation in the
lower Illinois Valley, a region in which Hopewellian development was
particularly marked. The first phase of this program sought to learn what
changes, if any, had occurred in the exploitative economy              and the struc-
ture of settlement and social organization between the terminal, or Black
Sand, phase of the Early Woodland period (ca. 450 to 200 s.c.) and
Middle Woodland times (200 3.c. to a.p. 400).
   To date, three multi-component Woodland              habitation sites have been
excavated    and surface survey has yielded cultural debris from about
thirty additional sites with occupations falling into this time range. Effort
was made to maximize recovery of materials relating to the exploitative
economy of the resident Woodland groups.
   No matter how detailed the collection and analysis of Early and Middle
Woodland cultural remains, subsistence-settlement systems cannot be in-
ferred without knowing something of the environmental context within
which these systems evolved. If, for example, Middle Woodland commun-
ities in the lower Illinois Valley were situated partly in terms of the
distribution of certain natural food resources, correlation between sites
and these resources should provide valuable clues for understanding their
subsistence-settlement system.
   Vegetation is pivotal to understanding natural food resource distribu-
tion. Not only are the plants themselves             a potential food source,       but
adaptation of animal species is in part dependent on the kind and distri-
bution of plants. Accordingly, Allison (1966) has attempted a reconstruc-
tion of the floral make-up of the lower Illinois Valley based on the kind,
quantity and spatial relationships of potential vegetal foods. This recon-
struction is based on data from the original land surveyor’s logs and maps,
together with Turner’s (1931) ecological studies of the 1920’s. The results
can be regarded as a valid picture of the vegetation during the early
nineteenth century.’ To what degree this early nineteenth-century floral
makeup is similar to that of Woodland times remains to be learned; in this
discussion the reconstructed nineteenth-century vegetation is treated as
comparable to that of the centuries immediately before and after Christ.
Allison was able to define ten microvegetation zones. Each is based upon
a complex of natural food plants which, because of similar adaptive re-
quirements, have a localized distribution within the lower Illinois Valley

  2 The early nineteenth century was chosen “because it is the earliest period for
which there is good documentary evidence on the vegetation . . . and because this
period preceded major changes in the flora . . . due to the influx of settlers, bringing
modern technology and large scale agriculture into the area” (Allison, 1966, p. 3).
290                                           Variability among Occupational Units




                                                                 LAKE
                                                             MICHIGAN




                                                           aan    geographic     area      encompassed
               =      ;                                    Va     by lower     Illinois     Valley
       Scale   in    Miles                                ia      Archaeological          Project




                    Figure 1. Lower Illinois Valley Archeological Project.


region. These plant distributions play an important role later in this paper
in interpreting Woodland subsistence and settlement.
   The hydrology and physiography of the lower Illinois, and in particular
their relationship to the flora, are essential for understanding Woodland
adaptations here. In this region the Illinois Valley is a broad, north-
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                            291
south—oriented trench that has cut deeply into Mississippian limestones.
The lower Valley ranges from 3.5 to 5 miles in width and is bordered by
perpendicular bluffs along both its eastern and western margins.
  The Illinois River is a sluggish stream with a gradual gradient. Accord-
ingly, it has not cut a deep channel, and natural levees that have a flood-
controlling function are poorly developed along its banks. In this region
the river hugs the western bluff line. Between the river and the bluffs on
the opposite or eastern side of the valley stretches a broad alluvial bot-
tomland which, prior to recent drainage, supported a dense forest of
cottonwood, willow, and other water-tolerant trees, interspersed with
sloughs and shallow lakes. Except for a narrow terrace along the eastern
edge of the valley, this bottomland spans the entire breadth of the valley
floor (cf. Fig. 4). The lakes were shallow catchbasins refilled almost
annually by the spring floods. Through the summer months these lakes
gradually evaporated and shrank, creating extensive mud-flats that pro-
vided an ideal habitat for local seed-bearing plants such as Chenopodium,
Polygonum, Iva, and Amaranthus spp. The extensiveness of these back-
water lakes is attributable to the gradual gradient, shallow stream bed,
and minimal levee development characteristic of the lower reaches of the
Illinois River. These, together with waters backing up from the Missis-
sippi River into the Illinois Valley during periods of high water, resulted
in prolonged floods in the lower Illinois. The sustained and almost annual
flooding and subsequent gradual recession of the waters created a satu-
rated floodplain dotted with shallow lakes and puddles, each with its
taptive fish population and a bottom formed of newly deposited silt.
  Within the valley floor, adjacent to and paralleling the eastern bluff
line, was a wet prairie covering the narrow corridor of higher ground
previously mentioned.
   The talus slope at the base of the bluffs along the valley margins, as
well as the slopes of the tributary stream valleys cutting through the
bluffs and leading into the Illinois from both east and west (cf. Fig. 4),
were and are today covered by an oak-hickory forest. Above this “Hillside-
Talus   Slope Zone,” as defined by Allison        (1966),   and extending   from
several hundred yards to more than a mile away from the Illinois Valley is
a heavily dissected   terrain.   Like the Talus    Slope Zone, this landscape
supported a heavy and predominately oak-hickory forest. Beyond this
upland forest belt, and still farther from the valley, began the high grass
prairie which formed the predominant vegetation over an extensive area
immediately south of the western Great Lakes. The Illinois River Valley
and bordering uplands present a picture, then, of a narrow biome differ-
entiated internally into a number of small-scale plant associations and
cutting through a vast prairie landscape.

  To analyze what, if any, change occurred in subsistence and settlement
as part of a hypothesized general change in cultural system between the
292                            Variability among Occupational Units
Early and Middle Woodland periods in the lower Illinois Valley, it is
necessary to describe and compare the material remains associated with
Black Sand and the later Havana and Pike-Hopewellian phases.
  The interpretations presented here are based upon data recovered and
analyzed through December, 1965. These are preliminary impressions of
incomplete studies; many changes in the interpretations presented here
can be expected when the analyses of artifacts, faunal, and floral materi-
als are completed.


  Description of Black Sand Phase Sites in the Lower Illinois Valley

DISTRIBUTION

Black Sand living sites tend to be scattered along a series of low sand
ridges situated in the Illinois Valley bottomlands and roughly paralleling
the river (Fig. 2). In the main, these sand ridges, which in some cases run
continuously for miles, appear to be shorelines of extinct river chahnels.
They represent the highest ground in the floodplain.
   Black Sand sites are located on the crest of these sand ridges, as well as
on the upper few yards of slope leading into what was formerly the river;
they are not located back from the immediate edge of what was then or
formerly the river shore.

SIZE AND   GROSS FORM   OF SITES

Surface survey indicates Black Sand living sites on the old river beaches
take two different forms: (1) small scatters of debris with definable
limits; the area of scatter ranges from 0.5 to 2 acres; (2) continuous linear
scatter; a light density of debris spread along the crest of a sand ridge for
considerable distances. We might guess that the continuous linear scatter
reflects repeated reoccupation or continuing occupation over some time
of the same locality (that is, the sand ridge) but not reoccupation of a
specific site locus. Stated differently, the continuous linear scatter reflects
frequent shifting of the settlement without intention of confining occupa-
tion to a few spatially-bounded site locations. The debris left from many
reoccupations or a continually shifting occupation gives the illusion of a
single, long, shoreline community. It is our guess that the occasional small
Black Sand site found on these same beaches reflects the true size of the
local aggregate.
   The predominance of a continuous scatter of Black Sand debris along
the old river shorelines suggests: (1) intensive occupation of a single
microenvironment, but not confinement of settlement for long periods to
a specific site locus in that microenvironment; and (2) since the shoreline
settlement was temporary and shifting, permanent constructions such as
reuseable house frames and storage pits were not built there. It can be
guessed that if constructions made for long-term use characterized these
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                                293




                                                   @ —_shoreline settlement
                                                   © _shoreline settlement
                                                         with cemetery assoc.
                                                   A _valley edge settlement

                                                   1 area shown in Fig. 4.

                                                        al       a
                                                         scale   in miles




     Figure 2. Distribution of Black Sand Phase Settlements in the Lower Illi-
              nois Valley.     —
294                                  Variability among Occupational Units
shoreline communities, a higher frequency of sites with definable boun-
daries would occur.

INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF THE SITES
  Survey data. Surface survey indicates a very light scatter of debris
characterizes these Black Sand shoreline sites. Sherd densities are particu-
larly low, while chert debris occurs in relatively high densities. A recent
study of chert sources indicates exclusively local raw material on these
sites. Mussel shell and animal bone are almost nonexistent on the surface,
and burnt limestone—characteristic hearth stone in this region of natural
limestone deposits—is scarce. Hand-size cobbles of crystalline rock, most
often used in hammer and grinding activities, occur in high frequency.
The soil of these Black Sand sites shows no sign of organic staining.
  Excavation data. To date, Peisker represents the only excavated Black
Sand habitation site in the lower Illinois Valley. Luckily, this site was
protected against later disturbances by a Hopewellian burial mound built
over it. Peisker was completely excavated in 1962 and 1963 by Gregory
Perino of the Gilcrease Institute of Indian History and Art (Tulsa, Okla-
homa), with intermittent help by the writer. This site was no more than
an acre in area. Conforming to the surface survey evidence for Black
Sand sites, densities of most classes of artifacts were light. A hunting-
butchering tool kit was well-represented by the high frequency of pro-
jectile points and flake knives. Pebble manos and hammerstones also
occurred in high frequencies. Recognizable imported chert was absent. It
is notable that so-called “ceremonial     items” (or, better, artifacts whose
primary functional context was probably the social rather than techno-
logical) were also absent from the site.
   Food remains included a wide range of land mammals; except for
white-tail deer, high frequencies of bone from any one or two animal
species were lacking. Flotation sampling of feature contents enabled re-
trieval of moderate   densities of wood    charcoal, but charred nut shells
provided the sole evidence for plant foods.
  Small, basin-like pits were found whose frequent charcoal contents in-
dicate they were fire features of some sort. If cooking features, they were
more likely roasting pits than earth ovens. Earth ovens are usually deep
and steep-sided, and might be expected to contain fire-altered stone; none
of these characteristics describes the Peisker features. Storage pits and
houses are other feature types notably absent at this site.
   A small cemetery occurred within the settlement precincts. A few pri-
mary and secondary burials were found in simple unprepared pits in the
old beach; grave goods were absent except for red ochre associated with
some skeletons. There was no evidence of differentiation between burials
that might be associated with status.
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                          295

         Description of Middle Woodland Habitation Sites in the
                           Lower Illinois Valley
DISTRIBUTION

Middle    Woodland   habitation   sites are, with a few exceptions,   concen-
trated at the base of the steep bluffs that define the eastern and western
margins of the Illinois Valley (Fig. 3). These sites lie within Allison’s
Hillside—Talus Slope Zone with its dense and predominantly oak-hickory
forest. The terrain is high and well-drained—not even exceptional floods
in recent times have reached this elevation. The majority of these bluff-
base sites are located along the western side of the valley; perhaps the
bluffs here afforded protection against severe and prevailing westerly
winds during the winter months. Proximity to the river, if it occupied its
present channel, may also have been a factor favoring occupation of the
western bluff-base.
   Detailed analyses of prehistoric hydrology and physiography in the
lower Illinois remain to be undertaken,      but a few observations    on the
relationship of Middle Woodland bluff-base sites to water sources and
land forms today are pertinent. First, the majority of Middle Woodland
bluff-base settlements were situated at the junction of a secondary stream
valley with the Illinois Valley. Inspection of these localities indicates most
have three characteristics in common: (1) the tributary valley supports a
perennial stream—even during dry months the drainage system of the
small valley is extensive enough to maintain some minimum water level;
(2) the river today passes close by the mouth of these secondary valleys;
and (3) the floodplain in the lower reaches of the tributary valley is
broad; heavy, swift run-off from the hill-country drained by the stream
would have resulted in frequent floods and consequent silt deposition
over extensive areas of the floodplain at the mouth of the secondary
valley.
   The great majority of Middle Woodland habitation sites in the lower
Illinois occupy a bluff-base position, but there are a handful of sites on
the old river shorelines in the valley floodplain. Not a single site is known
from any of the tributary valleys leading into the Illinois, the upland
forest bordering the Illinois Valley, or the prairie zone beyond (cf. Figs. 3
and 4). In short, Middle Woodland sites are located entirely within the
trench of the Illinois Valley itself; they do not occur even several hundred
yards outside the limestone bluffs that define its margins.

NUMBER AND SIZE OF SITES
The number of habitation sites increases sharply from Early to Middle
Woodland periods in the lower Illinois. There are ten documented Early
Woodland habitation components in the region, 25 Middle Woodland
296                                  Variability among Occupational Units




                                                    © _base settlement
                                                    #& — summer agricultural           camp (?)
                                                    %* _ regional   exchange       center
                                                    @ _ Hopewell       burial   site   (mound     group)
                                                    @ _ Hopewell       burial   site
                                                            with    mortuary       camp     assoc.


                                                    {{area shown           in Fig. 4

                                                            Oe 2

                                                               scale    in miles




      Figure 3. Distribution of Middle   Woodland       Settlements                       in the Lower
                Illinois Valley.
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                           297
ones. This increase in frequency of living sites is believed to reflect both a
change in settlement system, with a greater number of settlement types
occupied by a single Middle Woodland local group within the span of a
complete settlement cycle, and an absolute increase in population size in
the region. The population increase cannot be measured until controlled
sampling of all recognized microenvironments has been completed and
both Early and Middle Woodland settlement systems are understood.
Then, comparison of the size and number of examples of the settlement
type believed to have been occupied by the Maximum Local Aggregate’
chaaracteristic of a single Maximum Subsistence-Settlement Unit‘ can be
used to estimate relative population densities here during the Early and
Middle Woodland periods.
  Certainly the increased frequency of living sites cannot be attributed to
the concealing or destruction of Early Woodland sites; quite the contrary,
Early Woodland sites are concentrated on natural levees most of which
have not been covered or destroyed in any way. Middle Woodland habi-
tation sites, on the other hand, because they are largely situated at the
bluff base, are in position to be covered by sheet wash carried down from
the bluff above. Test excavation indicates most bluff-base sites have been
partially covered by recent sheet wash, and by chance two sites have been
discovered that were completely covered by sterile overburden. It is clear
that extensive sheet erosion has concealed entirely some bluff-base Mid-
dle Woodland       settlements,    and therefore     the number     of these sites is
expected to be greater than the present survey evidence indicates.
   Bluff-base Middle Woodland sites tend to have an area of scatter rang-
ing from 2.5 to 8 acres. Even the smaller bluff-base sites are larger than
any known Black Sand habitation site with definable boundaries. Middle
Woodland bluff-base sites reveal a heavy scatter of debris; sharp increases
are noted over Early Woodland in the density of all stone artifact types
relating to exploitative and maintenance             tasks, and in the density of
sherds, faunal debris, and hearth stone. The soil within the site area is
usually dark-stained, reflecting its high organic content. The site limits, in
contrast to Black Sand, are sharply defined by the color differences be-
tween the organically stained habitation             area   and the unstained       soil
around it.

INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF SITES
To date, Apple Creek is the only extensively excavated Middle Woodland
bluff-base site in the lower Illinois Valley. Snyder's Site in the Mississippi

   3.4 Maximum Local Aggregate consists of the maximum number of people who
together occupy a single settlement at some time during a total settlement cycle.
   4A Maximum Subsistence-Settlement Unit includes all those people integrated at
one or more intervals in the functioning of a single example of a subsistence-settlement
system. It may or may not be synonomous with a Maximum Local Aggregate, depend-
ing on the system. It sometimes occurs that people who at no time in the subsistence-
298                                 Variability among Occupational Units
Valley a few miles to the west is similarly located and was excavated by
the writer in 1960.
   At Apple Creek there is a major early Late Woodland occupation be-
longing to the newly defined White Hall phase. White Hall dates from
about a.p. 400 to 700.° It immediately post-dates the Pike-Hopewellian
phase of the Middle Woodland period (dated ca. a.v. 100 to 400). The
succeeding is a composite description of the internal structure of the
Apple Creek settlement compiled from the materials associated with both
Middle and early Late Woodland occupations. Analysis of the Apple
Creek materials has not yet proceeded far enough to enable division of
excavated materials between these two successive occupations, nor is it
yet possible to demonstrate the association of specific artifact and feature
types in arriving at a definition of tool kits, activity areas, and areas of
social distinction. However, the kind and quantity of artifact and feature
types, together with food remains recovered are themselves illuminating.
   Tools belonging to a hunting-butchering tool kit occur in very high
frequency, as do pebble hammer-grinding stones. Manufacturing tools
also occur in large numbers. These include tools to make items of exploi-
tative technology and others to make products not directly associated
with food procurement and preparation (for example, clothing). Items of
recreational equipment (for example, deer phalanges drilled for use in
the cup-and-pin game) are also frequent.
   Noteworthy is the high frequency of artifacts fitting L. R. Binford’s
(1962, p. 219) definition of “sociotechnic” items. These artifacts are be-
lieved to have their primary functional context in the social subsystem
where, for example, they might serve to symbolize and communicate
status of the person identified with the object. At Apple Creek these
would include drilled bear cariine teeth, pottery earspools and figurines,
fragments of platform pipes (some converted into pendants), and per-
haps obsidian lamellar flakes. Mica flakes recovered in the excavations
suggest that sheets of this mineral—a characteristic Hopewellian grave
good in this region—were cut and shaped by the Middle Woodland occu-
pants. This perhaps reflects manufacture as well as use of these status
goods in the Apple Creek community.
   An exceedingly high density of structural features occurred at Apple
Creek. Most numerous were deep, cylindrical storage pits and earth
ovens. Earth ovens were characteristically filled in part with a mass of
burnt limestone chunks. Quantities of this burnt rock were                  dispersed


settlement cycle are members of a common residence unit (such as a nucleated
community ) belong to a single Maximum Subsistence-Settlement Unit. This would be
the case in some redistributive systems.
   * Apple Creek is the type site for White Hall. Characteristic White Hall pottery
styles are sufficiently distinctive to warrant the separate phase designation, yet they
are similar enough to Weaver in the central Illinois Valley, and other early Late
Woodland regional variants in the Midwest, to indicate contemporaneity with them.
Radiocarbon evidence confirms this estimate of White Hall dating.
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                          299
through the midden and littered the site surface. At Apple Creek more
than 600 of these and other features were located in some 18,500 square
feet of excavated site surface; this is equivalent to one storage-refuse pit
or earth oven per 5 x 6-ft. area of site surface. As a further indication of
the magnitude of storage and cooking facilities at Apple Creek, total
volume of these features exceeds an estimated 10,000 cubic feet.
  One complete Middle Woodland house, 40 feet in diameter, was exca-
vated at Apple Creek. Holes defining the perimeter of the building
ranged from 6 to 16 inches in diameter, suggesting that posts of the
exterior supporting wall were both large and permanent. In turn, this
suggests the building was constructed for use over some period of time.
Remains associated with this building indicate it served as a domicile.
   By-products of living, particularly food remains, excavated at Apple
Creek also reflect Middle and early Late Woodland subsistence practices.
Quantities of animal bone were recovered; Paul W. Parmalee (ethno-
zoologist at the Illinois State Museum) and Andreas A. Paloumpis (icthy-
ologist at Illinois State University) have almost completed identification
of these materials. A diverse local fauna is represented, but it is noted that
bone from the white-tail deer, wild turkey, and various migratory water-
fowl species occurs in high frequencies. In addition, Paloumpis (1966) has
analyzed almost 30,000 fish bones from the site. Lawrence Kaplan (Uni-
versity of Massachusetts )and Richard A. Yarnell (Emory University) are
working with quantities of carbonized plant remains from Apple Creek.
These were recovered almost entirely by means of water and chemical
flotation processes (Struever, 1965b). Over 36,000 fragments of hickory
nut shell from 189 earth ovens, surface hearths, and storage-refuse pits
have been identified, together with more than 4,200 fragments of acorn
shell from 140 features. Seeds of commensal plants are represented by
some   1,800 charred   Polygonum    seeds, 230 Chenopodium,      and 160 Iva
seeds (Lawrence Kaplan, personal communication).
   Food remains associated with Middle and early Late Woodland occu-
pations at Apple Creek, while reflecting exploitation of a broad range of
local fauna, show major reliance on deer, turkey, ducks and geese, and
fish. Aside from one Lagenaria seed and four seeds of Cucurbita pepo
 (Hugh C. Cutler, personal communications), no certain cultigens have
been identified from Apple Creek. The evidence indicates reliance on
hickory nuts and acorns in season, with the seeds of pigweed, lamb’s-
quarter, and other local] plants still of indeterminate importance.
  At the Newbridge site, three miles from Apple Creek, the writer re-
covered a mass of carbonized Chenopodium and Polygonum seeds from a
White Hall phase pit. The seed mass was entirely free of leaves, stems, or
other plant debris and had all the appearances of food that had been
burnt and discarded in the process of cooking. While nothing comparable
was recovered from any feature at Apple Creek, the Newbridge Cheno-
podium-Polygonum seed mass suggests these seed-bearing plants played a
role in the White Hall subsistence economy.
300                                  Variability among Occupational Units
  Discussion thus far has centered entirely on the number, distribution,
and internal structure of Middle Woodland sites located at the base of the
talus slope along the margins of the Illinois Valley. The majority of Mid-
dle Woodland habitation sites occupy this bluff-base position, but survey
to date also reveals five sites on the old river shorelines in the Illinois
Valley floodplain. Unfortunately none has been excavated.
   One of these five floodplain sites is different from all other known
Middle Woodland sites in the lower Illinois Valley. This site covers a
minimum of twenty acres and its surface is littered with an incredibly
high density and diversity of cultural materials. The size of the Mound
House site sets it apart from the other 24 Middle Woodland habitation
sites known in this region. None of these 24 covers an area more than one-
third that of Mound House. This site has not yet been excavated, and
little can be said of its internal structure. However, debris collected from
its surface suggests it may represent a unique example of one settlement
type in the Middle Woodland settlement system of this region.
  Large quantities of imported raw material and finished goods made
from this material have been collected from its surface. Copper celts and
earspools, drilled bear canine teeth, platform pipe fragments, and other
typical Hopewellian status items are found in numbers. Artifacts or unal-
tered bits of obsidian, mica, marine shells, and copper reflect participa-
tion of the inhabitants in an exchange system bringing raw materials from
distant sources into the Illinois Valley. The diversity and density of this
exotic material are additional characteristics that set Mound House apart
from the other Middle Woodland sites in the region. The site appears to
represent some sort of trade or exchange hub, and perhaps served as a
center of within- and between-region interaction, in which exchange ac-
tivities took place articulating local Middle Woodland groups with each
other and, in turn, with groups outside the region.
   The Peisker site, described earlier in this paper, is both the location of
the one excavated Black Sand component in the lower Illinois Valley, and
also the site of a group of three Hopewellian burial mounds. These
mounds were recently excavated by the Gilcrease Institute under Gregory
Perino. Altogether they yielded five log crypts in each of which occurred
from seven to twelve adult human skeletons with typical Hopewellian
artifacts in association.
  Alongside these mounds was a Middle Woodland habitation site which
the writer excavated. The artifacts recovered here suggest this living site
belonged to the same cultural group that was responsible for the mounds.
  This Middle Woodland occupation site situated adjacent to the Peisker
mounds is markedly different in size and internal structure from the
aforementioned bluff-base settlement as represented by Apple Creek.
Evidence recovered indicates the site was not occupied primarily to per-
form tasks relating to the subsistence economy. Rather, activities relating
to maintenance and reinforcement of social integration of the group, cen-
tering about mortuary ceremonialism, appear to characterize the occupa-
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                            301
tion. The excavated materials indicate exploitative and maintanence activ-
ities connected with subsistence were singularly unimportant at this site.
Evidence to support this interpretation is of several kinds:
  1. Low densities of faunal material occurred, even though bone was
moderately well preserved.
   2. Extensive flotation sampling produced quantities of charcoal flecks
from the midden, but little analogous to the nut shells and seeds re-
covered at Apple Creek. The widespread occurrence of wood charcoal
indicates this absence cannot be attributed to poor preservation.
   3. A marked lack of storage-refuse pits and earth ovens in contrast to
the great numbers of these features at Apple Creek.
   4, Projectile points, scrapers, knives, manos and metates and other food
preparation tools were scarce.
   5. Manufacturing tools of all kinds were almost totally absent.
   6. Woodworking tools (for example, celts) and stone or shell hoes were
rare,
   7. Sherds from what were likely culinary or storage vessels were nu-
merous.
   In brief, the combined evidence from Peisker indicates that little, if
any, food was collected, processed, or stored on this site. The occurrence
of hearths in numbers and pottery vessels caked with char suggest that
food was prepared and eaten on the site, but it may well have been
carried here from another settlement. House remains were absent.
   In contrast to the scarcity of artifacts and features associated with
subsistence activities, numbers of typical Hopewellian status items were
recovered. These comprise a high proportion of the total artifact assem-
blage, when compared against assemblages from known bluff-base sites.
   Taken together, this evidence suggests that Peisker represents a special-
ized Middle Woodland mortuary camp. Data in support of this conclusion
are: (1) the large number of status items, all common Hopewellian burial
associations; (2) two apparent ritual features—one a cache of status
items and the other remnants of a structure that was apparently built and
burned several times; (3) a small area within the habitation site in which
status artifacts were concentrated; (4) Hopewellian burial mounds in im-
mediate proximity; (5) paucity of evidence for exploitation, preparation,
and storage of food and manufacture of tools and other goods; and (6)
the absence of houses or other permanent constructions.
   The Gilcrease Institute excavations uncovered a total of five log crypts
in the three mounds. Each tomb apparently served as a mausoleum into
which bodies were placed; burial occurred soon enough after death that
decomposition had not progressed to the point where bone articulations
were disturbed. It would appear that each log crypt was reopened at
intervals to receive a new body. Only occasional burials occurred in the
mound fill or around the mounds.
   In sum, the materials from the living area and the mounds appear to be
the remnants   of multiple,   short-lived   occupations   associated   with the
302                                  Variability among Occupational Units
burial of select dead. Activities involved were earthwork and tomb con-
struction, mortuary ritual, and interment of the body.


            A Black Sand Subsistence-Settlement System in the
                          Lower Illinois Valley
The totality of evidence from which to interpret Black Sand subsistence
and settlement is relatively sparse compared to that available for the
succeeding Middle and early Late Woodland periods. However, certain
generalizations can be made.
   Settlement was concentrated in the alluvial floodplain of the Illinois
River, specifically on the shorelines of old river channels and perhaps on
the banks of floodplain lakes. Occasional Black Sand sites are found on
sand ridges located near the bluffs at the valley edge, but none are known
from the base of the bluff talus slope itself or outside the Illinois Valley
proper (that is, within the secondary stream valleys, in the dissected
uplands adjacent to the river, or on the prairie beyond).
   The preponderance of Black Sand habitation sites in the Illinois Valley
floodplain may reflect heavy dependence on riverbottom flora and fauna.
The faunal remains recovered at Peisker indicate Black Sand groups ex-
ploited a wide range of land animals. Location of habitation sites on the
river shoreline may relate to fishing, but the faunal materials do not
confirm this. Fish remains were rare. It is important to know, in this
connection, whether the sand ridges were, at the time of occupation, the
shoreline of an existing river or the shoreline of an abandoned stream
channel. Immediate proximity of sites to river channels does not necessar-
ily indicate Black Sand groups depended heavily on river foods; occupa-
tion of the natural levees may reflect effort to settle on the highest avail-
able ground in the floodplain.
   Perhaps most important of all, there is no evidence that Black Sand
groups depended heavily on one or a few animal species.
   No evidence for plant cultivation was found, whether of tropical or
local plant types. Admittedly, carbonized plant remains have been ac-
tively sought at one site only. Plant remains at Peisker indicate use of
nuts, but preliminary inspection reveals few, if any, seeds from such local
plants as    Chenopodium, Polygonum, and Iva.
   In sum, diversified collecting of river-bottom fauna, and perhaps plant
foods, characterizes Black Sand subsistence.
   Our sample of Black Sand sites is too small to determine if settlement
size has one or more than one mode. If further survey confirms the
present suggestion that bounded Black Sand habitation sites are uni-
formly small (about 0.5 to 2 acres in area), it may be possible to infer
that fusion and fission of the Maximum Local Aggregate did not occur in
the course of the settlement cycle.
   The sites tend to be linear in form and to hold to the crest of the
natural levees. Continuous scatters of debris, in at least one case extend-
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                      303
ing for a mile or more, are thought to reflect intensive occupation of the
shoreline zone with shifting, impermanent settlement characteristic. Ap-
parently no attempt was made to occupy for long periods or to contin-
ually reoccupy a specific site location, and it is inferred that constructions
made for long-term use were not part of these communities. Excavation at
Peisker confirms this interpretation, since no evidence of houses or other
permanent constructions was recovered here. The absence of storage pits
supports the view of a shifting residence pattern.
   It will be recalled that there was no evidence at Peisker for Black Sand
natural food harvests. It can be inferred that harvest of natural food
“crops” with concomitant surpluses would have resulted in storage; in
turn, the latter would make continued occupation or seasonal reoccupa-
tion of a single site adaptive. We have seen that the combined survey and
excavation data from Black Sand sites reveal the absence of all three—
that is, natural food harvests, food storage, and long-term residence at one
site.
  In sum, one, and perhaps two, Black Sand settlement types are recog-
nizable. One, the Shoreline Settlement, was temporary and shifting. Local
Black Sand groups used an existing or former river shoreline as a base of
operations from which to exploit resources in the riverbottoms surround-
ing it. These sand ridges and adjacent bottomlands fall within Allison’s
Floodplain Forest and Backwater       Lakes Zones, two microenvironments
with the highest productive potential of any in the lower Illinois Valley
region in terms of the density and diversity of natural.food resources.
  Seasonally, local groups may have moved nearer the bluffs at the valley
edge to exploit ripening nuts, and these sites, none of which have been
excavated, would represent a possible second settlement type (cf. Fig. 2).


           Middle Woodland Subsistence-Settlement System
Middle Woodland sites in the lower Illinois Valley, then, have three char-
acteristic locations: (1) at the base of the talus slope along the valley
margins; (2) on river shorelines in the Illinois Valley floodplain; and (3)
immediately proximal to a Hopewellian burial site. Figure 3 shows this
distribution clearly. Furthermore, it has been seen that in structural terms
the floodplain sites can be separated into two types, with Mound House a
unique example of one type.
   The totality of evidence supports the interpretation that the bluff-base
Middle Woodland site represents a community occupied continuously or
intermittently over a long time span. It reflects an adaptation character-
ized by a high level of residential stability.
   Differentiation in soil color alone suggests that the bluff-base site is the
remains of a discrete, bounded settlement. The internal structure of the
community, as seen at Apple Creek, supports the idea of long-term resi-
dence. High frequencies of storage pits and a house with heavy support-
ing framework are seen as evidence for permanent constructions. The
304                                     Variability among Occupational Units
artifactual evidence indicates that tool manufacturing was important at
this site, and that recreational activity was part of the daily life of the
local inhabitants. The occurrence of artifacts associated with manufac-
turing and recreational activities itself suggests sustained occupation of
the site. Ethnographically in the eastern Woodlands it was during the
long winter occupations that the bulk of tool manufacturing and repair, as
well as games and other entertainment took place.
   In sum, bluff-base sites like Apple Creek provide evidence of sustained
occupation of a specific site locus. The site may have been occupied year-
round, or for a span of several months each year.
  The analyses of the food remains from Apple Creek indicate heavy
dependence    on white-tail deer, wild turkey, migratory       waterfowl,   and
fish. Large quantities of hickory nut and acorn shell indicate these were
collected   in quantity,   while   smaller   numbers   of charred   smartweed,
lamb’s-quarter, and marsh-elder seeds suggest they may have been ex-
ploited at the time the site was occupied. Noteworthy here is the apparent
selectivity in natural foods exploited. From the various Apple Creek data
it is inferred that the bluff-base settlement was occupied during all or
part of the fall, winter, and spring. -
   Because none have been excavated, the Middle Woodland sites located
on the sand ridges in the flood-plain—sometimes          three or more miles
from the nearest bluff-base site—remain a mystery.
  It may be noteworthy that these sites are located in the microenviron-
ment where the backwater lakes occur with their shorelines of rich allu-
vial silt.
  The Mound House site, from the surface evidence alone, is distinguish-
able from all other known Middle Woodland sites in the lower Illinois. Its
size is several times that of the next largest Middle Woodland site. Its
surface yields an unequaled density and diversity of debris; and the mate-
rials collected there include a high proportion of imported raw materials
used exclusively in making Hopewellian sociotechnic items.
   The Peisker Middle Woodland component is different from Apple
Creek and any of the aforementioned sites. High densities of animal bone
are lacking. Occupations of the site may have been of short duration,
since storage pits and other features interpreted as permanent        construc-
tions are lacking. Tools of exploitative and maintenance technology re-
lating to subsistence are scarce, while manufacturing tools and recrea-
tional paraphernalia are absent. That food was prepared and cooked on
the site is indicated by bone fragments, apparent roasting pits, and char-
covered sherds from culinary vessels.
   Noteworthy in this Middle Woodland occupation site at Peisker was
direct evidence for ceremonial-mortuary activity. This was reflected in the
high proportion of sociotechnic artifacts, the occurrence of two ritual
features and a possible ceremonial precinct (inferred from the localiza-
tion of sociotechnic artifacts on the site), and the immediate proximity of
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                305
the occupation area to five log mausoleums covered by earth mounds.
Each tomb contained a few adult burials with associated Hopewellian
goods.


     Middle Woodland Culture Change: An Explanatory Model
What model most economically explains the observed structural changes
between the Early and Middle Woodland archeological complexes de-
scribed here?
  The following hypothesis suggests that a shift in subsistence-settlement
system occurred between Early and Middle Woodland times. Changes
also occurred in social organization, reflecting different integrative re-
quirements created by higher population densities, larger local aggre-
gates, and changes in the manner of segmenting and partitioning the
population required for performing the new subsistence tasks.
  It is inferred that a marked change in ecological adaptation occurred in
the lower Illinois Valley about the time of Christ. Caldwell (1958, p. 31)
has noted that following the establishment of primary forest efficiency in
the eastern Woodlands by Late Archaic times (ca. 2500 to 1000 B.c.), the
hunting-gathering pattern continued, and in favored areas it was charac-
terized by more “specific adjustments to regional resources.” The lower
Illinois Valley is seen as one such “favored area” and here collecting of
natural foods reached a new high level of efficiency by at least the
Hopewell phase of the Pike tradition (Middle Woodland period, ca. a.p.
100 to 400).
   This new subsistence base can be termed Intensive Harvest Collecting.
Intensive Harvest Collecting denotes an adaptation centering on exploita-
tion of selected, high-yielding natural food resources characteristic of cer-
tain biomes that have a sharply restricted geographic distribution within
the woodlands of northeastern United States.
   Two factors are seen as essential to the biomes in which Intensive
Harvest Collecting is feasible: (1) natural food products must occur in
large, concentrated populations and lend themselves to harvesting (that
is, they can be collected in quantity with relatively small labor output);
and (2) the plant and animal populations from which these food pro-
ducts are derived must be regularly renewed.
   At least five resources available to Woodland groups in the lower II-
linois Valley meet these criteria: (1) nuts and acorns; (2) the seeds of
commensal plants such as Iva (marsh-elder), Polygonum (smartweed),
and Chenopodium (lamb’s-quarter); (3) white-tail deer; (4) migratory
waterfowl; and (5) certain species of fish. All five resources can be effi-
ciently exploited by means of a simple harvest technology. Annual fall nut
crops, with hickory nuts and acorns especially important, have their high-
est productive potential in the Hillside-Talus Slope and Upland Forest
zones occupying the steep slopes and dissected uplands along the margins
306                                   Variability among Occupational Units




                                              UPLAND       FOREST
                                               (oak - hickory - elm)




                                               UPLAND       FOREST
                                                 ( oak - hickory- elm)




                                                                       O   -Middie    Woodland      Settlement

                                1ayen json                            3
                                y    = Sees                        Prey — bluffs

                                                                       °                 2

                                                                                   scale in miles


      Figure 4. Middle Woodland Settlements and the distribution of harvest-
                able natural foods.


of the Illinois and secondary stream valleys (Allison, 1966). Cheno-
podium and the other seed-bearing plants mentioned above colonize na-
tural scars in the mantle of vegetation. In the valley bottomlands, spring
floods are constantly opening new areas of soil, the most extensive of
which are the mud-flats bordering permanent floodplain lakes and the silt
deposits remaining after temporary catch-basins of floodwater have en-
tirely evaporated. It may be that here, naturally or through man’s inter-
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                        307
vention, grew stands of lamb’s-quarter and other plants whose carbonized
seeds at Apple Creek, Newbridge, and other sites attest to their economic
importance. Indeed, Allison’s (1966) botanical study highlights the locali-
zation of these species on the floodplain lake shorelines.
   During the winter deer tend to move out of the Illinois Valley flood-
plain and into the valleys of feeder streams and into the forested areas of
the talus slope and adjacent uplands where browse is more plentiful.
Here, by various ambush and drive techniques, large numbers might be
killed. The Ilinois Valley is an important waterfowl migration route, part
of the Mississippi flyway. Ducks and geese move along this narrow cor-
ridor twice annually. The migrating birds stay largely within the confines
of the river valley, feeding and resting on the floodplain lakes. On these
lakes, by means of cast nets or other trapping devices, it was feasible for
Middle Woodland hunters to harvest these birds. In the early twentieth
century, market hunters using different techniques have demonstrated
this all too successfully. Paloumpis (1966) demonstrates that on the basis
of both species composition and size range within species determined on
fish remains from the Apple Creek site, entire fish populations character-
istic of riverbottom lakes were apparently collected by the Middle and/or
early Late Woodland residents. Possible techniques for harvesting fish in
this situation would include use of natural poisons, draining the lake, and
stunning the fish by stirring up the muddy bottom and thus reducing the
oxygen level of the water.
   In short, the food remains from Apple Creek suggest selective exploita-
tion of those natural plants and animals that could be harvested effi-
ciently and with resulting high yields. This change in subsistence prac-
tices appears to have begun in Middle Woodland and continued into
White Hall times (at least to a.p. 700).
   With these changes in subsistence there occurred a concomitant shift in
settlement. From the survey and excavation data, four settlement types
can be tentatively recognized constituting a Middle Woodland settlement
system. The Base Settlement is represented by Apple Creek and all those
sites located at the talus slope along the sides of the Illinois Valley. The
valley-edge lies midway between all the microenvironments in which oc-
cur one or more of the aforementioned harvestable natural foods. Inhab-
itants of the Base Settlement had immediate access to all five resources. It
is guessed that these resources were exploited in season from this site, and
also that processing and storage of these foods constituted major tasks
performed in these communities. These foods are available at various
times from fall through early spring, and it is hypothesized that valley-
edge settlements were occupied continuously during this period.
  The few Middle Woodland sites on the sand ridges in the floodplain may
represent Summer Agricultural Camps. These sites are located proximal
to former lake shorelines which provided the only extensive soil areas on
which plant cultivation could be practiced, given a simple hoe techn-
ology. Until one of these floodplain sites is excavated, little more can be
308                                    Variability among Occupational Units
said to support the thesis that these sites were occupied primarily during
the summer to perform agricultural tasks. There is some suggestion from
the pollen evidence that Apple Creek was abandoned during the summer
(Schoenwetter, 1964). During this period the occupants may have moved
into the floodplain, setting up temporary camps on the sand-ridge shore-
lines of the river and lakes to carry on agricultural activities nearby.
Summer and early fall were seasons in which inhabitants of the bottom-
lands were relatively safe from the floods that regularly inundated the
valley floor.
   The Mound House site is a unique example of the third tentative Mid-
dle Woodland settlement type: the Regional Exchange Center. Here,
finished goods and raw materials characteristic of the Hopewell Interac-
tion Sphere (Caldwell, 1964; Struever, 1964) may have entered the lower
Illinois Valley and been exchanged for local products (pearls?). At
Mound House, members of the local Middle Woodland groups through-
out the lower Illinois Valley area may have congregated periodically to
trade and carry on ritual activities by means of which these foreign
imports—copper,   mica,   marine    shells,   obsidian,   etc.—were   distributed
over the region, eventually to become burial goods in status graves cov-
ered by earth mounds that occur in small groups scattered along the
valley margins.
  The fourth Middle Woodland settlement type here is the Mortuary
Camp. These small habitation sites proximal to Hopewell mound ceme-
teries appear to represent short-lived, specialized occupations undertaken
to perform mortuary tasks. The archeological evidence from Peisker, the
only excavated example of this settlement type, reflects activities relating
both to mortuary tasks themselves and to maintenance of the participants
engaged in this work.         :


                                  Conclusions
This paper attempts to demonstrate a major change in subsistence-settle-
ment systems from Early to Middle Woodland periods in the lower Illinois
Valley. The new subsistence pattern involves the intensive “harvest” ex-
ploitation of select natural food resources,      with possible cultivation of
local seed-bearing plants along the shorelines of riverbottom lakes. The
resulting higher levels of economic productivity were accompanied by
population expansion (documented by the marked increase in total num-
ber and size of habitation sites). Population expansion, combined with
new patterns of segmenting and partitioning the population necessitated
by the harvest-collecting technology, created new integrative require-
ments. Now perhaps larger numbers of people were organized into a
single sociopolitical system. Differential access to goods and services, so
apparent in Hopewell burial sites in the lower Illinois Valley, reflects
increased status differentiation. Imported raw materials and craft items
fashioned from them occur with relatively few burials interred in tombs
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                        309
or mausoleums. These constructions involved major outlays of labor; one
Hopewellian mound       in the lower Illinois is built from more than an
estimated one million cubic feet of soil. Associated with these inferred
changes in social structure is the extension and intensification of long-
distance trade which, for the first time on any scale, brought exotic raw
materials and finished goods into the region. Again, for the most part
these imported goods appear archeologically as burial associations with
selected individuals.
   How can this episode of culture change—at this time and place—be
explained? David Aberle (personal communication) reminds us that cul-
tures do not necessarily maximize the exploitative potential of their en-
vironment. It is only in certain, still-to-be-defined coping situations in-
volving particular relationships of culture to other cultures and culture to
biophysical environment that “maximizing adaptations” occur. It remains
to be determined what changing selective pressures provided the impetus
for maximization of productivity based on collecting, as documented here
for Middle and early Late Woodland in the lower Illinois Valley. It is
important only to reaffirm that it is in the nature of the shifting coping
situations during Early Woodland and initial phases of Middle Woodland
that we must seek an explanation for the culture changes described here.
   Whatever the shifting selective pressures from Early to Middle Wood-
land times in the lower Illinois Valley, they were not present equally—or
at least did not produce the same results—throughout the entire western
Great Lakes—Riverine area. Judging from the distribution of Hopewel-
lian goods and mortuary sites, the shift in adaptation described here—-
involving changes in the structure of subsistence and settlement, an in-
crease in population density, increased social complexity, and participa-
tion in long-distance trade—appears to have been a localized phenome-
non confined largely to the central and lower Illinois Valley, sections of
the central Mississippi Valley, and a few other localities.
   Increased economic productivity is regarded as prerequisite to the
other manifestations of change noted here. To the extent that increased
productivity was dependent on an intensification of collecting like that
inferred here for the lower Illinois Valley, it is not surprising that major
 culture change during Middle and early Late Woodland was geograph-
 ically restricted in the western Great Lakes area. The complex of poten-
tially harvestable natural resources described here for the lower Illinois
have a very limited distribution. Paloumpis (1966) demonstrates that fish
in riverbottom lakes of the central Mississippi drainage have an exceed-
ingly high biomass; furthermore, he points out how restricted within the
Great Lakes area are broad floodplain situations with extensive back-
water lakes. Waterfowl migration routes within the Mississippi flyway are
narrow corridors along which great flights of ducks and geese move sea-
sonally. Outside these routes, which follow certain major river valleys,
waterfowl numbers diminish sharply. Cleland (1965) points out that deer
prefer deciduous forest “edges,” that is, places where forest borders on
310                                   Variability among Occupational Units
scrub and grassland, and Taylor (1956, p. 137) notes that white-tail deer
have always produced their largest populations where edges are most
extensive. One such edge situation is the forest-grassland ecotone, an
example of which is the strip of forested uplands bordering the Illinois
and other river valleys that dissect the long-grass prairie south of the
western Great Lakes. It can be expected that this forest-grassland zone
supported a dense deer population in prehistoric times.
   The northern boundary of the temperate deciduous forest lies in south-
ern Illinois and Indiana. North of it, and extending into southern Wis-
consin and Michigan, lies the prairie peninsula. Within the prairie penin-
sula nut crops were restricted to the narrow strips of forest bordering
stream courses. The dissected terrain adjacent to the Illinois Valley and
feeder streams leading into it supported a heavy oak-hickory forest with
excellent potential for nut production. And, finally, large stands of Che-
nopodium and similar seed-bearing plants occur only where stable plant
associations are prohibited from forming over extensive areas. The most
extensive areas of this kind in the eastern Woodlands occur in the broad
river floodplains.
  Intensive   Harvest   Collecting, then, is a subsistence   type that, given
certain selective pressures, may develop in an ecological context support-
ing a number of particularly high-yielding natural food resources. In the
western   Great Lakes area these conditions are found in certain broad
river valleys only. These valleys have extensive floodplains with a shallow
river channel, low gradient, and poorly developed natural levees.
Flooding is an annual occurrence. These valleys have a high productive
potential in fish, a fact traced to the great expanse of backwater      lakes
with their high biomass and fish populations that are renewed through
regular flooding (Paloumpis; 1966). These same conditions create exten-
sive areas of raw soil on which seed-bearing chenopods, marsh elder, and
other plants flourish. During the spring and fall, waterfowl migrate along
certain of these valleys. Heavy forests along the valley margins produce
nut crops and provide maximal conditions for support of a dense white-
tailed deer population (Cleland, 1965).
   It is interesting that culture change during the Middle Woodland pe-
riod in the western Great Lakes area appears most marked in localities
where this convergence of high-yielding populations of several plant and
animal species seems to have existed. Hopewell burial sites have their
greatest density in areas characterized by such an environment. It can be
hypothesized that, were the evidence available, these same areas would
also disclose significant population expansion and extensive participation
in the Hopewell “interaction sphere,” or trade system, during the Middle
Woodland period.
  This is not to imply that all culture change during Middle Woodland in
eastern United States was based on this particular shift in subsistence
practices. Rather, it might be expected that marked regional variability in
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                                              311
both ecological conditions and selective pressures gave rise to a complex
mosaic of regional developments. Each was characterized by greater or
lesser rates and varying types of change and influenced in varying ways
by occurrences in contiguous and non-contiguous regions. David Aberle
(personal communication) cautions that developments in any one region
must be understood in terms of changes in the total environmental con-
text of a culture, and this context includes the whole sphere of between-
culture interaction in which the group under investigation resides. There-
fore, the eventual explanation of the accelerated culture change in Middle
Woodland groups of the lower Illinois Valley may lie more in a response
to significant culture change occurring in southern Ohio, the Gulf Coastal
Plain, or elsewhere, than in the changing availability of fish, chenopods,
hickory nuts, deer, and ducks in the lower Illinois Valley, or in a new
realization that these resources could be collected on a large-scale by
means of new techniques.
   In short, it may well be to changes in the social environment of these
Illinois Valley Middle Woodland groups that we will eventually ascribe
the changes      in subsistence,      settlement,       population      density, and        social
structure that are only now beginning to emerge from the archeological
record.


                                       References

ALLIson, Aprit L. 1966. Reconstruction of pre-modern vegetation in the lower
  Illinois Valley: a study of floral communities and their distribution with
  reference to prehistoric cultural-ecological adaptations. (Unpublished).
Brnrorp, Lewis R. 1962 Archaelogy as anthropology. American Antiquity,
  28 (2): 217—25.
Bryrorp, Lewis R., and Satty R. Brvrorp. 1966. A preliminary analysis of
  functional variability in the Mousterian of Levallois facies. American Anthro-
  pologist, 68 (2), Part 2: 238—95.
CALDWELL,     JosEPH    R.   1958.   Trend   and    tradition     in the prehistory     of the
  eastern United States. American Anthropological Association, Memoir No.
  88.
     . 1964, Interaction spheres in prehistory. In Joseph R. Caldwell and
  Robert    L. Hall    (Eds.),   Hopewellian       studies.     Scientific   Papers,   12    (6):
  133—43. Springfield: Illinois State Museum.
CALDWELL, JosePH R., and Rosert Hau                 (Eds.). 1964. Hopewellian studies.
  Scientific Papers, Vol. 12. Springfield: Illinois State Museum.
CLELAND, CuarLEes E. 1965. The evolution of subsistence patterns in the
  eastern United States. (Unpublished. )
PaLoumpis, ANDREAS A. 1966. Prehistoric utilization of fish populations in the
  lower Illinois Valley. (Unpublished. )
SCHOFNWETTER,     JAMES. 1964. Pollen studies in southern Illinois. Unpublished
  report to M.    L. Fowler,     Southern    Illinois    University,    as part of research
  undertaken under the auspices of the National Science Foundation                     (G188)
  and the Illinois Archaeological Survey.
STRUEVER, STUART.      1964. The Hopewell interaction sphere in Riverine-western
312                                   Variability among Occupational Units
  Great Lakes culture history. In Joseph Caldwell and Robert L. Hall (Eds.),
  Hopewellian studies. Scientific Papers, 12(3): 85—106. Springfield: Illinois
  State Museum.
     . 1965a. Middle woodland culture history in the Great Lakes-Riverine
  area. American Antiquity, 31(2): 211—23.
     . 1965b. The flotation process for recovery of plant remains. Southeast-
  ern Archaeological Conference, Bulletin 3: 32—35.
TayLor, WALTER P. 1956. The deer of North America. Harrisburg, Pa.: Stack-
  pole Press.
TuRNER, Lewis MacDona.p. 1931. Ecological studies in the lower Illinois
  River Valley. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.
Winters, Howarp D. 1966. The Riverton Culture. Unpublished Ph.D. disser-
  tation, University of Chicago.
SIXTEEN                                                LEWIS    R. BINFORD




                                                    Post- Pleistocene
                                                         Adaptations




This paper will examine some of the major assumptions underlying the
current systematics of the archeological remains of the post-Pleistocene
period. The paper falls into three parts: (1) a brief survey of the history
of research on the immediately post-Pleistocene period, with particular
attention to the conditions affecting research orientation and, conse-
quently, systematics; (2) an assessment of the utility of current concepts,
schemes, and arguments which are advanced to explain cultural events of
the post-Pleistocene period; and (3) the outlining of a different approach
for understanding the nature and extent of cultural changes occurring
during the period.
   The archeological remains of the immediately post-Pleistocene period
are generally termed Mesolithic. They are characterized over wide areas
by the appearance of small, highly specialized flint implements; these
occur frequently on later sites in the coastal and riverine regions in the
context of the systematic exploitation of aquatic resources.
   Until 1892, there was widespread agreement among European scholars
that there was a break, or “hiatus,” in the archeological record between
the Paleolithic and Neolithic epochs (Brown, 1893; G. de Mortillet, 1885,
pp. 479-84; Breuil, 1946, p. 25).
  It has generally been assumed that a break occurred between the periods
  during which this country, and in fact the continent of Europe, was inhab-
  ited by Palaeolithic Man and his Neolithic successors, and that the race or
  races of Palaeolithic falk who hunted the elephant, rhinoceros, cave bear,

                                   313
314                                        Variability among Occupational Units
  hippopotamus, reindeer, ursus, bison, etc., were completely seperated as by a
  chasm from the agricultural people, the herdsmen with their oxen and
  sheep, and the tillers of the soil of the so-called Neolithic epoch, implying
  that man in Britain had changed suddenly from the low savage hunter to a
  half-civilized farmer and drover (Brown, 1893, p. 66).

   A. C. Carlyle who conducted archeological investigations in the
Vindhya Hills of Central India between 1868 and 1888 was the first to use
the term “mezolithic.” Carlyle was also one of the early questioners of the
validity of the hiatus between the Paleolithic and Neolithic. Carlyle’s
excavations yielded typical crescents, trapezoids, and other geometric
microliths; it was asserted that these implements were found both with
late Paleolithic tools and pottery. This led him to propose that there was
no hiatus in India and that the microliths constituted an intermediate
industry to which he applied the term “mezolithic.” These materials were
exhibited in England in 1888 at the Royal Albert Hall.
   Carlyle’s findings served to stimulate John Allen Brown who published
an article summarizing Carlyle’s work (Brown, 1889). In this article,
Brown asked if there had been similar microlithic forms found in the
British Isles, pointing out that they were already reported from Tunis,
Egypt, Italy, Palestine, France, Portugal, and the Crimea. Brown’s main
concern was with documenting the widespread occurrences of microliths,
and he offered no chronological interpretation. Wilson (1894) reported
that in 1892, the U.S. National Museum acquired much of Carlyle’s ma-
terial, and he proposed the acceptance of the Mesolithic as a transitional
period between the Paleolithic and Neolithic.
   The following year Brown published an extensive paper (Brown, 1893)
in which he discussed the problem of the hiatus. He went on to argue in
favor of an unbroken continuity between the Paleolithic and Neolithic,
setting forth four stages: Eolithic, Paleolithic, Mesolithic, and Neolithic.
He based this four-fold division on the transformational sequence of axes,
from the crude forms of the “Drift” to the well-made polished types of the
Neolithic. He documented finds of “intermediate” forms and used a scale
of crude to fine as evidence for historical continuity, citing Pitt-Rivers’
argument that such a transformational sequence indicated historical con-
tinuity (see Pitt-Rivers, 1906, pp. 20—44). Occupation of the same caves
by Paleolithic and Neolithic populations is cited as further support for the
claim of continuity.
   The following year, Boyd Dawkins challenged Brown’s views:
      [ shall first of all address myself to the point as to continuity in this
   country. Is there any evidence that the Palaeolithic shaded off into the
   Neolithic age in this country without any such break as I have mentioned
   above? Next, I shall examine the facts bearing on the point outside of the
  British Isles, premising that the evolution of the Neolithic from the Palae-
  olithic stage of culture in some part of the world may be accepted as a high
  probability, although we may be unable to fix with precision the land where
      this transition took place (1894, p. 243).
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations"                         315
   Dawkins went on to question the validity of the reasoning behind the
claims for continuity and concluded: “The exploration of caverns has not,
I submit, yet resulted in establishing       a ‘continuity’ but simply a. sequence”
(1894, p. 274).
  The English literature of the early 1890's is full of arguments on these
issues, and similar questions were also occupying continental scholars.
                                                                      The
formal changes in the archeological record were the subject of contro-
versy, both with regard to the meaning of the observed changes and the
reality of a hiatus. Lartet and G. deMortillet claimed as early as 1872 that
the apparent break in the archeological record was in reality simply a gap
in knowledge and did not represent a period during which Europe was
not occupied (Piette, 1895b, pp. 235-36). Cartailhac, on the other hand,
stated that the hiatus consituted a major break in the occupancy of the
continent.    In 1875 the Congress of Prehistory held a meeting at Nantes,
and an argument was presented which attempted to disprove Cartailhac’s
position by pointing to formal similarities between the flints from Solutré
and those of the Neolithic period (Piette, 1895b, p. 238).
   Shortly after this, artifacts were found which were dated to the period
between the remains of the Magdalenian, or “reindeer,” period and that
of the Lake Dwellers, the Robenhausian. In 1879 Vielle discovered micro-
liths at Fére-en-Tardenois (1890, p. 961). Almost ten years later Piette
made his discoveries at Mas d’Azil where microliths were found in associ-
ation with modern fauna. The deposits in question overlay the Magdalen-
ian and lacked the features then considered diagnostic of the Neolithic
(Piette, 1895a). These finds were followed by surveys of locations with
microliths (A. deMortillet, 1896), and there was a proliferation of names
for these industries which were said to fill the hiatus (see Coutil, 1912).
New excavations were also carried out (deLoe, 1907; Herve, 1899).
   In the years following World War I, there was a marked increase of
interest in the post-Pleistocene period, and a number of regional syntheses
were made (Kozlowski, 1926; Clark, 1932, 1936; Childe, 1931, 1937).
Further,     there was   an   extension    of European   terms   to non-European
materials which were considered intermediate between the Paleolithic
and Neolithic (Garrod, 1932, 1937). Some general works also appeared in
which data from various regions were summarized and compared
(Obermaier,      1916;   Osborn,   1919;    deMorgan,    1924;   MacCurdy,    1924;
Menghin, 1927). Specific syntheses of the Mesolithic period proper have
appeared (Burkett, 1925; Gimbutas, 1956, 1963). In these various sum-
mary and interpretive writings, there are several distinct lines of reason-
ing, leading to a diversity of opinion as to the historical significance of the
archeological record.
   One line of argument sought to demonstrate that the Mesolithic repre-
sented a way of life, and a subsistence base, intermediate in a develop-
mental sequence between the reindeer hunters of the terminal Pleistocene
and the food-producing villagers of the Neolithic. For example, Piette
claimed that there was evidence for the domestication of the horse by the
316                                 Variability among Occupational Units
Solutreans, reindeer by the Magdalenians, and cattle by the occupants of
Mas d’Azil who also, according to Piette, domesticated plants (Piette,
'1895b). Less extravagant claims have recently been made for the transi-
tional nature of the Baltic materials (Troels-Smith, 1953) and those from
Central Europe   (Pittioni, 1962). Few workers, however, have seriously
considered the European Mesolithic as a stage transitional to the later
food-producing societies.
   Other workers were more concerned with the problem of the continuity
(or lack of it) between the human groups responsible for the Paleolithic
and Mesolithic. Osborn (1919, p. 457) saw in each change in form of
archeological assemblages evidence for the invasion of new “races.”
Others argued that the presence or absence of discrete traits was diagnos-
tic of population stability or change. For example, Grahame Clark (1932,
p. 2) and Menghin (1927) based their claims for historical continuity
between the Paleolithic and Mesolithic on the continued use of core tools.
Obermaier   (1924, p. 324), on the other hand, viewed the shift to the
exploitation of aquatic resources in Ertebglle and the Auterian as justi-
fying the postulation of movement of new people into Western Europe.
DeMorgan    (1924, p. 74) saw the adoption of microliths and the loss of
graphic arts as “revolutionary” and as proof of a major break in historical
continuity. Childe (1925, p. 2), Clark (1932, p. 1), Gimbutas (1956) and
Braidwood (1963) are in general agreement that the Mesolithic of
Europe is a continuation of the Paleolithic way of life and that the ob-
served archeological changes can be related directly to the major climatic
changes of the post-Pleistocene period. These authors do differ, however,
on the degree to which changes in the form of archeological assemblages
can be explained by pecpce to new populations or to “influences” from
other cultures.
   We have attempted to show in this brief historical survey that Meso-
lithic research has been characterized by a series of changing questions
and that the answers to any one question have tended to generate new
questions. The initial problem was to determine whether or not Europe
was occupied between the end of the Paleolithic and the beginning of the
Neolithic. The affirmative answer to this problem led to the question of
historical continuity. Consideration of this problem necessitated consider-
ation of the criteria for evaluation of formal archeological variations in
terms of their meaning for population change or lack of change. There
was considerable diversity of opinion on this question.
  Although problems of interpretive theory and method were never
solved (see the papers by S. R. Binford and J. Sackett, this volume), they
began to occupy scholars less and less as more detailed knowledge of the
archeological record accumulated. Local sequences were worked out, and
a more limited geographical perspective led to greater conservatism in
interpretive viewpoints. Most recent workers have used a diffusionist
model for interpreting geographic variations in archeological data, with
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations                                 317
the postulation of actual movement of peoples playing a minor role (see,
for example, Waterbolk,    1962). The problem of historical continuity vs.
population movement has not been so much solved as circumvented; this
circumvention has involved two means: first, application of one’s own
criteria to an extremely detailed sequence in a very limited area making it
almost impossible for other workers to judge interpretations offered; and
second, stressing certain widespread “traits” in macroregional syntheses,
traits which are usually so generalized that one might question their
relevance to the measurement of detailed changes in culture history.
  The work of the past 100 years has resulted in the accumulation            of
sufficient data to justify some generalizations made by workers in the
field of European Mesolithic studies. Some of the generalizations made in
distinguishing the Paleolithic from the Mesolithic are:
   1. There was a major shift in the centers of population growth in
Western Europe. “During the Upper Magdalenian, the density of popula-
tion was relatively high in France, as evidenced by the great number of
sites occupied for the first time, and by the richness of the sites. . . . The
end of the glacial times was fatal to this striking human expansion. The
disappearance of the cold fauna and the replacement of the steppe, rich
in game, by forests was followed by the demographic recession and break-
up of the Upper Paleolithic cultures resulting in the traditions which are
grouped together under the general name of Mesolithic” (deSonneville-
Bordes, 1963a, p. 354; see also deSonneville-Bordes,        1960, 1963b; and
Sackett’s paper, this volume ).
  2. There was a major change in the form of stone tools. “Small, geomet-
ric flints became very common, and the bow and arrow became wide-
spread during the immediately post-Pleistocene period. The changes have
occasionally been taken as defining features of the Mesolithic” (Childe,
1956, p. 96, see also Gabel, 1958, p. 658).
  3. There is greater geographic variety in cultural remains suggesting
more specific responses to local environmental conditions. See deMorgan,
1924, p. 74, Garrod and Bate, 1937, p. 121, Braidwood and Willey, 1962,
p. 333, Schwabedissen, 1962, p. 260, Pittioni, 1962, p. 218; deSonneville-
Bordes, 1960, p. 497—500; 1963 for specific statements of this generali-
zation.
   4, There was a marked increase in the exploitation of aquatic resources
and wild fowl. This statement scarcely requires documentation since it is
practically a definiens of the Mesolithic (cf. Gabel, 1958, p. 661).
   5. There was a “trend” toward small game hunting. Braidwood (1962,
p. 332) notes that this phenomenon has traditionally been explained as a
response to the extinction of large mammals at the close of the Pleisto-
cene. He points out, however, that this trend occurs before the end of the
Pleistocene and characterizes Africa and India as well as Europe (see also
Gimbutas, 1956, p. 14). _
  6. The Mesolithic represents cultural degeneration when compared
318                                  Variability among Occupational Units
with the Upper Paleolithic. This is generally cited in the context of discus-
sions of the Western European materials and the loss of graphic arts (see
Osborn, 1919, p. 456; deMorgan, 1924, p. 73; Clark, 1932, p. 1; Sollas,
1924, p. 595; deSonneville-Bordes, 1960, p. 498). Reference is also made
to the less prestigeful activity of fishing and shellfish collecting, as op-
posed to reindeer hunting (Osborn, 1919, p. 457).
   These generalizations which summarize archeological observations
have been conceived by most European scholars in the following manner
(see Clark, 1962, p. 100):
   1. There are major changes in cultural remains which serve to differen-
tiate the cultural systems of the terminal Pleistocene from those of the
immediately post-Pleistocene period.
   2. This immediately post-Pleistocene period is further characterized by
major changes in pollen profiles, fossil beach lines, and the geomorphol-
ogy of major drainage systems.
   3. The demonstrable correlation between the dramatic cultural and
environmental changes at this time is evidence for the systematic articula-
tion of cultural and environmental systems.
   Therefore:
   a) Archeological differences observed between the terminal Paleolithic
and the Mesolithic can be explained by reference to environmental
changes.
   b) Differences not explained by reference to environmental changes
are the result of new social contacts; such social contacts were a result of
movement of populations in response to local climatic deterioration (for
example, the “desiccation” of North Africa cited by Clark, 1936, p. xiv).
  This argument is a relatively straightforward mechanistic approach and
is completely compatible with a materialistic, systemic approach to the
understanding of cultural change. The extent to which this approach
might be questioned and the particulars of its application tested depends
upon the degree to which: (1) equally radical changes in culture can be
demonstrated in the absence of analogous environmental changes, and/or
(2) major environmental changes can be demonstrated to vary independ-
ently of analogous changes in cultural systems.
   Such test situations can be found either at a contemporary time period
outside the area directly affected by the retreat of glacial ice or in the
same regions under similar environmental conditions at a different time
period. Researchers concerned with the initial appearance of food pro-
duction, as well as those workers operating in a variety of non-Western
European regions, are the ones to whom we now turn for an evaluation of
the explanatory approach commonly used on Western European mate-
rials.
  The shift from food-procurement to food-production has been ex-
amined by many scholars; Childe termed this change the Neolithic Revo-
lution. In The Dawn of European Civilization (1925) Childe suggested
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations —                                    319
that the investigation of the origins of the Neolithic and its spread into
Europe would be a major step in the understanding of the post-Mesolithic
history of Western Europe. In his New Light on the Most Ancient East
(1952) Childe offered a model to explain the beginnings of the Neolithic
Revolution. Until this point, several other workers had considered the
problems of understanding the conditions surrounding the origins of agri-
culture, and some offered idealistic progressions of conditions under
which man would have gained sufficient knowledge of plant and animal
biology to permit cultivation (Darwin, 1875, pp- 326-27; Roth, 1887).
Others offered mechanistic generalizations about the conditions under
which man would have been most likely to have implemented his know-
ledge (Tylor, 1881, p. 214; deCandolle, 1959). Childe’s consideration of
the problem was the most influential, since he presented a series of prop-
ositions specific enough to be tested through the collection of paleoenvir-
onmental and paleoanthropological data:
   Food production—the deliberate cultivation of food plants, especially cere-
   als, and the taming, breeding and selection of animals.      . .was an economic
   revolution. . .the greatest in human history after the mastery of fire. . . . The
   conditions of incipient desiccation. . .would provide the stimulus towards
   the adoption of a food-producing economy. Enforced concentration by the
   banks of streams and shrinking springs would entail an intensive search for
   means of nourishment. Animals and men would be herded together in oases
   that were becoming increasingly isolated by desert tracts. Such enforced
   juxtaposition might promote that sort of symbiosis between man and beast
   implied by the word domestication (Childe, 1951, pp. 23-25).

   If it was Childe who first provided a set of testable propositions as to
the conditions under which food-production was achieved, it was Braid-
wood who actively sought the field data to test Childe’s propositions. For
a short history of the Iraqi-Jarmo project, the reader is referred to Braid-
wood and Howe       (1960, pp. 1-8); we shall simply summarize            the find-
ings of Braidwood and his co-workers with specific reference to the valid-
ity of the oasis theory and to the materialistic approach to the understand-
ing of culture change. In discussing the oasis theory Braidwood states:
   So far this theory is pretty much all guess-work, and there are certainly
   some questions it leaves unanswered. I will tell you quite frankly that there
   are times when I feel it is plain balderdash (1951a, p. 85).

Braidwood also questioned the relevance of the postulated environmental
changes to the origins of food-production:
   There had also been three earlier periods of great glaciers, and long periods
  of warm    weather in between.    ..   . Thus the forced neighborliness of men,
  plants and animals in river valleys and oases must also have happened
  earlier. Why didn’t domestication happen earlier too, then? (1951a, p. 86).
Braidwood has made the above point on numerous occasions, but it is in
more recent publications (Braidwood and Willey, 1962, p. 342) that the
320                              Variability among Occupational Units
comment is less directly aimed at the oasis theory and more toward
questioning the role of environmental change in bringing about food-
production.
  Braidwood’s work in the “hilly flanks” zone of the Fertile Crescent was
carried out over a number of years and involved the collaboration of a
number of scientists from the fields of zoology, paleontology, geology,
palynology, paleobotany,    etc. Their investigations had been directed
toward the identification of the physical effects of domestication on
plants and animals and the documentation of the environmental events of
the period between 10,000 B.c. and the appearance of “settled village life.”
The climatological-environmental results have allowed Braidwood to gen-
eralize:
   It seems most unlikely that there was any really significant difference be-
  tween then and now in the general land forms and rainfall patterns (1952b,
  pail:
  In southwestern Asia. . .our colleagues in the natural sciences see no evi-
  dence for radical change in climate or fauna between the levels of the
  Zarzian and those of the Jarmo or Hassunah phases (Braidwood and Howe,
  1960, p. 181).
Discussing specifically the relationship between environmental            change
and the beginnings of food-production, Braidwood states:
  We   do not believe that the answers     will lie within the realm of environ-
  mental determinism and in any direct or strict sense. . . we and our natural-
  science colleagues reviewed the evidence for possible pertinent fluctuations
  of climate and of plant and animal distributions. . .and convinced ourselves
  that there is no such evidence available. . no evidence exists for such
  changes in the natural environment. . .as might be of sufficient impact to
  have predetermined the shift’to food production (Braidwood and Howe,
   1960, p. 142)

  Thus Braidwood argues that: (1) environmental conditions analogous
to those at the close of the Pleistocene had occurred previously without
having brought about food-production, and (2) there is no evidence to
support major climatic changes in the Near East of sufficient magnitude
to have “predetermined the shift to food production.” These observations
are not only directed against the oasis theory but also against the argu-
ment   that food-production       constituted   an   alternative   adaptation   to
changed environmental conditions at the close of the Pleistocene. Braid-
wood also argues against the causative role of environmental change in
his consideration of the applicability of the term Mesolithic to non-Euro-
pean areas (Braidwood and Willey, 1962, p. 332). Garrod (1932) called
the Natufian of Israel a Mesolithic industry, and the appropriateness of
this terminology has been questioned by Braidwood:
   . . .the usual conception of the Mesolithic is as a cultural readaptation to
  post-Pleistocene environments    but the conception has become     an awkward
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations                                  32]
  one, on a world wide scale, since as we have just seen, there is evidence that
  the same trends toward readaptation and intensification of collecting activi-
  ties had begun to manifest themselves in certain areas before the conven-
  tional date for the end of the Pleistocene. One of us is of the opinion that
  there was no Mesolithic sensu stricto, in southwestern Asia, at least (Braid-
  wood and Willey, 1962, p. 332).

There is also increasing evidence that there were cultural changes parallel
to those occurring in Western Europe in regions where there were no
correlated major climatic changes (see, for example, Perrot, 1962, pp. 147,
151-53).
  Braidwood presents a strong case that there was major cultural change
in areas where environmental change was minor or absent, as well is in
areas such as Western Europe where environmental change was marked.
This, together with the fact that earlier interglacial warm periods were
not accompanied by drastic cultural changes of analogous form, is suf-
ficient to invalidate the argument that the magnitude of environmental
and cultural change can be expected to vary directly in a simple stimulus-
response pattern. These data also raise questions about the positive corre-
lations claimed for the form of environmental and cultural changes.
  Braidwood, however, is not completely consistent in his application of
these findings. He argues against the causative role of environmental
change in the Near East, yet for such an explanation for the cultural
changes observed in Western Europe (Braidwood and Willey, 1962, p.
341). We do not propose here that there is no relationship between
environmental and cultural change in Western Europe but rather argue
against the direct and simple causative role of environmental change in
view of Braidwood’s own findings. What we must seek is a set of explana-
tory variables which will be valid on a world-wide scale at the terminal-
and post-Pleistocene periods.
   If Braidwood rejects environmental change as the principal explanation
in the Near East, what does he propose instead? After apologizing for
Childe’s “materialistic philosophy of history” (Braidwood and Howe,
1960, p. 7), Braidwood offers his “nuclear zone” theory:
  In my opinion there is no need to complicate the story with extraneous
  “causes.” The food producing revolution seems to have occurred as the
  culmination of the ever increasing cultural differentiation and specialization
  of human communities. Around 8,000 B.c. the inhabitants of the hills around
  the fertile crescent had come to know their habitat so well that they were
  beginning to domesticate the plants and animals they had been collecting
  and hunting. . . . From these “nuclear” zones cultural diffusion spread the
  new way of life to the rest of the world (1960a, p. 134).
A nuclear zone is defined as follows:
  A region with a natural environment which included a variety of wild plants
  and animals, both possible and ready for domestication ... (Braidwood,
  1963, p. 106).
322                                   Variability among Occupational Units
  In his statements Braidwood proposes that cultivation is the expected,
natural outcome of a long, directional evolutionary trend, limited only by
the presence in the environment of domesticable plants and animals. This
is clearly an orthogenetic argument (see Simpson, 1949, pp. 130-59 fora
critical discussion of orthogenesis).The vital element responsible for the
directional series of events appears to be inherent in human nature; it is
expressed by Braidwood in such phrases as “increased experimentation”
(1963, p. 106) and “increased receptiveness” (1963, pp. 97-98, 137—38).
These behavioral traits made it possible for man to “settle into” his envir-
onment   (Braidwood and Reed, 1957, p. 20), and they serve as the basis
for Braidwood’s taxonomy of subsistence-settlement types (1960b, pp.
143—51) in which three long-run trends can be seen: (1) increased
localization of activity within the territory of a group, (2) more specific
exploitation of the habitat, and (3) increased group size. (For a playful
treatment of Braidwood’s frame of reference see Binford and Binford,
1966.) It is when we have these trends, based on inherent human nature,
operating in the context of a “nuclear zone” that things begin to happen:
  Now my hunch goes that when this experimentation and settling down took
  place within a potential nuclear area... where a whole constellation of
  plants and animals possible of domestication were available ...the change
  was easily made .. . (Braidwood, 1963, p. 110).

The explanation for absence of food production during earlier inter-
glacial periods is that: “culture was not ready to achieve it” (Braidwood
and Willey, 1962, p. 342).
   It is argued here that vitalism, whether expressed in terms of inherent
forces orienting the direction of organic evolution or in its more anthro-
pocentric form of emergent human properties which direct cultural evolu-
tion, is unacceptable   as an explanation.   Trends   which   are observed   in
cultural evolution require explanation; they are certainly not explained by
postulating emergent human traits which are said to account for the
trends.
   In summary, post-Pleistocene research began with the question of
whether or not Western Europe was populated between the close of the
Pleistocene and the first appearance of the later Neolithic settlements.
When this question was answered affirmatively, emphasis shifted to the
question of continuity—were the “intermediate” populations indigenous
or were they intruders? In seeking to solve this problem scholars were
involved in the methodological question of what archeological data could
be cited as proof or disproof of continuity. As local sequences became
better documented, this question was dropped, and there was an increas-
ing tendency to view variability as a direct response to local environments
which had radically changed with the retreat of the ice. This stimulus-
response reasoning was generalized not only for the European foraging
adaptation but was also used to explain the origins of food-production
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations — |                          323
(the propinquity or oasis theory). Field investigation in the relevant parts
of the Near East showed that dramatic environmental change did not
characterize the crucial periods of time. The oasis theory has fallen into
disfavor, and Braidwood’s nuclear zone theory has tended to replace it.
We have sought to demonstrate in our analysis that this theory is based
on a kind of vitalism and a postulation of causal factors which are incap-
able of being tested. We also propose that current explanations for the
form and distribution of post-Pleistocene cultures in Europe are implic-
itly, and often explicitly, based on simple and direct environmental deter-
minism which the data from non-European parts of the world tend to
refute. What follows is an examination of post-Pleistocene data within a
different theoretical framework and the formulation of explanatory hy-
potheses which, it is hoped, are both more generally applicable and also
testable.
   If our aim is the explanation of cultural differences and similarities in
different places and at different times, we must first isolate the phe-
nomena we designate “cultural.” Culture is all those means whose forms
are not under direct genetic control (that is, extrasomatic [White, 1959, p.
8]) which serve to adjust individuals and groups within their ecological
communities. If we seek understanding of the origins of agriculture or of
“the spread of the village-farming community,” we must analyze these
cultural means as adaptive adjustments in the variety of ecosystems
within which human groups were participants.
  Adaptation is always a local problem, and selective pressures favoring
new cultural forms result from non-equilibrium conditions in the local
ecosystem. Our task, then, becomes the isolation of the variables initiating
directional change in the internal structuring of ecological systems. Of
particular importance is understanding the conditions which favor the
rearrangement of energy-matter components and their linked depend-
encies in a manner which alters the effective environment of the unit
under study.
  The term “effective environment”      (Allee et al., 1941, p. 1) designates
those parts of the total environment which are in regular or cyclical
articulation with the unit under study. Changes in the effective environ-
ment will produce changes not only in the boundaries of the ecological
community but also in the internal organization of the community. Both
of these changes in tum set up conditions favoring adaptive adjustments
among the components of the community. In dealing with sociocultural
systems and in trying to understand the conditions under which such
systems undergo adaptive change, we are necessarily concerned with the
effective environment of a given system.
   Cultural systems relate man to habitat, and an equilibrium can be estab-
  lished in this relationship as in others. When an equilibrium has been estab-
  lished culturally between man and habitat, it may be continued indefinitely
  until it is upset by the intrusion of a new factor (White, 1959, p. 284).
324                                  Variability among Occupational Units
  If we hope to understand culture change in general, and the changes of
the post-Pleistocene period in particular, we must seek the conditions
which have brought new factors into play in the effective environments of
the cultural systems at the close of the Pleistocene.
   Before undertaking our analysis, one further distinction needs to be
made—the distinction between functional and structural differences in
ecological niches. Functional differences are those which result from dif-
ferences in the form of the elements of a system and which do not neces-
sarily imply differences in the kind of articulation which exists between a
cultural system and the ecological community of which it is a part. Struc-
tural differences refer to communities made up of non-analogous com-
ponents which are integrated in different ways. In citing functional vari-
ability between niches, we are referring to differences in the form of the
gross environment in which ecological communities occur; in such cases
there would be no necessary structural differences in the organization of
the ecological communities of the system, but only in the form of their
environments.   A case in point might be two     cultural   systems, both of
which are solely dependent upon terrestrial resources within their home
ranges and neither of which possesses the technological means for food
storage or circulation beyond the locus of procurement. If one such sys-
tem were located in a tropical rain forest and the other in a temperate
deciduous forest, we would observe numerous formal differences between
the cultural elements in the two systems, yet both can be said to occupy
similar ecological niches within their habitats. Despite obvious differences
in raw materials, the form of implements, differences in phasing of activ-
ities, and even in social organization, all such differences are explicable
directly by reference to differences in gross environment. Therefore, we
would term these differences functional, not structural.
   Structural differences in ecological niches, on the other hand, refer to
differences in the modes of integration between cultural and other com-
ponents within ecological communities. Such differences imply a different
set of relationships between the cultural unit and the variables in the
gross environment with which the cultural unit is articulated. Cultural
systems which occupy different ecological niches would therefore have
different effective environments. An example of two cultural systems in
the same gross environment but occupying different ecological niches
would be the commonly        occurring   case where horticulturalists    and
hunters and gatherers live side by side. Each cultural group is in articula-
tion with quite different elements of the gross environment and is inte-
grated with the environment differently. Such cultural systems would be
subject to qualitatively different types of selective pressure.
   We would argue that understanding the selective pressures favoring the
adoption of adaptive means as radical and as new as animal husbandry
and cultivation in the post-Pleistocene requires the application of the
ecological principles outlined above. A first step would be to determine
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations |                      325
whether food-production constitutes a functional variant of analogous
ecological niches in different environments, or whether it is a structurally
new adaptive means in an ecological niche not previously occupied by
cultural systems.
   Braidwood’s nuclear zone theory is an argument for the former inter-
pretation; the differences between the post-Pleistocene cultures in the
hilly flanks and elsewhere are explicable by reference to formally unique
elements in the plant and animal populations of the piedmont regions of
the Near East. Childe’s position is a statement of the latter interpretation,
and he cites changes in the physical environment as the cause for bringing
about new structural relationships between plants, animals, and men. Our
argument also favors the second interpretation but with demographic,
rather than gross environmental, variables responsible for the generation
of pressures favoring new ecological niches.
  At certain times and places in the course of culture history, the threat of a
  diminished food supply, coming from an increase of population through
  immigration, or from a decline in local flora due to climatic or physiographic
  change, was   met   by various   measures   of cultural   control over   plant life,
  which collectively, we call agriculture (White, 1959, p. 285).

  White's citation of population increase through immigration as a rele-
vant variable in explaining the appearance of agriculture is a radical
departure from traditional interpretations.
   In the traditional approach, changes and variation in the available food
supply have been cited as the major factors which regulate population
equilibrium systems (Childe, 1958, p. 98; Dumond, 1965, p. 310).
  Man must eat to live at all; food is perhaps the one absolute and overriding
  need for man. In early and primitive societies the quest for food was and is
  the most absorbing preoccupation for all members of the group. The en-
  largement of the food-supply was therefore presumably the indispensable
  condition for human progress (Childe, 1944, p. 12).
  The community of food-gatherers had been restricted in size by the food
  supplies available (Childe, 1951, p. 61).

Similar statements have been made by Braidwood (1963, pp. 121—22),
among others.
   The inference about population dynamics to be made from these state-
ments is that populations will grow until the food requirements of the
group begin to exceed the standing crop in the local habitat. No popula-
tion could ever achieve a stable adaptation, since its members would
always be under strong selective pressure to develop new means of get-
ting food. This assumption of the available food supply as the critical
variable in population dynamics has prevented consideration of popula-
tion variables themselves as possible sources of disequilibrium.
   Recent studies in demography have argued strongly against the direct
control of population density by the availability of food.
326                                   Variability among Occupational Units
  We have the strongest reasons for concluding... that population density
  must at all costs be prevented from rising to the level where food shortage
  begins to take a toll of the numbers—an effect that could not be felt until
  long after the optimum density had been exceeded. It would be bound to
  result in chronic over-exploitation and a spiral of diminishing returns
   (Wynne-Edwards, 1962, p. 11).

  Long term population equilibrium... implies some      kind of restraint...    .
  “Food supply” offers a quick answer, but not, I think, the correct one. At
  any rate, a forest is full of game for an expert mouse-hunter, and a Paleo-
  lithic man who stuck to business should have found enough food on two
  square kilometers instead of 20 or 200. Social forces were probably more
  powerful than mere starvation in causing men to huddle in small bands
   (Deevey, 1960, p. 6).

Most demographers agree that functional relationships between the nor-
mal birth rate and other requirements (for example, the mobility of the
female) favor the cultural regulation of fertility through such practices as
infanticide, abortion, lactation taboos, etc. These practices have the effect
of homeostatically keeping population size below the point at which di-
minishing returns from the local habitat would come into play. (See Carr-
Saunders, 1922; Wynne-Edwards,       1962, 1964; Birdsell, 1958, 1968;
Deevey, 1960; Hainline, 1965; Dumond, 1965; and Halbwachs, 1960).
   The arguments of demographers are supported by a number of recent
ethnographic studies which document the abundance of food available to
even marginal hunters. Some cases of importance are J. D. Clark (1951)
on the Barotse, Lee (1965) on the !Kung Bushmen, Woodburn (1968) on
the Hadza, and Huntingford (1955) on the Dorobo. Similar conditions of
relative abundance have been reported for Australia. For example, life on
the Daly River in the Northern Territory led McCarthy (1957, p. 90) to
generalize: “for the uncontaminated bush native the food problem hardly
exists.” Ease in food procurement is also reported for Armhemland
(McCarthy, 1957, p. 90; McCarthy and McArthur, 1960, pp. 145-93).
Quimby has described the truly impressive quantities of food obtained in
the course of a single year by a Chippewa family in the Lower Peninsula
of Michigan in 1763 (Quimby, 1962, pp. 217-39). In a quantitative
study of food intake by the Onge hunters of Little Andaman, Bose (1964,
p. 306) states: “The region surrounding Tokebuea can supply more food
than the requirement of the local people.”
   These data suggest that while hunting-gathering populations may vary
in density between different habitats in direct proportion to the relative
size of the standing food crop, nevertheless within any given habitat the
population is homeostatically regulated below the level of depletion of
the local food supply.
   There are two corollaries of the assumption that population size is
regulated almost exclusively by food supply which we also need to ex-
amine. The first corollary is: Man would be continually seeking means for
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations                            327
increasing his food supply. In other words, there would be ubiquitous and
constant selective pressure favoring the development of technological in-
novations, such as agriculture, which serve to make larger amounts of
food available to a group. There is a large body of ethnographic data
which suggests that this is not the case.
  Carneiro (1957) in his study of the Kuikuru, who are horticulturalists,
demonstrated that these people were capable of producing several times
the amount of food they did. A small increment in the amount of time
devoted to planting and harvesting would have brought about substantial
increases in the available food, yet the Kuikuru chose not to do this.
Enough food was produced to meet local demands, and it was at that
point that production stopped. Equilibrium         had been reached, and
neither population nor production increased.
   In writing about the Southeastern United States, Caldwell concerned
himself with the question of why no effective early prehistoric agriculture
was developed in the region. He concluded:
  We have suggested that so many natural foods were available that to place
  any reliance on cultivation. ..might have seemed risky or irrelevant. The
  hunting-gathering pattern was developed to a peak of efficiency and jelled,
  so to speak, in the very heart of eastern cultures (1958, p. 72).

   If we recognize that an equilibrium system can be established so that
populations are homeostatically regulated below the carrying capacity of
the local food supply, it follows that there is no necessary adaptive pres-
sure continually favoring means of increasing the food supply. The ques-
tion to be asked then is net why agricultural and food-storage techniques
were not developed everywhere, but why they were developed at all.
Under what set of conditions does increasing the supply of available food
have adaptive advantage?
  The second corollary to be examined concerns leisure time: It is only
when man is freed from preoccupation with the food quest that he has
time to elaborate culture. A fairly representative statement of this corol-
lary has been made    by Childe   (1951, p. 61) and is cited above. Also,
Braidwood writes:
  Proper village life now came into being, and with it a completely new kind
  of technology. This latter depends on the fact that time now became avail-
  able for pursuits other than that of simply collecting food (Braidwood and
  Braidwood, 1950, p. 189).
Braidwood reiterates the same argument in more detail in another place
(1963, pp. 121-22). The view of the hunter constantly involved in
scrounging a bare subsistence and existing on the brink of starvation has
recently received some rather pointed comments by Sahlins:
  Almost totally committed to the argument that life was hard in the Paleo-
  lithic, our text books compete to convey a sense of impending doom, leaving
  the student to wonder not only how hunters managed to make a living but
328                                      Variability among Occupational Units
  whether, after all, this is living. The spectre of starvation stalks the stalker in
  these pages. His technical incompetence is said to enjoin continuous work
  just to survive, leaving him without respite from the food quest and without
  the “leisure time to build culture” (1968).
  There is abundant data which suggests not only that hunter-gatherers
have adequate supplies of food but also that they enjoy quantities of
leisure time, much more in fact than do modern industrial or farm work-
ers, or even professors of archeology. Lee (1965), Bose (1954), McCar-
thy and McArthur (1960), and Woodbum (1968) have shown that hunt-
ers on a simple level of technology spend a very small percentage of their
time obtaining food. On these grounds we can reasonably question the
proposition that cultural elaboration is caused by leisure time which is
available for the first time to agriculturalists.
   In rejecting the assumption that hunter-gatherer populations are pri-
marily regulated by the available supply of food, we put the problem of
the development of new types of subsistence in a different light. As long.
as one could assume that man was continually trying to increase his food
supply, understanding the “origins of agriculture” simply involved pin-
pointing those geographic areas where the potential resources were and
postulating that man would inevitably take advantage of them. With the
recognition that equilibrium systems regulate population density below
the carrying capacity of an environment, we are forced to look for those
conditions which might bring about disequilibrium and bring about selec-
tive advantage for increased productivity. According to the arguments
developed here, there could be only two such sets of conditions:
   1. A change in the physical environment of a population which brings
about a reduction in the biotic mass of the region would decrease the
amounts of available food. The previous balance between population and
standing crop is upset, and more efficient extractive means would be
favored. This is essentially the basis for Childe’s propinquity theory.
   2. Change in the demographic structure of a region which brings about
the impingement of one group on the territory of another would also
upset an established equilibrium system, and might serve to increase the
population density of a region beyond the carrying capacity of the natural
environment. Under these conditions manipulation of the natural envir-
onment in order to increase its productivity would be highly advan-
tageous.
   The remainder of this paper is devoted to the exploration of this second
set of conditions. The first step of our analysis is to build models of
different types of population systems under different conditions. One
such type of system is termed a closed population system (Hyrenius,
1959, p. 476) in which a steady state is maintained by internal mech-
anisms limiting numbers of offspring at the generational replacement
level. Techniques    such as abortion,      contraception,    abstinence,   and in-
fanticide serve to lower the birth rate and increase the mortality rate so
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations                            329
that a given population would be homeostatically regulated at a given
size or density.
   The second type of system, the open population system, is one in which
size and/or density is maintained by either the budding off of new groups
or by the emigration of individuals. This would be an open system of the
donor type. If the size or density of the system is altered through the
introduction of immigrants from other population groups, we have an
open system of the recipient type.
  Given these two types of population systems—closed and open, the
latter including two sub-types,   recipient and donor—we     can begin to
analyze differences in the ways in which the two system types can be
articulated in a given region.


                             Closed   Systems
We can identify the population of a region as a whole as a closed system,
yet find that within the region there would be some variability in op-
timum group size as a response to geographical differences in the regional
distribution of resources. Further, each local group within the region may
operate periodically as an open system, since we would expect some
variability in the degree to which local groups have achieved equilibrium.
There would therefore be some redistribution of population between
groups which would promote a more uniform and steady density equilib-
rium system over the region as a whole.
  We would expect selection favoring cultural means of regulating pop-
ulation to occur in situations where the density equilibrium system for the
region as a whole was in fact a closed system, and where there were
significant imbalances in the losses and recruits for the local subsegments
of the regional population. There would be differential selective advan-
tage for cultural regulation of population growth between two closed
population systems in different environmental settings if there were dis-
crepancies between the actual birth and death rates on the one hand and
the optimal rates for maintaining population size on the other.


                      Open Systems, Donor Type
We would expect to find this type of population system in areas which
are not filled to the point at which density dependent factors are brought
into play. The peopling of a new land mass, such as the New World or
Australia, would be an example of such a situation in which there would
be positive advantage for this type of system.
  The rate of expansion of open donor systems into uninhabited territory
has been discussed in the literature, and models for this type of expansion
have been built (Bartholomew and Birdsell, 1953; Birdsell, 1957, 1958,
1968; Yengoyan,   1960). Birdsell has made two observations which are
330                                  Variability among Occupational Units
particularly relevant here. First, the budding off of new groups occurs
before optimum local population size has been reached (Birdsell, 1957, p.
54). This observation demonstrates the role of emigration in bringing
about and maintaining equilibrium and also shows that the unit on which
selection for emigration operates is a subunit of the local population, since
conditions favoring segmentation appear before the regional population is
under pressure from density dependent factors.
  Second, the adaptation of any given sociocultural system will determine
in part the locus of selection within the social system and the particular
selective advantages for different fertility rates. Birdsell writes:

  In a population stabilized at the carrying capacity of its given environment,
  some limitation on procreative activities naturally filter down to the level of
  the biological family. These may be examined most profitably in terms of the
  requirements which affect the spacing of the natal survivors. Generalized
  hunters with their requirements of high mobility present the most exacting
  model. Australian data indicate that the inability of a mother to carry more
  than one child at a time together with her female baggage impose the first
  insurmountable barrier to a large number of children. Strongly reinforced by
  an equally limiting incapacity to nurse more than one child simultaneously
  imposes a minimum of a three-year spacing upon children designed for
  survival. Since human female reproductive physiology does not reliably pre-
  vent conception while still nursing, children are frequently conceived and
  born which cannot be reared. The result is systematic infanticide (1968).

   We have seen that two frequent means of maintaining homeostasis are
emigration and cultural regulation of births and deaths. The relative im-
portance to any group of one of these means vs. the other will be condi-
tioned by such factors as mobility requirements of the group. Another
conditioning factor would be the type of articulation between segments of
the population which can directly affect the ease with which budding-off
can occur. A third factor would be the degree to which the region as a
whole is occupied which would affect the expectations of success in the
establishment of daughter communities.


                     Open Systems, Recipient Type
This type of system could occur under only two sets of conditions; the
first would be where there is the expansion of a donor system into an
uninhabited region. The frontier of the region would contain a number of
population units which could, for a short time, serve as recipient systems.
Their change from recipient to donor systems would depend upon the
extent to which optimal densities were achieved locally and the frontier
continued to advance.
   The second set of conditions promoting systems of the recipient type is
more relevant to the consideration of early agricultural developments.
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations                              331
This is the situation in which two or more different kinds of sociocultural
systems occupy adjacent environmental zones. If the adaptation of one
sociocultural unit is translatable into the adjacent environmental zone, it
may expand into that zone at the expense of resident systems. Cases of
this type have been cited by Kaplan (1960) as examples of the Law of
Cultural Dominance, and a specific instance referred to by Sahlins are the
Tiv and the Nuer (1961). We would expect expansion of the dominant
system until the zone to which the system was adapted was occupied; at
this juncture there would be selection for increased efficiency of produc-
tion and/or for increased regulation of the birth rate.
   A different kind of situation would obtain in the case of sociocultural
systems occupying adjacent zones if the adaptation of the more rapidly
growing group is not translatable into the adjacent zone. Population
growth within the area occupied by the parent group might well be so
great that daughter communities would frequently be forced to reside in
an environment which is incompatible with their particular cultural adap-
tation. There could be a number of effects under these circumstances.
  From the standpoint of the populations already in the recipient zone,
the intrusion of immigrant groups would disturb the existing density equi-
librium system and might raise the population density to the level at
which we would expect diminishing food resources. This situation would
serve to increase markedly for the recipient groups the pressures favoring
means for increasing productivity. The intrusive group, on the other hand,
would be forced to make adaptive adjustments to their new environment
(for an example of this situation see L. R. Binford, 1968). There would be
strong selective pressures favoring the development of more efficient sub-
sistence techniques by both groups.
   It should be pointed out, however, that such advantage does not insure
that these developments will inevitably occur. In many cases these prob-
lems are met by changes which might be called regressive in that the
changes in adaptation which occur may be in the direction of less com-
plex cultural forms. Examples of this sort of change can be seen among
the hunter-gatherers of the non-riverine tropical forest zones in South
America. Steward and Faron write of the Siriono and Guayaki:

  These Indians retreated . . . to inaccessible regions where they largely
  abandoned horticulture to rely on a predominantly hunting and gathering
  subsistence. Other enclaves of nomads isolated in the tropical forests and
  interfluvial regions may also have experienced similar deculturation   (1959,
  p. 378).

Lathrap has offered the possibility that perhaps all of the less sedentary
South American groups are “the degraded descendants of peoples who at
one time maintained an advanced form of Tropical Forest Culture”
(1968).               “
  While in these examples the adaptations along population frontiers
332                                    Variability among Occupational Units
were   in the direction   of less complexity,    it is in the context      of such
situations of stress in environments with plant and animal forms amen-
able to manipulation that we would expect to find conditions favoring
the development of plant and animal domestication. Such situations
would be characterized by disequilibrium between population and re-
sources which, in turn, would offer selective advantage to increases in the
efficacy of subsistence technology. Rather than seeking the locus for the
origins of agriculture in the heart of a “natural habitat zone,” we would
argue that we must look to those places where a population frontier or
adaptive tension zone intersects a “natural habitat zone.” This means that
archeological investigations might well concentrate on those areas within
the natural habitat zone where there is an archeologically demonstrated
major shift in population density. The presence of such a shift might well
indicate a population frontier where rapid evolutionary changes were
taking place.
   Another archeological clue to be exploited is the degree to which set-
tlements are characterized by sedentism. The frontier zones would be
expected between regions which differed widely in the degree of seden-
tism practiced by resident groups. In those areas with highly sedentary
population, problems of transport of young and belongings would be
reduced. Reduced mobility of social units in general and in the daily
routines of females in particular would in tur reduce the selective ad-
vantages accruing to cultural means of controlling population growth.
Therefore,   under   conditions   of increased   sedentism   we    would    expect
population growth. A consequence of such growth would be the increased
relative importance of emigration as a mechanism for maintaining the
local group within optimal size and density limits.
   Therefore where there is a marked contrast in degree of sedentism
between two sociocultural units within a relatively restricted geographical
region, there would be a tension zone where emigrant colonies from the
more sedentary group would periodically disrupt the density equilibrium
balances of the less sedentary group. Under these conditions there would
be strong selective pressure favoring the development of more effective
means of food production for both groups within this zone of tension.
There would also be increasing pressures against immigration, given the
failure to develop more effective extractive technologies.
   It is proposed here that it was in the selective context outlined above
that initial practices of cultivation occurred. Such selective situations
would have been the consequence           of the increased        dependence    on
aquatic resources during the terminal and immediately post-Pleistocene
period. Not all portions of rivers and shorelines favor the harvesting of
fish, molluscs, and migratory fowl; it is with the systematic dependence
on just these resources that we find archeological remains indicating a
higher degree of sedentism in both the Archaic of the New World and the
terminal Paleolithic and Mesolithic of the Old World. This hypothesis is
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations |                             333
lent strong support by the fact that it is also in the terminal Paleolithic-
Mesolithic and Archaic that we find, associated with increased sedentism,
evidence for marked population growth and for the development of food-
storage techniques, the latter being functionally linked to the highly sea-
sonal nature of migratory fowl and anadromous fish exploited as food
crops (for an example of the importance of anadromous fish see L. R.
Binford, 1964).
   Since the systematic exploitation of these food sources (and of mark-
edly seasonally available terrestrial forms as well—for example, reindeer)
characterized adaptations of this time range in a wide variety of envir-
onments, we would expect that tension zones, with their concomitant
selective pressures favoring increased subsistence efficiency, would be
widely distributed also. This expectation is in accord with the empirical
generalizations that: (1) There were a number of independent loci of the
development of cultivation techniques—the Near East, Asia, and the
New World—and all the developments of these techniques occur within
the time range in question; and (2) These loci were distributed across
widely different environmental types—root crops in the tropics and ce-
reals in semi-aridlands, for example.
   The widespread nature of conditions favoring increased subsistence
efficiency also accounts for the rapid transmission and integration of con-
tributing innovations from one cultural system to another. Many authors
have cited the rapid “diffusion” of cultural elements as characterizing the
immediately post-Pleistocene period.
  Finally, in the traditional view the “Neolithic Revolution” is character-
ized by the appearance of a number of traits which are thought to be
linked to the shift to food production. The manufacture of ceramics and
textiles, relatively permanent   houses, and craft specialization are only a
few of those frequently cited (cf. Braidwood, 1963, pp. 122-23). These
traits constitute part of the definition of the “village farming way of life,”
and the assumption is that they originated in the “nuclear area” from
which they spread as a complex, the spread being achieved by diffusion,
stimulus diffusion, and/or migration. As more data have been accumu-
lated, it becomes increasingly clear that these traits are not mutually
dependent; indeed, it seems to be quite clear that ceramics, for example,
were first used in the Old World in coastal Japan (Griffin, 1961, p. 92),
with a cluster of radiocarbon dates averaging ca. 7000 x.c. This is about
the same time that effective grain agriculture was initially practiced in the
Near East (Mellaart,    1961, 1963; Hole, 1966; Young and Smith, 1966),
and the occupations in question have yielded no ceramics. Given our
model, such traits insofar as they are functionally linked to sedentism
and/or food production would be expected to appear in a variety of
regions as the result of numerous independent but parallel inventions.
  Further utility for the model presented here can be shown by the
degree to which it provides explanatory answers for a series of questions
334                                          Variability among Occupational Units
posed by Braidwood           and Willey—questions        which      cannot. be satisfac-
torily answered within the traditional framework.
  Why did incipient food production not come earlier? Our only answer at the
  moment      is that culture was       not yet ready to achieve it (Braidwood          and
  Willey, 1962, p. 342).
  We believe that a more complete answer is possible. The shift to the
exploitation of highly seasonal resources such as anadromous fish and
migratory fowl did not occur until the close of the Pleistocene. This shift,
probably linked to worldwide changes in sea level, with attendant in-
crease in sedentism, established for the first time conditions leading to
marked heterogeneity in rates of population growth and structure of the
ecological niche of immediately adjacent sociocultural systems. This new
set of conditions brought about, in turn, conditions favoring improved
subsistence technology. It was not that culture was unready, but rather
that the selective conditions favoring such changes had not previously
existed.
  What were the . . . cultural conditions favoring incipient cultivation or
  domestication? Certainly there is nothing in the archeological record to
  indicate that those few instances          of cultural build-up    and elaboration,    as
  manifested by the varying art styles of the upper paleolithic from western
  Europe into Siberia... provided a favorable ground for incipient food
  production. On the contrary, those instances of incipient cultivation or do-
  mestication of greatest potential are found in contexts of a much less spec-
  tacular character        (Braidwood    and Willey,   1962, p. 343, see also Willey,
      1966, pp. 141—42).

  According to our model, we would expect to find the selective situation
favoring “incipient cultivation” in “contexts of a much less spectacular
character’—in those tension zones where less sedentary populations are
being moved in on by daughter groups from more sedentary populations.
These are the areas where the development of greater productive means
is most advantageous.
      The perplexing question of what kinds of natural environmental settings
  were most propitious for the early development of incipient food production
  is by no means solved. Nevertheless, the data on hand suggest that generally
  semi-arid regions ... with adequate but not overabundant collectible food
  resources were the hearths of the most important beginnings of cultivation
  and domestication (Braidwood and Willey, 1962, p. 342).

  If we look at the semi-arid areas where the crops referred to (wheat
and barley in the Old World; maize in the New World) were developed,
it turns out that they are adjacent to areas which already supported
settled (that is, sedentary ) villages whose populations depended in large
part upon aquatic resources. The Natufian of the Near East (Kenyon,
1959; Perrot, 1960, 1962) and the coastal settlements of Mexico and Peru
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations                                  335
(Willey, 1966, p. 144; see also Flannery and Coe, this volume) are cases
in point.
  The explanation of the distribution noted above of the hearths of
domestication of most economically significant crops within semi-arid re-
gions lies in the nature of the seeds produced by the plants in such
regions. Seeds of xerophytic plants normally have low moisture require-
ments and can therefore remain viable without being subject to rots
which attack many other kinds of seeds. Their economic value also lies in
the fact that semi-arid regions are areas with low diversity indices
(Odum,      1954, p. 281), which means     that there will typically be many
individuals of a given species within a very limited space.
   We would like to note in passing that the post hoc evaluation of some
“beginnings of cultivation” as “most important” (because of the ultimate
economic significance of the crops produced ) and the limitation of ques-
tion-asking to these instances has served to prevent the recognition of the
general conditions under which cultivation may have been initiated.
   How did the new elements spread into Europe; how shall we conceptualize
   the nature of the cultural mechanisms of “diffusion” and the spread of new
   “influences” through a vast area of already functioning cultural and environ-
   mental adaptations? (Braidwood and Willey, 1962, p. 347).

  While wheat and barley might have constituted “new influences” in
Europe, it has been suggested above that cultivation arose as a response
to similar pressures many times and in many places. Given the existence
of the selective situation favoring food production and the response to
this adaptive situation occurring in a number of places, including Europe,
the adoption of easily storable high-yield crops such as wheat and barley
becomes     readily understandable.   However,    it is important not to con-
found the adoption of specific crops with the “spread of the village-
farming way of life.”
  If the model presented here has value above and beyond that of a
logical exercise, it must be tested by the formulation of hypotheses and
the collection of data. While the outlining of a program of research is
beyond the scope of and irrelevant to the aims of this paper, a few
predictions follow which, if borne out by field research, would empirically
validate some of our assertions.
   1. Evidence for the initial domestication of plants and animals in the
Near East will come from areas adjacent to those occupied by relatively
sedentary forager-fishers. One such area is that adjacent to the Natufian
settlements in the Jordan Valley. These settlements have yielded evidence
of heavy dependence upon fish and migratory fowl (Perrot, 1960, p. 20)
and the architecture suggests a sedentary way of life. The areas just
beyond these villages would have received “excess” population and would
therefore have been areas of disequilibrium in which adaptive change
would have been favored. Intermontane valleys and foothills which sup-
336                                        Variability among Occupational Units
ported migratory hunters far removed from the kind of villages described
above will not yield information on the earliest transition to dependence
on food production, regardless of the density of wild ancestors of domes-
ticates.
   2. Evidence for independent experimentation leading to the develop-
ment of agriculture as well as animal domestication will be found in
European Russia and south-central Europe. We would expect the relevant
areas to be adjacent to those where there was effective exploitation of
anadromous fish and migratory fowl. Such areas appear to be the rivers
flowing into the Black Sea (Clark, 1948b, p. 50).
   3. As further research is carried out in Europe, Asia, and the New
World, there will be evidence for numerous independent innovations
paralleling forms appearing in other areas. Post-Pleistocene adaptations
are viewed as the result of the operation of local selective pressures, and
the development of food production is one instance of such adaptations.
Parallel innovations can be expected where structurally similar ecological
niches were occupied, regardless of differences in the general form of the
environment.
   In conclusion, it is hoped that the theoretical perspective offered here
will serve to generate a new series of questions, the answers to which may
increase our understanding of the major cultural changes which occurred
at the close of the Pleistocene.


                                      References

ALLEE,     W.   C., A. IX. Emerson,    O. Park,    T. Park,   and Kari   P. SCHMIDT.
  1949. Principles of animal: ecology. Philadelphia and London: W. B.
  Saunders.
BARTHOLOMEW, GEorRGE A. JR., and J. B. BrrpsELL. 1953. Ecology and the
   protohominids. American Anthropologist, 55 (2): 481-98.
BrnrorbD, Lewis R. 1964. Archaeological and ethnohistorical investigations of
  cultural diversity. Microfilm, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan.
        1965. Archaeological systematics and the study of culture process.
   American Antiquity, 31(2): 203-210.
      . 1968. An ethnohistory of the Nottoway,          Meherrin and Weanock       In-
  dians of southeastern Virginia. Ethnohistory, Vol. 14, No. 3-4 (whole num-
  ber).
Binrorp, Lewis R., and Satty R. Brnrorp 1966. The predatory revolution: a
   consideration of the evidence for a new subsistence level. American Anthro-
   pologist, 68 (2), Part 1: 508-512.
BIRDSELL, JOSEPH B, 1953. Some environmental and cultural factors influencing
   the structuring of Australian      aboriginal populations.    American   Naturalist
   (Supp.; May—June) 87 (834): 171-207.
——. 1957. Some population problems involving Pleistocene man. Cold
  Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, 22: 47-69.
     . 1958. On population structure in generalized hunting and collecting
   populations. Evolution, 12(2): 189-205.
      . 1968. Some predictions for the Pleistocene            based upon equilibrium
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations —                                              337
  systems among recent hunters. In Richard B. Lee and Irven DeVore (Eds.),
  Man the hunter. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Bosr, SARADINDU.     1964.   Economy      of the Onge of Little Andaman.            Man    In
  India, 44(4): 298-310.
Braiwwoon, R. J. 195la. Prehistoric men.        (2d ed.) Popular Series, Anthropol-
  ogy No. 37, Chicago: Chicago Natural History Museum.
     . 1951b. From cave to village in prehistoric Iraq. Bulletin of the Amer-
  ican Schools of Oriental Research, 124: 12-18.
     . 1952a. From cave to village. Scientific American, 187 (4): 62—66.
     . 1952b. The Near East and the foundations for civilization. (Condon
  Lectures.) Eugene: Oregon State System of Higher Education.
     . 1960a. The agricultural revolution. Scientific American, 203: 130—41.
     . 1960b.    Levels   in prehistory:    a model     for the consideration        of the
  evidence. In Sol Tax (Ed.), The evolution of man (Vol. 2 of Evolution after
  Darwin). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
     . 1963. Prehistoric men. (6th ed.) Popular Series, Anthropology No. 37,
  Chicago: Chicago Natural History Museum.
Braiwwoop,      R. J., and Linpa    Bramwoop.         1950. Jarmo: a village of early
  farmers in Iraq. Antiquity, 24(96): 189-95.
Braipwoop, R. J., and CHartes A. REED. 1957. The achievement and early
  consequences of food production. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quanti-
  tative Biology, 22: 19-31.
Brarpwoop, R. J., and Gorpon WILLEY. 1962. Conclusions and afterthoughts.
  In R. J. Braidwood      and G. R. Willey      (Eds.),    Courses      toward   urban life
  Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Braipwoop, R. J., and Bruce Howe. 1960. Prehistoric investigations in Iraqi
  Kurdistan. Oriental Institute Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, no. 31.
  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
     . 1962. Southwestern Asia beyond the lands of the Mediterranean lit-
  toral. In R. J. Braidwood and G. R. Willey (Eds.), Courses toward urban
  life. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Breuit, H. 1921. Observations suivantes: M. Cartilhac, La question de l’hiatus
  entre le Paléolithique et le Néolithique. L’Anthropologie, 31: 349-55.
     . 1946. The discovery of the antiquity of man. Journal of the Royal
  Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 75(1): 21-31.
Brown, JoHN ALLEN. 1888. On some small highly specialized forms of stone
  implements, found in Asia, North Africa, and Europe. In Journal of the
  Royal   Anthropological     Institute    of Great    Britain    and    Ireland,    18(2):
  134—39.
    . 1892.     On   the continuity of the Palaeolithic          and Neolithic      periods.
  Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland,
  22(1 and 2): 66—98.
Burkitt, M. C. 1925. The transition between Palaeolithic and Neolithic times,
  ie. the Mesolithic period. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society of East
  Anglia, 5(1): 16-33.
CaLpweE.L,    JosepH R. 1958. Trend and tradition in the prehistory of the
  eastern United States. Memoir no. 88, American Anthropological                    Associa-
  tion, vol. 60(6), Part 2. Springfield: Ilinois State Museum.
Carneiro, RoBert. 1957. Subsistence and social structure: an ecological study
  of the Kuikuru Indians. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan.               (Mimeo-
  graphed.)
Carr-Saunvers, A. M. 1922. The population problem: a study in human evo-
  lution. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
338                                           Variability among Occupational Units
Cumpr, V. Gorvon.          1925. The dawn of European               civilization.    New   York:
  Alfred A. Knopf.
——. 1931. The forest cultures of northern Europe: a study in evolution and
  diffusion. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and
  Ireland, Vol. 61, Part 2: 325—48.
     . 1937. Adaptation to the postglacial forest on the north Eurasiatic
  plain. In G. G. McCurdy (Ed.), Early man. Philadelphia and New York: J.
  B, Lippincott.
      . 1944. Progress and archaeology. The Thinkers                Library, No.      102. Lon-
  don: Watts and Co.
     . 1951. Man makes himself. New York: Mentor Books, New American
  Library.
      . 1952. New light on the most ancient East. London: Routledge and
  Kegan Paul. (4th ed.)
      . 1956. The new Stone Age. In Harry L. Shapiro                   (Ed.), Man, culture,
  and society. New York: Oxford University Press.
Crark, J. DesMonp. 1951. Bushmen hunters of the Barotse forests. The North-
   ern Rhodesia Journal, 1(3): 56—65.
      . 1962. Africa south of the Sahara. In. R. J. Braidwood and G. R. Willey
   (Eds.), Courses toward urban life. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Ciark, J. G. D. 1932. The Mesolithic age in Britain. Cambridge, England:
  The University Press.
     . 1936. The Mesolithic settlement of northern Europe: a study of the
  food gathering peoples of northern Europe during the early post-glacial
  period. Cambridge, England: The University Press.
      . 1948a. Fowling in prehistoric Europe. Antiquity, 22(8): 116—30.
      . 1948b. The development of fishing in prehistoric Europe. The Anti-
  quaries Journal, 28: 45—85.
      . 1963. A survey of the Mesolithic phase in the prehistory of Europe and
   Southwest Asia. Atti de 6 Congresso internazionale delle Scienze preissto-
   riche e Protostoriche, 1: 97-111. Rome: Collegio Romano.
CoutiL,    L.   1912.   Tardenoisien,      Capsien,    Getulien,    Ibero-Maurusien        Inter-
   getulo-Néolithique,     Tellien “Loubirien,        Geneyenien.      Congrés International
  @ Anthropologie       et d’Archéologie     préhistorique,    14th session,        1: 301-336.
  Geneva.
Cumont, M. 1907. Quelques mots au sujet de Tardenoisien et de la transition
   du Paléolithique au Néolithique. Sociéte Royale Belge d Anthropologie et de
  Préhistoire,. Bulletin, 26: ccv-ceviii.
Darwin, Cuarces R .1875. The variation of animals and plants under domes-
  tication, Vol. 1. (2d ed.) London: Murray and Sons.
Dawkins, WiLLI1AM Boyp. 1894. On the relation of the Palaeolithic to the
  Neolithic period. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great
  Britain and Ireland, 23: 242—54.
DECANDOLLE, ALPHONSE L. P. P. 1959. Origin of cultivated plants. (Reprint of
   the 2d ed., 1886.) New York: Hafner.
DrrEvey,   Epwarp       S., Jr. 1960. The human          population.     Scientific American,
   203(1): 194-204.
Dicsy, Aprian. 1949. Technique and the time factor in relation to economic
  organization. Man, 49: 16—18.
     . 1962. Time the catalyst: or why we should study the material culture
  of primitive peoples. The Advancement of Science, 19(80) : 349—57.
Dumonp, D. E. 1965. Population growth and cultural change. Southwestern
  Journal of Anthropology, 21(4): 302—324.
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations                                                  339
eee            EmiLte.   1897—98.      Morphologie     sociale,   L’année   sociologique,    2:

GaseL, W. Criecuton. 1958a. The Mesolithic continuum in western Europe.
  American Anthropologist, 60 (4): 658—67.
——. 1958b. European secondary Neolithic cultures. Journal of the Royal
  Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 88(1): 97—107.
     . 1960. Seminar on economic types in pre-urban cultures of temperate
  ne peat arid,          and    tropical   areas.   In Current    Anthropology,     1(5—6):

Garrop, D. A. E. 1932. A new Mesolithic industry: the Natufian of Palestine.
  Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland,
  62(2): 257-69.
Gannon, D. A. E., and D. M. A. Bate. 1937. The Stone Age of Mount Carmel,
  eg         at the Wadi El-Mughara, Vol. 1. Oxford, England: Clarendon
    Tess,
Gimputas, Marrya. 1956. The prehistory of eastern Europe. In Hugh Hencken
  (Ed.), Harvard University, Bulletin No. 20. Cambridge, Mass.: American
  School of Prehistoric Research, Peabody Museum.
     . 1963. European prehistory: Neolithic to the Iron Age. In Bernard J.
  Siegel (Ed.), Biennial Review of Anthropology 1963, Stanford: Stanford
  University Press.
GrirFin, JAMEs B. 1961. Comments in Edmonson: Neolithic diffusion rates.
  Current Anthropology, 2(2): 92—93.
Hartpwacus,     Maurice.       1960.   Population    and society, introduction      to social
  morphology. Translated by Otis Duncan and Harold W. Pfautz. Glencoe,
  Ill.: The Free Press.
HAINLINE, JANE. 1965. Culture and biological adaptation. American Anthropol-
  ogist, 67(5), Part 1: 1174—97.
Herve, Grorces. 1899. Populations               Mesolithiques     et Néolithiques   de TEs-
  pagne et du Portugal. Revue Mensuelle de L’Ecole d Anthropologie de Paris,
  9(Series no. 1): 265—80.
Hote, Franx. 1966. Investigating the origins of Mesopotamian civilization.
  Science, 153(3736) : 605-611.
Huntincrorp,      G. W.    B. 1955. The economic         life of the Dorobo.      Anthropos,
  50: 605-684.
Hyrenius, Hannes. 1959. Population growth and replacement. In P. M.
  Hauser and Otis Duncan (Eds.), The study of population: an inventory and
  appraisal. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kapian, Davin. 1960. The law of cultural dominance. In Marshall D. Sahlins
  and Elman R. Service         (Eds.), Evolution and culture. Ann Arbor: University
  of Michigan Press.
Kenyon,    KATHLEEN       M. 1959. Some observations on the beginnings of settle-
  ment in the Near East. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of
  Great Britain and Ireland, 89: 35—43.
Koztowsk1, Leon. 1926. L’Epoque Mésolithique en Pologne. L’Anthropologie,
  36: 47—74.
LaTHrap,    DonaLtp W.         1968. The hunting economies          of the Tropical Forest
  Zone of South America: an attempt at historical perspective. In Richard B.
  Lee, and Irven DeVore          (Eds.), Man the hunter. Chicago: Aldine Publishing
  Company.
Ler, R. B. 1965. Subsistence ecology of [Kung Bushmen, Microfilm. Ph.D.
  dissertation, Berkeley: University of California.
pe Lor, Baron A. 1908. Contribution a l’étude des temps intermédiares entre
340                                          Variability among Occupational Units
  le Paléolithique et le Néolithique, XIII Congrés International dAnthropolog-
  ie et d Archéologie préhistorique, Monaco, 1907, 1: 422—23.
McCartny,      Freperick       D, 1957. Habitat, economy,      and equipment of the
  Australian aborigines. The Australian Journal of Science, 19: 88—97.
     . and Marcart McArrtuur. 1960. The food quest and the time factor
  in aboriginal economic life. Records of the American Australian Scientific
  Expedition to Arnhemland, 2: 145—94.             Parkville, Australia:   University of
  Melbourne, University Press.
MacCurpy, GrorcE Grant. 1924. Human origins: a manual of prehistory. (2
  vols.) New York: D. Appleton.
MELLaAaktT, JAMES. 1961. Excavations at Hacilar: 4th preliminary report. Ana-
  tolian Studies, 11: 39—75.
        . 1963. Excavations at Catal-Hiiyiik 1962: 2d preliminary report. Ana-
  tolian Studies, 13: 43—103.
MENGHIN, Oswa.Lp. 1925. Die mesolithische Kulturentwicklung in Europa.
  Deutsches Archiologisches Institut, Rém.-Germ., Komsn. Bericht., 17: 154.
pEMorGAN, JACQUES JEAN Marie. 1924. Prehistoric man: a general outline of
  prehistory. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
DEMoRTILLET,        ADRIEN.    1896. Les petits silex taillés, 4 contours géométriques
  trouvés en Europe, Asie et Afrique. Revue de [Ecole dAnthropologie, 6:
  376—405.
DEMorTILLET,        GABRIEL.    1885.   Le préhistorique,   antiquité de Thomme.     (2d
  ed.) Paris: C. Reinwald.
OseRMaIER, Huco. 1925. Fossil man in Spain. New Haven: Yale University
  Press.
Opvum, EvceEne P., and H. T. Opum. 1959. Fundamentals of ecology. (2d ed.)
  Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
OsBorn,     HENRY     FarrFIELD.    1919. Men   of the Old Stone Age, their environ-
  ment, life and art. (3d ed.) New York: Charles Scribner.
PERROT, JEAN. 1960. Excavations at "Eynan (’Ein Mallaha). Preliminary report
  on the 1959 season. The Israel Exploration Journal, 10(1): 14—22.
        . 1962. Palestine-Syria-Cilicia.     In R. J. Braidwood     and G. R. Willey
      (Eds.), Courses toward urban life. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Prette, Ep. 1895a. Etudes d’ethnographie préhistorique. L’Anthropologie, 6:
   276-92.
        . 1895b. Hiatus et lacune vestiges de la période de transition dans la
      grotte du Mas-d’Azil. Bulletin de la Société d Anthropologie de Paris, 6(4th
      series):235—67.
Prirtion1, RicHarp. 1962. Southern middle Europe and southeastern Europe.
   In R. J. Braidwood and G. R. Willey (Eds.), Courses toward urban life.
   Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Pirr-Rivers, A. Lane-Fox. 1906. The evolution of culture and other essays.
   Edited by J. L. Myres. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Qumpy, Grorce I. 1962. A year with a Chippewa family, 1763-1764.
      Ethnohistory, 9(3): 217-39.
 Rortu, H. Linc. 1887. On the origin of agriculture. Journal of the Royal An-
   thropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 16(2): 102—136.
 SAHLINS, MARSHALL. 1958. Social stratification in Polynesia. Seattle: University
   of Washington Press.
       . 1961. The segmentary lineage: an organization of predatory expan-
    sion. American Anthropologist, 63(2), Part I: 322—45.
        . 1968. Notes on the original affluent society. In Richard B. Lee and
    Irven DeVore (Eds.), Man the hunter. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Com-
    pany.
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations —                                               341
SCHWABEDISSEN,      HERMAN.       1962. Northern continental Europe. In R. J. Braid-
  wood and G. R. Willey (Eds.), Courses toward urban life. Chicago: Aldine
  Publishing Company.
Stimpson, Georce Gaytorp.               1949. The meaning of evolution. New Haven:
  Yale University Press.
DE SONNEVILLE-BorbDES,          Denise.    1960. Le Paléolithique supérieur en Périgord,
  2. vol. Bordeaux: Imprimerie Delmas.
——.     1963a. Upper Paleolithic cultures in western Europe. Science, 142
   (3590): 347—55.
——.      1963b. Le Paléolithique supérieur en Suisse. L’Anthropologie, 67
   (3—4): 205—268.
Sotias, W. J. 1924. Ancient hunters, and their modern representatives. New
  York: Macmillan.
STEWARD,     JULIAN H., and Lours C. Faron.                 1959. Native peoples of South
  America. New York: McGraw-Hill.
TROELS-SMITH,      JORGEN.      1953.     Ertebdlle culture-farmer     culture, results of the
  past ten years’ excavations             in Asmosen     Bog, West Zealand. Aarboger for
  nordisk Oldkyndighed of Historie, pp. 1—62. Copenhagen.
Tytor, E. B. 1881. Anthropology. London: Henry Holt.
Vavitov, N. I. 1951. The origin, variation, immunity and breeding of culti-
  vated plants. Chronica Botanica, Vol. 13, No. 1/6.
VreLLe,     EpMonp.      1890. Pointes       de fleches typiques de Fére-en-Tardenois
  (Aisne). Bulletin de Société Anthropologique de Paris, 1(6th series):
  959—64.
WaTERBOLK, H. T. 1962. The lower Rhine Basin. In R. J. Braidwood and G. R.
  Willey (Eds.), Courses toward urban life. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Com-
   any.
Wine, Leste A. 1959. The evolution of culture. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Wittey, Gorpon R. 1966. New World archaeology in 1965. In Proceedings of
  the American Philosophical Society, 110(2): 140—45.
Witson, THoMas. 1894. Minute stone implements from India. In Report of the
   U.S. National Museum, 1882. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
  Office.
Woopsurn, JAMES. 1968. Background material on the Hadza of Tanzania. In
  Richard     B.   Lee    and    Irven     DeVore      (Eds.),   Man   the   hunter.   Chicago:
  Aldine Publishing Company.
Wynne-Epwarps,           V. C. 1962. Animal dispersion in relation to social behav-
  iour. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd.
       1964. Population control in animals. Scientific American, 211(2):
  68—74.
YeNGoYAN, Aram A, 1960. Preliminary notes on a model of the initial populat-
  ing of the Philippines. Anthropology Tomorrow, 6(3) : 42—48.
Younc, T. C., and P. E. L. Smiru.             1966. Research in the prehistory of central
  western Iran. Science, 153 (3734): 386—91.
                                        ei                                                                                                                     -

    a                                                       [a                      na                                                                     siete          :
7           vy                                  bf                   a         :                                                             °                 Pepin
                 ,                                      :                a,         a                                   me                       Ciceierar
                                            7               :                        -_               @,                Td                                           >        ail
                                                    :                           ie                                      a.


                               pols                                            aa            al               PT        es
                                                                                                                                                                               —
              _

             :                 tabs                                                                       — araieion
                     at        ee                                                    aut                      ee                                 ¢                 eer   wit

                          7 -                                       ' n              a8 86                    i          fp                           ins                na
              aie              w                            -                                 :           =    ~                    en
                                                                                                                    .

                          Le                                             Teg                 pawgdetins                                  go® tan
                          , NOs                                 Pinta                         (use                      Si                           “a
                     -              _                           at       nae             i                              ‘=

                     3                          Gp0®ee                              “Sigegin                                    reeenr aaa
                               x        :           jyTse                          Fae            et          Wer                                2
                          ~~                                                                          Poids
                           &                                                                                   od                            wu
                          _—_ 7.                                                                  ’            2                         awe
                                                    7                                                                   -



                          dt                                             ae                                         wee wey
                               : ve                         =             wwe                         _       . 7
                     i.           :                                                           :                 —


                                   aah                                               =                              |
                                   ao                           5                             ;                                                          the




o                                                                         —                                                              -

                               a                H                                        -
”                         hi                                                                                                    F

7                                                                                                                           ;
_           oho P              (fe                                                                    %

7

                                                        ~
                                                        ~                                                                                            me

        %

                                   a4




                                                                                                                                    L)


                                                                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                  %                                                  ,~


                                                se
                                                =
                                                                     PART IV




                                                           Discussion




The anthropologists whose comments constitute this section of the book
were invited to comment only on certain portions of the complete sym-
posium at Denver. The comments of Lee, DeVore, and Fried were made
with reference to the papers of S. R. Binford, Sackett, L. R. Binford,
Winters, and Hole. The comments of Dozier, Aberle, and Harris were
made with reference to the papers of Flannery and Coe, Longacre, Hill,
Whallon, and Deetz. The purpose of soliciting the comments of these non-
archeological anthropologists was to get their response to the kinds of
approaches used and to insure that there would be the very essential
feedback maintained between students of living cultures and students of
extinct ones. Their comments were especially gratifying in that they went
far beyond the content of the symposium papers and further elucidated
the nature of the relationship between anthropological subdisciplines.



Comments by Richard B. Lee
As a social anthropologist who has been interested in problems of arche-
ological reconstruction and more generally in the problems of the evolu-
tion of human behavior, I hope to offer one or two suggestions about how
social anthropology can be of use to the archeologist and how the arche-
ologist can make richer inferences from his own data.
   First of all it appeared to me in listening to several of the papers that
perhaps this symposium entitled “Social Organization of Prehistoric Com-
munities” had been misnamed. Sally Binford’s and Sackett’s papers were
intriguing examples of the current highly sophisticated methodologies
                                   343
344                                                                   Discussion
I felt that they stopped far short of inferences about social organization.
Perhaps these papers should have been put into a symposium entitled
“Human Behavior Patterns of Archeological Significance.”
  On the other hand, L. R. Binford’s concluding paper is a strange bed-
fellow because it goes far beyond the discussion of social organization to a
consideration of total socioecological adaptation in the post-Pleistocene.
Thus, he considers one of the basic questions that informs the humanities:
the transformation of the human condition brought about by the onset of
agriculture and animal domestication. So, in this respect it goes beyond
the scope of the symposium, and of course it raises exciting questions for
many of us.
   I am going to make two comments now on the Paleolithic materials.
First of all, I think that we    need for this earlier period the kind of
synthesis that Lewis Binford has offered us for the later post-Pleistocene
period. One of the important ways that social anthropologists can assist in
this task is to get down to the long overdue job of developing a general
statement about the ecology, subsistence, and social organization of con-
temporary hunting and gathering peoples.’
  Another way that we can assist is to undertake more ethnographic
studies of hunting and gathering peoples, with archeological questions in
mind. DeVore and I attempted to do this between 1963 and 1965 in our
research among the !Kung Bushmen of Bechuanaland. What we found
may be of interest to archeologists. We were impressed that the !Kung
have a very substantial subsistence base largely made up of vegetable
foods and small mammals, but that there would be almost a total loss of
this evidence to the archeologist. !Kung campsites are subject to very
rapid destruction, and after ten or fifteen years the evidence of the set-
tlement pattern disappears and the evidence for the substantial vegetable
food base rots away. Therefore, by doing Bushman archeology, I think
one would radically underestimate the level of their subsistence. One
would infer that life among the Bushmen must have been nasty, brutish,
and short, whereas it is in fact delightful, as DeVore and I can attest.
   This leads into a second point about the synthesis that is yet to be done
on the subsistence and ecology of contemporary hunting and gathering
peoples. One thing that we can say right off concerns the importance of
meat. In the world ethnographic sample of food-gathering societies, only
the Eskimos    are primarily mammal      eaters, and we        are not even   sure
about them because fish among the Eskimo may have been of equal
importance with mammals. Virtually all the rest of the societies in the
sample have a subsistence base primarily of vegetable foods and/or
marine resources. This is a very marked contrast to the Paleolithic
peoples. The latter appear to be much more successful big game hunters,
  * An attempt at synthesizing hunter-gatherer materials was made by an interna-
tional panel of scholars at the symposium, “Man the Hunter,”    Chicago, April 6-9,
1966 (Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company, 1968).
Discussion                                                               345
and, I would think that the Dordogne cultures, for instance, would fall
quite outside the range of variation of known food-gathering peoples. In
light of this, I think that the archeologists could be much more intrepid in
their reconstruction of Paleolithic social organization. What their material
suggests to me is very substantial group sizes and a high level of social
complexity for late Paleolithic man.
   One starts with the question: What are the implications of the regular
hunting of large numbers of large mammals? First of all, it requires a high
level of social organization to organize a game-drive or to attack and kill
an animal as large as an elephant. Second, and even more important, it
requires a large number of people to butcher, transport, cook, and con-
sume the many thousands of pounds of meat that would be derived from
such hunting activities.
  The contemporary !Kung Bushmen are a case in point. They live in
small groups of ten to thirty people, and they specialize in hunting small
mammals non-cooperatively. Practically all the mammals they kill can be
consumed within the local group. However, when a large animal, such as
a gemsbok or wildebeeste is killed, providing 200 to 300 pounds of meat,
visitors from far and wide come in to consume and to share in the good
fortune of the local group. I would predict, if large game were regularly
killed by the !Kung Bushmen, that instead of people visiting back and
forth every second day, the present small groups would tend to combine
into substantially larger groups, simply in order to consume the meat that
is available. Let us make a simple calculation: one gemsbok with 250
pounds of meat, will in fact feed forty !Kung Bushmen for three days. An
elephant yielding ten times as much meat as a gemsbok would provide,
instead of 120 man-days of meat, something on the order of 1,200 man-
days of meat! This quantity of meat would feed 400 people for three days.
Such a calculatidn would necessarily imply much larger groups for Pale-
olithic hunters than, for instance, occur among the !Kung Bushmen, and
these larger groups would display much greater residential stability.
   I am reminded of the old chestnut about the Eskimo hunter who goes
out on the iceflows, and by a great stroke of fortune manages to harpoon
and kill a whale. By organizing his dog team and by dint of great effort
he manages to drag this enormous carcass back to the igloo. He knocks on
the door of the igloo, and he calls to his wife, “Dear, dear, come and look
what I have.” His wife crawls out of the igloo, takes one look at this hulk,
and says, “You clean it, and I'll eat it!” In other words, Paleolithic arche-
ologists would do well to consider Brecht’s dictum: “Erst kommt die
Fressen, dann kommt die Moral.”
   Finally I want to propose that we should offer as an option in the
graduate anthropology program something called “interpretive arche-
ology.” In this scheme, each archeology graduate student would be re-
quired to spend three to six months doing an ethnographic field study,
preferably after he has had archeological field experience and preferably
346                                                               Discussion
that have been developed for the analysis of Paleolithic assemblages, but
in a living culture that is somehow related to his archeological work or
related to the kinds of interpretive problems he is dealing with. Person-
ally, I can’t help feeling, for instance, that if every African prehistorian
spent a field season working with the Kalahari Bushmen (or with Austra-
lian aborigines), this experience would immeasurably enrich his under-
standing of all levels of African prehistory. I cite as an example Francis
van Noten, a Belgian archeologist, who first excavated an early Bushman
site with a carbon date of 4700 BP, and then came to our field station at
Dobe, Bechuanaland, where he spent three weeks studying Bushman
settlement patterns. At the end it was not possible for him to say “I
learned this, this, and this,” but the experience certainly enlarged his
understanding at an intuitive level.
  Here is an example of another kind of ethnographic project that arche-
ologists could usefully carry out. Deetz’s paper considers the problem of
how residence and descent rules may be inferred from archeological evi-
dence. It would seem to me that an archeology graduate student could
very usefully go into an ethnographic field situation and study the actual
fit between the observed post-marital residence pattern and the distribu-
tion of stylistic techniques and technology. My guess is that no discern-
able correspondence could be demonstrated between, for example, an
uxori-matrilocal rule of residence and the spatial distribution of pottery
types, but I would be delighted to be proven wrong!


Comments by Irven DeVore
As a non-archeologist, I warmly applaud the shift in emphasis in arche-
ological thinking in recent years as evidenced, for example, by the papers
in this symposium. In the past we were presented with lithic industries
which, to judge by their descriptions, were copulating, hybridizing, evol-
ving, adapting, and producing offspring. The modern emphasis on the
meticulous excavation of living floors is not only an exciting development
within archeology, but is also rapidly creating an atmosphere in which the
ethnographer and the archeologist may enter into useful discourse.
   I want to amplify some of the points Richard Lee made with regard to
the Bushmen study and archeological interpretation. I trust it is unneces-
sary to state that we view the Bushmen study not as a study of living
Paleolithic fossils but as an opportunity to test some assumptions about
correlations between observed behavior patterns and the artifactual
materials that are left behind to reveal those patterns.

RECONSTRUCTION   OF SUBSISTENCE ACTIVITIES
Sally Binford has called attention to the analysis of “tool kits” as a means
of revealing much more about the actual hunting activities of hominids
than is possible from the interpretation of either tool types or total assem-
blages. That the ability to reconstruct the activity of a hunter or hunters
Discussion                                                                347
at a given time and place would yield extremely important information is
obvious, but what can then be made of this information to predict the
entire subsistence pattern is less straightforward.
   Lee has carefully documented the tool kit that a Bushman hunter uses
in pursuit of game, and it is a very complex kit (Lee, 1965). When a
hunter leaves in the morning he may well be carrying a spear, a bow and
arrows, a digging stick, a throwing stick, and a flexible 12—14-ft. pole
used for snagging spring hares in their underground burrows. Under his
arm will be a pouch containing snares, an arrow-poison kit, gum mastic,
fire sticks, a knife, an ostrich eggshell canteen, and so on. Hunting is a
complex activity; even though you may hunt for days or weeks without
killing an animal, you must be prepared to kill or capture anything from a
hare to a 2,000-lb. eland.   A woman’s kit is far simpler; a pair of stones to
crack mungongo nuts, a leather pouch to carry foodstuffs, and a digging
stick comprise the essentials. If these two kits are projected backward in
time to a pre-iron period, all of the woman’s kit would have disintegrated
in an excavation site except the stones, but the range of chipped stone
projectiles and cutting edges would be impressive. The abundance and
complexity of the hunting artifacts would suggest that hunting had been
the basis of the economy (and that the nut-cracking stones were used to
extract marrow). Quite the opposite is the case, but it happens that the
important nut-and-vegetable subsistence of the Dobe area Bushmen is
extracted by a very simple, largely perishable, tool kit.
  That the ordinary site yields only a small, imperishable fraction of a
culture’s total impedimenta will hardly be greeted by archeologists as a
revelation, but I am suggesting something more. Increasingly large sam-
ples of the “hunting artifacts” and bone debris on the living floors of early
man will naturally lead to more sophisticated analyses of hunting tech-
niques and the prey animals, but these data may also divert attention
from consideration of the broader aspects of subsistence. Bushmen groups
orient to vegetable supplies and water, and after these requirements are
met the hunters find what game they can in the area. Lee has already
mentioned the importance of vegetable and marine resources in the sub-
sistence of living hunter-gatherer peoples, and a comparably vegetarian
diet is universal among Old World monkeys and apes. Even though both
primates, and, with rare exceptions, living hunter-gatherers depend heav-
ily on a vegetable subsistence base, our textbooks treat human prehistory
as a series of stages of more and more efficient hunting. Yet it seems
unlikely that the women, the young, and the aged sat idly by during more
than a million years of male hunting activities. We believe that a more
balanced view of living hunter-gatherers will offer a better perspective on
prehistory.

LIVING FLOORS           :
Archeologists now speak of “activity specific” areas within a living site as
early as the Middle Pleistocene at such sites as Ambrona and Torralba.
348                                                                     Discussion
Lee has already pointed to the necessary size and presumed complexity of
a social group capable of routinely killing elephants, and in these Spanish
sites   there   is evidence   of some   40—50   butchered   elephants     (Butzer,
1964). The Dobe Bushmen will not tackle an elephant, but their camp-
sites can reveal much more to the archeologist than the ethnographic
literature implies. As everyone knows from the literature, and a brief visit
would confirm the impression, a Bushman campsite is disappointingly
ephemeral—a series of flimsy grass huts around campfires. But it is soon
apparent to the observer that the Bushmen are carrying out a series of
activities whose diversity is comparable to those in middle-class suburbia.
These activities can be described in objective terms (eating, sleeping,
defecation, etc.), but for the present illustration suffice it to say that in
these simple hunter-gatherer camps one finds the functional equivalents
of a bedroom, a kitchen, a sitting room, bathroom, storage closet, pantry,
den, doghouse, and even a patio barbecue pit. The “den” is the dance
circle where Bushmen gather with visitors. Wart hogs and other such
delicacies may be cooked in the skin and this tends to be a smelly busi-
ness. The sensible chef digs his roasting pit (his “barbecue pit”) some
twenty yards outside the camp circle. These routine activities, then, tend
to occur in specific areas, and these areas can be plotted by their charac-
teristic debris.
   The relocation of a campsite may owe more to olfactory considerations
than is sometimes appreciated. As L. R. Binford has already mentioned,
people defecate and the accumulation of these waste products may be-
come noisome. Thus the Bushmen may move             a camp, not for some tidy
ecological reason such as shifting game herds or drought, but because, as
they say, “the place stinks.” Even hunting success may create problems. A
typical reconstruction depicts the hunters camped beside a dead elephant,
happily hacking away. This may be reasonable in near-freezing weather,
but it is intolerable in the tropics. In 1964 an elephant was killed in the
Masai Amboseli Reserve, Kenya. After 24 hours in this climate the bub-
bling carcass could be both heard and smelled for hundreds of feet in all
directions; the smell of putrefaction could scarcely be borne at 1,000
yards downwind, and the winds were variable. Presumably our ancestors
were not oblivious to this situation, and one might postulate an olfactory
theory of shifting human occupation. Perhaps this will serve as an ex-
ample of the “intuitive level of understanding” Lee is asking archeologists
to seek in the ethnographer’s camp.
   A dead elephant is outside the experience of most of us, whether arche-
ologist or otherwise. What amazed me was the number of animals at-
tracted to this mountain of rotting flesh. There were thirteen lions (who
seemed as eager to eat people as to work at the carcass), a great many
hyenas and jackals, and over 350 very persistent vultures and marabou
storks. From the simple fact of a dead elephant, then, one can make some
calculations about the size of the group that could be supported by its
Discussion               |                                                   349
flesh, the minimum number of adults necessary to separate an individual
from an angry and protective herd, surround and dispatch it (and then
fight off competing predators);and, perhaps, arrive at some notion of the
effect of the carcass on the location of the campsite.

CONCLUSION

The methodological expertise evident in these symposium papers is the
envy of social anthropologists. One is struck not only by the impressive
amount of material being excavated, preserved, and analyzed, but also by
the amount of information derivable from these efforts. As archeologists
go beyond the analysis of tool types and assemblages to reconstruction of
the tool makers and their life patterns, they will increasingly engage the
interest of their colleagues. While the social anthropologist may be
scandalized by reconstructions of ancestral systems of residence and de-
scent, he should       recognize   that contemporary   studies in social anthro-
pology have not always offered archeologists a very wide range of alter-
natives for dialogue. Indeed I would echo Lee’s statement that, bold as
archeologists may now consider themselves to be, I feel they are being
unnecessarily timid, and wish they would extend their reconstructive
necks still further.
   I realize that a predictable result of this widespread sticking-out-of-
necks would be wholesale decapitation. As an alternative, I would hope
that archeologists could offer not one, but a range of possible interpreta-
tions and models based on their data—models which would be at least in
some respects empirically verifiable independent of archeological evi-
dence. In a different context, S. L. Washburn suggested one way in which
these alternatives could be offered. This would involve not only making a
clear distinction between the data from an excavation and the interpre-
tation of these data, but would also involve giving some sort of confi-
dence limits to interpretations and reconstructions. Crudely, the prehis-
torian could say that on the basis of material “A,” I place considerable (90
per cent?) confidence in the conclusion that “X” is true, but the interpre-
tation of material “B” is much less straightforward and I would suggest at
only the “20 per cent level” that “Y” occurred. This approach has the
advantage of taking the more controversial aspects of archeology out of
the realm of personal invective and ad hominem argument, while at the
same time allowing us to discuss the necessarily controversial aspects of
reconstruction which will surely continue to be of the most interest to the
profession at large.
                                    References

Burzer,   Kart W.      1964. Environment   and archeology. Chicago:   Aldine Pub-
   lishing Company.
Ler, Ricuarp B. 1965. Subsistence ecology of [Kung Bushmen. Unpublished
   Ph.D. thesis. Berkeley: University of California.
350                                                               Discussion


Comments by Morton H. Fried
I will be brief because my expertise falls far short of that displayed by the
other discussants, not to mention the speakers. I am going to make six
points, all quite brief and programmatic. My comments, of course, repre-
sent only one sociocultural anthropologist’s reaction to what some arche-
ologists are doing at the present time. Since I am considering certain
aspects of that work which I consider exciting and of which I approve,
my message should be scanned for encouragement rather than wisdom.
  First, what have some    archeologists been up to recently? Well, they
have been getting wordy, as prolix as their sociocultural brethren, and this
does not excite me, although I am in no position to disapprove. Actually,
my first point is somewhat more serious, for I would like to note and
loudly cheer the continued collapse of archetypal thinking among arche-
ologists. Almost gone are such procrustean notions of my youth as the
core cultures or the flake cultures. I must confess now to having harbored
certain subversive images when I was a graduate student and forced to
submit to a number of archeology courses. One image involved an ancient
hominid type who I imagined squatting over his work as he bashed out a
stone tool. After laboring long and intently he rose and with an expression
of ineffable sadness chucked away the neat object of his labors. One close
enough to hear and understand him would have caught his plaintive
remark: “I’m not allowed to use that, it’s flake and I’m core.”
  These papers have universally shown disdain for the rigid categorical
thinking that mars much of the earlier archeology and makes it incompat-
ible with what we know about the dynamics of culture. While culture has
its own laws of conservation, it is an unusually volatile realm and the
notion of static, homogeneous archeological cultures is impossible to fit
with current theoretical models of culture. As a by-product, we also viti-
ate the requirement that major cultural changes in the remote past oc-
curred to the tune of genocide, which may be seen ultimately as a projec-
tion of the world we know into the past we must reconstruct.
   Second, these papers universally avoid anything that might be called,
for want of a better term, “organic thinking.” Nowhere, I believe, is there
a reference to “race” or even ethnic groups or populations. What we are
told about is culture, the dynamics of culture, and social systems and the
dynamics of such systems. This is closely linked to the first point that I
made, for the archeological emphasis is located in the realm of culture
and not in some hypothetical realm of racial biology. Fundamentally, the
intrinsic assumption is that ideas can spread wide and more or less rapidly
depending upon sociocultural circumstances. Acting upon assumptions
such as this, we can see that there is no theoretical gulf between arche-
ologists and sociocultural anthropologists, but essentially a difference of
data.
Discussion                                                               351
   My third observation has to do with archeological method. Those of us
who have not had a primary investment in archeology but who have
dutifully kept contact by reading monographs or serving on dissertation
committees have sometimes been pained by the detailed empiricism of
the field archeologist. But now the painstaking methods of recovery and
reporting are beginning to pay off: fellows, you were right! Intricate,
comprehensive    summaries   of living floor contents are infinitely more
meaningful and useful than the intuitive epitomizations that take us back
to archetyping. Dependence upon itemization of the contents of living
floors, however boring to the reader in quest of the fast generalization,
has its rewards. Those who pursue this method, I believe, are on the verge
of revolutionizing our detailed understanding of the logic and flow of
prehistory. This is being done by constantly increasing the probability
coefficients of statements that were originally made as speculations, and
the increasing reliability of these statements is a direct function of the
energy that has been put into site inventories, or so it would seem to an
observer from outside.
  My fourth point is that archeology, like certain other fields, is now in
possession of a “synthetic theory.” I mean by this exactly what Julian
Huxley meant when he applied it to biology: you have come upon a
theory and a method that are the integrated product of several disci-
plines. Like biology, archeology has had its wedding with statistics and
with ecology.
   This leads me to the fifth point, which acknowledges the mutual rela-
tions between archeology and comparative ethnography. I use the latter
phrase instead of ethnology, because it better conveys the emphasis upon
the detailed inventory, which is parallel to the detailed inventory of living
floors already mentioned. I should also like to endorse Mr. Lee’s sugges-
tions about ethnographic training for archeologists, even at the risk of
further elaborating the graduate program. In all of this, however, I think
a distinction should be drawn between an archeology informed by com-
parative ethnography and an archeology dominated by sociocultural an-
thropology. Obviously, the data of archeology and the discipline-specific
theories of archeology must take first place in this exchange.
   Since the question has been raised, I cannot refrain from commenting
on the relation between archeology and contemporary ethnographic expe-
rience. Everyone is aware that contemporary marginal cultures occupy
environmental niches that are in most cases probably quite different from
those occupied by the hunters and gatherers of the past. What is more,
certain processes of sociocultural development, particularly in the area of
polity, are probably much different under derived and induced condi-
tions, as opposed to those which transpired under pristine conditions. This
is not to say that Bushman culture cannot reflect things of great value and
interest to the archeologist, but does suggest that the reflecting edge must
be held at the proper angle to avoid distortion.
Gow                                                                    Discussion
  Finally, my last point has to do with an ancient philosophical conflict
presently reviving once again in more than one subdiscipline of our
anthropological complex. It seems to me, in the conflict between materi-
alistic and idealistic approaches, that the archeologists have swung back
to the former. Some may argue that archeologists never really departed
from materialism, since their data are of such nature as to encourage a
materialistic approach. We did not hear in the preceding comments very
much about ideas, values, or desires; we did hear about stinking elephant
carcasses and how camps will be moved to avoid them. We heard about
the contents of tool kits and their limitations, and things of this kind.
While I am certainly not willing to cast out the humanistic approach with
its various benefits, I think that there is a time for various research strat-
egies and that this is the time to stress the painstaking recovery and
description of whole sites which are then presented in their complexity
rather than as epitomes of limited value and less limited error.


Comments by Edward P. Dozier
I am not going to comment on methodology or techniques explored or
expressed in the papers of the participants. I want, instead, to say some-
thing about social units and the types which may occur in prehistoric
sites.
  I note that our speakers have searched for, or have tried to infer only
unilinear type organizations in the sites that they have worked. This is
probably because they are dealing with the former habitations of simpler
societies and, therefore, do not expect to find other types of social units.
Or, perhaps, they have simply taken a cue from social anthropologists
who have devoted so much attention to the study of kinship units. How-
ever, I feel strongly that non-kinship units were present in some of the
groups reported on, particularly those in Mesoamerica. I think that a
search for non-kinship units should be made in these groups. What the
social anthropologist is particularly concerned with is: “What are the
corporate aspects of the particular prehistoric society?” I believe this is
the same question—-or at least related to it—-that Deetz raised in his
paper. As far as kinship organizations are concerned, we are restricted
essentially to two broad types of social units: unilinear organizations or
ramified,   bilateral   descent   groups.   We   cannot   assume,   however,   that
given evidence of corporateness in house or ceramic remains we are deal-
ing with kinship units. We must still resolve this either by reference to
surviving groups in the area, or by other means, for corporateness may
exist in kinship units as well as in non-kinship units.
  In many of our societies today, in North America as well as in Meso-
america,    non-kinship sodalities are extremely important; these organiza-
tions provide integrative functions and have corporate features. The fact
that these units are represented in living indigenous peoples in the neigh-
Discussion                                                        353
borhood of some of the sites reported in the symposium would indicate
that they have deep historical roots.
   As a social anthropologist, non-kinship organizations are the kind of
units I would like to have archeologists look for. This is simply because I
believe that particularly in Mexico, but also in parts of the Southwestern
United States, such units are of primary importance among the contem-
porary Indian populations. I would like to make a plea to social anthro-
pologists that we begin to study non-kinship organizations with the same
fervor we have devoted to kinship units. If we do this, we will have a
model for the archeologists to aim at and, hence, to have them seek
evidence for both types of social structures.

Comments by David F. Aberle
My general remarks and specific comments are restricted to the papers
that were read at the session for which I was asked to serve as a discus-
sant: those by Flannery and Coe, Struever, Longacre, Hill, Deetz, and
Whallon. The papers are characterized by freshness, enthusiasm, sophisti-
cation in the use of quantitative methods, and an informed and sensitive
use of the concepts of social anthropology and of cultural ecology as
applied to ethnographically recorded cultures. They afford a promise of
new,   cooperative    intellectual   endeavors    requiring   the collaboration     of
archeologists and ethnologists and providing rewards for both. And they
also open the possibility of a kind of sequential analysis that is often
difficult in ethnology for lack of adequate historical information. In this
respect, archeology may well advance ethnological thinking, whereas in
some other respects, archeology depends on ethnological theory.
   There are two problems about work of the sort represented in these
papers. The first lies in the area of methods. These papers show more
sophisticated use of statistics than is characteristic of a good deal of work
in ethnology, but in the drafts I saw some did not make entirely clear
why a particular statistic was chosen, nor what it did. In ethnology (and
in archeology, for that matter), although the situation is changing, there
are a good many of us who have little enough background in statistics. As
a result, data analysis surrounded by a sufficient number of tables is likely
to be accepted because of the figures, whether they are understood or
not, or rejected in spite of the figures, because they are not understood. It
behooves those who use novel or complex statistics to inform us quite
carefully as to what they are doing, and why, so as to maximize the
chance for the spread of the techniques and for their critical evaluation.
  The second problem lies in the area of theory, or perhaps of concepts,
since theory in ethnology has a limited development at present.’ On the
one hand, the archeologist will have to keep very much abreast of current
   1 By “theory” I refer to generalized propositions stating relationships between two
or more classes of phenomena.
354                                                              Discussion
theory and concepts, or we will have the usual spectacle of the use of
ideas outworn in one field as the basic assumptions of another. This is a
familiar problem to anthropologists in general: many economists, political
scientists, and psychologists start with working assumptions borrowed
from the anthropology of twenty or more years ago and are startlingly
invulnerable to efforts to update them. It is notable that the authors of
these papers are relatively young and recently trained in ethnology. Petri-
faction has had no time to set in, but it is an ever-present possibility. On
the other hand, efforts to use the “fancier” types of ethnological concepts
may lead to difficulties, particularly as these concepts demand moving
several steps away from the data. As Morton Fried points out, there are
advantages to a material perspective in this kind of work.
   I come now to specific comments. The paper by Hill provides a find-
ing surprising to me. He says that the pottery in the kivas was relatively
uniform and he suggests therefore that each kiva was attached to a par-
ticular matrilocal cluster. In such modern matrilineal, matrilocal pueblos
as the Hopi towns and Zufii, kivas are made up of members of a number
of clans, thus cross-cutting clan membership. If the kivas are in fact made
up of unrelated men, married to matrilineally related women       who form
matrilocal clusters, this has escaped the attention of ethnographers. One
might therefore expect that if these prehistoric pueblos moved in the di-
rection of modern pueblos, later horizons would show less uniformity of
kiva pottery. Whether or not data of this sort emerge, we find in the
archeological picture a form of social organization that differs signifi-
cantly from known ethnological types.
   Whallon’s illuminating paper brings out the point I referred to above
about sequence analysis. And it also raises a point of significance about
the interpretation of residence patterns. His paper shows increasing fixity
of matrilocal residence over time. Now it is perfectly true that evidence of
some degree of matrilocality at any one point of time is a poor basis for
inferring matrilineal descent, whether the data are archeological or ethno-
logical. There are at least four possible interpretations of such a pattern.
The group may be moving toward matrilineality via matrilocality; it may
have once been matrilineal but have lost matrilineal descent groups with-
out losing a matrilocal bias; it may have a statistical preference for matri-
locality without either a dogma of residence or a dogma of descent; or it
may be matrilineal and matrilocal. But a pattern of increasing tendency
over time toward matrilocality would seem to reduce us to two possibili-
ties: that the system was matrilineal with increasing matrilocal prefer-
ence, or that it was moving toward matrilineality via matrilocality. This at
least reduces some of the static. Change over time, then, would seem a
more powerful tool for social inferences than analysis of single sites in a
restricted time range.
   But Whallon’s interpretation of his data does raise a problem: that of
“fancy” theory. His interpretation is concerned with degree of corporate-
Discussion                                                                355
ness. This is a concept exceedingly difficult to operationalize in ethnology,
and perhaps of dubious value, since it tends to use a unidimensional
quantitative concept to cover a multitude of dimensions (for example,
inheritance, residential fixity, jural responsibility, sharing, joint economic
activity, exclusive ritual activity, etc.). It would seem more profitable for
the moment     for him to remain somewhat        closer to his data, which do
indicate more fixity of residence and perhaps a larger number of people
in the fixed clusters. I would be reluctant to use a statistical measure
applied to artifacts to describe a condition (corporateness ) that has yet to
be satisfactorily quantified in ethnology.
  With respect to Struever’s paper, if indeed Hopewell is primarily non-
agricultural and is based on what he calls the harvesting of wild re-
sources, there is an interesting parallel with the Northwest Coast, where
cultural elaboration is clearly based on just such harvesting. In Hopewell
there is an elaboration of the mortuary pattern; in the Northwest Coast
there is a considerable elaboration of the potlatch complex surrounding
funerals. Indeed, up and down the Northwest Coast, and indeed among
those Alaskan Eskimo groups with relatively abundant resources, what-
ever else is elaborated, feasting and prestations in connection with death
show a rich development. Nor is this funerary elaboration simply a given
of all relatively well-off cultures; it is not found, for example, in Pueblo
culture, and there is no evidence that it was even at the climax of that
culture.
   The stimulating paper by Flannery and Coe does have some loopholes
from the point of view of ethnological theory and data. The authors seem
to assume to begin with that a kinship system is either unilineal and
egalitarian or non-unilineal, ranked, and ramifying. As I see it, this is a
misinterpretation of what Sahlins wrote, although a plausible (but I think
incorrect )extrapolation from what Kirchhoff wrote.
  Sahlins says, “A ramage then is a nonexogamous, internally stratified,
unilineal—in Polynesia, patrilineal—descent group. Distance from the
senior line of descent from the common ancestor is the criterion of strati-
fication. By this definition, segments of a ramage are also ramages”
(Sahlins, 1958, p. 140). He continues in a footnote: “At approximately the
same time that Firth applied the term ‘ramage’ to this distinct type of
organization, Paul Kirchhoff, in a brilliant paper, had isolated ramage
organizations and called them ‘conical clans’ in contrast to the ‘equali-
tarian clans’ as one finds, for example, among the Iroquois” (Sahlins,
1958, p. 140). Elsewhere Sahlins speaks of “localized, discrete, patrilineal
descent lines” as a contrast to ramified systems in Polynesia and con-
tinues, “The descent lines held titles. . . . Status did not depend—at least
not in the same way as in the ramified system—on distance from the
main line of descent, but rather on the traditional position of one’s title in
the territorial hierarchy of titles” (Sahlins, 1958, p. 181).
  In a paper that “modifies, in places extends, and generally develops”
356                                                              Discussion
(1957, p. 291, n. 1) the interpretative sections of Sahlins, 1958, Sahlins
changes his definitions and terms slightly. “A ramage is a common de-
scent group internally ranked by a principle of genealogical seniority.
Succession . . . is by rule of primogeniture. . . . Every line is ranked
according to the respective birth order of ancestral figures, and every
individual in a ramage holds a different rank—one precisely proportion-
ate to his distance from the senior line. This is the outstanding indicative
feature of ramages” (1957, p. 291). “A truncated descent line is a small
localized common descent group. It differs from a ramage by absence of
internal ranking according to genealogical principles. Although descent
lines supply chiefs in territorial units, succession is determined primarily
by leadership qualifications, not by rule of primogeniture. Correspond-
ingly, distinction of senior and junior line is not made” (1957, p. 292). He
continues by pointing out that villages involve sets of truncated descent
groups. When a descent group within a village divides, genealogical ties
eventually are forgotten. But descent groups of different villages are often
affiliated by ties of ancestry. When this occurs, the different descent
groups thus affiliated are not mutually ranked. Thus the fundamental
political units of societies with ramages are the ramages themselves. The
fundamental political units of societies with truncated descent lines are
villages governed by councils of titled men, these offices being held by
the leaders of the various descent lines. Villages in turn are grouped into
districts ruled by similar councils (1957, pp. 292-93, paraphrased).
“Neither exogamy nor endogamy are indicative features of ramages and
truncated descent lines. Both are agamous” (1957, p. 293). Furthermore,
these units may be either patrilineal or non-unilineal. “In the present
discussion internal ranking and segmentary features of descent groups are
at issue and ‘ramage’ and ‘truncated descent lines’ are discriminated prin-
cipally by these criteria” (1957, p. 293). He continues, “Characteristics of
lineality . . . are not features with which we are directly concerned at the
moment” (1957, p. 293). Finally, the presence and absence of redistri-
bution are not at stake. Both kinds of units redistribute (1958, passim;
1957, p. 295). It is clear throughout his 1957 paper that Sahlins’ typology
is oriented   to Polynesian   social forms, and that he is not    concerned
whether his typology can be carried over to other areas unchanged        (cf.
1957, pp. 291, 299).
  Flannery and Coe, however, say, “The first type of social organization
was the ‘descent line,’ or simple ‘unilateral exogamous clan’ of Kirchoff.
. . . These we might describe as corporate groups united by actual (or
fictionalized )common descent through the male or female line, all mem-
bers of a given lineage being regarded as equals. The second type of
social organization was the ramified system, ‘ramage, or ‘conical clan’ of
Kirchhoff ...,   which   is not really a clan at all....It is based   not on
unilateral descent but on primogeniture; individuals are ranked in status
according to their distance from the direct line of descent from an ances-
Discussion                                                          357
tor at the apex of the ramified system” (Flannery and Coe, this volume,
p. 274).
  Thus they contrast egalitarian, exogamous, unilineal units with inter-
nally ranked, non-exogamous, non-unilineal units; they equate the former
with Kirchhoff’s equalitarian clan and Sahlins’ descent line, and the latter
with Kirchhoff’s conical clan and Sahlins’ ramage.
   But Sahlins’ contrasts do not involve unilineality versus non-unilineal-
ity, do not involve exogamy versus agamy, and do not involve egalitarian-
ism versus ranking. They involve depth of genealogical reckoning, as-
signment of rank, and community composition. Neither group as defined
for Polynesia is exogamous, and neither group is egalitarian. The “descent
line” or “truncated descent line,” however, does not assign rank on the
basis of genealogical position. Its leaders, however, have rank within the
descent group. The exogamous equalitarian clan of Kirchhoff appears
only in a footnote; this unit is not used by Sahlins to analyze Polynesian
data.
   I now take a step beyond Sahlins’ argument. Not only are there ram-
ified unilineal and non-unilineal, agamous, genealogically ranked units in
various parts of the world, but there are also at least the following:
ramified, unilineal, genealogically   ranked   units exogamous   in the main
but with special, agamous marriages for those of high status, and uni-
lineal, exogamous, genealogically ranked units, whose high-status figures
contract marriages only with high-status figures from other units. Thus
neither unilineality nor agamy are critical for the analysis of ramified,
genealogically ranked units.
   Now all of this does not undermine the analysis of Flannery and Coe.
Their simple contrastive pair, however, does necessitate an unnecessarily
complex argument to show that the lowland Maya were organized with
patrilineal exogamous clans and redistribution and stratification. It is not
that they have contructed    an improbable model for the lowland Maya,
but that they have found a problem in accounting for redistribution and
stratification and exogamy as a package where no problem exists: there
are many systems that combine      all three features. They have not, then.
used Sahlins’ theory, either as stated in his 1958 book or in his 1957
article, with sufficient precision, nor have they taken into account living
ethnographic examples that would have entitled them to arrive at the
same conclusions with less elaboration. (There is a problem in accounting
for the transition from egalitarian clans with little or no redistribution to
less egalitarian units with considerable redistribution, but the problem is
that of breaking out of egalitarianism, not out of unilineality or exo-
gamy.)
  They also argue—and this is a different point—that a system of re-
ciprocity, as opposed to a system of redistribution, could not have ade-
quately organized the exchanges of durable and perishable products in
the Mexican highlands. They propose that two solutions were available
358                                                              Discussion

for this: the market system of the Mexican highlands and a redistributive
system.
   Here they ignore ethnological evidence that indicates—unfortunately
for the neatness of their theory—that exceedingly complex exchange
systems involving basic foodstuffs can, in fact, be based on reciprocity.
The trading system of Manus and the kula ring are cases in point (and
the kula ring does not depend on redistribution, even though some of the
systems involved in the kula ring were redistributive). Hence one can
argue only that markets and redistribution are among the mechanisms
that make possible the circulation of goods that they see as adaptive for
the region, but not that these are the sole mechanisms. So far as I can see,
we still have no empirically substantiated theory—in this paper or any-
where else—that will account for the origin of redistribution.
   But the reason for raising these strictures is not to criticize Flannery
and Coe. It is only to point out that the kind of archeological interpreta-
tion attempted in this and other papers in this volume will require con-
stant interaction between ethnologist and archeologist; it is a concrete
example of a general point raised earlier in my comments.
   To turn briefly to Deetz’s paper, it would appear that inferences about
residence can be made with some security under some conditions, but not
others. Inferences of matrilocal residence seem fairly secure. But evidence
of clustering of attributes of equipment made by men         could indicate
either patrilocal or avunculocal residence, and the inferences about lineal-
ity to be made under these conditions would take one in opposite direc-
tions—toward patrilineality or matrilineality. Nor would the failure of
women’s implements to show clustering forbid us to consider matriline-
ality, since in avunculocal systems the co-resident women    may be drawn
from several descent groups.
   Finally—although I am personally interested in inferences about resi-
dence and descent—it must be said that these variables are not always
the most interesting ones. There is a sense in which such variables as
ranking, hierarchy, organization, and so on,       variables that cross-cut
matriliny, patriliny, and non-unilineal descent    groups, are of equal or
greater importance, especially in the context of evolutionary and ecolog-
ical considerations (cf. Fried, 1957, which introduces concepts for the
comparison of unilineal units, many of which can, without strain, be used
for non-unilineal ones as well).
  Thus, to say that the Kaska and the Tsimshian resemble each other in
being matrilineal is true enough, but what is omitted from consideration
by that statement   is the existence   of organized, internally ranked, lo-
calized unilineal groups in the case of the Tsimshian and the absence of
such units in the case of the Kaska. And many parallel instances could be
cited. It is, of course, this sort of problem with which Flannery and Coe
are concerned.
  I return finally to analysis of sequence. This, it seems to me, is a
Discussion                                                                    359
peculiar strength available to archeology and not so often to ethnology.
Insofar as ethnology examines a culture at a single point in time, prob-
lems arise as to whether particular features are, as it were, required by an
ecological situation, or merely permitted. We do not know whether, given
the technology, this is a “climax” culture or not. Increased time in the area
alone, and time and increased population combined, might well produce
changes, but we are often in no position to deal with these issues. What
seems to emerge to some degree from Whallon’s, Struever’s, Longacre’s,
and Hill’s papers, as well as from such important earlier work as that
of Wedel on the Plains, is a picture of increased specialization of produc-
tion, increased community size, decreased number of suitable locations,
given the increased specialization and increased size, and perhaps in-
creased competition for suitable sites. This parallel development for nu-
merous areas invites further analysis and comparison and promises to pro-
vide us with new empirical and theoretical approaches in the areas of cul-
tural evolution and ecology to which archeology will make a unique
contribution.


                                   References

Frrep, Morton H. 1957. The classification of corporate unilineal descent
   groups. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 87: 1-30.
SAHLINS, MarsHALL D. 1957. Differentiation by adaption in Polynesian soci-
   eties. Journal of the Polynesian Society, 66: 291—300.
       . 1958. Social stratification in Polynesia. Seattle: University of Washing-
   ton Press:


Comments by Marvin Harris
I have to express my apologies for assuming to be able to contribute
something here, suffering from the double handicap of not being an
archeologist and not having had the opportunity to have read these fas-
cinating papers before composing these comments. I am extremely moti-
vated to encourage the type of analysis which has been attempted by the
authors of these papers. I could comment on certain specific extrapola-
tions from archeological data to social organization with respect to some
of the individual papers which I have heard. For example, I think that the
treatment of Marshall Sahlins’ hypotheses concerning the distinctions be-
tween ramified and unilinear types of structures should have been
brought up to date by reference to additional attempts to establish a more
sophisticated typology of unilineal descent groups. Various other sugges-
tions of this sort might be appropriate.
  Let me, however, proceed to what I consider to be a more important
type of comment which I personally can make, a comment on a much
more general level. Actually, it is in the form of an exhortation: Archeolo-
360                                                                Discussion
gists, shrive yourselves of the notion that the units which you seek to
reconstruct must match the units in social organization which contempo-
rary ethnographers have attempted to tell you exist.
   The problem in its widest scope, I think, is best understood in terms of
the epistemological principles that are involved in an operational ap-
proach to definition. As archeologists, you have a number of observational
procedures consisting of measuring instruments and the techniques
through which you push these measuring instruments. Out of these opera-
tions you are capable of defining entities whose reality, I assure you, is
every bit as well grounded as the entities which are now being discussed
at great length by ethnographers dealing with contemporary sociopolitical
systems. To set yourselves free, you have only to reflect upon the prodigi-
ous research effort now being expended by your colleagues in cultural
anthropology upon the attempt to state the cognitive rules by which
sociocultural systems are allegedly governed.
   There is no need for you to enter into the trap which has snared
generations of cultural anthropologists, by which they have been caught
in the delusion that an understanding of the regularities of historical
processes was to be derived from an analysis of the idea systems of
surviving primitive societies. On the contrary, since you cannot legiti-
mately hope to arrive at the sophisticated delusions of the componential
and transformational techniques, I suggest that you abandon the attempt
to reconstruct descent systems. What is being done by cultural anthropol-
ogists today is not be articulated with what is being done by archeolo-
gists; on the contrary, I am suggesting that you take the lead in the
following sense:
   You have knowledge of the material remains of populations, and thus
you can develop techniques for measuring variations in the demographic
and behavioral characteristics of such populations over long periods of
time in relationship to specific complexes of biological, natural, and cul-
tural features of their ecosystems.
   What advantage is to be derived from attempting to use this knowledge
for the identification of prehistoric patrilineal or matrilineal descent rules
or similar cognitive phenomena? The really important questions which
need answering are those which relate a population’s pattern of material
existence to its habitat over time periods sufficiently ample to shed light
on the interaction between technology, economic behavior, and the “etic”
organizations or groupings with which these are associated. The great
strength of archeology is that it can deal with groups which are defined
by the actual coming together and working together or living together of
specific individuals at specific times and places. It does not have to and
indeed cannot and should not deal with “emic” entities.
  Ultimately, what we seek I presume in common,         is the explanation of
the differences and similarities in sociocultural phenomena. You are in a
better position to provide such explanations because of your greater time
Discussion             |                                                   361
span and because you can be relatively free from the mystifications which
arise from the emic approach. You therefore ought not to permit your
activities to be compressed into the narrow compass of attempting to link
up with ethnographic data. Your operationally defined categories and
processes are superior to the unoperational definitions and categories of
much of contemporary cultural anthropology. It is for us in ethnology to
find the equivalents of your units among our emically contaminated data.
It is for us to link up descent rules, prestige formulations of stratification,
ideal moral imperatives and all other subjective actor-oriented ethno-
graphic categories with the durable and verifiable material conditions of
sociocultural systems.
                         ay
                          a




        ie         me                                   -gl
      ai, vi: ity de: evi                                 wk 4i                    me
-   Se dadelitnerya               ray w,                           aera
: Tapco    banfied, RS 4
   in   tuts ene or i nee                                                         —
~ gd!          1) rer?                           en                     _— if                       tat
tet PB Dee wey                            ea,        oo maines          hy    at ee
                                                                             helen        as


      a
                                      pennit avid                   a


                                                          kee
          Aye: ~         oxant                                          4
                                                                                                     a            Aas
                                                                                                                        2
          -        f)         >       ¥                        J   ih        at                1G         a                 %

         To   =e    :   as        ‘             i”         =       wees       a)     =r                       7
                                                               Contributors




David F. Aberle is Professor of Anthropology, University of British Columbia.
James E. Ayres is a graduate student in anthropology, University of Arizona.
Lewis R. Binford is Associate Professor of Anthropology, University of New
     Mexico.
Sally R. Biniford is Associate Professor of Anthropology, University of New
     Mexico.
Michael D. Coe is Associate Professor of Anthropology, Yale University.
George L. Cowgill is Associate Professor of Anthropology, Brandeis University.
James Deetz is Professor of Anthropology, Brown University.
Irven     DeVore is Associate   Professor    of Anthropology   and   Social    Relations,
        Harvard University.
Edward P. Dozier is Professor of Anthropology, University of Arizona.
Kent   V. Flannery is Assistant Professor of Anthropology, University of
     Michigan.
Morton Fried is Professor of Anthropology, Columbia University.
Marvin Harris is Professor of Anthropology, Columbia University.
James N. Hill is Assistant Professor of Anthropology, University of California
     at Los Angeles.
Frank Hole is Associate Professor of Anthropology, Rice University.
Richard B. Lee is Assistant Professor of Social Relations, Harvard            University.
William A. Longacre is Associate Professor of Anthropology,             University of
      Arizona.
James R. Sackett is Assistant Professor of Anthropology, University of California
      at Los Angeles.
Albert C. Spaulding is Professor of Anthropology and Dean of Letters and
      Sciences, University of California at Santa Barbara.
Stuart Struever is Assistant Professor of Anthropology, Northwestern University.
                                            363
364                                                                    Contributors
Robert   Whallon,   Jr., is Assistant   Professor   of Anthropology,   University   of
    Michigan.
Bobby Jo Williams is Assistant Professor of Anthropology, University of
    California at Los Angeles.
Howard D, Winters is Associate Professor of Anthropology, New York
    University.
                                                                                      Index




Abbott, R. Tucker, 215                              Apple Creek site, 297, 298, 299, 303, 304,
Aberle, David F., 236, 309, 311, 343                     305, 307, 309
Abri Pataud, 67, 78                                 Archaic cultures,   176, 182, 186, 187, 200,
Abu Halka, 54, 55, 56                                    201, 202, 212, 219, 286, 305, 332
Acculturation, 44                                   Archetypal thinking, 350, 351
Activities, 43, 44, 69, 70, 71, 72, 79, 85,         Arguments of relevance, 2, 3, 22, 23, 25,
      96, 104, 106, 110, 114, 116, 118,                  86, 145, 172
      119, 136, 137, 144, 148, 153, 184,            Arikara, 46, 224
      202, 246, 258, 262, 287, 300, 301             Ascher, Robert, 12, 13
Activity areas, 96, 104, 155, 287, 298,             Asiab site, 253
     347, 348                                       Aurignacian, 73, 74, 75, 76, 78
Activity structure, 104, 106                        Aurignacian, lower, 55, 72
Adams, Robert M., Jr., 144, 254, 255, 256           Austerian, 316
Adaptive change, 56, 89, 172, 286, 288,             Australian aborigines, 217, 326
     291                                            Ayres, James, 86
Adaptive mechanisms, 268                            Aztec,   147
Adena culture, 202
Agricultural activities, 260                        Band, 161, 162, 163, 165, 166, 246, 249,
Agricultural camps, 307                                  252, 204,270
Agriculture, 157, 241, 243, 248, 250, 260,          Barber, Daniel, 224
     332, 333, 344                                  Barrett site, 175, 177, 181, 183, 199, 201,
Agriculture, incipient, 249, 334                         206
Aikens, C. Melvin, 11                               Barth, Fredrik, 7
Aims of archeology, 2, 5, 6, 8, 12, 16, 25,         Bartholomew, George A., 329
     26, 27                                         Base camp, 52, 162, 176, 208
Allchin, Bridget, 18, 19                            Base settlement, 307
Allee, W. C., 270, 323                              Bate, Dorothy, 55, 56, 317
Allison, April, 289, 291, 306, 307                  Bates site, 236
Ambrona site, 347                                   Bayat Phase, 251, 255, 258, 260, 262,
Analogous forms, 8, 10, 15, 26                           263, 264
Analogy,   TOS tse 14ay 1G) Lesa, lke lio,          Beaglehole, Ernest, 100, 114, 117, 118,
     116, 131, 135, 136, 184, 242, 246,                  119
     249, 261, 268, 275                             Beardsley, R. K., 15, 50
Apache, 151, 157, 158                               Bennett, John W., 7

                                              365
366                                                                                 Index
Bennyhoff, James, 144, 145                   Carter Ranch site, 44, 89, 93, 96, 100,
Berndt, Roland M., 217                            101, 124, 131
Binford, Lewis R., 13, 14, 21, 22, 50, 51,   Caso, Alfonso, 277
      69, 71, 72, 89, 90, 101, 104, 137,     Castle Creek site, 236
      172, 173, 285, 286, 287, 298, 331,     Ceremonial centers, 279
      333, 343, 344, 348                     Chang, Kwang-chih, 12, 13, 14, 20, 27,
Binford, Sally R., 12, 13, 44, 51, 52, 55,        42, 44, 71, 101
      72, 87, 172, 286, 287, 316, 343, 346   Cherokee,     242
Birdsell, Joseph B., 71, 326, 329, 330       Chief-paramont, 274
Birhor,    161, 163, 165                     Chiefs, 243
Black Sand phase, 292, 294, 297, 300,        Chiggerville site, 175, 176, 183, 195, 206
     302, 303                                Childe, V. Gordon,     7, 315, 316, 317, 318,
Blalock, Hubert M., 23                            319, 325, 327
Bohmers, A., 68                              Chippewa, 326
Bonifay, Eugene, 68                          Chi-square, 52, 106, 108, 123, 124, 147,
Bordes, Francois H., 11, 49, 51, 52, 58,          165, 167, 169, 170, 227, 238, 239
     65, 67, 68, 72, 79                      Chumash, 43, 45, 46
Boriskovski, P. J., 62                       City, 143, 146, 147
Borotse,    326                              Civilization, 264
Bose, Saradindu, 326, 327                    Clan, 252, 267, 354
Bouchud, Jean, 64, 65, 68, 71                  ambilateral, 277
Bourlon, M., 66                                conical, 274, 355
Bouyssonie, J., 66                             exogamous, 277, 278, 356, 357
Brace, C. Loring, 58                           patrilineal, 281
Braidwood, Robert J., 6, 15, 144, 253,          unilateral, 277, 278, 279, 356
     255, 316; 317, 319, 320, 321, 322)         unilateral exogamous, 274, 277, 356
     SPL CPL SEE) BREE Sis                   Clark, J. Desmond, 13, 71, 326
Brainard, George W., 77                      Clark, J. Grahame D., 7, 64, 71, 78, 268,
Brainard, Margaret, 117                           315, 316, 318, 336
Breuil, Henri, 66, 313                       Cleland, Charles E., 309, 310
Brodbeck, May, 34, 35                        Climatic change, 92, 316
Broken K Pueblo, 103, 104, 106, 114,         Closed system, 38
      TTS VMIGR26. 1275 LeOe1 Sieg:          Clustering, artifact, 46, 97, 116, 135, 146,
      135, 136, 140                               147, 153, 156; attribute, 45, 73, 74,
Bronze age, 55                                    75, 96, 108, 135, 146, 226, 238, 239,
Brown, James A., 96, 101, 124, 226, 287           240, 358
Brown, John Allen, 313, 314     :            Cochran, William G., 106
Budding-off, 256, 270, 274, 330              Coefficient of variation, 162, 229, 232,
Bunzel, Ruth L., 118                              234, 236
Buringh, P., 255                             Coe, Michael D., 172, 173, 269, 272, 278,
Burkett, M. C., 315                               279) 335, 343. 303.005; ODOsoo1s
Bus Mordeh phase, 248, 249, 250, 253,             358
     254, 255, 256, 257, 260, 261, 264       Cognitive rules, 360
Butchering, 51, 52, 117, 126, 345            Cole, Fay-Cooper, 10
Butterfield site, 175, 177, 183, 184         Collecting camp, 176
Butzer, Karl W., 64, 246                     Colton, Harold S., 10
                                             Computer, 96, 106, 144, 145, 146, 238
Caldwell, Joseph R., 7, 287, 288, 305, 326   Conjunctive approach, 6
Canandaigua site, 236                        Contagious distribution, 270, 272, 274,
deCandolle, Alphonse, 319                         PUT Cites, Os)!
Cann, J. R., 259                             Cora-Huichol, 267, 268
Carlson, Annis site, 175, 176, 177, 181,     Corporate estate, 206
      185, 196, 197, 210, 211, 212           Corporate groups, 274
Carlyle, A. C., 314                          Correlation coefficient, 146
Carneiro, Robert, 326                        Councils, 252, 254, 264, 356
Carpenter Brook site, 239                    Coutil, L., 315
Carr-Saunders, A. M., 326                    Co-variance analysis, 147, 164
Carrying capacity, 327, 332                  Cowgill, George, 86
Cartailhac, M., 315                          Craftsman, 261
Index                                                                                      367
Craft specialization, 144, 209, 246, 252,      Dow, James, 144
     256, 259, 262, 263                        Dozier, Edward, 343
Crawford, O. G. S., 7,13                       Drewitt, Bruce, 144
Cronin, Constance, 97, 227, 229                Dubois, Philip H., 227, 234, 238, 239
Cultural boundaries, 18, 20                    Dumond, D. E., 325, 326
Cultural drift, 172, 229
Cultural ecology, 39, 70, 71, 72, 90, 353,     Echegaray, J. G., 58
     359                                       Ecological diversity, 247
Cultural patterns, 65                          Ecological niche, 324, 325, 334, 336, 351
Cultural process, 7, 8, 12, 14, 15, 65, 69,    Ecological processes, 172, 286
     171, 172                                  Ecological systems, 268, 360
Cultural stability, 89, 171                    Ecological variables, 288, 344
Cultural systems, 2, 69, 77, 86, 91, 103,      Ecotone, 310
     286                                       Edge effect, 309
Cultural traditions, 18, 19, 50, 54, 57, 65,   Effective environment,     323, 324
     75,317                                    Egalitarian society, 257
Culture area, 33                               Eggan, Fred, 89, 100, 115, 117, 118, 119
Cumulative graphs, 231, 232                    Ekholm, Gordon F., 267
Cushing, Frank H., 117, 118                    Elders, 262, 264
Cutler, Hugh C., 299                           Emic approach, 360, 361
                                               Emigration, 330, 332
Dahlgren deJordan, Bardro, 277                 Emiran culture, 54, 55
Darwin, Charles R., 319                        Emireh site, 55, 56
Dawkins, William Boyd, 314, 315                Empirical generalization,      15, 18, 20, 34,
Deduction, 16, 34, 36                               35, 85
Deetz, James, 2, 6, 17, 18, 21, 43, 45, 46,    Environmental determinism, 320, 323
     98, 103, 172, 224, 226, 227, 238, 240,    Eolithic, 314
     343, 346, 352, 353, 358                   Equilibrium, 323, 325, 327, 328, 330
Deevey, Edward S., Jr., 326                    Equilibrium system, 328, 329
Demographic patterns, 77, 93, 246, 360         Erasmus, Charles J., 9
Demographic structure, 328                     Eridu site, 256, 260
Demography,       65, 70, 71, 101, 162, 242,   Ertebglle culture, 316
     325, 326                                  Escalon de Fonton, Max, 62, 68
Descent, 41, 44, 47, 48, 99, 100, 162, 242,    Eskimo, 344, 345, 355
     267, 277, 285, 349, 355, 358, 360         Estrada, Emilio, 6, 10
  bilateral, 46, 268, 352                      Evans, Clifford, 6, 10
  matrilineal, 242, 267, 277, 354, 355,        Evans-Pritchard, E. E., 217
     358, 360                                  Evolutionary change, 50, 57, 76, 173,
  patrilineal, 249, 261, 267, 268, 277,             286, 343, 359
     279, 280, 360                             Ewing, J. F., 55
  unilateral, 274, 277, 355                    Exchanges, reciprocal, 272
  unilineal,    46, 47, 162, 352, 355, 357,    Explanation, 2, 7, 15, 22, 27, 34, 35, 36,
     359                                            37, 38, 45, 49, 50, 66, 85, 89, 104,
Descent line, 274, 355, 356                         LOT, 135 13827172, 173,213,
Dethlefsen, Edwin, 172, 226                         218, 241, 242, 253, 285, 286, 308,
Deuel, Thorne,      10                              313, 318, 322, 360
DeVore, Irven, 343, 344                          casual, 34, 37
Dickson site, 220                                historical, 33, 34, 35, 47
Diffusion,     6, 8, 10, 223, 229, 268, 333,     nomological, 34
     335                                         scientific, 34
Diffusionist model, 316                        Exploitative activities, 78, 250, 285, 297,
Digby, Adrian, 338                                  301
Directional change, 234, 322, 323, 358,
     359                                       Factor analysis, 51, 54, 72, 106, 123, 146
Disequilibrium, 325, 328, 332, 335             Factory Hollow site, 240
Diversity index, 335                           Fallers, L. A., 89
Donaldson, Thomas, 115, 117, 118               Family, 252, 261
Doren, J. E., 11                                  extended, 47, 240
Dorobo, 326                                       nuclear, 43, 155, 157
368                                                                                        Index
Farmsteads,      176                              Gremliza, F. G. L., 253
Faron, Louis C., 331                              Griffin, James B., 10, 11, 333
Fenton, William N., 240, 241                      Guayaki, 331
Fére-en-Tardenois site, 315                       Guichard, J., 79
Firth, Raymond, 355                               Guran site, 254, 255
Fisher, R. A., 106
Fisher exact test, 106, 167                       Haag, William C., 175, 183
Fishing, 205                                      Habitation sites, 296, 297, 302, 303
Flannery, Kent V., 172, 173, 245, 247,            Hadza, 326
      249, 269, 272, 279, 335, 343, 353,          Hainline, Jane, 326
    355, 356, 357, 358                            Hall, Robert, 288
Food collecting, 157, 248, 262                    Haller, J., 55
Food collectors, 143, 191, 200, 246, 267,         Hanson, Lee H., Jr., 186, 189
    315                                           Hardin, Margaret, 172
Food preparation, 52, 100, 101, 112, 117,         Hardin site, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190
      126, 155, 156, 301, 304                     Harmann, H. H., 51
Food preservation, 101                            Harris, Marvin,      343
Food processing, 125, 285                         Haury, Emil W., 128
Food producers,        143, 200, 246, 267, 315,   Havana tradition, 219
      316                                         Hawkes, Christopher, 12, 20, 21
Food production, 318, 325                         Hawley, F. M., 119
Ford, James A., 11, 218                           Hayes, Charles, 224
Forde, C. Daryll, 114, 118, 119                   Heider, Karl G., 18
Formative cultures, 268, 270, 271, 272,           Helback, Hans, 245, 248
      274, 275, 276, 278, 279, 281; early,        Helm, June, 70
      267, 272                                    Hempel, Carl G., 17, 34
Fort Ancient culture, 189, 191                    Herding,     249, 250, 257, 260
Fortified settlements, 236                        Herve, Georges, 315
Fossile directeur, 56, 66, 68, 78                 Hevly, Richard H., 92, 93, 105, 106, 129,
Fourneau du Diable site, 78                            130, 132
Fowler, Melvin, 287                               Hidden data, 19, 20
Frankfort, Henri, 253                             Hide working, 52
Freeman, Leslie G., 72, 96, 100, 101, 124,        Hill, James N., 86, 89, 101, 103, 104, 106,
      226                                               107, 180. 1325137 a135. Doda    le
Freund, G., 58                                         343, 353, 354, 359
Fried, Morton H., 278, 279, 343, 354, 358         Historical continuity, 317
Fritz, John, 105                                  Hodson, F. R., 11
Frontenac site, 199, 204, 205                     Hole, Frank,       172, 173, 245, 251, 255,
Fruchter, B., 51, 106                                  333, 343
Functional approach, 50, 58                       Homeostatic regulation, 326, 328, 330
Functional variability, 45, 49, 50, 74, 96,       Homologous forms, 8, 10, 15, 26
      172, 259                                    Hopewellian, 219, 288, 308, 309, 355
Funk, Robert, 224                                 Hopi,     114, 115, 116, 117, 126, 135, 136,
                                                       354
Gabel, Creighton, 317                             Household, 100, 101, 114, 138, 155, 162,
Gallus, A., 58                                         240, 272, 275
Garoga site, 236, 240                             Howe, Bruce, 253, 319, 320, 321
Garrod, Dorothy, 51, 54, 55, 56, 58, 315,         Howell, F. Clark, 13, 51, 56, 57
      317, 320                                    Huave,     268
Gaussen, Jean, 79                                 Hunting, 51, 52, 57, 249, 250, 261, 262,
Gearing, Frederick O., 242                                345, 346
Genealogies, 275, 276, 277                        Hunting camps, 54, 176, 208, 253
Gerald, Rex E., 155                               Huntingford, G. W. B., 326
Gimbutas, Marija, 315, 316, 317                   Huxley, Julian, 351
Gladwin, Harold S., 10                            Hypothetico-deductive method,         18, 23,
Goldenweiser, Alexander A., 240, 241,                  25
      249                                         Hyrenius, Hannes, 328
Goodwin, Grenville, 157
Graebner, Fritz, 9, 10                            Idealistic philosophy, 352, 360
Index                                                                                       369
Immigration,      332                              Lathrap, Donald, 69, 331
Independent development, 8, 333, 336               Laugerie Haute site, 77
Indian Knoll Culture, 175, 176, 184, 185,          Laville, Henri, 68
     186, 190, 191, 196, 199, 201, 202,            Lavocat, 68
     205, 207, 209, 212, 216, 217, 218             Law of Cultural Dominance,      331
Indian Knoll site, 175, 176, 177, 181, 183,        Lee, Richard B., 326, 327, 343, 346, 347,
     185, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 201,                 349, 351
     202, 206                                      Leisure Time Hypothegis,     199, 200, 327,
Induction, 16, 17                                       328
Inference, 18, 19, 20, 21, 37, 38, 41, 42,         Lenca, 268
     44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 65, 69, 71, 75,           Leroi-Gourhan, André, 62
     101, 103, 104, 112, 150, 155, 156,            Levanna site, 236
     157, 158, 161, 236, 241, 245, 248,            Libby, Willard T., 175
     251, 254, 256, 264, 288, 343, 344,            Limitations of archeological data, 18, 19,
     358                                                20, 22, 86
Inherited status, 275                              Lineage, 162, 249, 250, 252, 254, 261,
Innovation, 261, 327, 333, 336                          262, 274, 355, 356
Intensive harvest collection, 305, 310               egalitarian, 278, 355, 356, 357
Interaction sphere, 219, 310                         royal, 277
Interpretive archeology, 345                       Linton, Ralph, 10
Interpretive principle, 11, 16, 18, 19, 21,        Lloyd, Seton, 256
     200                                           deLoe, Baron A., 315
Invasion,   316                                    Longacre, William, 43, 44, 45, 86, 101,
Iraqi-Jarmo project, 319                               103, 104, 107, 131, 138, 224, 229,
Irrigation, 250, 251, 255, 256, 262                    281, 343, 353, 359
Iroquois, 225, 226, 229, 230, 236, 240,            Lowie, Robert H., 9, 12
      241, 242, 355                                Lumley, H., 68

Jabrud site, 51, 52, 53                            MacCurdy, George Grant, 315
Jarmo site, 254                                    MacNeish, Richard S., 226, 267, 269,
Jennings, Jesse D., 10                                 270, 272, 274
Jicaque, 268                                       MacWhite, Eoin, 20
Johnson, Frederick,           175                  Magdalenian, 79, 315, 316
Jones, Kenneth,         146                        Magdalenian-proto, 79
                                                   Maintenance activities, 78, 297, 300
Kaplan, Abraham, 34                                Manufacturing activities, 117, 119, 136,
Kaplan, David, 330                                      205, 301, 304
Kaplan, Lawrence, 299                              Manufacturing, ceramics,     128, 259
Karim Shahir site, 253                             Manus, 358
Kaska, 358                                         Mapping, 143
Kelley, David H., 279                              Markets, 257, 358
Kelso site, 236                                    Market system, 274
Kenyon, Kathleen M., 334                           Marriages, brother-sister, 277, 280
Kin group, 272, 353, 355, 356                        cross-cousin, 277
Kirchoff, Paul, 274, 278, 355, 356, 357              parallel-cousin, 277
Kirkland site, 175, 176, 177, 181, 183             Martin, Paul S., 12, 89, 90, 92, 93, 95, 96,
Kleindienst, Maxine R., 13, 50                          104, 107, 138
Klima, 62                                          Mas d’Azil site, 315, 316
Kozlowski, Leon, 315                               Mason, Otis T., 5
Kraeling, C. H., 144                               Materialistic philosophy, 321, 352
Kroeber, Alfred L., 5, 36, 119, 224                Matson, F. R., 258
Ksar ’Akil site, 55, 56                            Maximizing adaptions, 309
Kuikuru,    327                                    Maxon Derby site, 236
Kula Ring, 191, 217, 358                           Maya,   278, 279, 280, 357
[Kung Bushman,          326, 344, 345, 346, 348,   Mazapan Phase, 147
    351                                            McArthur, Margaret, 326, 327
                                                   McCarthy, Frederick, 326, 327
Laplace, Georges, 68                               McKern, W. C., 10
La Purisima Mission site, 43°                      McPherron, Alan, 226
370                                                                                     Index
Measurement scales, 23, 24, 25, 86, 172,         Oikoumene, 200
     355                                         Old Copper Culture,      199, 200
Mechanistic approach, 318                        Onge Hunters, 326
Media of exchange, 185, 186, 191                 Optimum population density, 326, 332
Meggars, Betty J., 6, 10                         Ordinal scale, 15
Mellaart, James, 333                             Orthogenetic argument, 322
Menghin, Oswald, 315, 316                        Ortiz, Alfonse, 117
Mesolithic, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 319,        Osborn, Henry Fairfield, 315, 316, 318
     320, 332                                    Owasco culture, 225, 226, 229, 230, 236,
Miccaotli phase, 147                                  240, 241
Microenvironmental reduction, 270, 272
Microenvironments, 64, 173, 269, 270,            Paleo-Indian,     176
      271, 297, 303, 307                         Paleolithic,   13, 50, 51, 57, 61, 313, 314,
Midwestern Taxonomic System, 10                       332, 343, 344, 345, 346
Migrations,      50, 58, 333                     Paleolithic, Middle, 56, 57, 58
Millon, René, 143, 144, 267                      Paloumpis, Andreas A., 299, 307, 309,
Mindeleff, Victor,     114, 115, 116, 118, 119        310
Mississippian cultures, 176, 185, 191, 201       Panch Pera camp, 165
Mixtecs, 277, 280                                Parker, A. C., 236
Moberg, Carl-Axel, 68                            Parkinson’s Law, 252
Mogollon culture, 95                             Parmalee, Paul, 299
Mohammad Jaffar Phase, 249, 250, 254,            Parrish site, 199, 201
      255, 257, 258, 259, 261, 262, 264          Parsorssba Ga bios tlis bio
deMorgan, Jacques Jean M., 315, 316,             Patterning, 41, 44, 45, 47, 68, 73, 75, 78,
      317, 318                                        176, 209
Morris site, 199, 201                              attribute, 42, 43
Morrow site, 226                                   community, 42, 44
Morse, Dan F., 10                                   contextual, 190
Mortensen, Peder, 254                               generational, 224
deMortillet, Adrien, 315                            group, 44, 224
deMortillet, Gabriel, 66, 313                       individual, 42, 45, 224
Mortuary activities, 103, 300, 304, 305             locational, 104, 158, 346
Mortuary camp, 301, 308                          Peisker site, 294, 300, 301, 303, 304, 305,
Mound House site, 300, 304, 309                       309
Mousterian, 44, 51, 52, 54, 55, 56, 58, 62,      Périgordian, lower, 78
     65, 68, 72, 75, 78                          Périgordian, upper, 77, 78
Movius, Hallam L., Jr., 67, 78                   Perino, Gregory, 294, 300
Multivariate analysis, 51, 72, 73, 74, 143,      Perrot, Jean, 68, 321, 334, 335
      146                                        Peyrony, D., 66, 67, 78
Multivariate causation, 50, 51                   Phillips, Philip, 1, 7, 15, 16
                                                 Piette, Ed, 315, 316
Nagel, Ernest, 24                                Piggott, Stuart, 8, 12, 18, 20
Narroll, Raoul, 252, 254                         Pike phase, 292, 305
Natufian,      320, 334, 335                     Pina-Chan, Roman, 267
Neely, J. A., 245                                Pittioni, Richard, 316, 317
Neolithic,     62, 313, 314, 315, 319, 322       Pitt-Rivers, A. Lane-Fox,      314
Neolithic revolution, 318                        Pleistocene,    13, 317, 320
New archeology, 27                               Polanyi, Karl, 274
Newbridge site, 299, 307                         Political activities, 144, 355
Nominal scale, 23, 163, 166                      Political units, 356
vanNorten, Francis, 346                          Pond site, 220
Northwest Coast Indians, 251, 355                Population, sedentary, 269, 332, 333, 334 >
Nuclear Zone Theory, 321, 323, 325, 332,              335
      Stefs}                                     Population density, 297, 305, 309, 311,
                                                      326, 328, 331, 332
Oak Hill Phase, 240, 241, 242                    Population dynamics, 325
Oasis Theory, 319, 323                           Population frontiers, 331, 332, 333
Obermaier, Hugo, 315, 316                        Population increase, 261, 262, 263, 288,
Odum, Eugene P., 335                                  297, 325, 331, 332, 333, 334
Index                                                                                   371
Population movement, 218, 317, 318, 332,       Richardson, Jane, 224
     333                                       Riley, Carroll L., 9
Population pressure, 256, 261, 332             Rinaldo, John, 12, 89, 95, 104, 128
Population size, 246, 252, 253, 254, 261       Ritchie, William A., 204, 224, 225, 226,
Population stability, 316                           236, 240, 241
Population system, closed, 328                 Ritual activities, 118, 132, 136, 144, 257,
   open (Donor type), 329, 330                       258, 259, 302, 355
  open (Recipient type), 329, 330              Riverton Culture, 176, 191
Post-Classic period, 268, 269                  Robbins, Michael C., 13
Post-Pleistocene, 313, 315, 316, 317, 318,     Robenhausian, 315
     321, 322, 324, 336, 344                   Roberts, John B., 100, 101, 118
Poverty Point site, 218, 219                   Robinson, W. S., 77
Pradel, Louis, 58                              Rolingson, Martha Ann, 199, 201
Pre-Classic      period, 147                   Ronen, Avraham, 68
Preindustrial   cities, 144                    Rootenberg, S., 13
Priestly organization, 256                     Roth, H. Ling, 319
Priests, 264                                   Round Top site, 226, 236
Primary Forest Efficiency, 305                 Rouse, Irving, 6, 10, 11, 12, 15, 182
Primogeniture, 274, 277, 356, 357              Rowe, John Howland, 10
Processual models, 58                          Roys, Ralph L., 278
Propinquity Theory, 328                        R-Technique, 146
Proskouriakoff, Tatiana, 279                   Rust, A., 51, 53


Q-Technique, 146
                                               Sackett, James R., 9, 49, 57, 74, 76, 79,
Quimby, George I., 326
                                                    316, 317, 343
                                               Sahlins, Marshall D., 70, 251, 269, 274,
Ramage, 274, 275, 355, 356, 357                     275, 276, 277, 281, 327, 328,330;
Ramified systems, 274, 275, 277, 278,               355, 356, 357, 359
     279, 352, 355                             Sampling, 2, 13, 67, 76, 77, 79, 85, 104,
Randall-Maclver, David, 12                          114, 148, 172, 190
Rands, Robert L., 9                            Sanders, William T., 271
Read Shell Mound,        175, 176, 181, 210,   Sanger, David, 11
    212                                        Santa Maria phase, 274
Reconstruction of culture history, 5, 8, 10,   Sapir, Edward, 36, 268
     11, 62, 246                               Sarab site, 254, 255
Reconstruction of past life ways, 5, 6, 8,     Schlesier, Karl H., 11
      12, 14, 41, 48, 65, 103                  Schmitt, Karl, 185, 186, 208
Recreational activities, 304                   Schoenwetter, James, 92, 93, 106, 30&
Redistributive Center, 217                     Schoff, Harry L., 236
Redistributive economy, 251                    Schwabedissen, Herman,       317
Reed, Charles, 15, 95, 253, 322                Schwartz, Douglas, 199, 201
Regional exchange center, 308                  Scioto tradition, 202
Regional symbiosis, 271, 272, 275, 277         Sears, William H., 103
Regression analysis, 96, 97, 98                Seasonal camps, 44, 176, 255, 344
Renfrew, Colin, 259                            Sedentism,   269, 331, 332, 333, 334, 335
Research design, 71, 97                        Segmentation, 275, 285, 305, 308, 330
Research strategy, 61, 75, 79, 352             Selective Pressures, 286, 309, 311, 323,
Residence, 41, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 71, 72,          324, 325, 327, 331, 332, 333, 334,
     97, 98, 99, 100, 103, 161, 227, 229,           336
     238, 281, 284, 345, 346, 349, 354         Semenoy, S. A., 75
  avuncular, 358                               Seneca, 236
  bilocal, 46                                  Seriation, 76
  matrilocal, 43, 46, 99, 224, 227, 228,       Service, Elman R., 21, 162
     238, 240, 242, 354                        Settlement cycle, 297, 302
  patrilocal, 46, 162                          Settlement patterns, 7; 12, 42, 58, 70, 71,
  unilocal, 46                                      72, 77, 79, 103, 170, 240, 246, 252,
  uxorilocal, 46                                    255, 256, 268, 272, 274, 277, 281,
  virilocal, 46                                     289, 346
372                                                                                  Index
Settlement systems, 58, 70, 78, 176, 208,      Stimulus diffusion, 333
      216, 285, 286, 289, 297, 303, 308,       Stirling, Matthew W., 278
      309, 311                                 Stites, Sara Henry,      241
Settlement types, 287, 303, 307                Storage activities, 112, 117, 118, 128, 136,
Setzler, Frank M., 6                                155, 156, 251, 285, 303, 333
Sexual division of labor, 43, 44, 45, 46,      Structural poses, 72
       97, 98, 121, 133, 134, 157, 246, 250,   Struever, Stuart,    172, 173, 288, 299, 308,
     256, 257, 258, 261, 264, 347                    Boo, O01 Co
Shaeffer, Margaret W. M., 155                  Style, 50, 54, 57, 223, 226
Shaman, 257                                    Stylistic change, 57, 77, 92
Shawnee, 186, 190                              Stylistic variability, 45, 65, 74, 76, 226,
Shepherds’ camps, 258                               227, 228, 229, 230, 235, 240, 346
Shook, Edwin M., 279                           Subsistence activities, 56, 58, 144, 260,
Shubbabiq, Mugharet es-, 51, 52, 53, 55,            285
     56                                        Succession, 172
Siegel, Sidney, 23, 106, 227, 234, 238         Surplus, 257, 263, 272, 274, 303
Sierra Mixe, 268                               Systematics,     49, 76, 313
Simpson, George Gaylord, 322
Siriono, 331                                   Tabun site, 56
Sjoberg, Gideon, 144                           Tallgren, A. M., 7
Skhul site, 56, 57                             Tarahumara, 267, 268
Skinner, James, 56                             Tasks, 50, 85, 97, 156, 308
Slotkin, J. S., 12, 185, 186, 208              Taylor, Walter D., 310
Smith, GC. S., 10                              Taylor, Walter W., 1, 5, 6, 12
Smith, H.L, 6                                  Temple centers, 251, 272
Smith, M. A., 18, 20, 21                       Temple towns, 274
Smith, Phillip E. L., 58, 61, 79, 258, 333     Temporary work camps, 53
Sneath, P. H. A., 146                          Teotihuacan site, 143
Snyderman, George S., 241                      Thompson, Donald F., 172
Snyder’s Site, 298                             Thompson, Raymond H., 13, 14, 16, 23
Social class, 271                              Tiamimilopa phase, 147
Social ranking, 200, 209, 258                  Time series, cyclical, 176, 213, 218
Social status, 103, 200, 246, 256, 355,        Titiev, Mischa, 100, 114, 115, 117, 118,
        356                                         119
Social stratification, 274                     Tixier, Jacques,    73
Sodalities, 92, 93, 252, 352                   Tool kits, 51, 52, 58, 72, 287, 298, 346,
Sokel, R. R., 146                                   352
Solecki, Ralph, 252                            Tool manufacture,        52
Sollas, W. J., 6, 318                          Torralba site, 347
Solutré site, 315                              Towns,     143
Solutrean culture, 78, 316                     Trade, 216, 217, 246, 257, 258, 261, 262,
de Sonneville-Bordes, D., 49, 62, 68, 78,           271, 272, 300, 308, 309
        79, 317, 318                           Trade centers, 219
Spaulding, Albert C., 1, 2, 25, 27, 33, 57,    Trade network, 177, 216, 220
        58, 69, 74, 106, 144                   Trade system, 216, 219, 220, 358
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient,       Trade system, reciprocal, 274; redistribu-
      234                                           tive, 274, 278, 281
Speck, Frank G., 185                           Trading partners, 216, 217
Stage classification, 15, 25                   Traditional framework, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17       >

Standard deviation, 240                             66, 69, 162, 334
State, 242                                     Traditions, micro, 45, 46; regional, 58
Status differentiation, 260, 262, 278, 288,    Transhumance, 249, 258, 261
      308                                      Transitional cultures, 54, 56, 57, 58, 314,
   by age, 202, 203                                 316
      by sex, 202, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208,    Tribal society, 267
     258                                       Trigger, Bruce G., 12
Stevenson, Matilda C., 114, 115, 117,          Troels-Smith, Jorgen, 316
        126, 130, 132                          Tsimshian, 358
Steward, Julian H., 6, 7, 15, 70, 116, 331     Tugby, Donald, 146
Index                                                                                   373
Tuohy, Donald R., 155                          Watson, Patty Jo, 13
Turner, Lewis MacDonald, 289                   Wauchope, Robert,      14, 252
Turville-Petre, F., 55                         Webb, W. S., 175, 181, 183, 185, 191,
Tylor, Edward B., 8, 9, 10, 319                    192, 195, 196, 206, 212, 218
Type concept,   74                             Wedel, Waldo, 359
Typologies, 50, 51, 55, 65, 67, 68, 73, 75,    Whallon, Robert, 72, 172, 287, 343, 353,
     145, 162                                       354, 359
                                               White Hall phase, 298, 299, 307
Uberoi, J. P. Singh, 216                       White, Leslie A., 7, 323, 325
Units of analysis, 23, 26, 148, 149, 223,      Whiting, Alfred F., 117, 119, 126, 130,
     360                                            132
Units of observation, 23, 24, 26, 86, 148,     Willey, Gordon R., 1, 6, 7, 12, 15, 16, 17,
     223, 360                                       144, 267, 317, 319, 320, 321, 322,
Upper Paleolithic, 54, 56, 57, 58, 61, 62,          Boe. Oo
     63, 64, 65, 66, 68, 69, 70, 71, 73, 77,   Williams, Bobby Jo, 86
     78, 79, 318                               Wilson, E. Bright, 14, 139
Urbanism, 264                                  Wilson, Thomas, 314
Urban society, 144, 246                        Winters, Howard D., 172, 176, 182, 190,
Van Zeist, W., 246                                  286, 343
Variability, measure of, 108, 228, 229         Wolf, Eric R., 267
Vavilov, N.I., 341                             Woodburn, James, 326, 327
Vielle, Edmond, 315                            Woodland period, 176, 182, 185, 186,
Village Farming Communities, 92, 143,               191, 200, 201, 209, 288, 291, 295
     246, 267                                    early, 220
                                                 middle, 200, 201, 202, 289, 295, 297,
Villages, 252, 256, 260, 270, 272, 274,
                                                    303, 304, 305, 307, 309, 310, 311
     275; semi-permanent,    44, 246
Vitalism, 322                                  Wood-working activities, 205
                                               Wray, Charles F., 224, 236
Vogel, J. C., 58
Vogt, Evon Z., 12
                                               Wright, H. E., Jr., 247
                                               Wright, J.K.,232
el Wad site, 55, 56                            Wynne-Edwards, V. C., 326
Wallis, Wilson D., 10
Wallrath, Matthew, 144                         Yarnell, Richard, 299
Wampum,      185, 186, 191                     Yengoyan, Aram, 329
Ward site, 175, 177, 181, 183, 206             Young, T. C., 333
Warfare,   240, 241, 242, 243
Warren,    Claude N., 11                       Zawi Chemi Shanidar site, 253
Washburn, S. L., 26, 349                       Zuni, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 126,
Waterbolk, H. T., 317                               132, 135, 136, 354
                                                                                                                                         ri?      ota                                               Tietitfyet                                                                                                        t         ita                                                                           fats Gr
                                                                                                                                        te sepUeeRUTE                                               aHi                                                                                                                                 syieeeatarte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                vesesests                                                                Etre
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mi                                                                                                                          niprrattawer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nian
                                                                                                                                               a ith
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sebeties :              ent
                                                                                                                                                        t                                           mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                    rye  if                                                                                                                                :
                                                        ios                                                                                                                                                                                                           itMS
                                                                                                                                                    eae                                        te
                                                                                                                                                          Siev       if                                                                                                                                    i                                                                                                                                                                           Sit              if
                                                       Bee                                                                                                       Creegne                                                                                ee                                                                              renee        payr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        aeyst                                                                                                                          iat a        3
                                                            tetesiae                                                                                                    eypereenteri
                                                                                                                                      aaroa                                         ytua                                 ete :              cae     biay                                                                                            wetter pprppot                                                                                                                                   7
                                                                                                                                                          et         ar                                                                             Ei LeseyErt                                                                                              oe          ¥ east
                                                                                                                                    an reaisr er
                                                                                                                                              eectet                    Mi
                                                                                                                                                                        erhoto                                                          a         epe  e                                                                           N      botgore      nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rrranaat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           an            at
                                                                                                                                   pe my                                 wry
                                                                                                                                                                         Mpeve
                                                                                                                                                                             ns nr
                                                                                                                                                                                veyne                                                             brttervr eaee                                                                                                                                                                                           om
                                                                                                                       :        tit sv
                                                                                                                                       el retry} bepeeres
                                                                                                                                                          eerePiseva                oeret
                                                                                                                                                                                       ateruent
                                                                                                       —                             vet
                                                                                                                                       stean
                                                                                                                                         e       orevtelnPeusyerepe                                                                                               of                                                                                                                                                                                      a    eregeart
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rea Roeseyeh
                                                                                         eye
                                                                                                                                                                 aeseenrUne                                                                                                                                                                                                         beaveoeriotealy
                                                                                      i tt                                                                        ue                                                                                                                                                                                    a eTgit                               enate                                  Seas   het Bier
                                                                                           Hit
                                                                                             mnt                           iit                                      ae                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hraa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ys
                                                                                                  bbcsrortee
                                                                                                                                                   cae                                                                                                                                                                                              at eat                                                        re                            Raeintt
                                                                                                tscan                            rate                areal                                                                                                                                                                                          Serene          ey
                                                                                                                                i    crret
                                                                                                                                        rte at                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hah
                                                                                                            tea                     ti                                                                                                                            lt           bia           doit                                                                                                                                                                        et
                                                                                                                                           ;                                                                                                                                            yi                                                                                                                                                                                s itabek e
                                                                                                                                     Wien reeen Sonne
                                                                                                                                                      Pe                                                                                              ts reyin area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Eateasetatec)                                                                          sq                                                                                                      wi         tas atehig
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               yas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Tyre                                                                                   yest)                                                                                                        os
                                                                                          the                         Brea
                                                                                                                                           SE                                                                                                                                                                                              wee ti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14izt
                                                                                                            i                              Goa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nt as
                              raseasd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Hite                                                                                                                                                                                         ETav
                            yes g                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 its                                           eres by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pay                                                                                                                                                wHht iey           Ger
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       trett i isft                                                                                                                                             En
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ay tht
                                                                                                                                                                                                Feesrereresey                                                                s                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ra
                                                                                                            ty                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                            Rte                                                                 ee e
                                                                                                                                                        mr                  abdtyiev eseb
                                                                                                                                                                                 respferyyt
                                                                                                                                                                                          eaperey
                                                                                                                           ea                                                 ibusmHtervar He                       aIem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AnH
                                                                                                                                                ELT STU           eeeed       Poses                                       arsreryeiaee
                                                                                                                           a                      a     en                               mern    Raar                                                                                        oe ey PUTeEr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   gavage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oppsster oey       eeeopayeneG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               eEeUeevest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A FS
                                                           |a                                           fi              me
                                                                                                                         ttytae            ry gite ry pearbes                     veuTt
                                                                                                                                                                                      tata tmemirau   ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lg vi
                                                                                                                                                                                                      nnaeent                                                                                 i                  ie       pesPit    Nanae yet reste
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             eupreoyh      14                       et
                                                                a                                       :                  He                                                 veet
                                                                                                                                                              Teecoatveges bertoe rsevetaeve
                                                                                                                                                                                          ten
                                                                                                                                                                                         ea    che
                                                                                                                                                                                                vu  rra bovo        rent  trev
                                                                                                                           i                                   bint                    vou  re                  Ure
                                                       vee : i                                                                                yr tn    ne
                                                                                                                                                       renertet                    yhiv
                                                                                                                                                                                   ytse eere
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      eyeyyvevreereorsegeet                                                                                                                                                             et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       eth
                                                                                                            i                                               tat ste
                                                                                                                                                             eee     teerenPrpeereenebeset   hwegevevesrie pig
                                                                                                                                                                                          rina                  saueayeeyeurvepear
                                                                                                                           tH                 rire                                     Fyar atutsety
                                                                                                                                                                                                 atoeypon
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ieteay bibses
                                                                             ae                                                                                    Wegpeebau               uty
                                                                                                                                                                                 tneer awrvdb                                                                                                                                                                                                         ifsie
                                                                 spyeeerearee                                              Ha                                                                 eycboaneie             revert
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Wet ea                                                                                                                                                  ah
                                                                                                            :hte             a
                                                                                                                           Mopa
                                                                                                                       if4. ahehveret       t       gets f                                                                                                                             Prberb
                                                                                                            i            i                                          l ta
                                                                                                                                                   dt He!feeiSpeelnea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                    siaih           Hat
                                                                                                                                                                                                     i Hteaarrheerenese    es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        yeahi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            at                                                                                                                                                     Hale
                                                                                                                                                         {                                                    reta          myryieeer                            a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             reeeT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 reiIca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t
    i                                                          en              ier a rat                                                                                                            ate                                                 rei
i   a<                                                      7 it artepT MeeR
                                                                        rie na
                                                                                rn   U ese i                                                                       ;Hti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    wrote
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ete                                                                                          _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i
                                                                             a Ra ty
                                                                                 st  L
                                                                                     raenesrr
                                                                                         enq n                                                enneH                                             i           a e
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ste
i'                                                        h             5
                                                                                     edit
                                                                                              ra                                                                    "if                                                                                                                                                                                                            o
                                                            a               Sptesbaerore e
                                                                               asS        ity erate at              eet tifet
                                                                                                                   tea                                                                   itHa! t i sperrent                       apyahr  get
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BSsT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      oyerevn              Rieti
                                             |                                                                      a                sebeheyyyeacreeeft
                                                                                                                       t aiesetetat brah
                                                                                                                                    1              mertryve             a
                                                                                                                                                        restvCaredtarstaen         re ees nt a
                                                                                                                                                                                  eenei pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ieoeahru
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      eeytipsyrod bat
                                                                                                                                                                                                       tek
                                                                                                                                                                           esati rrtehyt Nsivitieeeerarays1
                                                                                                                    tne
                                                                                                                 eata                  ceme
                                                                                                                                   aibrereorsrteeuniee                                                      ee
                                                                                                                                                                 nctse eeeh MeaecHr ath
  tit                                                                                                                                                                                      miata
uh titsit     ri   enSUpb        n  atsrTo
                                        appur
                                         ate    care  fl
                                                     ecov  ih
                                                          Tpoe               po ntusrerae
                                                                                                                                                                                                    aetear veerateteba het poi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Trsevticteoe
      wi          e ti                                                  sruo
                                                                        Pa                w
                                                                                          yr   h  chcran     iy    e      DnteicbptaDre
                                                                                                                                     mrsey
                                                                                                                                    Ra
          reTENRGT Seen t evesHERSHape   Hiern
                                         C cov                      a            y
                                                                           et oent
                                                                                 Hury  etee  tt
                                                                                         eenee een            iter                         eprcu
                                                                                                                                            ma   geuP                       c m  a    t
                                                                                                venet cvi      eeutyt Hia gec
                                                                                                                                tt  at   eyey  tei  cyaren                    eut
                                                                                                                                                                               aU
                                                                                                                                                                                TO t      i
                                                                                                                                                                                          1i
   me Wit
             a                                                                                                                           e     eeveoegoueerureetsve
                                                                                                                                                                    ivee
                                                                                                                                                                 aity          ae     d     Heme
                                                                                                                                                                                           iif    ¥           a       n        a
                  cS eaa cnren eEt  ayt Grin
                                         at
                                         t  e e ih rey bey ntyeabeatoa                                                                                                                                                               HeBhe EE
      te                                                                            raresVet
                                                                                      yeetbet             i                       fitt
                                                                                                                                                                                          Hua atitt                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rite
      iine
         nett                aeorhr
                        weprtvns  nnN      tebeccete atceveresvurhareay                                                                                  det
                                                                                                                                                          a!                                                               ce
                                 tsesyere
                                      Seeyeyese                                                                                                                             ee prorereat oanTay                                                                                                                                                                                                                     siei
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sitena
                   Lea                  Ha tHoat igey vay
                                                                                     HbebytePUeyeary           erro
                                                                                                      iorsMlavit       }
                                                                                                                      vore   af
                                                                                                                           vuon   i
                                                                                                                                enseryt
                                                                                                                                      vepmens           irt)                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i
    ai
              enna EAE
                   uenvapesy                                                                 beastpemeit       i
                                                                                                                                                                                yeygetpilreperiti
                                                                                                                                                                                            riti
                                   TidesHH
                            deacatons                                                                                                mysueysey          iit                                                                         yn
iei e                                                                          i
                                                                                                                                                 ee                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t
              Ant te                    nt       vor
                                                                                                                  Lonae          4               ate  Tet
                                                                                                                                                                vt                      tyre                fibre                                                                                                                                                                        4r
                                                                                                                      r eeanh                    r
                                                                                                                              aero er     Hse    ivaea
                                                                                                                                                 Hue      eayts                                                                                                       He
                                                                                                                            eit       merwan wit     sttoae      rf)                                                                                                                                                                                                                   :
                                                                                                                                                                                         egeyyha sta                                                                  if                                                                                                               1 Lt
                                                                                                                                                            iit                                           ET                                                          iL
                                                                                                                                                                          Ouanbeh tgabeapseben
                                                                                                                                                                                            ue ovrev                                                                   thne                                                                                                            :
                                                                                                                                                                                 erititarerhateat
                                                                                                                                                                                               Ait enetehaye
                            aan EeGn O                                  ze           et                                                                                                                                                                           4
ehpear eeDes
          t tstrEn es                                                                              ETH                                                                                                                                                                Hi
         s chacoatt    breppe Heeetye   meine                               R
                                                                            wes
                                                                             esUE
                                                                                                SSeHUNE

                                                                                                                                                                                                tteser Sovit
        a             Ho
                       itd                                                                      y ry                                                                          i                   | esta at
    ne ita
    t ah              Tbe                                                                                                                                                 4
                       nyhebere
         getes
          yehe une    rated
               hacsoe [it     anaes
                       Tepeprtaper
             «
                                                                            ae
                             A                                          Uae
                                                                             Hat                                                                                  ;                                                                                                                          WUE
                                                           TS                tA                                                                                                                                                                                               bears
                                                                }4:iS                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ibs rheedtn                                                                t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             va+a
                                                                             ister                                                                                                                                                                                                           re  ret
