                                                                       PART II




                                      Investigating Variability
                                in the Archeological Record:
                                 A Single Occupation Unit




The papers in this section all focus on the analysis of archeological re-
mains from a single site. Concern is primarily with the recognition, mea-
surement, and explanation of variability in the form and distribution of a
site’s cultural remains. The authors argue that internal variability is to be
expected and that it derives from the differential composition and distri-
bution of the societial segments represented at the site. These segments
were distinguished by their activities and tasks and by their cultural
means of relating to one another.
   All of the papers deal with analytical techniques that facilitate the
demonstration of non-random distributions and associations among units
of archeological observation. The isolation and definition of ordered rela-
tionships in the archeological record are necessary for empirical generali-
zations about the record; these generalizations then can serve as the refer-
ents for our explanations. An assumption basic to this process is that the
archeological deposits are undisturbed and have been investigated in a
manner which takes sampling error into account, and that order in the
record derives from the systematic relationships which characterized the
social life of the cultural unit under study. Explanations for order there-
fore take the form of propositions as to the organizational and/or behav-
ioral characteristics of the sociocultural unit represented. If these proposi-
tions are verified, they may then account for the observations made on
the archeological record,
                                      85
86                                Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
   Most of the papers in   this section  emphasize the initial, exploratory
phase of analysis. This emphasis  is probably  due to an enthusiasm on the
part of archeologists free to explore their data for classes of order not
considered before. These classes of order are not to be seen in the “self-
evident” units of observation, nor would they be seen by those who pro-
claim our knowledge of the past limited by the incompleteness of the
archeological record. These papers are examples of some of the directions
in which our knowledge of the past can expand, given the new perspec-
tives developing in archeology.
   The papers by Longacre, Hill, and Cowgill are concerned with the
analysis of the archeological record at a single site. Problems related to
data collection, handling, and analysis are discussed—problems which
could arise only when the archeological record is viewed as a complex of
structured relationships arising out of the organizational and dynamic
characteristics of extinct cultural systems. Pursuit of the arguments of
relevance presented by these authors can result in the development of
general systems of measurement of cultural variables in the operation of
any number of cultural systems. It is here that much of the excitement of
this kind of archeology lies: By developing archeological theory and veri-
fying arguments of relevance to past conditions, we can gradually build
up a battery of measurement scales for the comparative study of behav-
ior or of cultural and ecological variables. The crucial link here is the
development of sound, verifiable arguments of relevance. However, the
comparative study of archeological observations can bring us understand-
ing of the operation of past cultural systems only insofar as our observa-
tions can be shown to be relevant to stated classes of cultural variables.
   The papers by Ayres and Longacre and the paper by Williams explore
the feedback that can be developed between archeological and ethno-
graphic problems. The expected relationships between material items and
behavioral features of cultural systems are frequently most economically
analyzed and tested with non-archeological data. Similarly, many prob-
lems originating in the investigation of non-archeological data may be
efficiently tested by the use of archeological data. These papers exemplify
both these cases and demonstrate kinds of research which will be more
frequently taken up in the future.
   The grouping of these papers under a single section heading is not
meant to imply that the authors have failed to consider the relevance of
the particular site under study to broader regional and more general
anthropological considerations. But one lesson to be drawn from the pa-
pers presented is that without a rigorous investigation of the meaning of
the internal variablity at a single site and the contexts in which such
variability is produced, comparisons of differences and similarities be-
tween sites can be very misleading. Comparisons made on such a basis
can frequently obscure variability within a stable system and change from
Variability in a Single Occupational Unit                            87
one kind of system to another (see S. R. Binford’s paper, this volume).
The arrangement of these papers in the book is the work of the editors
and does not reflect the context in which individual authors developed
their arguments. Thus, some of the arguments offered here as to processes
of culture change and the significance of ecological relationships should
more appropriately be considered in the context of the discussion of the
following section, Part III.
 SIX                                                     WILLIAM     A, LONGACRE




                                                             Some Aspects
                                                      of Prehistoric Society
                                           in East-Central Arizona




This paper discusses a series of archeological investigations conducted in
east-central Arizona (Fig. 1) directed toward elucidating the nature of
cultural stability and change in the extinct societies of the region.’ The
primary focus is on the Carter Ranch Pueblo (ca. a.v. 1050—1200), where
we attempted to isolate and explain certain organizational features of the
sociocultural system as an initial step toward gaining a better understand-
ing of adaptive changes made by the society to environmental stress. This
report must be viewed as a case study and the research as a somewhat
crude and initial effort. It is our hope that as the field advances our
   * The field work that provided the data for this report was carried out in eastern
Arizona during the summers of 1959-62. This work was supported in large measure by
grants from the National Science Foundation to the Chicago Natural History Museum,
Paul S. Martin, Principal Investigator. I thank Dr. Martin and his colleague, J. B.
Rinaldo, for their encouragement and help both in the field and at the Museum.   Most
of the statistical operations were undertaken with the help of the IBM 7094 computer
at the University of Chicago. A grant to the Chicago Natural History Museum by the
Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research made these operations pos-
sible. The work reported here formed the basis for my doctoral dissertation at the
University of Chicago (Longacre, 1963). I acknowledge and thank the members of
my dissertation committee: L. R. Binford, Director; Fred Eggan; L. A. Fallers; and P.
S. Martin. This paper grew out of a shorter one presented by J. N. Hill and myself at
the 64th annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association, Symposium on
Prehistoric Social Organization, Denver, in 1965. _

                                          89
90                                                        Variability in a Single Occupational Unit


                                                                                             COLORADO
                                                                                   @ACKMEN



                                                                                       CORTEZ
                                                                                      e




                                                                                     @SHiPROCK




                                                  CHIN   LEEe



           <7
                a
                 e
                  om               ARIZONA                              |
                   is}
                    te)                                                 l
                     ¢




     erFLAGSTAFF
                                                                                                    NEW
                                                                                                  MEXICO
                          CARTER   RANCH   SITE
                                   SNOWFLAKE

                              CHILCOTT SITES
                            1957 EXCAVAT!                                                @ QUEMADO

                                                                           TUMBLE WEED CANYON
                            MINERAL CREEK SITE                  mee Bonrst~ HOOPER RANCH PUEBLO
                                    THODE SITE



                                                                             v
                                                                            &
                              ®e.OBE                                        -,     @MOGOLLON
                                                                                 )®6LENWOOD


                                                                                                                 ANOe


 @CABA   GRANOCE


                                                                                                 eSiILVER CiTy




                                                                                                   [Tee

         / Oh ine, aca                                                                                 MEXICO
                                                  ‘pce               eee oe                        |


                                       Figure 1. Area of investigations.
Longacre Prehistoric Society in East-Central Arizona                 91
findings will be rendered obsolete by refinement and growth of methods
of data collection and analysis.
  In the undertaking of this research we were guided by several assump-
tions of a basic theoretical nature. First, we adopted a perspective which
views culture as a systemic whole composed of interrelated subsystems,
such as the social system, the technological system, the religious system,
etc. This view of culture has been discussed and described by L. R.
Binford (1962, 1965). Such a perspective compels the paleoanthropologist
to focus on the nature and interrelations of the component parts of the
cultural system under study, and to work within an ecological frame of
reference. The aim is to isolate and define cultural processes, the means
by which cultures remain stable or change.
  The second assumption underlying this work is that the patterning of
material remains in an archeological site is the result of the patterned
behavior of the members of an extinct society and that this patterning is
potentially informative as to the way the society was organized. Our first
task, then, is to define the structure of the archeological remains at a site
and to offer hypotheses as to the organization of the society and associ-
ated patterns of individual behavior. The patterned relationships among
classes of artifacts should document the context in which they were made,
used, and lost or abandoned. It is essential to measure the mutual covaria-
tion among all classes and types of archeological data; the structure of
this covariation,   once   delimited,   should   reflect the organizational   and
behavioral aspects of the society that produced it.
  We will begin by discussing the environmental and cultural setting of
the prehistoric pueblo under consideration, and this will be followed by a
description of the archeological structure delimited at the site. We then
offer some propositions as to the nature of the society represented and
the cultural processes operative in the region.


      Sociocultural Background and the Environmental Setting
This section consists of a brief synthesis of environmental and cultural
changes which occurred in east-central Arizona before a.p. 1200 in order
to provide a background for the period under study. Data for this synthe-
sis come from excavation and survey (Martin et al., 1964, pp. 201-215).
   The area today is environmentally transitional between the White
Mountains and the Colorado Plateau. It is a semi-arid, topographically
rugged region in the upper drainage of the Little Colorado River. The
landscape is dotted with basalt-capped mesas, cinder cones, deep river
valleys, and numerous arroyos. This area was occupied from at least 1500
B.C. until approximately a.D. 1350, at which time permanent occupations
became restricted to the deepest stream valleys such as Silver Creek and
the Little Colorado itself.
   At the present time the region is marginal for most forms of agriculture;
92                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
the most important economic activity is stock-raising. The only economi-
cally significant agricultural lands are the irrigated lowlands in the deep
stream valleys such as those at Taylor and Shumway on Silver Creek
where corn and other cultigens grow readily. The lack of upland agricul-
ture cannot be explained simply by a lack of water; the critical factor
seems to be the absence of a regular growing season of at least 120 frost-
free days. In the upland town of Vernon, individuals who maintain irri-
gated garden plots tell us they are lucky to get a crop of corn to mature
once every three or four years. It is significant that these upland regions
are dotted with prehistoric sites dating from about a.p. 700 to about 1000
and we know that occupants of the sites were dependent upon corn
agriculture. Obviously there must have been some important changes in
the local environment.
   The study of fossil pollens has been a significant part of the investiga-
tion of the degree and kind of climatic change which has occurred.
Schoenwetter (Martin et al., 1962, pp. 191-94) and Hevley (1964) can
find no palynological evidence of major climatic change in the area. Both
workers, however, indicate that there are subtle and critical shifts in the
nature of the environment. It is argued here that these minor shifts neces-
sitated major adaptive changes on the part of the area’s prehistoric inhab-
itants. The nature of these changes must be seen against the preceding
centuries of gradual development.
   The period from about a.v. 600—700 to about 1000 or 1100 shows a
basic trend suggesting continuity despite numerous stylistic changes in
material remains. After the initial appearance of established village farm-
ing communities in the region, there was a regular and impressive increase
in the population, resulting in a network of small agricultural communi-
ties (Martin et al., 1964, pp. 205-209). Village distribution was linked to
the presence of arable lands in the alluvium of the many small streams in
the area, streams which today are arroyos. Pueblo architecture appears
later, but community size remains unchanged—small hamlets of from three
or four to fifteen or twenty rooms replaced the earlier pit house villages.
Rectangular or circular kivas are sometimes associated with these small
pueblo villages. When the population of a village reached a critical size,
budding-off seems to have occurred, and this process resulted in the
establishment of increasing numbers of small agricultural communities in
previously unoccupied habitats. The newly founded villages probably
maintained kinship and ritual ties with the mother community for several
generations, but there are indications that through time these ties became
attenuated.
  Cohesion within the villages was probably maintained along kin lines
and might have been reinforced by the emergence of non-kin-based
membership     groups, a ceremonial sponsorship system, or both. There is
no evidence suggesting strong multi-community integration during this
period.
     At about 1000 or 1100, or perhaps earlier in the eastern portion of the
Longacre Prehistoric Society in East-Central Arizona                         93
region, there is evidence of major structural change in these cultural
systems. The palynological data reflecting minor but critical environ-
mental shifts are correlated with these cultural changes. Schoenwetter
(Martin et al., 1962, pp. 194—206) argues that the pollen spectra suggest a
minor shift in rainfall pattern beginning about a.p. 1000. His report hints
also that about 1350 there might have been a slight decrease in the mean
annual temperature. Subsequent work by Hevley (1964) supports this
suggestion and points to a drop in mean annual temperature of about 2°—
3°F. at about 1300. This order of change may appear to be insignificant,
but it was of sufficient magnitude to have jeopardized the subsistence
base of the local people. The small temperature drop would have meant a
shorter growing season which, in turn, made corn agriculture hazardous.
As modern    environmental    conditions   were   reached,   the uplands   were
abandoned and there was a convergence of the prehistoric populations in
the deeper valleys, where the lower elevations meant mean temperatures
2°—3°F. higher. The importance of these conditions can be seen today if
the agricultural productivity at Taylor and Shumway is compared with
the marginal agricultural activity in the uplands.
   The coincidental occurrence of changes in critical climatic variables
and changes in location and size of settlements suggests that the local
populations underwent rather striking adaptive responses. Some of the
changes are readily apparent in the data; others are more difficult to
delimit.
   Two main trends can be detected. First, the beginning of population
convergence, with small, single-residence-unit villages coalescing to form
larger communities of more than one residence grouping; second, the
appearance of Great Kivas at a few sites at about a.p. 1000—1100 docu-
ments an attempt to integrate a number of villages via a religious mech-
nism such as a ceremonial sodality. This pattern of convergence continued
and culminated in the presence of a few very large towns composed of
units which had previously formed single villages.
   This aggregation forming larger population units posed certain integra-
tive problems. A community composed of residence units with strongly
traditional kinds of internal cohesion had built-in sharp lines of cleavage.
Some of the means available for a new level of integration were religious;
some might have involved sodalities such as curing societies which cross-
cut residence units; mutual interdependence among social groups could
have been created through reciprocal exchange of goods and services.
   Carter Ranch Pueblo was investigated in order to determine more pre-
cisely the nature of the environmental and cultural changes of this region
between a.p. 1050 and 1200.


                  Description of the Carter Ranch Site
The Carter Ranch Site consists of a U-shaped block of rooms which face a
courtyard with various activity areas such as cooking and storage facilities
94                                                     Variability in a Single Occupational Unit




                                                                                                          z


                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                 ee

                                                                                      TRENCH C        s


                                                                                                      4




      OO      tinerir                    MEALING BIN                                                 3
              PosT                =                                                              I
          °                      0}      eToRaee PIT                         warere
     —   C—   vent on coorway    * © |                                                            5
     ——TI_—   SALE Door
                                a        DEFLECTOR AND ASHPIT                                    -—S
       A      WALL ABUTMENT
                                                                                                  '
                                 @       OUTDOOR COOKING PIT
              WALL    BOND                                                                       —            4
        ae                      [LLL LT? suesesTeD Masonry
     ==,      NICHE               a      BURIAL



                                         Figure 2. Carter Ranch Site.


and religious structures                  (Fig. 2). The ceremonial structures include a
large D-shaped kiva and a small rectangular kiva adjacent to a detached
unit of rooms in the northeast section of the site. A large jug-shaped
granary pit lies just east of the large kiva and contained several bushels of
Longacre Prehistoric Society in East-Central Arizona                             95
charred corn. A detached circular Great Kiva is located about 10 meters
northwest of the north wing. This kiva is approximately 18 meters in
diameter and has a long lateral entry ramp to the east.
  A mound of trash of considerable size occurred just east of the site; this
midden yielded a number of burials which clustered in three distinct
areas. The burials in the northern cluster were oriented east-west; those in
the southern area were oriented north-south; burials in the central area
were mixed with respect to orientation.
  The site as a whole is oriented toward the east. The interior features of
the kivas and most of the rooms are lined up from west to east, and the
Great Kiva is also oriented in the same direction, 7°30’ south of true east.
This angle corresponds with the angle of sunrise in this location during
the first week of March, two weeks before the vernal equinox.’ Although
we have been unable to correlate this orientation with any specific celes-
tial phenomena,      such as solstice, eclipses, or constellations, it remains
clear that the measuring devices of the site’s inhabitants allowed a high
order of accuracy in that the Great Kiva and the community itself are
aligned exactly.

SEQUENCE OF CONSTRUCTION
The first rooms to be built at the site were in the north end of the central
section: rooms 19, 3, 5, 12, 15, 18, 16, and 10. There were four later
periods of construction, and the pueblo expanded mainly to the east and
the south. The last addition was probably the detached unit in the north-
eastern part of the site.’

THE ASSEMBLAGE
Thousands of potsherds, whole vessels, whole and partial tools of stone
and bone as well as ornaments and other kinds of cultural items were
recovered. They are described in detail elsewhere (Martin et al., 1964).

SUMMARY
The arrangement of the site is that of a “front-facing” plan (Reed, 1956).
The nature of the cultural items from the site suggests that it is stylisti-
cally affiliated with what Rinaldo (1964) has called “Late Mogollon”
culture. The easterly orientation of the site is support for this interpreta-
tion.

                 Formal and Spatial Correlational Analysis
Forming the initial archeological work at the Carter Ranch Site in 1961, a
statistical analysis of a portion of the data was undertaken by L. G.
   2 This was done with the help of Dr. Frank Jettner of the Adler Planetarium in
Chicago.
   3 Details of the sequence of construction and the supporting evidence are given by
Rinaldo (Martin et al., 1964, pp. 49—51).
96                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
Freeman and James Brown         (Martin et al., 1964; Brown and Freeman,
1964), Frequencies of ceramic types and their distribution were subjected
to bivariate regression analysis using a Univac computer at the University
of Chicago.
   Frequencies of fourteen pottery types in eighteen floor and subfloor
samples from twelve features were used in the analysis; frequencies of
each of these pottery types was analyzed against each of the other thir-
teen types. The results showed a strong mutual correlation among certain
of the pottery types, a non-random distribution of these covarying ce-
ramic classes among distinct classes of rooms. There were four such clus-
ters of pottery types which varied independently of one another. Brown
and Freeman (1964) were able to discard temporal variation in pottery
styles as a possible explanation for the observed independence and for the
related differential distribution of the ceramic classes among different
room types. An alternative explanation was advanced—that of functional
independence for the ceramic classes. This functional hypothesis was sup-
ported by the strong association between the ceramic classes and room
types; the defining attributes for the room types were the presence or
absence of features such as hearths, mealing bins, etc. The findings indi-
cate that the correlated differences in features and pottery reflect differ-
ent kinds of activities localized in different kinds of rooms.
   Excavations were continued at the Carter Ranch Site during 1962 with
finer control of provenience employed. The newly gathered data on ce-
ramic types and their distributions were subjected to multiple regression
analysis using the IBM 7094 computer at the University of Chicago. In
addition, non-ceramic artifact frequencies and distributions from both the
1961 and 1962 seasons were analyzed in the same way. Multiple regres-
sion analysis (IBM Bimed 34) proved to be a more powerful analytical
technique and resulted in some refinement of the findings.
   The four classes of pottery types originally suggested were expanded to
five; these five classes are presented in Table 1. One major point of
interest concerns class number three which contains a number of smudge
types. This corresponds to a class proposed by Freeman and Brown (Mar-
tin et al., 1964, pp. 129ff.) which was noted to occur in high frequency in
a ceremonial context (that is, kiva floors and burials). This same correla-
tion was demonstrated in the second multiple regression analysis (Great
Kiva and burials) and confirmed the association of this ceramic class with
ceremonial activities.
     Artifact frequencies by location were also subjected to multiple regres-
sion analysis. A number of clusterings were defined, but there was a great
deal of overlapping between them. Generalized tools would probably
have been used in a number of tasks, and this might account for the less
tight artifact clusters when compared to ceramics.
Longacre Prehistoric Society in East-Central Arizona                      97
———
eee

 Table 1. Pottery Constellations from Floors of Rooms 18—23 and
           Great Kiva, Carter Ranch Site.
OE            ES              LE LSE        ES AE
 I. Snowflake Black-on-White, Snowflake variety.
    Alma Plain.
    McDonald Corrugated, indented.
II. Snowflake Black-on-White, Carterville variety.
    St. Johns Polychrome.
    McDonald Corrugated, plain.
III. St. Johns Black-on-Red.
      Plain Brown Corrugated.
     Brown Indented Corrugated, smudged interior.
     Plain Brown Corrugated, smudged interior.
     Patterned Corrugated.
IV. Snowflake Black-on-White, Hay Hollow variety.
    Show Low Black-on-Red.
    Brown Indented Corrugated.
 V. Plain Brown Corrugated.
    Show Low Black-on-Red.
    St. Johns Polychrome.




  There were, however, two strong associations, each between two classes
of artifacts. First, the class called “ceremonial” and the weaving imple-
ments were highly correlated. Since weaving today is a male activity
associated with the kiva among the people of the Western Pueblos, this
correlation is consistent with the ethnographic data from the area.
   Second, there was an unusually tight association between the chopping
artifacts and those used in the manufacture of arrow-shafts. Since both
tool kits suggest male activities, this association strengthens the interpre-
tation of a fairly strong division of labor and functionally specific male
and female activity areas at the site.


      The Distribution of Design Elements and Element Groups
Our pre-excavation research design involved the formulation of a series of
testable hypotheses. One of these concerned post-marital residence pat-
terns. Briefly, the argument might be stated as follows: if there were a
residence rule which led to related females living in the same locale
through several generations, then ceramic manufacture and decoration
would be learned and passed down within the context of this residence
98                                  Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
unit (assuming female potters). Non-random preference for certain de-
signs might reflect this social pattern.’
   One hundred seventy-five design elements and element groups were
defined, using more than 6,000 sherds and a number of whole vessels.’
The first analytical step involved the plotting of distribution of relative
frequencies for each design on a site plan. This suggested that there was a
non-random distribution, but the technique was crude at best. It was
decided, therefore, to refine the analysis by using multiple regression
analysis. In this operation, actual counts were used rather than relative
frequencies.
   The counts from each floor were run against every other floor sample.
Floors were correlated on the basis of the frequencies of occurrence of the
175 design elements and element groups. The same was done for some of
the fill samples. Fourteen floor proveniences were used, and the following
clusters emerged: (1) Rooms 2, 4 (both floors), 7, and 8 (both floors)
form a tight group; (2) Rooms 3, 5, 10 (both floors), 12, 15, and Kiva I
form an equally tight group. Room               11 consistently shows        associations
with the first group.
  When the location of these rooms is noted on the site plan (Fig. 2), the
significance of these clusters becomes clear. The first group consists of a
block of adjacent rooms at the south end of the pueblo. The second group
is a block of rooms with an adjacent kiva at the north end of the pueblo.
Room 11, which associates with the first group, is in the northeastern
portion of the site and is part of a group of unexcavated rooms.
  The analysis of room fill was less successful, but there were similarities
among the fills of Rooms 3, 5, 12, 15, and Kiva I. This suggests continuity
in the pattern of design similarities in the floor distributions and argues
for the consistent production of similar designs in the northern part of the
village, probably over several generations of potters. Therefore, our hy-
pothesis on the spatial distribution of design elements correlating with
residence unites received support.


                                 The Burial Analysis
Thirty-four burials were excavated at the Carter Ranch Site; most were
in the trash east of the pueblo. Grave goods were associated with male
and infant burials, while interments of females yielded few or no associ-
ated goods.
  *The first demonstration of a correlation between changes in residence and the
distribution   of design attributes   of pottery was   made   by Deetz   (1960,   1965), by
utilizing data from the historic period in the Plains. The usefulness of the distribution
of design elements and element groups as a tool for sociological interpretation in
prehistory was first realized by Cronin (Martin et al., 1962, pp. 105 ff.). It was out of
the initial research by Cronin that the hypothesis reported here developed.
   ° This was done by two Chicago Natural History Museum artists, Mr. and Mrs.
Stevens Seaberg. I am grateful to Dr. Anna O. Shepard for excellent suggestions
regarding design terminology (personal communications, 1965).
Longacre Prehistoric Society in East-Central Arizona                     99
  The burials occurred in three clusters: the north and south clusters each
had eight burials, and there were nine in the central area. Seven of the
eight burials in the northern clusters were oriented east-west; all eight in
the southern group were oriented north-south. Orientation of burials in
the central area was mixed.
   The design elements and element groups of the mortuary ceramics
were analyzed to see if the burial groups could be related to the architec-
tural units of the site. Our results showed that the northern burial area
had pottery with designs that occurred in the northern cluster of rooms at
the site, and the southern burial group was similarly linked to the south-
ern group of rooms. The central area was mixed with respect to design
distribution, although there are more affinities to the northern block of
rooms.
   There were many respects in which the central burial cluster differed
from the other two. This group was mixed in orientation and in the
distribution of design elements and element groups. Further, almost all
of the ceremonial items included as grave offerings came from this cluster
of interments. There is also a non-random distribution of ceramic vessels
in the center cluster:
                              North     Center     South
                Vessels         19        32        20
                Burials          8         9          8

   The mixed orientations of the central burials, together with the large
number of ceremonial items and vessels, suggest that the central cluster
represents high-status individuals from the residence units. It would ap-
pear that each of the residence units maintained its own burial area but
that a separate portion of the cemetery was reserved for high-status indi-
viduals.
                        Summary and Conclusions
At the Carter Ranch Pueblo, 175 design elements and element groups
were analyzed in terms of their distribution in rooms, kivas, burials, and
trash. The designs clustered in association with two major architectural
units at the site. Kivas, discrete burial areas, and trash deposits were also
associated with the architectural units. On the assumption that the fe-
males were the potters, this patterned distribution argues for post-marital
residence in the vicinity of the wife’s female relatives, with ceramic deco-
ration learned and passed down within the residence unit. Time depth is
demonstrated by the association of designs on pottery in the architectural
units and associated trash in deposits of over one meter deep.
   The localization of females in architectural units at the site over a
period of several generations suggests in turn that non-portable objects,
such as rooms    and access   to a specific mortuary   area, were   inherited
within the residence units and that this inheritance was probably in the
100                                    Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
female line. The corporate nature of the residence unit is also suggested
by the maintenance of a kiva and by associated mortuary practices. A
large bell-shaped storage pit was excavated in association with one of the
kivas; this large storage facility contained the charred remains of several
bushels of corn. This adds support to the inference regarding the corpor-
ate nature of the residence units themselves, as it appears to have been a
jointly used storage area which must have been maintained by a social
unit larger than a single family.
   Although it has not been possible to demonstrate the actual lineality of
the residence units, it seems       likely that they were      localized matrilineal
descent groups.’ The inferred corporate nature of the units and the sug-
gested pattern of matrilineal inheritance support this suggestion. In addi-
tion, the maintenance of a discrete cemetery with design elements and
element groups clustering in terms of residence units argues for a lineage
organization and one which reckoned descent in the female line.
   Social groups smaller than the residence unit have not been archeolog-
ically determined. Arguing from the ethnographic present, one might
expect a household to be present, essentially a familial social unit. Among
the Hopi and Zuni, households are localized in adjoining rooms and form
the basic local unit among the Western Pueblos (Eggan, 1950, pp. 29—31,
297—99; Beaglehole, 1937, pp. 5—6; Titiev, 1944, pp. 7-14; Roberts, 1956,
p- 2). There is today a great deal of variation in the number of individuals
who compose a household and variability in the number of rooms consti-
tuting the spatial unit (cf. Roberts, 1956). The household today isa basic
economic unit and is the one which is the land-holding unit.
ently multi-functional, but the strong correlations among the ceramic
classes with room types suggest that each room had a primary or more
   The households at Carter Ranch Site probably consisted of groups of
adjoining rooms which formed residence areas. The rooms were appar-
usual function. Isolation of specific functions is admittedly difficult, but
the ceramic classes themselves offer some clues. The pottery types associ-
ated with ritual units such as the kivas are found in relatively low fre-
quencies on habitation room floors. This indicates that some ritual was
conducted in some houses, although on a small scale. The same pattern
exists among the present day Western Pueblo peoples (Eggan, 1950, pp.
298—99).
   Specific groupings of pottery types may indicate certain generalized
room functions. Painted pottery never shows signs of having been used
for cooking (absence of sooted exteriors), whereas the smaller brown,

   * Although I refer to these residence units as “localized matrilineal descent groups”
in earlier publications (Longacre, 1963, 1964), I have been able to refine my thoughts
regarding the difficulty if not the impossibility of getting at descent using archeolog-
ical data. This refinement is largely due to discussions with David Schneider, Univer-
sity of Chicago; F. K. Lehman, University of Illinois; and James N. Hill, University of
California, Los Angeles. Of equal importance have been my students, all of whom are
excellent teachers and to whom I extend my gratitude.
Longacre Prehistoric Society in East-Central Arizona              101
textured jars often show such evidence. Brown and Freeman (1964) have
noted a high frequency of such brown pottery at the site in rooms with
circular floor pits, suggesting that these rooms might have had cooking as
their primary function. They were probably also used for storage (many
had storage pits), general work (such as manufacture of household ar-
ticles),and other tasks as well.
  Painted ceramics occur as bowls, pitchers, and jars. Since they appar-
ently did not serve as cooking vessels, they were probably used in the
preparation of food for cooking and in the serving of food. As Brown and
Freeman (1964) point out, a grouping of painted pottery types consisting
principally of pitchers and bowls appears to be associated with rooms
with square fire pits and mealing bins. This suggests a function of food
preparation for rooms with these features. The smaller, featureless rooms
were probably used for storage.
   The pattern, then, appears to be one of multi-functional uses for each
room but with a more common set of activities for each room type. This is
precisely the pattern of the modern Western Pueblos (Roberts, 1956).
The multi-functional nature of the rooms makes the delimitation of
households at Carter Ranch very difficult. Chang (1958, p. 302) has
suggested that the fireplace (kitchen) is the most obvious index of a
household. His suggestion is, however, based on ethnographic data from
tropical or semi-tropical environments. In the more temperate climates,
heating fires would also be necessary. It is, therefore, not surprising to
find fire pits in so many of the rooms at the Carter Ranch Site. Some of
these fires might well have served also for lighting and food preservation.
   The Carter Ranch Site stands as a turning point in the prehistory of this
particular region of the Southwest. The occupation of the site by two
residence units ushers in an era of population aggregation in the area.
Prior to this—over a period of more than 500 years—villages consisted
of small groups of people approximating the size of one of the residence
units of the Carter Ranch Site. This striking shift in the structure of
population culminates     in a pattern of fewer but considerably larger
towns during the fourteenth century.
   The process of aggregation coincides with the onset of a period of
environmental stress and would seem to be an adaptive response on the
part of these extinct societies. The initial set of adaptive changes docu-
mented at the Carter Ranch Site are a prelude to the even greater
changes that appear in the region by 1300 (cf. Hill, 1966). Many of the
adaptive shifts that have been noted appear to be in the direction of a
form of cultural system exemplified by the modern Western Pueblos (cf.
Longacre, 1964).
  The inferences drawn in this report were largely justified by reference
to a set of propositions drawn within a particular theoretical context
(general systems theory) which served to structure the field research (cf.
L. R. Binford, 1965). The implications of our conclusions have not been
102                                  Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
stressed here, since they are made explicit elsewhere (Longacre, 1963,
1964, 1966). The conclusions offered here are tentative and only further
testing and research can strengthen, modify, or replace them.


                                   References
BEAGLEHOLE, Ernest. 1937. Notes on Hopi economic life. Yale University
   Publications in Anthropology, no. 15. New Haven: Yale University Press.
BinFrorD, Lewis R. 1962. Archaeology as anthropology. American Antiquity,
  28: 217-25.
——.   1965.     Archaeological   systematics and the study of culture   process.
  American Antiquity, 31: 203—210.
Brown, James A., and Leste G. Freeman, Jr. 1964.         A UNIVAC analysis of
  sherd frequencies from the Carter Ranch Pueblo, eastern Arizona. American
  Antiquity, 30(2): 162—67.
Cuanc, Kwano-cuin. 1958. Study of Neolithic social groupings: examples
  from the New World. American Anthropologist, 60(2) : 298—334.
DeEtz, James D. F. 1960. An archaeological approach to kinship change in
  eighteenth century Arikara culture. Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University.
     . 1965. The dynamics of stylistic change in Arikara ceramics. Illinois
  Studies in Anthropology, no. 4. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Eccan, FRED. 1950. Social organization of the western pueblos. Chicago: Uni-
   versity of Chicago Press.
HeEviy, Ricnarp H. 1964. Pollen analysis of Quaternary archeological and
  lacustrine sediments from the Colorado Plateau. Unpublished Ph.D. disserta-
  tion, University of Arizona.
Kroeser, A. L. 1917. Zuni kin and clan. Anthropological Papers, American
  Museum of Natural History, Vol. 18, Part 2.
Loncacre, WiLtiAM A. 1963. Archaeology as anthropology: a case study.
  Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.
——. 1964. Archaeology as anthropology: a case study. Science, 144 (3625):
  1454—55.                                 s
     . 1966. Changing patterns of social integration: a prehistoric example
  from the American Southwest. American Anthropologist, 68(1): pp. 94—
  102.
Markt, P. S., J. B. Rivatpo, W. A. Loncacre, C. Cronin, L. G. FREEMAN,
  and J. SCHOENWETTER. 1962. Chapters in the Prehistory of eastern Arizona,
  I. Fieldiana: Anthropology, vol. 53.
Marti,   P. S., J. B. Rivatpo, W. A. Loncacre, L. G. FREEMAN, J. A. Brown,
  R. H. Heviy, and M. E. Coorry. 1964. Chapters in the prehistory of eastern
  Arizona, II. Fieldiana: Anthropology, vol. 55.
REED, Erix K. 1956. Types of village-plan layouts in the Southwest. In G. R.
  Willey (Ed.), Prehistoric settlement patterns in the New World, Viking Fund
  Publications in Anthropology, no. 23. New York: Wenner-Gren Foundation
  for Anthropological Research.
RINALDO, JOHN B. 1964. Notes on the origins of historic Zufi culture. Kiva,
  29(4): 86—98.
Roserts, J. H. 1956. Zuni daily life. Laboratory of Anthropology, Notebook,
   no. 3. Lincoln: University of Nebraska.
Tittev, Miscua, 1944. Old Oraibi, a study of the Hopi Indians of Third Mesa.
   Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology,
   no. 22, Cambridge.
SEYEY                                                            JAMES     N. HILL
CR               ete ere ee              ee      Pe              | yt           ee




                                                    Broken K Pueblo:
                             Patterns of Form and Function




As the other papers in this volume indicate, there is an increasing ten-
dency among archeologists to be concerned with making inferences about
prehistoric human behavior. In addition to the useful and time-honored
concerns with developing typologies and studying the spatial and tem-
poral distributions of artifacts, there is an increasing emphasis on trying
to find out how prehistoric peoples actually lived. While this concern is
by no means new, it is evident that our capabilities of implementing it are
being greatly enhanced by recent theoretical, methodological, and techni-
cal developments. Most of the contributions along this line have involved
examinations    of settlement    pattern,   ceremonial   organization,   mortuary
practices, craft specialization and social status (Sears, 1961). Within the
last half-dozen years or so, it has even been possible to describe prehis-
toric residence patterns (Deetz, 1960, 1965; Longacre, 1963, 1964; Hill,
1965, 1966; Martin, Longacre, and Hill, 1967). In short, we are beginning
to develop the means for gaining knowledge of many aspects of prehis-
toric cultural systems that were formerly considered beyond the limita-
tions of our data and competence.
   This paper attempts to describe a limited aspect of a cultural system
that existed in eastern Arizona during the thirteenth century a.p." My
  1 The data for this paper were derived from two summers of excavation (1962—63 )
at Broken K Pueblo, in east-central Arizona. Excavation and analysis were sponsored
by the Chicago Natural History Museum (now F ield Museum of Natural History),
and supported by the National Science Foundation (Grants G16006 and G22028).
Computer research was supported by the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropologi-

                                        103
104                                      Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
primary concern is threefold: (1) to describe the locational patterning of
various kinds of cultural features at the site, (2) to offer explanations of
the demonstrated patterning in terms of past behavior, and (3) to test the
accuracy of these explanatory propositions. This is intended as a case
study in the demonstration             of “activity-areas”      or “activity-structure”
within prehistoric communities.
  This paper also serves as an example of a general methodological ap-
proach that should prove useful in nearly all archeological studies, regard-
less of the kinds of archeological remains being considered (cf. L. R. Bin-
ford, 1957). I have attempted to illustrate          a means by which it is possible
to go beyond merely making inferences about past behavior; we can also
test these inferences, and gain confidence (or lose confidence) in their
validity. This can be done, even in those cases in which direct ethno-
graphic evidence is not available.
  The focus of the analysis is Broken K Pueblo, located eleven miles east
of Snowflake, Arizona (excavated by the Chicago Natural History Mu-
seum, with National Science Foundation support; cf. Martin, Longacre,
and Hill, 1967). The site is a 95-room,’ single-storied, surface masonry
pueblo, dating from about a.p. 1150 to 1280 (Fig. 1). It is the largest and
latest site in the Hay Hollow Valley, and it is located in a savanna-wood-
land vegetation zone. The climate is semi-arid today, and the terrain has
been heavily dissected by the prevailing pattern of torrential summer
thundershowers.
   Since the site was too large to excavate completely, it was necessary to
sample it. After extensive wall-trenching had revealed the locations of
nearly all of the rooms at the site, it was decided that a system of simple
random sampling would be employed; this provided a basis for making
probability statements, and permitted an objective evaluation of the rep-
resentativeness of the sample. Forty-six rooms were excavated in the ini-
tial sample, and eight additional rooms were excavated as the importance
of doing so became apparent. All unexcavated rooms are shown in Figure
1 as shaded areas. The plaza was scraped with a tractor blade to reveal
the major features, and several trenches were dug in that area.

cal Research   (Grant   1524).   The   project was   directed   by Paul   S. Martin,   Chief
Curator of Anthropology at the Museum. Dr. Martin and Dr. John B. Rinaldo (then
of the Museum) are responsible for stimulating the research; I have also received help
and encouragement from Lewis R. Binford (University of California, Los Angeles),
William A. Longacre (University of Arizona) and John M. Fritz (University of
Chicago). The pollen analyses were performed by Richard H. Hevly (Northern
Arizona University, Flagstaff). I thank all of these individuals and institutions, as well
as Mr. and Mrs. James Carter, who graciously permitted us to excavate on their
property.
   *’The room-count is complicated by the fact that the initial wall-trenching (to
discover all of the rooms in the site prior to sampling) failed to locate all of the rooms
accurately, Rooms 31 and 33 should be considered a single room, as should Rooms 35
and 37 (cf. Fig. 1). Room 44 was divided into two rooms            (Rooms 44a and 44b);
Room 92 (located in the west wing) is numerically out of place because it was not
discovered until the simple random sample had already been chosen, thus “freezing”
the room numbers.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                              105




      ts
          OuTLien




                                                              =
                                                                        a 3OUTLIER




      Ashpit



                    ia 3                       :S
                                                                            2OUTLIER


                     ei £3            le
               =    =s       gé            ~   =A~}
               H2            33
                             =
                                               :       Ss
                                                       or
         i}                  sit.                     os
                                                       a =6
Pst
      i555
               ss
                               fs
                             2522 3
                                                       Fy          ss
                                                                   Pe
 eo

3.1
3                        i    B..
                              iB                                   re
                                                                  oss


      Figure 1. Plan of Broken K Pueblo. Shaded rooms were not excavated.
106                                      Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
  All levels containing       cultural    material   (except in the plaza)       were
screened with a 1/4-in. screen in an attempt to ensure comparability of
samples. Materials found directly on the floors of the rooms were kept
separate from those in the fill levels, since in isolating the functions of the
various rooms the materials lying directly on the floors are clearly most
informative.
  Much of the data was quantified and manipulated statistically; both the
Chi-square test of association (Cochran, 1952; Siegel, 1956; Spaulding,
1953) and the Fisher Exact Test (Fisher, 1938) were extensively em-
ployed in demonstrating formal variability among the rooms, and in dem-
onstrating associations among attributes of rooms and other categories of
cultural remains. Factor analysis (Fruchter, 1954) was employed in dis-
covering non-random clusters of pottery-types.’ The IBM 7094 computer
at the University of Chicago was used to perform this multivariate analysis.
  A final item of concern, and a crucial one, involves an evaluation of the
degree to which the activities or functions carried out in the rooms at
Broken K Pueblo can be expected to have either remained stable or
changed during the period the site was occupied. The site was not con-
structed at a single point in time. Radiocarbon dating, as well as ceramic
cross-dating, indicate that the occupation lasted for about 130 years.*
Architectural and stratigraphic evidence show that in general the south-
em portion of the site was constructed slightly earlier than the northern
portion. There could, of course, have been changes in the kinds of activi-
ties performed at the site during this time period, and changes in the
kinds of locations in which they were carried out. If so, we should expect
this analysis of activity-structure to reveal evidence of two different activ-
ity-systems, separated somewhat in time—or perhaps a gradual change in
the activity-system through time.
   There is some independent evidence, however, which indicates that we
can expect no such change to be discovered. The basis for this expectation
lies in the fact that both architectural and stratigraphic data provide
evidence that people were living in the pueblo throughout its entire ex-
tent prior to abandonment. In the first place, there was ample evidence of
remodeling in the southern portion of the site, both in terms of construc-
ting new floors and in terms of changes and additions to the walls of
rooms. These architectural additions exhibit a style of masonry similar to

  * Factor analysis is a multivariate statistical technique useful in isolating non-
random clusters of materials that “behave” together, or occur together. The results of
a factor analysis of pottery-types are reported in this paper. This analysis yielded
seven clusters of pottery-types, and each cluster is a “factor.”
   *Pollen data were also found useful in intra-site dating. A pollen chronology for the
area   (Schoenwetter,   1962; Hevly, 1964) showed a gradual temporal change in the
relative proportions of pollen-types, characterized by decreasing percentages of arbo-
real pollen and increasing percentages of non-arboreal pollen during the period of
occupation of the site. Most of the “early” rooms at the site (based on architectural
and stratigraphic evidence) had significantly more arboreal pollen (esp. pine) than
did the “late” rooms; the late rooms contained more non-arboreal pollen (cf. Hill and
Hevly, 1968).
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                                 107
that used in the northern portion of the site. And secondly, many of the
rooms in the southern portion had not had trash dumped into them, as
might be expected if that area had been abandoned before the northern
half was occupied (Hill, 1965). We may thus infer that the entire site was
occupied contemporaneously, at least during a portion of its existence. It
must be pointed out, however, that even if this were not the case, the
temporal disparity between the two portions of the site would not mean
that there had necessarily been any changes in the kinds of activities
carried on, or in their spatial structure.
  More detailed discussions of the methodological aspects of the research
presented in this paper are given elsewhere (Hill, 1965, 1966; Martin,
Longacre, and Hill, 1967).

                                Variability in Rooms
During the excavation of the site it was noticed that there were differ-
ences in the formal characteristics of the rooms. In order to explain this
formal variability (in a behavioral or functional sense), it was first neces-
sary to define the differences among the rooms in a clear and rigorous
fashion. Traditionally, variability among pueblo rooms has been rather
loosely described, and the attributes that are chosen for use in measuring
variability are often not made explicit; it is frequently difficult to specify
what really distinguishes different kinds of rooms. I have attempted here
to describe such differences as rigorously as possible.
   Four of the rooms at the site were clearly different from all other rooms
and could be distinguished without an involved or complicated analysis.
These will be called “special” rooms; Southwestern archeologists would
recognize them as kivas (that is, similar to present-day Pueblo ceremonial
rooms). They were immediately separated from the analysis of room
variability for two reasons: (1) they contained a number of peculiar
features not common to the other rooms, including wall niches, benches,
and a peculiarly designed firepit-ventilator combination, and (2) there
were only four of them, which would have made a statistical description
of them difficult to accomplish.’ Two of them were subterranean (the
one in the northwest comer of the plaza and the one beneath Room 41)
with inferred roof entrances. The other two were surface rooms with slab-
lined floors (Rooms 6 and 29). Thus, while there may have been two
types of these special rooms, they did not resemble any of the other rooms
at the site.
   In dealing with the formal variability among other rooms, however,
  5 The four excavated special rooms include surface Rooms 6 and 29, the subter-
ranean room stratigraphically underlying Room 41, and the subterranean room in the
northwest corner of the plaza (Fig. 1). Two additional special rooms were discovered,
but they could only be partially excavated (the ones beneath Rooms 22 and 39). A
possible seventh special room in the southwest corner of the plaza was excavated
(contrary   to map   designation),   but it was   not actually a room;   it was a large,
rectangular prehistoric excavation that may have been intended for use as a special
room but had been abandoned prior to completion.
108                             Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
more difficulty was encountered; their similarities and differences were
by no means clear. Several classes of attributes were selected as likely
measures of these differences:
                   1, Size (floor-area)
                   2. Firepits (presence or absence)
                   3, Mealing bins (presence or absence)
                   4, Ventilators (presence or absence)
                   5. Doorways (presence or absence )
                   6. Height of door sill
                   7. Masonry style
  Size was   recognized as important while the excavation was         still in
progress; some rooms were much larger than others. This size differential
indicated that there were probably at least two major kinds of rooms at
the site, in addition to the special rooms. In order to check the validity of
this bimodal distribution, the floor-area of each excavated room was cal-
culated (in square meters), and the rooms were graphed on an interval
scale of size. The distribution proved to be non-random. There was no
continuum in size from small to large; instead there were two clear groups
of rooms, small and large, with few in between. Approximately half of the
rooms were in the small size-mode, containing less than 6.5 square meters
of floor-area. They ranged in size from 2.5 to 6.5 square meters, with an
average of 5.0 square meters. Most of the large rooms, on the other hand,
ranged from 6.6 to 16.0 square meters, with an average of 9.7 square
meters. The special rooms also fell within this mode. A similar graphic
analysis including the unexcavated rooms at the site yielded almost iden-
tical results; the dividing point between the two modes was shifted to 7.0
square meters. It was possible to do this because nearly all of the rooms
had been located and mapped prior to excavation.
   There was some indication, however, that this size distribution might
actually be considered trimodal. Seven of the rooms (Rooms ], 10, 26, 47,
64, 72, and 91) were larger than most of the rooms in the large size-mode,
ranging from 16.0 to 33.5 square meters in area. Unfortunately, there
were so few of them that a definite third mode could not be demon-
strated. Aside from their large size, they were indistinguishable from the
other rooms in the large-size mode, and I have here considered them as
belonging to the large-room category. Two of them (Rooms 1 and 64)
were excavated in the initial sample. and two more (Rooms 72 and 92)
were excavated later in order to obtain a larger sample of these rooms.
  Having demonstrated the clustered or non-continuous nature of varia-
bility in size, it was desirable to find out whether or not any of the other
attributes (above) were associated with one or another of the recognized
size classes. An examination of the distribution of sandstone, slab-lined
firepits revealed that they were usually found in the large-room category.
In fact, out of a total of 23 such firepits, only one of them occurred in a
small-size room.    This observation was    tested by Chi-square,   with the
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                      109
result that there is less than one chance in a thousand that the association
is not significant (.001 level).
   Mealing bins were also found to be associated with the large-room
category. Thirteen out of fifteen of these bins occurred in large rooms,
and the association was significant at the .05 level (probability of .95).
Some large rooms had two or more mealing bins side by side. A similar
association was discovered with respect to ventilators; ten of the eleven
ventilators were associated with large rooms         (.02 level). Further, the
ventilators, firepits and mealing bins were      associated with one       another
(in large rooms),with a 95 per cent chance of the association being valid.
  The other three attributes (doorways, height of door sill, and masonry
style) were not found associated with either of the room-size modes; they
appeared to vary randomly with respect to large and small rooms. This
suggests, of course, that variability in the locations of these particular
attributes had not been determined by the same behavioral determin-
ancies that were responsible for the tight clustering among the first four
attributes.
   The results of the analysis are clear, however. There were, in addition
to the four special rooms, two other kinds of rooms—large rooms contain-
ing firepits, mealing bins, and ventilators, and small rooms that did not
have such features. While some of the large rooms were extra large, they
were not associated with any peculiar structural features.
  All rooms did not fall neatly into one category or another, however.
There were six cases in which classification was difficult (Rooms 9, 27, 40,
48, 60, and 74; Fig. 1). These rooms exhibited some of the attributes of
both large and small rooms, and they may actually represent functional
overlap. For purposes of analysis, they were placed in the category to
which they seemed most similar; Rooms 40 and 48 were considered to be
in the large-room category, while Rooms 9, 27, 60, and 74 were included
in the small-room category.
   The schematic map (Fig. 2) shows the spatial distributions of these
formally different kinds of rooms. Of all of the rooms excavated, 26 were
large rooms, 24 were small rooms, and 4 were special rooms (Table 1).
Representative photographs of these room-classes are presented in Fig-
ures 3, 4, and 5.

                    Table 1. Room   Numbers      by Category
                                (See Figure 1)


                Large                      Small                 Special
        1; 9, 4—5,. 7) 11, 2;       8, 9, 19, 22, 23, 25,        6, 29,
        21, 24, 30, 31-33,          27, 28, 34, 36, 39,          41
        35—37, 40, 41, 43,          44a, 44b, 49, 51, 54,        Plaza
        48, 53, 62, 64, 69,         60, 61, 65, 67, 68,
        73, 78, 79, 80, 82,         74, Outlier 1 (a, b)
        92, Outlier 2
110                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit




                      77/7 ee      YL A                                a
                                 U1    1/14
                                         ee        oe V//fA          =”




      Figure2.Distribution of room-categories. Black areas represent “large”
              rooms; hatched areas represent “small” rooms; cross-hatched
              areas represent “special” rooms. Blank areas are unexcavated.



                          Explanations of Variability
It is quite clear that variability among rooms at the site must have re-
sulted from the fact that they were designed and built for different pur-
poses, to serve as the loci for different kinds of activities.
   The large rooms, for example, may have been built because they were
needed to accommodate larger groups of people than the small rooms
could accommodate. These may have been the rooms in which families or
households carried on most of their indoor activities, such as eating, work-
 ing, and sleeping. The need for such large areas may also have resulted
 from the fact that certain kinds of activities required large areas for their
 performance, or it may be that several different activities were performed
 in them simultaneously. It may simply be that their large size was deter-
 mined by the fact that they were to be used more frequently than the
 other rooms and it was convenient to have ample space in which to move
 about.
      The size of the small rooms, on the other hand, was certainly deter-
 mined by the fact that they were used in activities not requiring the
 congregation of large groups of people or a great deal of space, and they
 may also have been used infrequently. They would appear to have been
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                       111




                                       Se OS
                                           A el                 Sa
  Figure 3. A typical “large” room. Note slab-lined firepit and mealing bin
            with metate.




                      Figure 4.A typical “small” room.
112                                   Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
most suitable for storage purposes—and perhaps other small-scale activ-
ities on occasion.
  The presence of firepits in the large rooms permits the inference that
the activities performed in them required heat, light, or both. It is logical
that cooking may have been involved, since these firepits are the only
ones that could reasonably have been used in routine cooking activities.’
Heat and light were not of importance to the activities carried out in the
small rooms.
  The presence of mealing bins in the large rooms must certainly indicate
that corn or other food materials were ground in such rooms. It would
thus appear that food preparation (or some of it) was being done in the
large rooms, and this lends support to the inference that the firepits were
used in cooking. There is no indication that such activities were carried
out in the small rooms.
   The presence of ventilators in many of the large rooms indicates that
the activities involved in these rooms        required fresh air or draft. If, as
suggested, these rooms were frequented by relatively large numbers of
people, fresh air might have been needed for comfort. The draft provided
by the ventilators may have served to facilitate burning in the firepits.
The activities carried out in the small rooms obviously did not require
ventilation.
   Although the special rooms (or kivas) were generally about the same
size as those in the large-room category, their peculiar internal structural
features leave no doubt that the activities performed in them were in
some sense special. From their large size, it can be inferred that they were
used by relatively large groups of people (or in several activities); the
firepits suggest a need for heat and light; the ventilators indicate a need
for fresh air or draft. The peculiar construction of these features, how-
ever, suggests that they were not used in the same way as those in any of
the other rooms; and such features as wall niches, benches, and slab-lined
floors support this idea.
   In summary, it may be inferred that the large rooms were occupied by
relatively large groups of people and that there might have been several
different kinds of activities performed in them simultaneously; in any
event, the activities evidently required more space than those carried out
in the small rooms. Heat and/or light were also needed in these rooms, as
well as fresh air and facilities for grinding food materials. All of these
features would be expected to occur in living rooms, or the rooms in
which most household activities were performed. The small rooms, on the
other hand, were evidently not used for these activities but were used
instead for activities that were suitably carried out in small, dark, un-

   ° There were eight large pit-ovens in the plaza, but these ovens would have been
unsuitable for routine cooking; they were very deep (sometimes more than a meter
deep), without draft, and contained    large quantities of dense, fireburned   volcanic
rock. They were almost certainly used in roasting large game animals.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function   113
114                              Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
heated, and unventilated areas—a storage function seems most likely. The
special rooms served an entirely different purpose, perhaps ceremonial.
   Additional inferences about the three different kinds of rooms at
Broken K Pueblo can also be made on the basis of the archeological data.
The large and small rooms, for example, occur in an approximate ratio of
50:50, and they almost appear to occur in pairs throughout the site. It is
thus logical to infer that each household (or social unit of some kind)
occupied at least one pair of these rooms, and performed two different
sets of activities in them. Further, each such social unit appears to have
been a self-contained unit, each of which was carrying on the same gen-
eral sets of activities.
   The special rooms are also of interest here. Since only six of them were
discovered in the random sample (four excavated), it can be predicted
that not more than eight or nine of them existed at the site. Regardless of
whether or not they were all used simultaneously, it is reasonable to infer
that several of the units discussed above were participating in the activi-
ties performed in them. This ratio of special rooms to other kinds of
rooms clearly indicates the possibility of some form of institutional link-
ages among the basic social segments of the population of Broken K.


                      Analogies to    Modern Pueblos
At this point, it is useful to examine ethnographic data to find out
whether or not the modern western Pueblo villages have analogous kinds
of rooms. The attributes of the modern rooms that are relevant to such
analogies are, of course, the same kinds of attributes that were found
useful in measuring variability among the prehistoric rooms—namely,
room-size and the presence or absence of firepits, mealing bins, and venti-
lators. If the functions of the modem rooms are in fact similar to the
functions ot the prehistoric rooms, they ought to have some of the same
kinds of attributes.
  This in fact proved to be the case; both the Hopi and Zufi have large
rooms, small rooms and special rooms (kivas) (Mindeleff, 1891, pp. 65,
102; Stevenson,   1904; Forde, 1931; E. Beaglehole, 1937; Titiev, 1944, p.
197). The large rooms contain a firepit (stove), mealing facilities, and
ventilators or windows (Mindeleff, 1891, and personal observation). It is
true, of course, that these features do not always look similar to their
supposed prehistoric analogues, but they are certainly functionally sim-
ilar.
   The small rooms in the western Pueblo villages usually do not contain
such features. Some of them do, however, have small holes excavated into
their floors, and some contain bins or boxes of various sorts (Stevenson,
1904, pp. 292-93, 352; E. Beaglehole, 1937, pp. 43-45; Forde, 1931, pp:
393—94). I have myself observed such boxes in some of the smaller Hopi
rooms, and there are occasionally mealing facilities in them as well. At
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                   115
Zufi, there are sometimes even firepits in these rooms, although they are
a different style from those in the large rooms (Stevenson, 1904, pp:
292—93, 352). Nonetheless, the small rooms in western Pueblo villages
contain fewer internal structural features than do the large rooms; they
usually lack firepits and mealing bins, and they are usually poorly venti-
lated (Mindeleff, 1891; Donaldson,     1893). As I recall, they are less well
lighted than the large rooms.
  The third major type of pueblo room, the kiva, also appears in many
ways similar to its suspected analogue at Broken K Pueblo. It is well
known that among the Hopi, at least, these rooms contain such features as
wall niches, a bench     or platform   along one   side, and a host of other
peculiarities including the construction     of the firepits and ventilators
(Mindeleff,   1891;   Donaldson,   1893, p. 55; Parsons,   1936, pp. 719-22;
Titiev, personal communication).       Although    the Zufii do not, strictly
speaking, have “kivas,” they do have large living rooms that also serve as
ceremonial rooms. In addition to being distinguished by their large size,
they contain a special type of fireplace and a trap-door entrance (Min-
deleff, 1891, p. 112).
  There is one additional kind of room found in present-day pueblos that
should be mentioned here. There are among the Hopi a few rooms in
each village called “clanhouses.” These rooms are distinguished primarily
by being larger than other kinds of rooms (Eggan, 1950, pp. 62, 89-90,
178; Parsons, 1936, p. xxxii). Although the functions of these rooms will
be considered later, it is important to note the possibility that they are
analogous to the seven extra large rooms at Broken K Pueblo.
   The evidence thus far indicates that the variations in rooms at Broken
K are analogous to the variations in rooms found in modern pueblos—
large rooms with firepits and mealing bins (including extra-large rooms),
small rooms lacking certain features, and special rooms containing a set of
peculiar features of their own. The fact that these detailed analogies can
be established suggests that the analogous rooms had similar functions.
Had there been a great deal of functional change between a.v. 1300 and
the historic present, we would expect to find that there had also been
changes in the kinds of rooms being utilized in performing the functions.
The similarities between the suspected analogues are so great that they
almost certainly cannot be coincidental.
   There is an additional analogue that would appear to clinch the case. In
addition to the fact that the formal properties of the prehistoric and
historic rooms are similar, the relative proportions of the room-types are
similar. The reader will recall that at Broken K Pueblo the ratio of large
rooms to small rooms was almost 50:50, and there were very few special
rooms or extra-large rooms. These proportions are evidently about the
same in the modern Pueblo villages. While there are great numbers of
large and small rooms, with a ratio close to 50:50, there are very few kivas
or clanhouses (Mindeleff, 1891; Eggan, 1950; Parsons, 1936; and personal
116                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
observation). With regard to kivas, Steward (1937, pp. 96-99) has ob-
served that there is now only about one kiva for every hundred rooms in
the pueblos; at Broken K the ratio was more like 1:20 (which corresponds
nicely with Steward’s Pueblo III ratio, 1:18). The general similarities in
room-type ratios between Broken K Pueblo and the historic pueblos are
again, too close to be coincidental. Further, the large and small rooms in
the historic pueblos generally occur in pairs, just as appears to be the case
at Broken K. If large-scale functional changes had occurred, the probabil-
ity is very great that neither the ratios among room-types nor the paired
nature of their distribution would have remained so nearly the same.
   Given all of these analogies, it seems reasonable to state the proposition
that the variability in rooms at the site has the same behavioral context as
does the variability in modern pueblo rooms; the respective room-types
are functional equivalents. It would not, however, be profitable to ter-
minate the analysis at this point, as is so often done; the proposition must
first be tested.

                           Testing the Proposition
The testing of this proposition requires additional data, and these data
must be independent of those categories of data that have been used thus
far in measuring formal variability among rooms. It would be neither
logical nor useful to define rooms on the basis of size and internal fea-
tures, and then use this same data in demonstrating that they were func-
tionally similar to modern Hopi or Zufi rooms; such a procedure would
amount to testing the proposition with the same data used in generating
it.
      The procedure used here involved, first of all, an examination   of the
ethnographic literature to find out what kinds of activities are carried out
in the different kinds of present-day pueblo rooms,      and what kinds of
artifacts and other materials might be expected to occur in the respective
room-types as a result of these activities; and secondly, an examination of
the archeological evidence to find out whether or not similar artifact
clusters occurred in the supposedly analogous rooms at Broken K. If the
proposition of functional equivalence is correct, the large, small, and
special rooms at the site should contain similar cultural materials to the
small, large, and special rooms in the modern pueblos (or materials useful
in the same kinds of functions ). Such a finding would, in fact, confirm the
proposition.

ETHNOGRAPHIC       DATA

The three major kinds of rooms found in modern Pueblo villages are
habitation rooms (or living rooms), storage rooms, and ceremonial rooms.
Each household or lineage segment occupies a group of rooms including
at least one habitation room and one or more storage rooms (Mindeleff,
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                      117
1891, pp. 65, 102; E. Beaglehole,    1937, p. 5; Titiev, 1944, p. 197). The
habitation room corresponds to the large-room category mentioned
above; in addition to being the largest, it is also the nucleus of the house-
hold (P. Beaglehole, 1935, p. 42). It is, in fact, the “general living room,
where the entire household works, eats and sleeps, and where guests are
entertained” (Stevenson, 1904, pp. 292—93). There is every indication
that this room serves as the center of almost all the indoor activities that
are of importance in maintaining a household, including a wide variety of
crafts or manufacturing activities (although the specific kinds of manu-
facturing activities are apparently not reported).
   One of the activities performed in these rooms is that of processing or
preparing food prior to cooking. The mealing bin, in conjunction with the
metate and mano, is used by the women for grinding corn, beans, squash,
and other plant materials (including seeds) into flour for use in the diet
(Mindeleff, 1891, pp. 211-12). There are often two or three metates in
each habitation room, and they may vary in the coarseness of their grind-
ing surfaces, depending on the stages of grinding for which they are used
(Mindeleff, 1891, p. 212). In addition to preparing domestic crops for
consumption, the Hopi and Zuni are known to process the seeds, stems,
flowers, and leaves of a variety of wild plants (Stevenson, 1909; Whiting,
1939). It also seems likely that the terminal phases of the butchering
process are carried out in these rooms.
   Cooking is also done in the habitation rooms; it is done on the fire-
places, and the task is usually performed by women (Eggan, personal
communication).Although the Hopi occasionally cook in other kinds of
rooms, and the Zufi in special cooking rooms, most of it is done in
habitation rooms (Cushing, 1920, pp. 295-96; Eggan, personal com-
munication).The containers used in cooking are now nearly identical to
our modern commercial hardware, but not many years ago the western
Pueblos were using simple, undecorated ceramic vessels for this purpose
(Donaldson, 1893, p. 127; Parsons, 1936, p. 1190).
   There is also good evidence that the moder Pueblo peoples take their
meals in the habitation rooms (Stevenson, 1904, pp. 292-93). Food is
frequently served in bowls (Cushing, 1920, pp. 296, 313; Brainard, 1935,
p. 267; E. Beaglehole, 1937, pp. 57—65; Roberts, 1956, p. 15), and these
bowls often have smudged or darkened interiors (Alfonso Ortiz, San Juan
Pueblo, personal communication ).
   Another function of these rooms is the storage and use of water. Water
is, of course, important in preparing and cooking food, and it is necessary
to have a supply for drinking as well. Both the Hopi and Zuni use large
decorated jars or “ollas” in the transportation and storage of water
(Brainard, 1935, p. 72; Parsons, 1936, p. 614; E. Beaglehole, 1937, pp. 57,
72), and these are generally kept in the habitation rooms        ( Mindeleff,
1891, pp. 109-110).
  The habitation rooms must certainly have a number of other functions,
118                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
but evidence of them is not apparent in the literature. The functions of
storage rooms are reported in somewhat more detail. The storage rooms
are small, and their primary function is the storage of food crops (Minde-
leff, 1891, pp. 143—44; Cushing, 1920, pp. 167, 171—73, 179). The most
important crops stored are corn, squash, beans, fruit and cotton (E. Bea-
glehole, 1937, pp. 43-44). Among the Hopi, corn is usually dried, and
the cobs are stored in stacks on the floor. Beans are stored in sacks
(formerly pots), and sometimes in small holes dug into the floors of the
rooms. Squash is cut into strips, dried, and hung from the rafters. Seed
com for the next season’s planting is also hung from the rafters, while
reserve squash seeds are kept in clay jars or boxes    (E. Beaglehole, 1937,
pp. 43-45; Forde, 1931, pp. 393-94). The Hopi also store jerked meat
in their storage rooms.
   The Zufi use their storage rooms in much the same fashion (Stevenson,
1904, p. 352). In fact, the similarities between the Hopi and Zuni, both in
terms of the crops that are stored and the manner in which it is done, are
striking. It is notable, also, that both groups are known to have made
extensive use of large storage jars in these rooms (Bunzel, 1929, p. 41;
Cushing, 1920, p. 208).
   In addition to food, a great variety of other materials are also stored.
The Zufi, for example, store their ceremonial paraphernalia in these
rooms. In fact, Stevenson reports that “A Zuni storage room . .. contains a
promiscuous mass of material ranging from objects of the most sacred
character to those of little or no value” (1904, p. 352). A personal exami-
nation of several Hopi storage rooms indicates that this statement applies
to them as well.
   Although these small rooms are used primarily for storage among both
groups, they are occasionally ‘involved in other kinds of activities; they
may serve as workrooms, kitchens and bedrooms (Roberts, 1956, pp. 11,
45—46, 80—81; Eggan, personal communication). While these usages
may not be everyday occurrences, it is clear that the storerooms may be
multi-functional. It is likely, in fact, that such rooms are at times involved
in a number of activities that are more commonly carried out in the living
rooms.
  The activities carried on in the ceremonial rooms or kivas are largely
different, of course, from those performed in other kinds of rooms. These
rooms serve as the centers of ritual activity, and access to them is usually
restricted to males (Mindeleff, 1891, pp. 130, 134; Titiev, 1944, p. 103).
The ritual activities involve the use of artifacts and other materials that
are usually not found in non-ceremonial rooms; these may include idols or
fetishes, for example (Donaldson, 1893, p. 55). The Hopi have specific
types of ceramic vessels (and perhaps other kinds of vessels) that are
reserved for use in ritual activities (Titiev, 1944, p. 16), and the Zufii
have sacred vessels on which ritually important designs are painted
(Bunzel, 1929, pp. 23-24). Presumably, such vessels are frequently used
in ceremonial rooms.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                   119
   Plant materials are also brought into the ceremonial rooms and used in
ritual activity; the most important ones are the domesticates: corn, beans,
and squash (Parsons, 1936, pp. 595, 608). Often, in fact, entire plants of
these types are brought into the kivas, and they are even germinated in
these rooms (Parsons, 1936, pp. 188, 287, 623, 690; Titiev, 1944, p. 166;
Forde, 1931, p- 398). This is not surprising of course, since corn, beans,
and squash are the economic mainstays of the Pueblos. In addition to
these crops, however,     a wide variety of wild plant materials           are often
introduced into the kivas (cf. Stevenson, 1909; Whiting, 1939).
  Beyond their ritual functions, and probably just as important, is the fact
that kivas also serve as male clubhouses           and craft centers     (Mindeleff,
1891, p. 130). The men do their weaving in these rooms (Mindeleff, 1891,
p- 129; Parsons, 1936, pp. 33, 134, 188, 202), and they carry on a variety
of leisure-time activities (Parsons, 1936, p. xliii). In addition to relaxa-
tion and manufacturing activities, the men sometimes eat and sleep in
these rooms—although no cooking is done in them (Mindeleff, 1891, p.
130; Parsons, 1936, pp. 605, 607). Meetings of various kinds are also held
in kivas, and decisions of public concern are made there.
   While this concludes the discussion of the primary functional character-
istics of the three major pueblo room-types, it will also be worthwhile to
consider the functions of the clanhouses. As already mentioned, these are
simply large habitation rooms. Although there are no recognized clan-
houses at Zuni (Kroeber, 1917, pp. 91, 118—19), the Hopi villages usually
have several of them. Each clan in a village has one, and it is regarded as
the “home” of that clan in the village. It is here that the headwoman of
the clan usually lives, and where clan meetings are held. The ritual para-
phernalia used in clan-controlled ceremonies are stored in the clanhouses,
and sometimes certain rituals are carried out in these rooms (cf. Titiev,
1944, p. 103; Eggan, 1950, pp. 62, 89-90, 178).
   It has already been pointed out that modern pueblo households are
composed of pairs (or small groups) of rooms, each having at least one
habitation room and one storage room. It is also important to note that
this household unit is the basic economic unit in pueblo villages. Although
households do indeed cooperate with one another on a large scale, they
are basically self-contained units, and each of them carries on the same
general kinds of activities in its respective rooms          (E. Beaglehole, 1936,
1937). The kivas, however, are shared, and the membership of each kiva-
group is drawn from a number of households, some of which belong to
different   lineages   (Stevenson,   1904,   pp.   413-21;    Kroeber,    1917, pp.
151—54, 161; Hawley, 1937, p. 515; Eggan, 1950, pp. 52, 117, 203; 1964,
pp. 181—82).

EXPECTATIONS
Given this discussion of -the major activities that are carried out in dif-
ferent kinds of rooms among the Pueblos today, it is possible to make
some specific statements concerning the kinds of artifacts and other cul-
120                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
tural materials that can be expected to occur in the rooms at Broken K
Pueblo—if indeed they were functionally similar to modern pueblo
rooms. These expectations may be stated in the form of a series of limited
propositions:

   1. If the large rooms were all-purpose living rooms, they ought to
contain larger numbers and higher densities of most categories of cultural
remains than either the small rooms or the special rooms. If the small
rooms were storage rooms, they should have the lowest densities of most
materials, with the exception of food crops; and the special rooms should
fall somewhere in between.
   2. The large rooms should contain a wider variety of materials than are
found in the other room-types, since the largest number of different kinds
of activities were presumably performed in them.
   3. The large rooms should contain evidence of the processing or prepar-
ing of food prior to cooking, independent of the mealing bins. They
should contain most of the metates, manos, and other tools usable in food-
processing; and they might be expected to contain some of the foodstuffs
that had been processed, possibly including seeds or pollen in the basins
of the mealing bins, and animal bones representing the remains of meat
preparation (butchering). While the small rooms may also be expected to
contain the remains of food materials, neither they nor the special rooms
should contain evidence of food-processing.
   4, The large rooms should contain evidence of cooking, in addition to
the firepits. They might contain the burned or charred remains of various
kinds of foods, and they might be expected to have the largest numbers of
plain or textured (unpainted) utility vessels (some of which should ex-
hibit evidence of having been, placed on the fire). The other rooms, on
the other hand, should contain little or no such evidence.
   5. The large rooms should contain evidence that eating was done in
them. In addition to having charred food remains (which may indicate
cooking as well), they might be expected to contain the fragments of
bowls that had been used in serving food—particularly bowls with
smudged interiors.
   6. The large rooms would be expected to contain evidence that water
was stored in them. They should have more large, narrow-necked, deco-
rated jars than the other rooms at the site.
   7. The large rooms should contain evidence of manufacturing or craft
activities; this should include the tools useful in such activities, as well as
the debris that resulted.
   8. The small rooms, in addition to containing only a small number and
variety of artifacts and manufacturing debris, should contain reasonably
large quantities of the remains of stored food crops—especially corn and
squash (since beans do not preserve well). This evidence should be in the
form of corn cobs, seeds, or pollen.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                   121
   9. The small rooms can be expected to contain evidence of some of the
ethnographically recorded storage techniques, although most of the traces
of these techniques would almost certainly not have been preserved.
These rooms     can, however, be expected to contain more       large undeco-
rated jars than do the other rooms, since the ethnographic evidence indi-
cates that such jars are often used in storing various kinds of materials.
  10. The small rooms should contain evidence that materials other than
food crops were stored in them—this might include ceremonial parapher-
nalia, tools, and even non-dietary plant remains     (in the form of seeds or
pollen).
   11. The small rooms can be expected to contain the remains of manu-
facturing or other non-storage activites; but since they were probably not
used frequently for such activities, they should not yield large quantities
of such remains.
  12. The special rooms should contain evidence of ritual activities, inde-
pendent of the peculiar structural features noted. They might, for ex-
ample, contain the remains of idols, fetishes, or other presumably cere-
monially related materials. They might also be expected to contain special
types of pottery, and they should      contain   large quantities   of seeds or
pollen of the domestic crops, corn and squash. They may even yield a
variety of wild plants that are used for ritual purposes in the present-day
pueblo kivas.
  13. The special rooms should exhibit evidence of having been used in
manufacturing or craft activities, and some of these activities could be
expected to be different from those carried on in the large and small
rooms. There should be evidence of weaving in these rooms, for example,
and perhaps the remains of manufacturing chert hunting implements.
  14. The special rooms ought to exhibit evidence that a certain amount
of eating (but not cooking) had been done in them. This would be
indicated by the presence of food remains, similar to those expected in the
large rooms, but probably not in the same quantities. Serving bowls
would also be expected.
   15. If the seven extra-large rooms at the site were indeed clanhouses,
one might expect to find some of the remains of ritual paraphernalia that
had been stored in them.
   16. It can be expected that the three major kinds of rooms at the site
did not all have the same context with regard to the sexual division of
labor. The special rooms should contain cultural items associated with
male activities primarily, while the large and small rooms should contain
both male- and female-associated items.

TESTING

In examining the archeological data to test the above propositions, I have
dealt with them in the order of their presentation in the last section.
122                                  Variability in a Single Occupational Unit

                     Table 2. Distribution of Artifact Types

                     MeanNo.per   MeanNo.per   Mean No.per           Dominant
Artifact Type        Large Room   Small Room   SpecialRoom   Total   Room-type
Projectile Points         92          08            50          27   i,     P
Arrowshaft Tools          .88          alll         .00         25   ib
Antler Flakers            .08          .08          25           5          12
Saws                      .28          .04          00           8   if
Graver-Burins             .20         .20           .00         10   Las
Flake Knives            1.70          23            00          48   1B
Bifacial Knives           20          .07           .00          7   if
Utilized Flakes         2.40         1.00         2.00          96   Peesaee
Blades                    16          16            .00          8   iG is
Cores                     .92          23         eb0e          35   jf     iz
 Scrapers               3.00          84          3.00*        108   L      P
Choppers                2.60          44          4,70*        96    L      P
Axes                      32          .00          00            8   L
Mauls                     28          sia          .00          10   1
Hammerstones            3.70          .69         2.00*        118   1B     12
Metates                 1.10          15            20          32   L
Manos                   6.60         1.00           OIs        192   ib
Worked Slabs              88          ml            15          29   L      i
Worked Sherds           1.50           lS           Oe          42   Vi,
Bone Awls               1.60           oy           25          48   L
Bone Rings and
  Ring Material          1.00         alli         25           30   1%;
“Ornamental” Items        .96         19           50           31   1      1B
L = large room; S = small room; P = special room
*All from a single special room (room beneath Room 41)


   There can be no doubt that the first two propositions are confirmed;
the large rooms contained not only the largest numbers and highest densi-
ties of most cultural materials at the site, but also the widest variety of
materials. The distribution of artifacts (Table 2) is a case in point. Notice
that 21 out of 22 artifact types occurred in high frequencies in the large
rooms, while only three types were associated with small rooms, and nine
with the special rooms. Further, 11 out of the 22 types occurrred in the
large rooms to the virtual exclusion of the other room-types, showing that
the inhabitants of the village had discarded about 50 per cent of their non-
perishable artifacts in these rooms. There were no types strongly dom-
inant in the small rooms, and only one (antler-flakers) was of primary
importance in the special rooms. There were eight types, however, which
were common in both large and special rooms, and two types which were
common in large rooms and small rooms. Only one type (utilized flakes)
was clearly common in all three kinds of rooms.
  These data demonstrate that the non-perishable tool kits used in each
type of room were as follows:
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                          123
       Large Rooms: All types, except antler-flakers
       Small Rooms:   Utilized flakes, blades and graver-burins
        Special Rooms:     Projectile points, antler-flakers, utilized flakes,
             cores, choppers, scrapers, hammerstones, worked slabs, and
             ornamental items
It is thus clear that in addition to having the greatest numbers of artifacts,
the large rooms had the greatest variety of them.
   The large rooms also contained most of the lithic waste at the site
(Table 3). A total of 5,868 unutilized chert chips were recovered during
the excavation, representing all stages in the manufacture of chert tools. It
was found that 17 out of 23 large rooms analyzed had an average of 127
chips per floor (13 per square meter), and an overall average of 98 chips
per floor. The small rooms, on the other hand, averaged only 30 chips per
floor, and 17 out of 24 of them had only 10 chips (2 per square meter).
The special rooms generally had 8 to 14 chips each, although one of them
(the room beneath Room 41) had 98. This evidence clearly demonstrates
that lithic waste was primarily associated with large rooms, and it lends
support to both proposition 1 and proposition 2.

                Table 3. Distribution of Non-Artifact Materials

                     Mean No. per         Mean No. per            Mean No. per
Item                 Large Room            Small Room             Special Room
Lithic Waste             98.0                 30.0                    37.0
Animal Bone             120.0                 26.0                    29.0
Seeds                     9.3                  4.2                     2.5
Pollen Grains            22.0                 51.0                    17.0
   (economic )



   Further support is found in the differential distribution of pottery den-
sity; there were many more sherds in the large rooms and special rooms
than in the small rooms. There were generally more than sixty sherds in
the large rooms and special rooms, and many fewer than this in the small
rooms. After the frequency of sherds in each of the rooms had been
converted to a density figure, it was found that the large rooms and
special rooms usually had more than three sherds per square meter of
floor area, while the small rooms had fewer than this (Chi-square, .01
level).
   While this supports proposition 1, the distribution of individual pottery-
types lends support to the second proposition. The factor analysis of
pottery types (which yielded non-random clusters of covarying types)
revealed that there was a larger variety of different kinds of pottery in the
large rooms than in either of the other two kinds of rooms. The pottery-
type factors are given in Table 4. Four of these seven factors (factors ], 2,
124   Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
a   ear              ee
                       Table 4. Pottery-Type Factors
rn

      Factor
     Number            Pottery Types                            Vessel Forms
         1             Patterned Corrugated                     Jars
                       Pinto Polychrome                         Bowls
                       Brown Indented Corrugated                Jars
        2              Brown Plain Corrugated
                          (Smudged Interior)                    Bowls
                       Tularosa Black-on-White                  Jars, Bowls
        3              Snowflake Black-on-White
                          (Snowflake Variety)                   Jars, Bowls
        4              Brown Plain Corrugated                   Jars
                       Brown Indented Corrugated                Jars
         5             Brown Indented Corrugated
                          (Smudged Interior)                    Bowls
                       McDonald Indented Corrugated             Bowls
                       Snowflake Black-on-White
                         (Hay Hollow Variety)                   Bowls, Jars
         6             McDonald Plain Corrugated                Bowls
                       St. Johns Polychrome                     Bowls
         1             St. Johns Black-on-Red                   Bowls
     Bowl and jar forms are given in order of frequency.


3, and 5) occurred primarily in the large room category.’ Table 5 shows
that nine out of thirteen pottery-types represented in these factors were
strongly associated with these rooms, while only two were associated
strongly with the small rooms and six with the special rooms. These
associations were tested by Chi-square (.05 level). There was clearly a
wider variety of pottery types in the large rooms.
   The distribution of animal bone at the site was also of interest with
respect to the first two propositions (see Table 3). A total of 3,681 bones
were found on the floors of rooms; of these, 2,895 were in large rooms,
671 were in small rooms, and 115 were in special rooms. The large rooms
averaged 120 bones each, while the small rooms averaged only 26 each;
the special rooms averaged 29 each. In fact, 77 per cent of the animal
bones found on floors at the site came from large rooms, only 18.3 per
cent from      small rooms,   and only 3.1 per cent from         special rooms.    A
comparison of the rooms in terms of the density of bone revealed that the
large rooms contained more than 2 bones per square meter (usually much
more), and the small rooms and special rooms had less than this (Chi-
square, .001).
  Similar tests were performed to find out whether any individual species

  "Using a multiple regression analysis, Freeman    and Brown   (1964)   demonstrated
that different clusters of pottery types occured in different rooms at Carter Ranch
Site, a slightly earlier pueblo in the same valley.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function              125
or genus of animal bone distributed in some other way. That is, were
there particular kinds of animals that were significantly represented in
small rooms or special rooms? The result was negative. All of the animal
bones followed the same pattern of distribution as did the lumped bone
counts."
   Most of the plant remains in the form of seeds were also found in the
large rooms (see Table 3). It was discovered that over twice as many
seeds (including charred com) were in the large rooms as in the small
ones; most of these were found in the basins of mealing bins. Out of a
total of 352 seeds (not including the seeds in a fecal sample from Room
31—33), there were 233 in large rooms,            109 in small rooms, and 10 in
special rooms. The average numbers of seeds for these rooms were 9.3,
4.2, and 2.5, respectively. Furthermore, of the twenty rooms in which
seeds were found, fourteen of them were large rooms, five were small
rooms, and one was a special room (Room 6). The association of seeds
with the large-room category was significant at the .01 level, and it may
thus be considered culturally significant.
   Having considered the major categories of cultural materials, it is clear
that both propositions 1 and 2 are confirmed; the large rooms not only
contained the largest quantities of most materials, but also the widest
variety. They contained the largest numbers of different kinds of artifacts
and pottery-types, as well as most of the lithic waste, animal bone, and
seeds. They were living rooms par excellence.
   The third proposition was that these rooms ought to exhibit evidence of
food processing prior to cooking, while the other rooms should not. This,
too, is confirmed. Food-processing activities are indicated by the fact that
most of the metates and manos occurred in large rooms (see Table 2).
There were, on the average, over seven times as many metates in large
rooms   as in smal] ones, and over four times as many              as in the special
rooms; there were six times as many manos in the large rooms as in the
small ones, and twenty six times as many as in the special rooms. In terms
of density (average number per square meter of floor area), these distri-
butions are as follows:

                                   Large        Small        Special
                                  Rooms         Rooms        Rooms
                 Metates           5 |           03           03
                 Manos             86            .20          03

   Further, it was pointed out that most of the seeds found at the site were

  8 The animal bone found in the fills of rooms did not follow this pattern. It seems
to have been distributed in a random    manner with respect to the different kinds of
rooms, and it was thus of no use to this analysis. This is a clear demonstration of the
fact that the floors of rooms must be kept separate from the fills if we are to learn
very much about the functions of rooms. Fill material may often reflect random
distribution simply because it can be largely a result of indiscriminate trash dumping.
126                                Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
from the basins   of mealing  bins;  this clearly indicates that seeds were
being processed in the large rooms. Out of twelve different types of seeds
found in mealing bins, seven of them are frequently eaten by the Hopi
and Zuni. These include Amaranthus (pigweed), Chenopodium ( goose-
foot family), Cucurbita (squash), Cycloloma (goosefoot family), Opun-
tia (prickly pear cactus), Juniperus (juniper), and Zea (corn) (Steven-
son, 1909; Whiting, 1939).
   Pollen samples collected from the basins of mealing bins yielded pollen
from sixteen different kinds of plants, at least nine of which are eaten by
the modern Pueblo peoples (Stevenson, 1909; Whiting, 1939). These in-
clude Cheno-ams (Chenopods and Amaranths), Cleome (bee weed),
Compositae (two types, low-spine and high-spine, including Artemisia),
Cucurbita (squash), Gramineae (grasses), Juniperus (juniper), Opuntia
(prickly pear cactus), Pinus (probably P. edulis, pinyon pine), and Zea
(corn).
   It is noteworthy in this connection that all of the above plants were
present in a fecal sample from Room 31—33, so the evidence is even
stronger that they were being prepared as food.
   Vegetal foods were not the only foods prepared in the large rooms,
however. Judging from the fact that 77 per cent of the animal bone was
found in these rooms, it is clear that butchering, or particular stages in the
butchering process, was being carried on in them. A large but unquan-
tified number of these bones had butchering marks on them. And beyond
this, the tools most reasonably associated with butchering were found
primarily in large rooms      (saws, flake knives, bifacial knives, and chop-
pers; cf. Table 2). There can be no doubt that food processing prior to
cooking was a major activity in these rooms and not in the others.
   There is also good evidence that cooking was done in these rooms
(proposition 4). This is not only indicated by the large amounts of animal
bone and seeds present in these rooms, but also, and more importantly, by
the fact that most of the burned bone and charrred corn cobs were found
in the large rooms. Out of a total of 179 fragments of burned bone, nearly
all were in these rooms (Chi-square, .001). And out of 37 charred corn
cobs, 28 of them were in large rooms (Chi-square, .001).
   Further, it was suggested that unpainted utility vessels could be ex-
pected to be found in these rooms; and this proved to be the case (Table
5). The large rooms contained two such vessel types, Indented Corrugated
and Patterned Corrugated (factor 1). Both types were also represented in
the special rooms, together with Brown Plain Corrugated (factor 4). Thus
it is evident that the so-called utility wares were well represented in both
large rooms and special rooms, but not in small rooms. Although no
   * The reader will notice that five of these plants were not represented by seeds in
the mealing bins. Why they should be represented by pollen alone is not clear, since it
is usually the seeds of the plants that are ground today. It may be, of course, that
flowers were ground for various non-dietary purposes, or that certain kinds of seeds
were not preserved.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                   127
systematic record was kept concerning the distribution of sherds exhibit-
ing evidence of exterior burning (and thus cooking), it was clear that
most such sherds did occur in the large rooms. Considering all of this
evidence, proposition 4 seems reasonably well confirmed.

                     Table 5. Distribution of Pottery Types
             (Room Categories in Which Pottery Types Are Dominant, as
                          Determined by Factor Analysis)

      Pottery Type                             Large      Small     Special
      Brown Plain Corrugated
        (Smudged Interior) (B)                    X
      Brown Indented Corrugated
        (Smudged Interior) (B)
      McDonald Indented Corrugated (B)
      Tularosa Black-on-White (J, B)
      Snowflake Black-on-White
        (Hay Hollow Variety) (B, J)
     Brown Indented Corrugated (J)
     Patterned Corrugated (J)
     Snowflake Black-on-White
          (Snowflake Variety) (J, B,)
      Pinto Polychrome (B)                       a
                                                 a
                                                 i
      Brown Plain Corrugated (J)
      St. Johns Black-on-Red (B)                                        rs
                                                                        Mr
                                                                        rod
      McDonald Corrugated (B)
      St. Johns Polychrome (B)                              vata
      B = bowl; J = jar

   The evidence expected under proposition 5 was also found. The idea
that eating was being done in the large rooms is supported by the fact
that most of the charred bone and corn cobs were found in these rooms,
 and by the fact that there was no evidence of dietary remains in the other
 rooms. It is also supported by the presence of ceramic vessels that would
have been useful in serving food (that is, bowls; cf. Table 5). And, as
expected, many of the bowls (three out of four types) had smudged
interiors. These include Brown Plain Corrugated, smudged interior; Brown
Indented Corrugated, smudged interior; and McDonald Indented Cor-
rugated.
   There was also good evidence of water storage in the large rooms
 (proposition 6). As mentioned, one would expect water to be stored in
large, narrow-necked jars or ollas, and that these would be decorated or
painted vessels (as among the historic pueblos). Such jars would be
particularly necessary at Broken K Pueblo because the nearest source of
water was probably not less than 300 yards from the village and some
kind of transportation and storage vessel would have been required. An
examination of the different kinds of large, painted olla-type jars at the site
revealed that most of them were found in the large rooms. This was
128                              Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
shown in the factor analysis of pottery-types (Table 5). Tularosa Black-
on-white, Snowflake Black-on-white (Snowflake variety), and Snowflake
black-on-white (Hay Hollow variety) were the only such types entering
into the factors, and they belong in factors that were clearly associated
with the large rooms. While it is true that Snowflake Black-on-white
(Snowflake variety.) jars were also found in special rooms, this may sim-
ply mean that water was stored in these rooms too.
   The large rooms also contained the expected evidence of manufactur-
ing or craft activities (proposition 7). One of these activities was the
manufacture of chert implements. Like so many of the materials re-
covered from the site, the implements which seem to be related to chert
tool manufacture were far more common in the large rooms than any-
where else (except in one of the special rooms). These materials include
hammerstones, cores, lithic waste, and antler-flakers (see Table 2). Some
of this chert knapping activity probably involved the manufacture of
hunting implements, since “arrowshaft tools” and projectile points also
occurred predominantly in the large rooms (Table 2).
   Certain stages in the process of pottery-making may also have been
carried out in these rooms. The evidence for this is that most of the
worked sherds were in large rooms (Table 2), and it is likely that they
were used in scraping pottery prior to firing (Haury, 1940, p. 119). Out
of a total of 42 worked sherds found on the floors of rooms, there were
only four in the small rooms, and none in the special rooms.
   Another manufacturing activity that may have been carried on in the
large rooms is the making of ground and pecked stone implements such as
metates and manos. The evidence for this is that most of the hammer-
stones were found in these rooms (Table 2). In addition to being used in
chert knapping, hammerstones are also used in roughening the grinding
surfaces of metates and manos (Rinaldo, 1964, p. 73).
  The manufacture of ornamental items may also have been carried out
in these rooms. Most ornamental items, including bone rings, occurred in
the large rooms (Table 2). Further, it was found that the bone material
from which the rings were cut was primarily in these rooms.
  The fact that bone awls occurred almost exclusively in the large rooms
(Table 2) also indicates that craft activities were being performed. Al-
though bone awls may be multi-functional, it is reasonable to infer that
they were being used in a manufacturing activity of some kind.
  In short, there can be no doubt that proposition 7 is confirmed;        in
addition to the various manufacturing activities that are demonstrated to
have occurred in the large rooms at the site, there must have been many
others. This is indicated by the already established fact that almost all of
the recovered artifacts were found in significant numbers in these rooms.
  The small rooms also yielded a great deal of the expected evidence. In
addition to having only small quantities of most materials, they yielded
good evidence that they had been used for storing food crops (proposi-
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                               129
tion 8); this evidence was largely palynological. The pollen of economic
plants was much more abundant on the floors of the small rooms than
on those of either of the other room types (see Table 3). Most of the
pollen samples from small rooms contained more than 43 grains of eco-
nomic pollen each, while the large rooms generally had between 0 and 42
grains. A Fisher Exact Test revealed that there is less than one chance in a
thousand that this distribution is in error (.001 level). A separate test was
performed using the frequencies of Zea and Cucurbita alone, with exactly
the same results. The special rooms had surprisingly small quantities of
economic pollen.
  This great density of economic pollen in the small rooms clearly indi-
cates that crops were being stored in these rooms. It is difficult to imagine
any alternative interpretation, because there is no evidence indicating
that these crops were processed, cooked, or eaten in such rooms.
   There is a logical argument in support of this, too. One would expect
that when corn and squash were brought in from the fields for storage, a
certain amount of pollen would have been carried in with them—either in
the form of the flowers themselves, or simply by clinging to the produce.
Then, as the crops were being stacked in these rooms, some of the pollen
would fall onto the floor. And, finally, as the crops began to dry out, any
flowers or pollen that had been introduced might also fall to the floor,
depositing large amounts of pollen. By the time the crops were needed as
food, much        of the pollen would      presumably     have   been    deposited on
storage room floors, and very little would find its way into the living
rooms. Although this argument is speculative, it is certainly a reasonable
explanation of the pollen distribution (Richard H. Hevly, Department of
Botany, Northern Arizona University, personal communication). In any
event,   the fact that the small rooms          contained   most   of the economic
pollen is, in itself, sufficient evidence for inferring that they were used for
the storage of food.
   It was also expected that these rooms would yield some evidence of the
storage techniques used (proposition 9). In this case, however, the unex-
pected occurred. The small rooms, instead of containing significant num-
bers of large textured storage jars, were characterized primarily by the
presence of bowls. The only pottery-type factor of importance in the
small rooms was factor 6 (McDonald Plain Corrugated and St. John
Polychrome), and the vessel forms are both bowls (Table 4). This was
so surprising that it was decided to ignore (temporarily )the results of the
factor analysis, and reexamine the raw frequencies of the various pottery
types by room. This exercise, however, yielded virtually the same results.
While large unpainted jars (sherds) did occur in the small rooms, their
frequencies were much lower than in either the large or special rooms.
  1° Economic plants are defined here as those for which there is evidence that they
were introduced into the ‘site by man rather than by natural agencies. They include
Zea, Cucurbita,    Cleome, Opuntia, and several others (Hevly, 1964. )
130                                  Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
The average number of sherds per room-type of each of the three types of
large undecorated jars is given as follows:
                                            Large        Small       Special
                                            Rooms        Rooms       Rooms
      Brown Indented Corrugated              57.4         14.0        39.5
      Brown Plain Corrugated                  2.9            9         3.0
      Patterned Corrugated                    2.8            a)        2.5
In terms of density (no. per sq. m.), the results are similar:
                                            Large        Small       Special
                                            Rooms        Rooms       Rooms
      Brown Indented Corrugated              5.92         2.80        4.07
      Brown Plain Corrugated                  .30          18          .22,
      Patterned Corrugated                    .29          .06          .26
Thus, while the palynological evidence supports the idea that the small
rooms were storage rooms, the pottery-type evidence does not. Proposi-
tion 9 is not confirmed.
   Proposition 10 is also difficult to confirm. If materials other than food
crops had been stored in the small rooms, there was little macroscopic
evidence of it. To be sure, a number of different kinds of artifacts were
represented in these rooms (Table 2), but it is unlikely that many of them
were being stored (see below). Perhaps most important is the fact that of
29 different types of pollen found at the site, nearly all of them were
found to some degree in the storage rooms (Hill and Hevly, 1968). Judg-
ing from the ethnobotanical evidence (Stevenson, 1909; Whiting, 1939),
many of these pollen types do not represent plants that were eaten by the
inhabitants of the site, and it is thus not likely that they were being stored
as food crops. While this evidence tends to confirm proposition 10, it does
not in any sense constitute proof.
   There is good data, however, to support the idea that certain activi-
ties besides storage were carried out in small rooms; this is indicated by
the artifact content of the rooms. It will be recalled that there were only
three types of artifacts that were common in these rooms, relative to their
frequencies of occurrence in the other rooms (graver-burins, blades and
utilized flakes; cf. Table 2), and these occurred in small quantities. At the
same time, however, almost all of the artifact types were present to some
degree in at least a few of the small rooms, and some             of them   (for
example, manos, hammerstones and scrapers )occurred in noticeable quan-
tities. While these artifacts do not serve to distinguish the small rooms
from the other rooms, they do permit the inference that activities other
than storage were occasionally performed in these rooms. The possibility
that these materials were all being stored is contradicted by the presence
of an average of thirty pieces of lithic waste per small room. One would
expect lithic waste to represent the by-product of chert tool manufacture.
  Thus it is likely that the small rooms were multi-functional, as expected.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                  131
The archeological evidence, given the state of preservation at the site,
indicates that food crops were being stored and that certain non-storage
activities were being carried out; most of the latter, however, were prob-
ably activities that were more commonly carried out in the large rooms or
special rooms.
  The special rooms also conform to our expectations (proposition 12).
Although there were no idols, fetishes, or other materials of that nature
recovered, these rooms did contain a peculiar combination of pottery
types. The dominant pottery-type factors in the special rooms were as
follows (in order of importance; cf. Table 4):
                Special Rooms                             Factors
                Room 6                                     7,4
                Room 29                                    1,4
                Room beneath Room 41                       a, 0, t
                Room in N.W. corner of plaza               cages
Thus, out of a total of seven factors, four of them were commonly found
in the special rooms (factors 1, 3 4, and 7). Although none of them were
found in all of the special rooms, they clearly represent the major pottery
types that were used in these rooms (Table 5). Factors 2 and 5, which
were strongly represented in the large rooms, were not important in the
special rooms; and factor 6, the small room factor, was also weakly repre-
sented.
  Some interesting support for the idea that factors 1, 3, 4, and 7 were
composed of ceremonial or ritual pottery types is found in an archeolog-
ical context at another site in the same valley (Carter Ranch Site; cf.
Longacre, 1963, 1964). Longacre discovered that at Carter Ranch Site
there was a constellation of five pottery types that was largely peculiar to
ceremonial-mortuary contexts, and he was able to make the following
statement:
   Thus we can say with great probability, that these ceramic types were used
   together in ceremonial activities—the others were not. We can go one step
   further and suggest that when these types are found in non-random high
   frequency on the floor of a cultural unit, that particular unit must be classed
   as a ceremonial one (1963, p. 95).

Although his “ceremonial” types differ somewhat from the equivalent
constellation at Broken K Pueblo, there are striking similarities. The two
constellations are given in Table 6. The first three types listed were char-
acteristic of kivas (special rooms) at both sites; the fourth type is also the
same, except that it had a smudged interior and a different shape at
Carter Ranch Site. The other types differ between the sites. The only
major difference, however, is that the two smudged-interior types at Car-
ter Ranch Site were not characteristic of the special rooms at Broken K; in
their place we have a black-on-white and a polychrome type.
   If these special rooms are in fact analogous to kivas, it is likely that the
first three or four of these pottery types represent ceremonial types com-
132                                    Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
mon to this area of the Southwest. They may be found in kivas (and
perhaps cemeteries )at other pueblo sites in the area.
   EEC
   n   LO TC LCE                                                          DA   LT A
en

             Table 6. Ceremonial-Mortuary Pottery Types

       Broken K Pueblo                             Carter Ranch Site
       St. Johns Black-on-Red                      St. Johns Black-on-Red
       Patterned Corrugated                        Patterned Corrugated
       Brown Plain Corrugated                      Brown Plain Corrugated
       Brown Indented Corrugated                   Brown Indented Corrugated
                                                      (Smudged Interior)
       Snowflake Black-on-White                    Brown Plain Corrugated
         (Snowflake Variety)                         (Smudged Interior)
       Pinto Polychrome

  There is some additional evidence, however, that the special rooms had
a ceremonial function, and this evidence is palynological. The pollen
content of the special rooms was in many ways similar to that of the
habitation rooms (Hill and Hevly, 1968). A major difference, however,
lay in the fact that the special rooms had greater concentrations of the
pollen of Ephedra (Mormon tea) and Eriogonum (buckwheat). There
was more pollen of these two types in the special rooms than the average
amounts of these types in the other rooms at the site. Both of these plants
have historically had ceremonial and medicinal uses among the Hopi and
Zuni Indians      (Stevenson,     1909; Whiting,    1939). Their presence      in the
special rooms lends support to the idea that these rooms were indeed
ceremonial rooms.
   Perhaps most interesting is the fact that certain pollen types that were
expected to occur in high amounts in the special rooms were present in
extremely low amounts. These are the domesticates: corn and squash.
Given the fact that the pollen of these plants (as well as whole plants.)
is extensively used in present-day Pueblo kivas, it is difficult to explain
their small amounts in the special rooms at Broken K. It is possible, of
course, that these domesticates were not as important ritually or econom-
ically in the past as they are today (cf. Hill, 1965, 1966).
   Nonetheless,     proposition    12 seems   reasonably well confirmed.         The
special rooms did contain a special set of pottery types, and they con-
tained significant quantities of two pollen types that may have been used
ceremonially.
   It was also expected, however, that these rooms would exhibit evidence
of having been used in manufacturing or craft activities (proposition
13)—and there can be no doubt that this was the case. In the first place,
two of these rooms had obvious loom-holes in their floors, indicating that
weaving was being done in them. No such holes were found elsewhere in
the site. And second, they contained significant quantities of chert-
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                       133
knapping tools, including hammerstones, cores, and antler-flakers (Table
2); and lithic waste was present.
   It was also proposed that these rooms might be expected to yield evi-
dence that eating (but not cooking) had occasionally been done in them.
Evidence that eating was done is found in the fact that the special rooms
had an average of 29 animal bones each, and this is slightly more than
was found in the small rooms. In addition, three of the six pottery types
found in these rooms were represented by bowl forms which would have
been useful in serving food (Table 5). While this evidence tends to
confirm the idea that eating was sometimes done in these rooms, there is
a small amount of evidence indicating that cooking was not done. The
fact that there were no charred com cobs or seeds in these rooms, and
only one of them had bummed bones (two fragments), suggests that cook-
ing could not have been a frequent occurrence. It should be noted, how-
ever, that there were three types of large, unpainted jars associated with
these rooms that would have been usable for cooking; these include
Brown Plain Corrugated, Brown Indented Corrugated and Patterned Cor-
rugated; (cf. Table 5). Unfortunately, the pottery in the special rooms
was not examined for evidence of exterior burning, which would be ex-
pected if any of it had been used in cooking.
  Nonetheless,    proposition   14 can be considered confirmed;     there was
evidence of eating in the special rooms, and the density of food remains
indicates that this activity was not performed in such rooms very fre-
quently.
  Proposition    15, however,   is definitely not confirmed.   The extra-large
rooms at the site yielded no evidence that they were in any way different
from the other large rooms. If ceremonial paraphernalia had been kept in
them, it was either removed upon abandonment, or simply not preserved.
A closer study of present-day Pueblo clanhouses might suggest other
kinds of data to look’ for in the larger prehistoric rooms, but this must
remain a concer for the future.
  The final proposition was that the special rooms at the site would
contain cultural items associated primarily with male activities, while the
large and small rooms would contain both male- and female-associated
items. In attempting to confirm this proposition it has, of course, been
necessary to deal only with those items that could reasonably be assigned
a context with regard to the sexual division of labor. These include the
following:
                 Male-Associated           Female-Associated
                     Artifacts                  Artifacts
                 Projectile points         Metates
                 Arrowshaft tools          Manos
                 Antler-flakers            Worked Sherds
                 Cores .
                 Hammerstones
134                              Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
An examination of Table 2 shows that the proposition is confirmed. The
three female-associated items were found predominantly in the large
rooms, and not in the special rooms; the male-associated items (except for
arrowshaft tools) were strongly represented in both large and special
rooms; both sets of items were found to some degree in the small rooms—
although rarely in significant quantities. The important point, however, is
that female-associated items were not significantly present in the special
rooms; among all four of these rooms there was only one metate, one
mano, and one worked sherd. This lends strong support to the idea that
these rooms were generally restricted to males, as was seen to be the case
among the present-day western Pueblos.
  In summary, it is clear that twelve of the sixteen propositions are un-
equivocally confirmed (1—8, 11, 13, 14, and 16); two of them (10 and
12) are at least partially confirmed; and only two of them were not
confirmed (9 and 15). It is thus demonstrated that the three major room
types at Broken K Pueblo were the general functional equivalents of the
three major kinds of rooms    in present-day Pueblo villages; they may
legitimately be called habitation, storage, and ceremonial rooms (or
kivas).The primary functional characteristics of these rooms are summa-
rized in Table 7. If the rooms were not functional equivalents of the
modern room types, it is highly unlikely that so many of the expectations
in terms of content would have been confirmed.



                  Table 7. Functions of the Room Types

        Habitation            Storage                    Ceremonial
        Food Processing       Storage of Plant           Ceremonies
                              Foods
        Cooking                                          Manufacturing
                              Storage of Non-
        Eating                Food Materials             Eating
                              (probably )                (occasionally)
        Water Storage
                              Manufacturing
        Manufacturing         (occasionally )



  It has not been possible, however, to demonstrate that the seven extra-
large rooms at the site were functionally equivalent to the modern clan-
houses. It could not be shown by this analysis that they were different
from the other habitation rooms, even in terms of floor area; they appear
to have been nothing more than large living rooms. Nonetheless, they
may have been clanhouses,     and a more         detailed study of present-day
clanhouses may suggest other evidence that can be looked for in prehis-
toric pueblos to document the existence of such rooms.
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function
                                                                          135
                        Summary and Discussion
During the excavation of Broken K Pueblo, it was noticed that there were
differences among the rooms, particularly with regard to size. To explain
this variability in behavioral or functional terms, however, it was first
necessary to describe the differences among the rooms more rigorously. In
addition to discovering the attributes that would provide accurate
measures of these differences, it was important to determine the extent to
which clustering could be demonstrated among the attributes. Although
seven different attributes were chosen for study, the ones that proved
most useful included size (floor area) and the presence or absence of
firepits, mealing bins, and ventilators.   A series of simple but powerful
statistical tests of association were employed in demonstrating that there
were two clearly distinguishable kinds of rooms (large and small rooms),
in addition to the already separated special rooms. The large rooms were
distinguished by having more than 6.5 square meters of floor area (some-
times much more), and by the fact that they contained slab-lined firepits,
mealing bins and ventilators; the small rooms had less than 6.5 square
meters of floor area, and did not contain such features. The special rooms
had a peculiar constellation of features all their own.
  A series of logical explanations for this variability among rooms was
then presented; it was obvious that this variability had resulted from the
fact that the rooms had been built to house different kinds of activities. It
was inferred that the large rooms had been designed for relatively large
groups of people, or for activities that required a relatively large space for
their performance. These activities must have required heat and/or light,
as well as fresh air and facilities for grinding food materials; they gave
every appearance of being living rooms. The small rooms, however, were
dark, unheated, and unventilated, and it seemed likely that they had been
storage rooms. The special rooms were inferred to have had an entirely
different function than any of the other rooms, perhaps ceremonial. The
scattered and paired nature of the spatial distribution of both large and
small rooms permitted the inference that each household had occupied at
least one pair of rooms (large and small), and that each such unit had
performed similar sets of activities in their rooms. Because there were
only a small number of special rooms, it was inferred that each of them
had been shared by a number of family or household units.
   An examination of the ethnographic evidence revealed a series of posi-
tive analogies between the nature of structural patterning at Broken K
and that in the Hopi and Zufi villages. It was found that the present-day
villages also contain   large, small, and special rooms,    and the internal
structural features of these rooms are generally the same as the features in
their supposed analogues at the site. And further, the different kinds of
rooms occurred in very. similar relative proportions in both cases, and the
large and small rooms tended to occur in pairs. The historic analogies
136                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
were so good, in fact, that they could hardly have been coincidental; on
this basis it was proposed that the three major kinds of rooms discovered
at Broken K Pueblo were in fact the functional equivalents of their formal
counterparts in present-day Pueblo villages. It also seemed possible that
the extra-large rooms at the site were functionally equivalent to the large
Hopi living rooms that serve as clanhouses.
   The next step was to test this proposition of functional equivalence; and
this required some additional (and independent) data. It was clear that if
the proposition was in fact true, the same general kinds of artifacts and
other cultural materials would be found in the three room types at Broken
K as are found in their supposed historic counterparts—or at least it could
be expected that evidence would be found at the site to document the
existence of the same general kinds of activities in these respective rooms.
   Upon examining the ethnographic evidence, it was found that the large
rooms in Hopi and Zufii villages are indeed living rooms, the small! ones
are storage rooms, and the special rooms serve as both ceremonial centers
and as clubhouses or lounging areas for the men. Although there is some
functional overlap among these kinds of rooms, it was found that they are
each used in distinctive sets of activities; and distinctive sets of cultural
materials occur in them as a result of these activities. The large rooms are
used in the greatest number of indoor family activities, especially those of
food processing, cooking, and eating. In addition, a great many manufac-
turing activities occur in these rooms, and water is stored and used in
them. The most important function of the storage rooms, on the other
hand, is the storage of food crops, especially corn, beans, and squash.
They are also used to store a number of other things, and they are occa-
sionally even involved in manufacturing activities, as well as some of the
other activities that are usually carried out in the living rooms. The spec-
ial rooms, in addition to being the centers of ritual activity, are used in a
wide variety of manufacturing and other secular activities (including
weaving). The extra-large rooms, or clanhouses, are occupied by the
headwomen of the different clans in a village and, in addition to being
ordinary living rooms, they serve as centers for clan meetings and the
storage of ritual paraphernalia.
   Given this discussion of the various kinds of activities that are com-
monly carried out in these different kinds of rooms,      it was possible to
point out some of the kinds of artifacts and other materials that could be
expected to occur in the different rooms at Broken K Pueblo. This was
presented in the form of a list of sixteen propositions or “expectations.” An
examination of the archeological data confirmed most of these proposi-
tions and, as was pointed out, we are justified in asserting that the three
major room    types at Broken K Pueblo      really do represent habitation,
storage, and ceremonial rooms. Whether or not the extra-large rooms
were clanhouses is still not known.
  There is no doubt, of course, that the activity-structure at Broken K
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                          187
remained stable during the 130 years in which the site was occupied. This
is demonstrated by the fact that there were no major differences in either
form or content among the rooms that had been constructed at different
time periods.
   Further, it is clear that the basic aspects of activity-organization have
not been significantly altered since a.p. 1300; they are virtually the same
among the modern Pueblos as they were then. In addition to the fact that
both the prehistoric and historic rooms are similar in terms of form and
function, the relative frequencies and spatial patterning among the rooms
has remained remarkably stable. It is almost certain that Broken K Pueblo
was composed of a number of households (perhaps about 25 of them),
each occupying at least one habitation room and one storage room, and
each carrying on the same fundamental sets of activities. This stability in
activity-structure holds true even though villages have gotten larger in
size, and have undergone changes in overall ground plan since a.p. 1300.
Further, it is likely that this stability extends at least as far back in time as
A.D. 800 or 900, the approximate period when surface masonry pueblos
were first being constructed in the Southwest.
  Nonetheless, while the general outlines of stability are evident, there
may also have been a few minor changes in activity-structure since A.D.
1300. This is suggested by the fact that not all of the propositions that
were tested were confirmed. Propositions 9 and 15 are particularly inter-
esting in this respect. Under proposition 9, it was expected that the stor-
age rooms at Broken K would contain great numbers of large undeco-
rated storage jars; this was not the case, and we may infer that the
inhabitants of the site were utilizing somewhat different storage tech-
niques than are employed by historic western Pueblo peoples. Proposition
10, on the other hand, included the prediction that large quantities of the
pollen or seeds of corn and squash would be found in the kivas; this, too,
proved not to be the case; it may be that these domesticates were not as
important ritually (or even economically) as they are among the present-
day Pueblo peoples ( Hill, 1964, 1966).
   In any event, the propositions that were not confirmed are just as
important as the ones that were (L R. Binford, 1967). In addition to pro-
viding evidence of culture-change, they provide new information that can-
not be obtained from ethnographic materials. They raise new questions,
and provide information which can serve as a basis for generating addi-
tional testable propositions. For example, one set of propositions, which
can be generated solely on the basis of the archeological data, is sug-
gested by the lack of pollen from domestic crops in the kivas:

   1. There was a shift in the physical or biological environment during
the time period in which the site was occupied.
   2. This environmental shift created conditions inimical to agriculture,
promoting reduced crop yields.
138                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
  3. Reduced crop yields forced the inhabitants of the site to rely heavily
on wild food crops, both economically and ritually.

While there are certainly other explanatory propositions that may pertain
in this case, these particular ones are clearly testable. We can predict that
if these propositions are correct, there ought to be independent evidence
in the environmental and archeological records to confirm them. We can
enumerate the kinds of evidence that could be expected under these
conditions, and then proceed to collect the relevant data to test them—
just as has been done in this paper with respect to the proposed functions
of rooms. As a matter of fact, these propositions have already been tested,
with marked success, using data derived from Broken K Pueblo and other
sites in east-central Arizona (Hill, 1965).
  In addition to the fact that new propositions can be generated on the
basis of those propositions that were    not confirmed,    they can also be
generated on the basis of information gained in the process of confirming
the others. It was suggested, for example, that the apparently paired
groups of rooms at ‘the site probably represent the loci of individual
household units. This proposition can be tested, of course, by examining
the ethnographic evidence to discover the kinds of stylistic differences
that distinguish present-day pueblo households and then examining the
archeological data in an effort to confirm the presence of similar stylistic
variation. One would not even think of gathering data relevant to such a
problem unless the problem had been in mind prior to excavation. It is
evident, however, that if residence units that are larger than households
can be identified using stylistic variability in various kinds of materials
(Longacre,   1963, 1964; Hill, 1965,    1966; Martin,   Longacre,   and Hill,
1967), then it ought to be possible to isolate the loci of individual house-
holds as well.
   The number of testable propositions that can be generated with respect
to past human behavior is virtually endless. The major conclusion to be
drawn is that by using this approach of generating and testing proposi-
tions it should be possible to expand our knowledge of the past almost
indefinitely. There is no need to rely solely on ethnographic data in
making inferences about the past. Although ethnographic evidence can
profitably be used to generate propositions, as has been done here, it is
equally feasible to use archeological data in the same way. Actually, it
matters little what kind of information is used; if the propositions are
testable (and of some scientific importance), they are useful to the ad-
vancement of knowledge.
   It cannot be stressed strongly enough, however, that our propositions
must be tested with data that is independent of the data used in formula-
ting them. The most common approach to making inferences about the
past can be illustrated with an example of the way in which the functions
of prehistoric pueblo rooms are usually inferred:
Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                           139
   1. The premise is stated that certain rooms look like living rooms be-
cause they contain firepits and mealing bins.
  2. Ethnographic data indicate that present-day pueblo living rooms
also contain these features.
   3. It is then proposed that since the prehistoric rooms have these fea-
tures, they must in fact be functionally the same as the historically re-
corded living rooms.

This is reasonable, of course, as far as it goes; but the analysis frequently
stops at this point, and the proposition (number 3 in this case) is repre-
sented as fact. In essence, the proposition is generated using both ethno-
graphic and archeological evidence, but it is left untested; there is little
attempt to find independent evidence that would either support or refute
it. This situation is common in all of the social sciences, and the problem
has been clearly stated by a noted philosopher of science:
      The most important feature about a hypothesis or proposition is that it is a
   mere trial idea. . . . Unfortunately, in many fields, especially on the border
   lines of science, hypotheses are often accepted without adequate tests. Plau-
   sibility is not a substitute for evidence, however great may be the emotional
   wish to believe. . . . The difficulty of testing hypotheses in the social
   sciences has led to an abbreviation of the scientific method in which this
   step is simply omitted. Plausible hypotheses are merely set down as facts
   without further ado (Wilson, 1952, pp. 26-27).
I have attempted to illustrate that we need not stop with the statement of
propositions; it is nearly always possible to find independent data with
which to test them.
   It is of further importance to note in this connection that when proposi-
tions are properly tested we are provided with measures of the degree to
which they are accurate. Such measures are not available when we simply
use ethnographic data to interpret the past, and the reason for this is
clear. If, for example, I had not tested the proposition of the functional
equivalence of room types at Broken K Pueblo with those among the
modern pueblos, there would have been no determination of the degree
to which the prehistoric rooms actually differ from the historic ones. The
discovery that the people of Broken K had different storage techniques
would not have been made, nor would it have been seen that corn and
squash were not frequently used in kiva rituals at the site. In applying
ethnographic evidence directly, I would simply have been asserting that
the prehistoric rooms (and activities) were the same as those that have
been recorded ethnographically. In short, there would have been no ex-
pansion of our knowledge of the past; we would simply have demon-
strated an ability to read the ethnographic literature.
  The difference in storage technique between Broken K and the modern
pueblos is probably the best illustration of this point. This incompatibility
with the ethnographic evidence suggests not only that certain changes
140                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
have occurred since A.p. 1300, but also that it is incorrect to assume that
large undecorated jars are always storage jars; they apparently had a
different function at Broken K Pueblo, and the same situation might be
found in other Southwestern pueblos. Whether this is true or not remains
to be seen, but it certainly warrants further investigation. Even as it
stands, this discovery represents an advance in knowledge that would not
have been forthcoming had the site been interpreted using ethnographic
evidence alone.
   It is evident, then, that archeology can contribute information of its
own: propositions can be generated and tested, and a great many things
can be learned that have not previously been known or speculated about
before. In addition to making use of available ethnographic evidence, it is
possible to discover new information that will be of use to ethnographers
and social anthropologists. This general methodology of generating and
testing propositions   is, of course,   not restricted to use in the American
Southwest; it is universally applicable.
  The substantive conclusions presented in this paper are not, of course,
wholly new; investigators have frequently been able to identify different
kinds of rooms in prehistoric pueblo sites. It is clear, however, that the
functional equivalence of prehistoric and historic room types has not
previously been demonstrated. Functional equivalence has been proposed
(and believed), on the basis of the fact that there are obvious formal
similarities; but the proposition has not been adequately tested.
   Still, I do not pretend to have presented many substantive conclusions
that have not already been believed for a number of years. I have used
this particular Southwestern example as a vehicle to illustrate what I
think is an important methodalogical approach in archeology. The sub-
stantive material was chosen because it is familiar to most archeologists
and is not in itself controversial.


                                  References

BEAGLEHOLE, Ernest. 1936. Hopi hunting and hunting ritual. Yale University
  Publications in Anthropology, no. 4. New Haven: Yale University Press.
——. 1937. Notes on Hopi economic life. Yale University Publications           in
  Anthropology, no. 15. New Haven: Yale University Press.
BEAGLEHOLE, PEarRL. 1935. Census data from two Hopi villages. American
  Anthropologist, 37(1) Part 1: 41—54.,
Brnrorp, Lewis R. 1967. Smudge pits and hide smoking: the use of analogy in
   archaeological reasoning. American Antiquity, 32(1): 1-12.
BrarnarpD, Marcarer. 1935. The Hopi Indian family: a study of the changes
   represented in its present structure and functions. Unpublished Ph.D. disser-
   tation, University of Chicago.
BuNZEL,   RutuH L. 1929. The Pueblo potter: a study of creative imagination in
  primitive art. New York: Columbia University Press.
 Hill Broken K Pueblo: Patterns of Form and Function                                 141
 Cocuran, WiiuiaM G. 1952. The X? test of goodness of fit. Annals of Mathe-
   matical Statistics, 23; 315—45.
 Cusuine, F. H. 1920. Zuni breadstuff. Indian Notes and Monographs, vol. 8.
   New York: Museum of the American Indian.
 Deetz, JAMes D. F. 1960. An archaeological approach to kinship change in
    eighteenth century Arikara culture. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard
    University,
         . 1965. The dynamics of stylistic change in Arikara ceramics.            Illinois
    Studies in Anthropology, no. 4. Urbana: University of Illinois.
  Donapson, THomas. 1893. Moqui Pueblo Indians of Arizona and New Mex-
    ico. Eleventh census of the United States, extra census bulletin. Washington,
    D.C.; U.S. Government Printing Office.
  Eccan, Frep. 1950. Social organization of the western Pueblos. Chicago: Uni-
    versity of Chicago Press.
       . 1964. Alliance and descent in western Pueblo society. In Robert A.
    Manners     (Ed.), Process and pattern in culture. Chicago: Aldine Publishing
    Company.
  Fisher, R. A. 1938. Statistical methods for research workers.         Edinburgh and
    London: Oliver and Boyd.
  Forve, C. Daryetv.     1931. Hopi agriculture and land ownership. Journal of the
    Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 61: 357—405.
  FREEMAN, LesLie G. Jr., and James A. Brown. 1964. Statistical analysis of
    Carter Ranch pottery. In Paul S. Martin et al. (Eds.), Chapters in the
    prehistory of eastern Arizona, II. Fieldiana: Anthropology, 55: 126—54.
  FRUCHTER, BENJAMIN. 1954. Introduction to factor analysis. Princeton, N.J.:
    D. van Nostrand.
  Haury, Emit W. 1940. Excavations in the Forestdale Valley, east-central Ari-
    zona.    University of Arizona   Bulletin,   11(4)    (Social Science   Bulletin, no.
    12).
  Hawtey, F. M. 1937. Pueblo social organization as a lead to Pueblo history.
    American Anthropologist, 39(3), Part 1: 504—22.
  Heyy, RicHarp Hotes. 1964. Pollen analysis of Quaternary achaeological
    and Lacustrine     sediments from the Colorado Plateau.         Unpublished Ph.D.
     dissertation, University of Arizona.
  Hitt, James N. 1965. Broken K: a prehistoric society in eastern               Arizona.
    Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.
       . 1966. A prehistoric community in eastern Arizona. Southwestern Journal
    of Anthropology, 22(1): 9-30.
  Hix,      James N., and Ricwarp H. Hevty.          1968. Pollen at Broken K Pueblo:
    some new interpretations. American Antiquity (In Press).
  Kroeser, A. L. 1917. Zuni kin and clan. Anthropological Papers of the Ameri-
    can     Museum   of Natural   History, vol. 28    (Part II). New   York:   American
    Museum of Natural History.
  LoncacrE, Witt1AM A. 1963.       Archaeology as anthropology: a case study.
.   Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.
  —. 1964. Archaeology as anthropology: a case study. Science, 144 (3625) :
    1454-55.
  Martin, Paut S., Wrtt1AM A. Loncacre, and James N. Hix. 1967. Chapters
    in the prehistory of eastern Arizona, Ill, Fieldiana: Anthropology, Vol. 57.
 MinveterF, Victor. 1891. A Study of Pueblo architecture, Fusayan and
   Cibola. Eighth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 1886—
   1887. Washington, D.C:: U.S. Government Printing Office.
142                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
Parsons, E. C. 1936. Hopi journal of Alexander M. Stephen. Columbia Uni-
  versity Contributions   to Anthropology,   Vols. 23 and 24. New    York:   Co-
  lumbia University Press.
RINALpDo, JoHN B. 1964. Artifacts. In Paul S. Martin et al. (Eds.), Chapters in
  the prehistory of eastern Arizona, II. Fieldiana: Anthropology, 55: 63—109.
Roserts, JoHN M. 1956. Zuni daily life. Monograph No. 2, Notebook No. 3,
  Lincoln: Laboratory of Anthropology, University of Nebraska.
SCHOENWETTER, JAMES. 1962. The pollen analysis of eighteen archaeological
  sites in Arizona and New Mexico. In Paul S. Martin et al. (Eds.). Chapters in
  the prehistory of eastern Arizona, I. Fieldiana: Anthropology, 53: 168—209.
Sears, WiLL1AM   H. 1961. The study of social and religious systems in North
  American archaeology. Current Anthropology, 2(3) : 223—46.
SIEGEL, SIDNEY. 1956. Nonparametric statistics for the behavioral sciences.
   New York: McGraw-Hill.
SPAULDING, ALBERT C. 1953. Statistical techniques for the discovery of artifact
   types. American Antiquity, 18(4): 305-13.
STEVENSON, Matitpa Coxe. 1904. The Zufi Indians: their mythology, esoteric
  fraternities, and ceremonies. Twenty-Third Annual Report of the Bureau of
  American Ethnology. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
     . 1909. Ethnobotany of the Zufi Indians. Thirtieth Annual Report of
  the Bureau of American Ethnology. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
  Printing Office.
STEWARD, JULIAN H. 1937. Ecological aspects of Southwestern society. Anthro-
  pos, 32: 87—104.
Titiev, Miscua. 1944. Old Oraibi: a study of the Hopi Indians of Third Mesa.
   Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology,
  22(1). Cambridge: Peabody Museum.
WaurTinc, Atrrep F. 1939. Ethnobotany of the Hopi. Museum           of Northern
  Arizona Bulletin, No. 15. Flagstaff: Museum of Northern Arizona.
Witson, E. Bricut, Jr. 1952. An introduction to scientific research.         New
  York: McGraw-Hill.
EIGHT
                                                     GEORGE     L. COWGILL
ee



                                              Computer Analysis
                                           of Archeological Data
                                 from Teotihuacan, Mexico




For the past several years, René Millon of the University of Rochester and
his associates have been engaged in the detailed mapping and intensive
archeological survey of the entire urban area of Teotihuacan, a great
prehispanic city covering more than eight square miles in the Valley of
Mexico   (Millon,   1964). There have, of course, been many       excavations
and restorations of specific structures and localities at Teotihuacan during
the past eighty years or so, but this is the first attempt to deal in a
systematic and thorough way with the city as a whole. Records are being
accumulated on all features detectable from the surface and on analyses
of surface collections for each of some 5,000 separate tracts; leading to an
enormous mass of detailed information.
   The past few years have also seen rapidly growing use of computers for
handling archeological data; especially in the use of multivariate statisti-
cal techniques which are too laborious to be feasible without computers.
So far as I know, none of these computer studies have attempted to deal
with a site as rich or as complex as Teotihuacan; they have all dealt with
the much smaller settlements of food collectors or with towns or villages
of food producers: This is not to say that studies of smaller sites have been
any less important either for their contributions to anthropological theory
or to computer technique; I merely wish to emphasize that the size and
complexity of Teotihuacan present problems and opportunities           some-
what different than those which characterized these earlier studies.
                                     143
144                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
  Since the spring of 1965, Millon and I have been collaborating in a pilot
study of computer analysis of his Teotihuacan data, working with a few
hundred tracts from those which have already been recorded." We have
received valuable assistance from other members of the mapping project,
especially from Bruce Drewitt, James Bennyhoff, Matthew Wallrath, and
James Dow.
   One major aim-of our computer work is to help us understand Teoti-
huacan better; in particular, to produce richer and better-substantiated
reconstructions of the city as a going concern during each phase of its
history. Here, instead of turning to the ethnographic literature on hunting
and gathering or on horticultural people for enlightenment or hypotheses,
one turns mainly to what is known of the broadly defined category of
“pre-industrial cities” (Sjoberg, 1960; Kraeling and Adams, 1960; Braid-
wood and Willey, 1962). Topics that particularly interest us include the
number and characteristics of the recognizable social classes in the city,
the extent to which different classes were sharply or rigidly defined, and
the kinds of craft specialties practiced. We would like to know the uses
and social functions of various kinds of artifacts and structures. We would
like to know what kinds of people lived in each district or neighborhood,
and what kinds of activities were carried out where. How was the city
organized and administered, and on what levels of centralization or de-
centralization were various ritual, political, and economic              activities and
services carried out? What kinds of changes and continuities through time
can be seen during the six centuries or so (roughly a.p. 100 to 700) that
the city flourished?
   Clearly, much can be established about these topics without computer
analysis of the survey data and, equally clearly, we do not expect that we
can use a computer to answer every question we would like to ask about
Teotihuacan. We do expect that we can establish some important findings
which it would have been difficult or impossible to demonstrate without
the aid of computer methods.
   One ultimate objective, then, is to learn more about Teotihuacan per se,
both for its own sake and as an important instance of an early urban
society to be compared with other examples in the Old and New Worlds.
At the same time, we find ourselves developing new concepts and tech-
niques for computer analysis which will be quite generally useful for
other bodies of archeological data. It is mainly some of these new con-
cepts and techniques that I wish to discuss in this paper.
   * Our computer work has been supported in part by the National Science Founda-
tion (Grant GS916) and in part by the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological
Research (Grant 1781). Brandeis University acted as the sponsoring institution and
provided important facilities and services, including access to an IBM 1620 computer
which, while too limited in capacity to handle many of our problems, has proved very
useful for some preliminary operations. The data themselves have been provided by
the Teotihuacan Mapping Project, directed by Millon, in part using University of
Rochester facilities. We are most grateful to all these institutions for their support and
assistance.
Cowgill Archeological Data from Teotihuacan                       145
  One of the most exciting archeological uses for computers is in the
generation of better taxonomies and other systems of ordering and sum-
marizing data on individual specimens and on assemblages of specimens;
this is closely related to the field of storage and retrieval of data on
specimens and assemblages. Each specimen is treated as a “case” charac-
terized by some particular observed value or state for each of many
variables or “dimensions” (the latter term was introduced and discussed
by Spaulding [1953, 1960]; the terms are synonymous). We have not
been pursuing this approach because an excellent classification and chro-
nology of Teotihuacan material is already available, thanks largely to
Bennyhoff; because fragmentary surface material is not nearly as good for
this as would be more complete excavated specimens; and above all
because we have more than enough to occupy us in working on other
equally exciting problems.
  Our conceptual framework is one in which tracts of the city, rather than
specimens, are taken as units or “cases,” and each tract is characterized by
many variables, which include characteristics of features detectable from
the surface and counts of artifacts of each category collected. It should be
pointed out very plainly that it is not feasible to encode for machine
processing everything recorded for every tract in the form of notes, draw-
ings, and photographs, nor is it necessary—or even, in my opinion, desir-
able. Things which are unique to a single site or a very small number of
sites are best apprehended and evaluated by more conventional methods;
and the costs of a larger and more complicated data code that would
attempt to provide for their description are not offset by any advantages
of machine processing. We do, however, want to avoid leaving out any-
thing which might later prove useful, and in this pilot study we have been
following the rule “When in doubt, include.” This has resulted in a set of
variables which requires seven punch cards, of eighty columns each, to
record the data from each tract. One of our objectives is to find out which
variables seem too unprofitable to justify their inclusion in the final full
analysis of the data. I should also mention that for any specific problem,
not all variables will be relevant. In some cases the computer can be
instructed to look at only some specified list of relevant variables, but in
other cases, especially in using previously written programs with built-in
limitations on the format of the input data, it will probably be easier to
run our original data through a simple program which recodes it, deleting
some variables, simplifying others, and sometimes creating new variables
which are functions of two or more of the original variables. This recoded
data can then be used as the input for other programs.
  What we aim to create with our present seven-card code is essentially
an “archival” record of all features which we think may be relevant for
any problems we may want to investigate by machine. Building up the
archive will be a relatively laborious job, but once it is done, a great many
recodings and simplifications of this data for specific problems will be
146                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
possible quickly and cheaply by machine,         without   need to return     to
further hand encoding of data.
   Any two tracts can be compared by noting their similarity or dissimilar-
ity for each variable considered relevant for any specific problem, and
there are a number of different mathematical measures designed to sum-
marize overall resemblance (many of which are reviewed by Sokal and
Sneath, 1963). Once a matrix of similarity or correlation coefficients for
all pairs of tracts has been obtained, multivariate techniques, including
factor analysis and various clustering methods can be used to generate
clusters and hierarchies of clusters of relatively similar tracts. This is a “Q-
technique” approach (Tugby, 1965, p. 8). Alternatively, we can also
evaluate the similarity in the distribution patterns of various pairs of
artifact categories or other variables, which is “R-technique,” and gen-
erate clusters and hierarchies of clusters of artifacts or other features with
relatively similar patterns of distribution.
   We aim to explore various methods of generating clusters and to com-
pare their consistency, intelligibility, and economy. At least to begin with,
we plan to make extensive use of computer programs contained in The
Multivariate Statistical Analyser, a package of mulitvariate programs de-
veloped by Kenneth Jones of Harvard University for use on the IBM 7094
(Jones, 1964). These appear to be at least as good as any other programs
of this kind available, and have the very great additional advantage that
they are already in routine use on computers in the Boston area, and that
Jones is readily available for assistance in using them.
   The general idea, of course, is that tracts which tum out to be in the
same cluster are importantly similar to one another, and presumably were
used by much the same kind of people for much the same purposes.
Artifact categories and other features which cluster together have highly
similar patterns of distribution, and presumably these similarities are not
accidental. Beyond this, it has to be stressed that clusters which emerge
are important data, but their interpretation in cultural terms may not be
self-evident. We see machine results as an aid to, not a substitute for,
human judgments based on a combination of controlled intuition, thor-
ough familiarity with the data, knowledge of relevant archeological and
ethnographic literature, and respect for the nature and limitations of the
evidence.
  I should mention that we have several additional kinds of computer
operations in mind; notably the production of quick but not too crude
maps or visual displays of the distributions of artifact categories, architec-
tural features, or clusters of any sort. We expect that such maps will be
valuable in guiding hypotheses, and at times they may answer some ques-
tions quite directly.
  Much of our work to date has been less concerned with these ultimate
objectives than with some essential preliminaries, chiefly in assessment of
the adequacy of the data and in some conceptual innovations we have
developed for data coding.
Cowgill Archeological Data from Teotihuacan                               147
  At the outset I had some distinct misgivings about the reliability we
could expect from surface collections, and I began by looking into the
extent that different workers collecting at different times and different
workers analyzing the collections at different times do in fact produce
comparable results. For four sites near the eastern edge of the city, collec-
tions had been made and analyzed separately in 1962 and 1963. Five
hundred and twenty sherds were collected in 1962, and 372 in 1963,
which is 72 per cent of the 1962 total, a reduction which may be due
wholly or partially to depletion from the previous collecting. Sherds had
been classified into nine phases, running from late Preclassic to Aztec. A
Chi-square analysis showed that for seven of the nine phases agreements
between 1962 and 1963 were very good. In fact, for six phases the dis-
agreement was considerably less than one might have expected from
unavoidable   sampling error. There was a greater discrepancy for one
phase, Tlamimilolpa, and far less Mazapan phase material in 1963 than
one would have expected. Nevertheless, excluding Mazapan and compar-
ing the other eight phases, differences    between   1962 and 1963 are not
significant at the 5 per cent level. It seems probable that the Mazapan
anomaly is due to shifting criteria for the recognition of that phase.
  In the earlier work, less emphasis was placed on obsidian than later,
and this is reflected by a pronounced increase in the 1963 proportion of
obsidian. This complicates things but it does not mean that early collec-
tions cannot be compared with later ones. It means that date of collection
must be taken into account as an important variable, and obsidian counts
in early collections must be multiplied by a suitable factor, perhaps best
determined by co-variance analysis.
  Another check on our data was made by comparing the 126 Miccaotli
phase sherds from these four sites at the eastern edge of the city with 586
sherds collected from 24 sites near the western edge of the city that were
assigned to Miccaotli by a different analyst. The comparison was made on
the basis of nine major ceramic categories. Here the agreements were all
good, and mostly amazingly good.
   Much more work remains to be done on checking the reliability and
validity of collections; in particular we have to find out more about the
effects of varying surface cover and varying degrees of site alteration.
But, from what has been done so far, the variations         due to different
workers have been far smaller than I had expected. We also have at least
a few indications that the effects of site alterations may also be unexpect-
edly small. Most important is that we have quite full data on present
conditions of sites, and can do a great deal by way of assessment of these
effects and correction for any that are large enough to warrant it.
   The remarkably good agreement between proportions of Miccaotli ce-
ramic categories at the eastern and western edges of the city calls for
comment. It implies not only uniformity in collecting practices, but great
similarity in what is actually in the sites, which in turn suggests consider-
able social similarity in these widely separated districts. This has to be
148                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
qualified in several ways for the moment. First, this comparison takes no
account of possible difference in non-ceramic features, nor of possible
internal variability within each district. Second, it is not very conclusive
for some rare categories in the smaller eastern sample. For example, six
censer fragments were expected there, but only three were found. This
discrepancy could easily be due to accidents in sampling. However, if the
same proportions hold when a larger sample is studied, so that we find
only thirty censer fragments where we would expect sixty, the difference
would then be highly significant, and would point to real differences in
the activities in the two districts. In other words, against a background of
close similarity in the proportions of common ceramic categories, there
may yet prove to be important contrasts between these two districts in the
abundance of certain rare categories. Finally, it will be of great interest to
see how both of these marginal districts compare with more central dis-
tricts, which could prove to be very different indeed.
   A somewhat different problem relating to adequacy of data derives
from the fact that specimens of rare categories are quite likely to be
collected from only a fraction of the sites in which they are really present.
One might suppose that all that is needed to correct for this is to include a
large number of sites in one’s sample. Actually, our mathematical investi-
gation shows that the expected absolute value of the correlation between
any easily missed category and any other category becomes lower than
the “true” value that would be found if the category were never missed,
and increasing the number of sites only increases the reliability of this
reduced correlation. This means that we can take individual sites as
“cases” only when comparing common or not easily missed categories;
while for scarcer categories we must pool sites and get a more “coarse-
grained” picture of their associations. By experimenting with different
criteria for pooling sites, a great deal of useful information can still be
extracted from scarce categories, however. An important topic for further
work will be improving criteria for deciding how “fine-grained” our treat-
ment of any specific rare category can be before correlations are seriously
reduced.
  Possibly the knottiest conceptual problem we have had to solve in
developing our data code concerns our units of analysis. I have so far
spoken rather easily of tracts or sites as if what I meant were self-evident,
but in fact it is not. Consider a case where four mounds are arranged
around the sides of a plaza as part of a clearly interrelated complex.
Certainly separate collections will have been made from each mound and
from the plaza itself, and frequently there are separate collections from
different parts of a single large mound or plaza. For some problems, we
may want to compare collections from different parts of a single mound,
treating each collection as a separate case. For other problems we want to
treat each whole mound as a single case; while for yet other problems we
want to compare the complex as a whole with other complexes, treating
Cowgill Archeological Data from Teotihuacan                                       149
the entire complex as one case or unit. It can be seen that there is no
single unit suitable for all problems.
  After some effort, we have developed a scheme based on the concepts
of collection tract, site, complex, macrocomplex, and neighborhood.
  The elementary indivisible building block or atom of the scheme is the
collection   tract, which   is whatever    actual physical tract was      collected
from and described as a unit by the field workers. A site is a minimal
distinguishable structural unit, such as a mound or an apparent residential
unit. Often a collection tract corresponds to a single site, but often for
various reasons one site was divided into two or more collection tracts.
Many sites are not clearly linked to any others, but in other cases several
sites form part of an interrelated        architectural   complex.   Sometimes,    in
turn, several complexes appear to be interrelated as elements of a larger
macrocomplex. If there are any meaningful macromacrocomplexes, they
are too rare to be useful for computer work. A final concept is the neigh-
borhood, which simply refers to the features that are physically close to a
given collection tract, whether there is any obvious relationship between
them or not. The neighborhood and the complex are quite different con-
cepts, since there may be closely neighboring sites which are not part of
the same complex, or sites belonging to one complex that are not espec-
ially close neighbors.
  Each collection record pertains primarily to the specific collection tract
from which the collection comes, and most of the data encoded for it are
about precisely that tract—features observed on it and counts of material
collected from it. But we also provide for data about the relationship of
the collection tract to a site, about the site itself, about the complex (if
any) that the site belongs to, about the macrocomplex (if any) that the
complex belongs to, and about features in the neighborhood of the collec-
tion tract. Any or all of these kinds of data may be needed as relevant
information about the context of a collection tract, and, starting with the
record of any collection tract, they must be readily accessible, even when
individual collection tracts are the units of analysis.
   When sites, complexes, macrocomplexes, or neighborhoods are the units
of analysis, we need a way for the computer to select all relevant collec-
tion tracts and summarize for itself the data from all of them. To do this
for neighborhoods, we have encoded the position of the approximate
center of each collection tract relative to the mapping project’s central
datum point, and this enables the machine to select all collection records
within any specified radius of a given tract, or within any specified dis-
tance in any specified direction. To get data on all tracts of a given site,
complex, or macrocomplex,      we can construct a loop in which each tract
record specifies the name of one other tract belonging to the same unit.
That is, tract A lists tract B, tract B lists C, and C lists A, so that one can
start at any given point in the loop and complete the whole circuit.
Within any given loop all tracts belonging as well to the same complex or
150                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
the same site can be identified, also. Once one has all tracts of a given site
or complex or macrocomplex linked together in this fashion, it is really
only necessary to encode data on the site as a whole for one collection
tract of the site, or data on the complex as a whole for one collection
tract of the whole complex, since we can get quickly from any collection
tract record of the complex to any other.
   Finally, even though the aim of our work is to enable us to make new
interpretations    of the data that would    not otherwise    be possible, it is
extremely helpful to have available the various interpretations which sug-
gest themselves in the field or in the course of encoding the data. We are
calling all these interpretations “preliminary” in order to emphasize their
distinctness from interpretations made         after computer    analysis. They
range from some that strike us as inescapable conclusions, to others that
are not much more than informed hunches. We have provided for ratings
of our confidence in them and for alternative interpretations in ambig-
uous cases. One use to be made of these preliminary interpretations is in
looking at all units interpreted as representing structures of a certain type
or as having a certain function, and finding out all the ways in which they
contrast   as a group,   with all other units.    Or, we   can   see   how   much
variation there is among units interpreted as belonging to some specific
category. Also, clusters can be generated without regard to preliminary
interpretations,   and one can then observe the extent to which any result-
ing clusters coincide with any categories based on preliminary interpreta-
tions. In all these examples, of course, we must be constantly aware that
insofar as some observed features point to specific preliminary interpreta-
tions, the logic involved is partly circular, and attention must be focused
on unexpected associations or lacks of associations that turn up.

                                  References
Braipwoop, R. J., and G. R. Witiey (Eds.). 1962. Courses toward urban life.
  Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Jones, Kennetu. 1964. The multivariate statistical analyser. Cambridge: Har-
   vard Computing Center, Harvard University.
Krae.inc, C. H., and R. M. Apams (Eds.). 1960. City invincible. Chicago:
  University of Chicago Press.
Mitton, RENE. 1964. The Teotihuacan mapping project. American Antiquity,
  29(3): 345—52.
SJOBERG, GipEon.     1960. The Preindustrial city. Glencoe, Illinois: The Free
  Press.
SoxaL, R. R., and Sneatu, P. H. A. 1963. Principles of numerical taxonomy.
  San Francisco and London: W. H. Freeman.
SPAULDING, A. C. 1953. Statistical techniques for the discovery of artifact types.
  American Antiquity, 18 (4): 305-13.
——. 1960. The dimensions of archaeology. In Gertrude R. Dole and Robert
  L. Carneiro (Eds.), Essays in the science of culture: in honor of Leslie A.
  White. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.
Tucspy, Donap. 1965. Archaeological objectives and statistical methods:             a
   frontier in archaeology. American Antiquity, 31(1): 1-16.
NINE                              WILLIAM    A. LONGACRE    AND JAMES E, AYRES




                                             Archeological Lessons
                                     from an Apache Wickiup




During the summer of 1965, an abandoned Apache living site was investi-
gated as a part of research undertaken by the University of Arizona
Archaeological Field School. The site appeared to have been deserted
quite recently. The former occupants left behind a considerable quantity
of cultural materials that seemed to have been only slightly disturbed.
The patterned distribution of cultural items and features suggested that
the site had a structure which might reflect aspects of the behavior and
organization of the people who occupied it. To test this proposition, we
tried to make deductions concerning the nature of activities carried out at
the site. An Apache informant was used to check the validity of our
interpretations.
   Our first step in the investigation was to delimit the area of occupation
and to describe the distribution and types of features and artifacts found.
A general map of the site and a plan of the wickiup floor were drawn.
Photos were taken of all features. While describing the features and arti-
facts, deductions were made concerning their use. Later, these interpreta-
tions were checked by consulting the female Apache informant. We made
every effort to phrase our questions as objectively as possible so as not to
   1 Paper presented at the Annual Meeting, Society for American Archeology, Reno,
Nevada, May, 1966. We thank Dr. Harry T. Getty, Department of , Anthropology,
University of Arizona, who made several valuable comments on this paper; Larry D.
Agenbroad who made the site map; and Bev Lea Teasley and Lorraine Williams, field
school students, who aided in.the field work.

                                      151
152                                                Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
elicit answers she might have thought we wanted. We let her explain in
her own words the use of the features and artifacts.
   The living site is located in the northeast part of the Fort Apache
Indian Reservation in the rugged, forested country south of the Mogollon
Rim. It lies on the north side of the westernmost branch of Spring Creek,
which follows a southerly course to join the Salt River. This area is in-
cluded in the physiographic province known as the transition zone—trans-
itional between the plateau to the north and the mountain region to the
south.
   The camp lies at an elevation of about 5750 feet on a structural terrace
formed by differential erosion. Seventy feet below lies Spring Creek
which flows only part of the year. A spring, located about 200 yards to the
west of the site and slightly above Spring Creek, has a permanent flow. It
occurs in an area where sandstone and shale are interbedded with the
shale acting as a water-confining layer. The artesian spring is caused by a
fracture which intersects an aquifer. The presence of this spring is prob-
ably the primary reason for the location of the Apache camp.
  There is moderately dense vegetation, including shaggy-bark and alli-
gator-bark juniper, pifion, and yellow pine, as well as live oak, yucca, bear
grass and squaw bush.




                                                                  APACHE
                                                                  WickiuP




                                                                    DOOR        AS oO”
                                                                              WOODEN
            PREPARED     va                                                    BOX
            SLEEPING
            AREAS
                                              ee                                       HEARTH @ FRYING PANS

                       [        /
   RAMADA                                      HORT! ")                       ASH      j
            TooL                             Lee we
            CLUSTER     =
                       CAN   OVER HEARTH                               BUSH

                                            (ARIZ. P; 14: 20)
                                              SCALE I"22M

                               COHEARTH




                                           Figure 1. Site plan.
Longacre/Ayres         Lessons from an Apache Wickiup                   153
  The immediate vicinity of the site revealed a long record of human
occupation. The wickiup was constructed beside the remains of one of the
buildings of a ranch built around the turn of the century. An older wicki-
up was discovered nearer the spring. The ranch was established on top of
trash from a small thirteenth-century pueblo, which in turn was erected
on a preceramic lithic site.
   The campsite may be divided into three major units—the wickiup at
the north end, a ramada at the south end about forty feet from the
wickiup, and the space in between         (Fig. 1). Many of the social and
economic activities of the occupants appear to have taken place out-of-
doors. Hearths, a tool cluster, and piles of ash, as well as other features
attest to this fact.
  A variety of tools and features appeared on the floor of the wickiup
(Fig. 2). At the rear of the dwelling was a thick layer of pine needles
placed in a shallow depression and surrounded by boards and poles.
About one-third of the floor space was taken by this feature.
  In the center of the floor we found a hearth covered by a small wash
tub. On one side of the hearth lay a fan-shaped bundle of turkey feathers,
and on the other side an enameled pail.
   There were several tin cans of various sizes on the floor along the south
wall, some of which showed unmistakable signs of having been used in a
hearth. A denim sack containing pots and pans was hanging on a trimmed
branch. A gallon-sized tin can with a homemade handle of wire, several
cans full of nails, a wooden box, a piece of burlap sack, a one-hand mano,
and a small slab metate were also found along the south wall.
  Several pieces of wood, a piece of window screen, an enameled basin, a
large milk can cover, a piece of plastic sheeting, and a bread wrapper
were found in the northeast corner of the wickiup. Also, on the north side
of the floor we found a wallet containing a paper on which was written a
man’s name. This was the only definitely male-associated item we discov-
ered on the site.
  Two plastic Clorox bottles were suspended by means of wire hooks
from the walls.
  At the south end of the site is a shade which was cut out of the center
of a clump of juniper and pine. This forms a shelter that is the functional
equivalent of a ramada and for which no formal construction was needed.
The area was scraped clean of debris to form the floor. No tools and
features were located in this structure. Other tools and features were
located between the ramada and the wickiup; they clustered in two units,
one around the ramada and one around the wickiup.
  Just outside the ramada was a group of objects: the cover from a
wooden Winchester cartridge case, a bundle of twigs, and a stick with a
flattened tin can fastened to one end. North of the ramada, and in the
same clump of trees, we found two scooped-out rectangular depressions
filled with small pieces of juniper branches. We found a hearth covered
154         Variability in a Single Occupational Unit




                                                 (wes)
                                                                                           yod


                                                 seyjooy




                                                           Yod peyounuz 3   wysoq ysDm 4
                                                                                           veo



                                                 Aoqeny
                                                                                           wl

                                                 0                                              Gay
                                                                                                Ss  yous
                                                                                                    joo,
                                                                                                    “1
                                                                                                qs0ey
                                                                                                YOM
                                                                                                Jeno




                                          wooo




                       Wis,2 21V9S


                      (OZ vid ‘ZiMv)


                    Wd    YOOTd dNINOIM




             Ail.
      TWA
      907




                                                                                                           dmyory
                                                                                                           ‘unjd
                                                                                                           soozf
                                                                                                           aanary
                                                                                                           “go
Longacre/Ayres Lessons from an Apache Wickiup                             155
by half a five-gallon can in the same area, and there was a small stick
lying partially under it; to the east of this was another, larger hearth.
  To the northwest of this area was a long pole supported on one end by
a tree and on the other by a forked stick. Located northeast of the pole
was a pile of ash.
  At the entrance to the wickiup stood a large wooden-box open on one
side, and behind the box was      a small, shallow pit. To the east of the
entrance lay a hearth with two frying pans and nearby was a large pile of
ash. In a bush beside the ash pile, eight bundles of twigs were found.
   The wickiup appears to be similar in size and shape to other wickiups
in the area (Gerald, 1958; Shaeffer, 1958; Tuohy, 1960). The materials
used in its construction are traditional except for the use of corrugated
metal sheeting as an outside cover instead of bear grass (Shaeffer, 1958,
pp. 17-18). The wickiup is built against one of the earlier ranch build-
ings and the wall of this structure forms one side of the wickiup. The
remainder of the construction is similar to other Cibecue wickiups.
   The size and nature of the site suggested that a small social unit had
occupied it, probably a household consisting of a nuclear family. The well-
built structure suggested that the occupation was not temporary, and the
presence of the ramada indicated that at least part of the occupation was
during warm weather.
   The site is characterized by a series of discrete activity areas. The camp
may be divided into three gross sections: (1) the wickiup itself, (2) the
ramada, and (3) the spaces in front of the wickiup and near the ramada.
The analysis of the features and the distribution of tools and other cul-
tural items suggested that the nature of the activities and tasks carried out
in these three areas was differentiated. The density of features and cul-
tural items indicated that the wickiup and the outside activity area were
used more intensively than was the featureless ramada where no cultural
items were found.
   A number of clues pointed to the specific nature of the activities carried
out in these three sections of the site. The outside area contained three
hearths, all of different types, as well as several ash dumps. In addition,
there was a grouping of tools located near the ramada found in a cluster
in an area about two feet in diameter. Also, near the ramada were two
prepared sleeping areas adjacent to one another, but with different orien-
tations. Near these sleeping areas were the pole and forked stick de-
scribed above. The outside area lacked features and tools associated with
storage and food preparation (for example, grinding tools).
   The gross inferences from this array of tools and features suggested
that the nature of out-of-doors activities included several forms of cook-
ery, and a specific task associated with the cluster of tools. There was also
an area for sleeping during pleasant weather. Except for the sleeping
area, all these activity areas seemed to reflect female-task performance.
  Three   kinds of cookery were     inferred from the different types of
156                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
hearths and their associated artifacts. There was a fairly small circular
hearth located in front of the wickiup with associated frying pans. We
inferred that this specific area was used primarily for fry-pan cookery.
Near the ramada was a larger hearth covered by half a metal can; this
appeared to be either an oven or some sort of a grill. There was a stick in
place in the ashes with a charred tip that apparently was used to adjust
the coals. A larger irregular hearth was located more peripherally; there
were no associated containers. We inferred a roasting or broiling function
for this feature.
  The cluster of tools near the ramada presented us with a problem.
Because they were found together, we inferred that they were used in a
single task, but we were unable to suggest the exact nature of the task.
Had we been more familiar with Apache ethnography at the time of this
investigation, the functional nature of this tool grouping would have been
clear.
   The two sleeping areas suggested that there was segregation in sleep-
ing. The obvious division in a nuclear family unit would be between
adults and children. We were unable to suggest the functional nature of
the pole and forked stick adjacent to the sleeping area.
  The absence of tools and features in the ramada indicated that certain
types of activities were at least not carried out in this structure. Neither
food preparation nor cookery was indicated. It probably was the scene of
light tasks involving portable equipment and relaxation in the shade.
   The wickiup itself reflected a much greater complexity of activities.
The nature of features and equipment suggested the following: sleeping,
storage, cookery, and food preparation. The location and nature of fea-
tures and the associated tool clusters on the wickiup floor permitted some
specific inferences regarding the nature of these activities.
   The sleeping area was located at the rear of the structure and was well
defined. The presence of the exterior sleeping areas suggested that the
wickiup was used for sleeping when the weather was inclement.
  The hearth in the wickiup was fairly large and was covered with an
inverted wash tub. There was some sooting on the interior of the tub
which we could not explain. The tub did not appear to be related to
cookery of any sort.
  There were several well-defined storage areas. One, near the doorway,
was reserved for fuel. Along the south wall was a cluster of containers
used in cookery. At another spot along the same wall was a wooden box
which probably served as a storage facility. Pots and pans and plastic
Clorox bottles, probably for water storage, were suspended from various
hooks in the walls.
  A cluster of tools occurring along the south wall was used in food
preparation; these included grinding tools and an associated piece of
burlap.
  From this array we made the following inferences:        (1) The range of
Longacre/Ayres Lessons from an Apache Wickiup                        157
activities carried out inside the wickiup was more varied than those un-
dertaken elsewhere on the site. (2) The structure served as the primary
storage facility for the social unit. (3) The wickiup was used for sleeping
only in bad weather. (4) Some cookery and food preparation were car-
ried out inside the structure. (5) The nature of the vessels inside the
structure suggested a form of cooking involving boiling rather than fry-
ing, raising the possibility that this form of cookery may have been local-
ized inside the wickiup. (6) There is also the possibility that activities of
food preparation were localized inside the structure.
   The spatial array of cultural items and features inside the wickiup was
highly structured. This non-random distribution reflected a formal parti-
tioning of space inside the wickiup in terms of specific activities. Tools
and equipment used in specific tasks were segregated and occurred in
clusters. There were well-defined use areas including storage, sleeping,
cooking, and food preparation. The nature of task performance localized
inside the wickiup appeared to be female-related, cookery and food prep-
aration in particular.
   Some summary remarks are in order at this point. The size and nature
of the site suggested it was occupied by a single nuclear family: a hus-
band, his wife, and unmarried children. The nature of activity areas and
tools reflecting specific task performance appeared to be female-related.
This indicated a strong sexual division of labor and that the primary
activities carried out at the camp were female activities. The only tool
noted at the site that might reflect male task performance was an axe
head, but this is a tool used by females in firewood collection as well.
  The nature of construction suggested a degree of permanence for the
occupation, but the lack of any evidence for agriculture cast some doubt
on this appraisal. There were no tools noted that might have functioned
in farming; there were no indications of agricultural plots either near the
site or down near the spring and creek. Also, single Apache families do
not generally live in isolated camps    (Goodwin,    1942, pp. 123—25). The
common pattern among the Western Apache is family clusters. A great
deal of sharing and cooperation necessitates spatial proximity of related
families. There is a great deal of pooling of labor in agricultural endeav-
ors; activities carried out by individuals are generally rare occurrences.
The only exception to this is the temporary exploitation of seasonally
available resources by family units (Goodwin, 1942, pp. 155-56). Histor-
ically, this included such activities as the exploitation of seasonally avail-
able wild plant resources.
  All these factors suggested that although the camp was somewhat per-
manent in construction, it might have been seasonally occupied. The lack
of male-related task performance reflected at the site suggests that the
specific function of the site was as a temporary camp for logistic support
of a nuclear family with the male member carrying out some sort of
seasonal exploitative activity elsewhere.
158                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
   To assess the validity of our inferences, we consulted an Apache infor-
mant, a female living at Grasshopper. She was most generous with her
help and agreed to visit the site with us. As it turned out, this was
fortunate as the women knew the family who had built and occupied the
site and, in fact, had visited the family at the camp when it was in use.
With her help, we were able to record a great deal of specific data
regarding the localization of task performance and the specific function of
areas, facilities and tools.
   The site was occupied by a single Apache family from Cibecue, a
husband and wife and two young children. The site was utilized from the
fall of 1962 through the spring of 1963. Thus the site had been abandoned
for more than two years before we began our investigation. The camp
was established to serve as a base of operations while the husband cut
and shaped juniper posts to sell during the following year.
  Most of the general inferences we made were essentially correct, and
the nature of the use of the sections of the camp was accurately inferred.
Many of our specific inferences were also correct. Our suggestions con-
cerning the localization of different forms of cookery as reflected in the
feature analysis and the association of certain types of containers were
accurate. The segregation of the exterior sleeping areas was in terms of
the adults and their children. The primary storage facility was the wicki-
up.
   Several problems were solved with the help of our informant. The pole
and forked stick served as a framework on which to hang bedding to air.
The cluster of tools located near the ramada was utilized in a single
activity. The wife is well known for her pitch-lined water bottles which
she makes during the winter, and the tools were used in the construction
of water bottles. The wooden box top served as a platform, the spatulate
tool was used to apply the pitch, and the bundle of shoots was simply a
package of raw materials. The bottles are built from squawbush rods. The
other tool clusters observed are also related to specific tasks. The mano,
metate, and burlap form a single cluster; the burlap is used to catch the
meal as it is ground. The can over the hearth near the ramada served as a
grill on which the woman cooked tortillas. The tub inverted over the
wickiup hearth was simply a safety device. The structure is not windproof
and when it is left for any period of time the tub is used to cover the live
coals to prevent them from spreading and causing a fire. The hearth in
front of the wickiup was used primarily for fry-pan cooking of bread. The
ash piles were dumps for disposal of ashes. No specific function could be
determined for the large box outside the wickiup or for the pit.
   The implications of this investigation are fairly obvious. What we have
done is define the structure of a habitation site in some detail and relate
this structure to the organization and behavior of the social group that
produced it. We conclude that this experiment has been successful in that
(1) we were able to define the material structure and (2) we were able
Longacre/Ayres Lessons from an Apache Wickiup                            159
to demonstrate the relations between this structure and the social unit and
its behavior.
   This suggests that the archeologist might well want to define and de-
scribe the material structure of an archeological site as a necessary step in
inferring the structure and behavior of extinct social groups. It would
seem to us that the material structure might be defined quantitatively,
permitting the mutual variation among all types of data to be measured.
Thus the archeologist might well attempt to assess the mutual variation
among pottery styles and container types, stone and bone tools, types of
features and structures to strengthen his inferences regarding behavior
and organization of extinct social groups. We contrast this suggestion
with the standard description of such archeological data in separate chap-
ters of a monograph with little or no attempt at relating these different
kinds of data in a systematic way.
  It is the primary conclusion of this admittedly crude study that archeo-
logists can go far beyond the statements contained in the standard sum-
mary chapters in reports, placing sites into a regional chronology and a
general cultural context.


                                 References

GeraLp,   Rex E. 1958. Two   wickiups on the San Carlos   Indian Reservation,
  Arizona. The Kiva, 23(3): 5—11.
Goopwin, GRENVILLE. 1942. The social organization of the Western Apache.
  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
SHAEFFER, MARGARET W. M. 1958. The construction of a wickiup on the Fort
  Apache Indian Reservation. The Kiva, 24(2): 14—20.
Tvony, Donatp R. 1960. Two more wickiups on the San Carlos Indian Reser-
  vation. The Kiva, 26(2): 27—30.
            C—O"                                                   .               i            ait       .

                             SPOR aie
                 PY          pares oth becy@leomy
                                        aes,              ‘se              <i
            ~daetaiel FAs oo(open -acrennaeriaal merle &
                 y=            Yon                    Swat We                                                                  a                  a.                                 ahd
             Paowe »                    taut ier                   nee At lee                             Dew ea                                  aie
                 Tat, eee                                                          ee


                                            hap           tee Sd KEM                            AA be
                                                aT                                                            +e               ¢)       een,                    4! tiple
                        te M8                                 yew ge                       iy cpm artad ewmnataialt                                                                       ran

                                                 oes               ct       ed         =,                                               agra) 4ee
                 g dr) vAvibe Ws Ieilinte”                                                      Onl jae;                                @ (nee                                       Cae

                                                                                   e                                  eile                    a          6      =        rage        a     :

                                                                           >                              7                                             17a                    ant        a
        J                                                                                                                                                                       7               7
                                                                                   =                          nag                                                    a
        7                      ai        Maer                                                       cipi                                                                            =O
        ‘

    7            aerate!                A       (od                a1      =           W        ey dij Oe

    a              :                     LAP                                                                  ah!
                 wan                Awe                                            a

a                      ie               pad                                ea          ae                         B
~                      ey,      > “a>                 _            S        ) ee oe                 ee                                                                    aw
                                                              oy       olel (40 saa teed                              ivy                Nina            sit               =
             y   papal o       hea,          r

                                    |                     ee                                                          oy tee a Me al
                                                                                                                                 LASTS
                                                      |                                         p                     aa                           vont doen
                                                                                                                            Listen                                   oa
                                                                                                                      ;                   a              Apia    4       ees)

                           a
                                                                                       7                                   om » Crt ay (Ua ae                         a
                                                                                                                  ’                 i             ti    Joey      tes shee Ah: ;

                                                                                                              :                     ot                          >) =a
                                                                                            i       aay           2         oh                         a) sm pore,         ee            DV, ST

                                                                                           %                           -        argh                     :       + why                   fo,
                                                                                           fs       oe)               i                 era              7      a) “oniiag vs Whig


                        i}                                                                                                      paleo itive                                TEM Koll MG
                                                                               -                                          Sie       |         i         Si      gis      vy              ie

                                                                       :                            MOA                                   Cree dabei
                                                                                                          ing             bP        Ly ee
                                                                                                    2     a               de            pk Oe eae

                                                          A                Be                   ee
                                                  ;                    1) ae aanine                                                               a                  a
TEN
                                                    BOBBY    JO   WILLIAMS
~s



                                            Establishing Cultural
                               Heterogeneities in Settlement
                  Patterns: An Ethnographic Example




This paper began as a straightforward, brief ethnography of residence
patterns among bands of a hunting-gathering group, the Birhor living on
the Chota Nagpur plateau of southern Bihar, India. It was hoped that
from the ethnographic data certain descriptive generalizations might be
advanced which would be of use to the archeologist in making inferences
about prehistoric cultures.
   The possible generalizations entertained suffered, from the archeolo-
gist’s point of view, from the fact that their confirmation on archeological
data alone would require greater control in the observation and measure-
ment of cultural variables than is presently provided in archeological
method.   On the other hand, the archeologist      has at his disposal data
which in some ways are a more direct reflection of the culture of a people
than are those of the ethnographer.       I suggest this because the ethno-
grapher returns with data which are largely weighted in the direction of
verbal behavior   only; retrospective historical accounts,   informants’   de-
scriptions, explanations and rationalizations concerning their way of life.
Some of this verbal material is after-the-fact discussion of ecologically
influenced cultural regularity and may obscure as well as reveal certain
relationships.
   The ability of the archeologist to test generalizations about culture
depends to a large extent on his ability to detect minor cultural differ-
                                    161
162                               Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
ences from this non-verbal data. The traditional approach to this problem
has been that of distinguishing patterns—that is, setting up typologies of
artifactual material, residence patterns, etc.—but the establishment of
typologies, by its nature, obscures finer cultural differences. In this paper
I would like to suggest a technique which will detect fairly fine or minor
cultural differences prior to the establishment of typologies.
   To make this thought less elliptical, let me cite a possible example. A
current problem in theories on primitive society concerns the prevalence
of the patrilocal exogamous band on Radcliffe-Brown’s model of the Aus-
tralian horde. The critics of the view that this form of organization was
very widespread among hunters point to the many ethnographically
known exceptions. Proponents of the model suggest that most of these
exceptions are due, directly or indirectly, to European contact (cf. Ser-
vice, 1962). Since discussion must usually stalemate at this point, I sug-
gest that it is the archeologist who must provide the crucial data. Let us
postulate, as I do, that pre-agricultural hunting society was in most cir-
cumstances a territorially localized, multi-family, unilineal descent group
whose size variation was fairly closely bounded. If such bands are line-
ages, the recruitment or the ideological charter for membership involves
reckoning of descent relationship. The latter can be carried out in either
of two ways. First, this reckoning may be through kinship terminology
without the use of proper names, as was found to be the case among the
Birhor and has frequently been reported for hunting societies. On the
other hand this reckoning may be true genealogical recitation.
  The former system is much more rapidly adjustable to demographic
realities than the latter, and lineage bands so chartered in ideology should
be able to gain or lose account of membership so as to maintain op-
timum size more readily than the latter. The archeological hypothesis
then might be that the coefficient of variation in household number per
camp in Paleolithic society would be smaller than in ethnographically
known, true genealogically based lineages.
   Some of the difficulties in testing this are apparent as soon as the
hypothesis is stated. An outstanding difficulty is in deciding whether
house patterns which appear in the same horizon represent a single
group, the same group occupying the site consecutively, or two or more
groups occupying the site concurrently.
   Solving such problems would be essential prior to dealing with the
illustrative hypothesis posed above, just as it is essential to many other
problems which archeologists hope to handle. The approach thus far to
such problems is in the development of dating techniques for finer and
finer control of the time variable. In this case it might be possible through
palynology to establish that the houses were occupied at the same season.
It might eventually be possible to show, through minor shifts in direction
of magnetic flux detectable in the hearths, that a space of years separated
certain houses. These and other dating improvements constitute possibili-
ties but they will never answer the question which we shall address, was
Williams Cultural Heterogeneities in Settlement Patterns                                         163
the site occupied concurrently by more than one band?
   This is part of the general problem of detecting minor cultural hetero-
geneities within a site. I would like to suggest                            a method which can in
some cases detect small cultural differences when no spatial or temporal
heterogeneity is detectable. The method will be explicated, then illus-
trated with data of the kind easily recoverable by the archeologist on a
single Birhor campsite occupied contemporaneously by four Birhor bands
during the dry season and wet season of 1961.


                                         The Method
Let us designate the nominal categories in two dichotomous variables in a
population as A and A
              Band B.
If A and A have relative frequencies in the population of p and q, respec-
tively, and B and B have relative frequencies of r and s, respectively, then
independence means that the joint distribution of the two variables will
give cell frequencies
                                                   A                  A
                            B                   pr                    qr

                            B            | Sp                         Sq

If these dichotomies represent presence-absence, then the category “one
present or the other present, but not both” (p/a) has the frequency pr +
sq, the category “both present” (p/p) has frequency pr, and a/a has
frquency sq.
  Now assume we have M populations of equal size. If all M populations
were identical with respect to these variables, we could treat the overall
group as a single population and we would find
                                                M
                Freq. p/p          1/M          QUbiti                     = pF
                                 M
                Freq. p/a = 1/M ))  (spit qai)= 56 + 97
                                i=1

                                               M
                Freq. a/a = 1/M                >) Si:                      =3q
                                               i=1


Considering first the a/a category, it can be shown that

                                <A                                   EY     Dm
                     1/MMY De sasq = 39 9 == (TE)
                                              (—) Ce
                                                  (—)
                                                                     SM                           k
             only   when    ‘ASy     =   S52   =       3   2.   ==

                                                                           conditions of homogenity.
                     and     1     =     @=°°°                  =    Cn
164                                     Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
If either of these conditions does not hold, then

                                 Dost    <     Ds DA,
                                  M              M
We can specify the magnitude of the inequality in the following manner:
By definition of co-variance,
                                        M
                         o,, = 1/M > Gp)                      (gr —@)
                                         M
                             =    1/M   >) siqi      — §G
                                        i=1

                therefore     1/M 54;          a         in    oper

This says that the frequency of the category a/a is 1/M = s,q: = sq when
the overall sample is homogeneous.
   When the overall sample is heterogeneous in the frequency of one or
the other variable such that some s; ¥ s; or p: ~ p;, then the frequency of
the category a/a is 1/M 2s.q: = sq + Ow. That is, heterogeneity inflates
this category even though the variables are randomly distributed within
the subpopulations.
  Using the same line of reasoning, we can show that the category p/p
has frequency
                  = p7 when homogeneous
                  = p7 + o,, when heterogeneous.
  Further, it can be shown that         Sy =       Tyg    AS follows:

                Sy, = 1/M Ddopr - pi                                       Soap
                                                                              ie 7
             G4 = 1/M Disq — 59                                       q=1-—p
                   a1)      M Di    (laste     os             Daal se        Pall peas),
      which reduces to      og     i/M Ypr—pr=                        Sh
  The above holds for the case where the M subpopulations are ot un-
equal size but, in this case, the means p, q, 7, § must be weighted means.
  To summarize, we have said that heterogeneity among the subpopula-
tions with respect to one or more variables will inflate both the p/p and
a/a classes by equal amounts. And since the relative frequencies

                            b/b + p/a
                                    + a/a = 1
                            Freq. p/p = pr+              o,

                            Freq. p/a = Sp + pf — 26,,
                            Freq. a/a = §¢+ Gy.
   This means that when we have a priori knowledge or reason to believe
Williams Cultural Heterogeneities in Settlement Patterns                                 165
that two variables are independently distributed we can test for cultural
heterogeneity by means of a simple test of association such as x’.

                       An Ethnographic Example
Figure | illustrates an area known as Panch Pera (the five trees) which is
a rise of ground near the Mohana River near the village of Kanosar,
Hazaribagh District, Bihar. Four Birhor bands were camped at Panch
Pera during the dry season and most of the following wet season of 1961.
The location of the bands relative to one another is shown in Figure 1 as
well as the placement of individual leaf huts.




                       Camp of Bano A                  ’
                       1s LOCATED ON                 4°
                       &   CENTRAL   ELEVATED      be)
                       KNOLL




                                                Pancw       Pera     Camp  196!
                                                   Four       Bimvnor Banos
                                                           Binar, Inna
                                                           Oca    Fear
                                        Se
                                        o tc 4 +e © ©0© 0                MO   60   180




                                            Figure 1.


  The site is chosen as an illustration not because these bands were well
known to the author—they were not—but because it is a case of four
bands coming together at one site at one point in time. The four bands
166                                        Variability in a Single Occupational Unit
share the same general culture and in some detail. They are socially
distant enough from one another, however, to be able to exchange daugh-
ters in marriage. A stated Birhor rule is that one does not marry relatives.
In other words, these bands share the same culture but are more or less
autonomous social units among whom we might expect minor differences
in cultural practices.
   In this case there is no problem in seeing that four bands were present
as this is reflected in spatial aggregation; sociometric relations between
families and between bands are always reflected in spacing of the houses
among the Birhor. But for the sake of the argument being presented, we
shall assume we cannot tell from house location whether one band or
more than one band is present. The problem is to see if we can detect
cultural heterogeneity, suggesting the presence of more than one group in
the sample, on the basis of archeologically observable nominal-scale vari-
ables.
   The most easily observable features which we can dichotomize and
which refer to house patterns after the structure is no longer standing are:
 (a) whether the diameter of the floor was larger or smaller than some
central figure; (b) whether or nota fire-pit was located inside the house;

Table 1. Houses in Birhor Camp                  Table 2. Houses in Birhor Camp
                   Area A                                         Area B

House                Over-   Fire-              House               Over-     Fire-
 No.    Diameter      size    pit    Burned      No.    Diameter    size       pit    Burned
  1      10/2’       _        _        +          ib     10/917          —     =        +
  2      12/0”       4+       —        +          2      108”            —     —        ao
  3      12/9’ (N-S),+        +        4          3      97107           _     +        +
         10/0”                                    eh
         (E-W),                                   5      6’10’”      =         -        _
  t      1 leees       +      --       +          6      14/4” (N-S),+         —        +
                       a      —        —                  9/2/’      ‘
  5       9/4/”

  6      INe 4         +      —        +                 (E-W),          a     —        +
  #      10/0”         —      a        —          y       7/6”

  8      12/3”        ae      ar       +          8      10’4”           =     a        +
  o      10/5”        ++      —        =          9      10/0”           om    Ls       ae
 10      SZ            +      _        —         10     HOMO             +     +        +
 i        Sa           =      +        _         iit     108”            ak    ==       at
 12      710”          =      =        =         12       Al             2     a        r
 13      10’6”         +      _—       ue:       13     10/11”           =     Be       4
 14      12/977        +      _        =
 15        9/6”        -      —        ae
 16      10/3”         +      --       ak
 17       F277         —      --       os
 18      NO            —      —        —
 19        OZ          _      —        =
 20      Sy ALI        =      —        —
 Zl      oO            _      _        —
Williams Cultural Heterogeneities in Settlement Patterns                               167

Table 3. Houses in Birhor Camp                 Table 4. Houses in Birhor Camp
                    Area C                                          Area D

House                 Over-   Fire-            House                  Over-   Fire-
 No.     Diameter      size    pit    Burned    No.      Diameter      size    pit — Burned
  1       15/8”         +      +        —        i       12/10”         +      —       =
           (N-S),                                2         iS lle       _      —       =
          10°3”                                  3        10/4”         +      --      ~
          (E-W)                                  4         9/5’         —      —       —
  2       Yig:          -       _       ~        5        106”          +      —       =
  3       12/3”         +       +       _           6     12/3”         —      —       =
  4       10/2”         _      -        _                  (N-S),
  5       12/0”                —        —                   76”
  6       Li"           +      ae       =                  (E-W)
           (N-S),                                7         9/9”         —      _       =
            86”                                  8         oT           —      a       =
           (E-W)                                 9        1/5”          +n             —_
  7        yi           a      -        -       10         we           _      _       _—
                                                i         10’8”         +      =       =
                                                12         Q/5”"        =      —       —


                                                13        10'S?         =      =       =
                                                14        9/10”         —      =       se
                                                15         rt a         —      =       =
                                                16        12/0”         +      ee      —


(c) whether         or not the house was burned by the occupants on their
departure. A number of other features could have been recorded and
used but these will be sufficient.
   The observations on individual houses in the separate bands are given
as Tables 1 through 4. Some Birhor now use a “new” house form which is
rectangular in outline but the Panch Pera bands, being conservative in a
number     of ways,      stick to the older, beehive-shaped            hut which     has a
circular floor plan and can, therefore, be characterized by a single diam-
eter. Five houses, however, were pronouncedly oblong and the mean of
the maximum and minimum diameters was used for comparability to
other houses. Since these houses were occupied in the wet season, some
had an outer drainage trench and all had an inner bank of dirt at the wall.
Diameters were taken from the outer edge of this inner bank.
   Let us now make the assumption that the three variables tabulated are
distributed independently within bands. In this case, being an ethno-
graphic example, we can test to see if the assumption was justified. Below
are listed 2 x 2 matrices, one set for each band, which show the distribu-
tion of the variables, taken two at a time, within that band. Figures are
too small to utilize a Chi-square approximation. Therefore Fisher’s Exact
Test was applied and the value of P underneath each matrix represents
the probability that the least frequent cell could be that small or smaller
due to chance alone.                                 .
168                                      Variability in a Single Occupational Unit

Band A
           burned                          firepit                               firepit




oversize                     burned                                oversize




Band B
           burned                          firepit                                firepit
                                            +    —                                +        —
i)                                                                    o
3                            iS                                    3       +       amt      ed
x3                           S
                                 3                                    es
                                                                      3
                                                                                         omer 3 ha
                                                                                   Ta       ots
                                                                               P=-38

Band C
           burned                                                                 firepit
                                                                                   _       —_



rS                               8=                                Ney             3               4
Fe                                                                    rs
=                                =                                    S =           Ose        Silas
                                                                                    Peas         | ae
                                                                               Pris

Band D
                                                                                  firepit
                                                                                   +        —




oversize                         burned                               oversize
                                                                                   2 14
            P=1                            Aa                                    P=.82
     If we set a level of significance at            a =   .05, this level is hardly ap-
proached in any of the above. Upon inspection of the above matrices,
we can find some hint of directionality only in Band A. In this band
we find a non-significant, but consistent in all three comparisons, excess
of p/p and a/a. Considering all three variables simultaneously for Band
A, we       find P=.35.   This        is the only band        which       shows        consistent
Williams Cultural Heterogeneities in Settlement Patterns         169
deviations from randomness and the effect is insufficient to account
for any significant deviation in the overall sample.
   Now let us consider what happens when we merge bands. This will
first be done for two variables at a time as shown below.

Merged Frequencies
             burned                        firepit                         firepit


8                                 y                               g
s                                  S                              re
=                                  ~                              NN
i)                                Pa}                             ~)



       x =      0.36                     y=     3a                       Veet
      Oe       Pt:70                    Os 6 P26210                    (OSS
                                                                         FP ay10


     These    three 2 x 2 matrices       represent    the situation    as it would    be
tabulated by the archeologist. The minor differences that clearly differ-
entiate bands as shown in Tables A—D are not discernable as there
is, in the situation supposed, no a priori way to assign houses to
particular bands. In the first comparison, oversize versus burned,
there is no evidence of association and therefore no evidence of
between-group heterogeneity. In the remaining two comparisons there
is an obvious effect of heterogeneity. By combining the latter two ’
values we find

                      x = 64        iN               Re      em aah

     In other words, on        the basis of the last two       comparisons,    we    can
reject the null hypothesis of homogeneity. The house floors present do
not represent the variability within a single social unit but reflect
at least minor cultural differentiation among units. It must be noted
that this method does not distinguish social units and, therefore, does
not give an indication of the number of such units present. It does say
that more than one unit was present.
   In résumé, a method has been presented                 for a simple test of minor
cultural heterogeneities in archeological material. The method involves
the assumption of the independent distribution of two or more variables
within units. The finding of an excess of cases in the p/p and a/a cate-
gories, tested by x’, is an indication of the presence of heterogeneity.
This method -was tested against a known ethnographic situation among
hunters. The existence of small cultural differences (that is, band iden-
tity) is confirmed by this method using house-pattern data even when
data on spatial heterogeneities in the settlement pattern are suppressed.
170                                 Variability in a Single Occupational Unit

                                 Discussion
Although the test data used in the foregoing concern settlement patterns
only, it must be stressed that the method has quite general applications.
Indeed there is no reason that the method can not be applied to skeletal
material. It could be possible to detect the presence of more than one
breeding population within'a region by the use of traits known to be
uncorrelated in living populations—for example, the frequency of shovel-
ling in I’ and size progression between M’ and M’.
  For cultural data, the method’s primary weakness will be found to be
the necessary assumption of independence of the variables within social
units, within tool traditions, or within any unit of postulated homogene-
ity. The case used to illustrate the point is trivial only in the sense that the
differences utilized are so minor as to be assignable no social significance
and of a nature such as is not normally noticed by the ethnographer. But
this can also be argued as a strength of the method—to be able to pick up
cultural heterogeneities of fairly fine scale in archeological data.


                                 References

SERVICE, E.. R. 1962. Primitive social organization. New York: Random House.
