

                                                    Post- Pleistocene
                                                         Adaptations




This paper will examine some of the major assumptions underlying the
current systematics of the archeological remains of the post-Pleistocene
period. The paper falls into three parts: (1) a brief survey of the history
of research on the immediately post-Pleistocene period, with particular
attention to the conditions affecting research orientation and, conse-
quently, systematics; (2) an assessment of the utility of current concepts,
schemes, and arguments which are advanced to explain cultural events of
the post-Pleistocene period; and (3) the outlining of a different approach
for understanding the nature and extent of cultural changes occurring
during the period.
   The archeological remains of the immediately post-Pleistocene period
are generally termed Mesolithic. They are characterized over wide areas
by the appearance of small, highly specialized flint implements; these
occur frequently on later sites in the coastal and riverine regions in the
context of the systematic exploitation of aquatic resources.
   Until 1892, there was widespread agreement among European scholars
that there was a break, or “hiatus,” in the archeological record between
the Paleolithic and Neolithic epochs (Brown, 1893; G. de Mortillet, 1885,
pp. 479-84; Breuil, 1946, p. 25).
  It has generally been assumed that a break occurred between the periods
  during which this country, and in fact the continent of Europe, was inhab-
  ited by Palaeolithic Man and his Neolithic successors, and that the race or
  races of Palaeolithic falk who hunted the elephant, rhinoceros, cave bear,

                                   313
314                                        Variability among Occupational Units
  hippopotamus, reindeer, ursus, bison, etc., were completely seperated as by a
  chasm from the agricultural people, the herdsmen with their oxen and
  sheep, and the tillers of the soil of the so-called Neolithic epoch, implying
  that man in Britain had changed suddenly from the low savage hunter to a
  half-civilized farmer and drover (Brown, 1893, p. 66).

   A. C. Carlyle who conducted archeological investigations in the
Vindhya Hills of Central India between 1868 and 1888 was the first to use
the term “mezolithic.” Carlyle was also one of the early questioners of the
validity of the hiatus between the Paleolithic and Neolithic. Carlyle’s
excavations yielded typical crescents, trapezoids, and other geometric
microliths; it was asserted that these implements were found both with
late Paleolithic tools and pottery. This led him to propose that there was
no hiatus in India and that the microliths constituted an intermediate
industry to which he applied the term “mezolithic.” These materials were
exhibited in England in 1888 at the Royal Albert Hall.
   Carlyle’s findings served to stimulate John Allen Brown who published
an article summarizing Carlyle’s work (Brown, 1889). In this article,
Brown asked if there had been similar microlithic forms found in the
British Isles, pointing out that they were already reported from Tunis,
Egypt, Italy, Palestine, France, Portugal, and the Crimea. Brown’s main
concern was with documenting the widespread occurrences of microliths,
and he offered no chronological interpretation. Wilson (1894) reported
that in 1892, the U.S. National Museum acquired much of Carlyle’s ma-
terial, and he proposed the acceptance of the Mesolithic as a transitional
period between the Paleolithic and Neolithic.
   The following year Brown published an extensive paper (Brown, 1893)
in which he discussed the problem of the hiatus. He went on to argue in
favor of an unbroken continuity between the Paleolithic and Neolithic,
setting forth four stages: Eolithic, Paleolithic, Mesolithic, and Neolithic.
He based this four-fold division on the transformational sequence of axes,
from the crude forms of the “Drift” to the well-made polished types of the
Neolithic. He documented finds of “intermediate” forms and used a scale
of crude to fine as evidence for historical continuity, citing Pitt-Rivers’
argument that such a transformational sequence indicated historical con-
tinuity (see Pitt-Rivers, 1906, pp. 20—44). Occupation of the same caves
by Paleolithic and Neolithic populations is cited as further support for the
claim of continuity.
   The following year, Boyd Dawkins challenged Brown’s views:
      [ shall first of all address myself to the point as to continuity in this
   country. Is there any evidence that the Palaeolithic shaded off into the
   Neolithic age in this country without any such break as I have mentioned
   above? Next, I shall examine the facts bearing on the point outside of the
  British Isles, premising that the evolution of the Neolithic from the Palae-
  olithic stage of culture in some part of the world may be accepted as a high
  probability, although we may be unable to fix with precision the land where
      this transition took place (1894, p. 243).
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations"                         315
   Dawkins went on to question the validity of the reasoning behind the
claims for continuity and concluded: “The exploration of caverns has not,
I submit, yet resulted in establishing       a ‘continuity’ but simply a. sequence”
(1894, p. 274).
  The English literature of the early 1890's is full of arguments on these
issues, and similar questions were also occupying continental scholars.
                                                                      The
formal changes in the archeological record were the subject of contro-
versy, both with regard to the meaning of the observed changes and the
reality of a hiatus. Lartet and G. deMortillet claimed as early as 1872 that
the apparent break in the archeological record was in reality simply a gap
in knowledge and did not represent a period during which Europe was
not occupied (Piette, 1895b, pp. 235-36). Cartailhac, on the other hand,
stated that the hiatus consituted a major break in the occupancy of the
continent.    In 1875 the Congress of Prehistory held a meeting at Nantes,
and an argument was presented which attempted to disprove Cartailhac’s
position by pointing to formal similarities between the flints from Solutré
and those of the Neolithic period (Piette, 1895b, p. 238).
   Shortly after this, artifacts were found which were dated to the period
between the remains of the Magdalenian, or “reindeer,” period and that
of the Lake Dwellers, the Robenhausian. In 1879 Vielle discovered micro-
liths at Fére-en-Tardenois (1890, p. 961). Almost ten years later Piette
made his discoveries at Mas d’Azil where microliths were found in associ-
ation with modern fauna. The deposits in question overlay the Magdalen-
ian and lacked the features then considered diagnostic of the Neolithic
(Piette, 1895a). These finds were followed by surveys of locations with
microliths (A. deMortillet, 1896), and there was a proliferation of names
for these industries which were said to fill the hiatus (see Coutil, 1912).
New excavations were also carried out (deLoe, 1907; Herve, 1899).
   In the years following World War I, there was a marked increase of
interest in the post-Pleistocene period, and a number of regional syntheses
were made (Kozlowski, 1926; Clark, 1932, 1936; Childe, 1931, 1937).
Further,     there was   an   extension    of European   terms   to non-European
materials which were considered intermediate between the Paleolithic
and Neolithic (Garrod, 1932, 1937). Some general works also appeared in
which data from various regions were summarized and compared
(Obermaier,      1916;   Osborn,   1919;    deMorgan,    1924;   MacCurdy,    1924;
Menghin, 1927). Specific syntheses of the Mesolithic period proper have
appeared (Burkett, 1925; Gimbutas, 1956, 1963). In these various sum-
mary and interpretive writings, there are several distinct lines of reason-
ing, leading to a diversity of opinion as to the historical significance of the
archeological record.
   One line of argument sought to demonstrate that the Mesolithic repre-
sented a way of life, and a subsistence base, intermediate in a develop-
mental sequence between the reindeer hunters of the terminal Pleistocene
and the food-producing villagers of the Neolithic. For example, Piette
claimed that there was evidence for the domestication of the horse by the
316                                 Variability among Occupational Units
Solutreans, reindeer by the Magdalenians, and cattle by the occupants of
Mas d’Azil who also, according to Piette, domesticated plants (Piette,
'1895b). Less extravagant claims have recently been made for the transi-
tional nature of the Baltic materials (Troels-Smith, 1953) and those from
Central Europe   (Pittioni, 1962). Few workers, however, have seriously
considered the European Mesolithic as a stage transitional to the later
food-producing societies.
   Other workers were more concerned with the problem of the continuity
(or lack of it) between the human groups responsible for the Paleolithic
and Mesolithic. Osborn (1919, p. 457) saw in each change in form of
archeological assemblages evidence for the invasion of new “races.”
Others argued that the presence or absence of discrete traits was diagnos-
tic of population stability or change. For example, Grahame Clark (1932,
p. 2) and Menghin (1927) based their claims for historical continuity
between the Paleolithic and Mesolithic on the continued use of core tools.
Obermaier   (1924, p. 324), on the other hand, viewed the shift to the
exploitation of aquatic resources in Ertebglle and the Auterian as justi-
fying the postulation of movement of new people into Western Europe.
DeMorgan    (1924, p. 74) saw the adoption of microliths and the loss of
graphic arts as “revolutionary” and as proof of a major break in historical
continuity. Childe (1925, p. 2), Clark (1932, p. 1), Gimbutas (1956) and
Braidwood (1963) are in general agreement that the Mesolithic of
Europe is a continuation of the Paleolithic way of life and that the ob-
served archeological changes can be related directly to the major climatic
changes of the post-Pleistocene period. These authors do differ, however,
on the degree to which changes in the form of archeological assemblages
can be explained by pecpce to new populations or to “influences” from
other cultures.
   We have attempted to show in this brief historical survey that Meso-
lithic research has been characterized by a series of changing questions
and that the answers to any one question have tended to generate new
questions. The initial problem was to determine whether or not Europe
was occupied between the end of the Paleolithic and the beginning of the
Neolithic. The affirmative answer to this problem led to the question of
historical continuity. Consideration of this problem necessitated consider-
ation of the criteria for evaluation of formal archeological variations in
terms of their meaning for population change or lack of change. There
was considerable diversity of opinion on this question.
  Although problems of interpretive theory and method were never
solved (see the papers by S. R. Binford and J. Sackett, this volume), they
began to occupy scholars less and less as more detailed knowledge of the
archeological record accumulated. Local sequences were worked out, and
a more limited geographical perspective led to greater conservatism in
interpretive viewpoints. Most recent workers have used a diffusionist
model for interpreting geographic variations in archeological data, with
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations                                 317
the postulation of actual movement of peoples playing a minor role (see,
for example, Waterbolk,    1962). The problem of historical continuity vs.
population movement has not been so much solved as circumvented; this
circumvention has involved two means: first, application of one’s own
criteria to an extremely detailed sequence in a very limited area making it
almost impossible for other workers to judge interpretations offered; and
second, stressing certain widespread “traits” in macroregional syntheses,
traits which are usually so generalized that one might question their
relevance to the measurement of detailed changes in culture history.
  The work of the past 100 years has resulted in the accumulation            of
sufficient data to justify some generalizations made by workers in the
field of European Mesolithic studies. Some of the generalizations made in
distinguishing the Paleolithic from the Mesolithic are:
   1. There was a major shift in the centers of population growth in
Western Europe. “During the Upper Magdalenian, the density of popula-
tion was relatively high in France, as evidenced by the great number of
sites occupied for the first time, and by the richness of the sites. . . . The
end of the glacial times was fatal to this striking human expansion. The
disappearance of the cold fauna and the replacement of the steppe, rich
in game, by forests was followed by the demographic recession and break-
up of the Upper Paleolithic cultures resulting in the traditions which are
grouped together under the general name of Mesolithic” (deSonneville-
Bordes, 1963a, p. 354; see also deSonneville-Bordes,        1960, 1963b; and
Sackett’s paper, this volume ).
  2. There was a major change in the form of stone tools. “Small, geomet-
ric flints became very common, and the bow and arrow became wide-
spread during the immediately post-Pleistocene period. The changes have
occasionally been taken as defining features of the Mesolithic” (Childe,
1956, p. 96, see also Gabel, 1958, p. 658).
  3. There is greater geographic variety in cultural remains suggesting
more specific responses to local environmental conditions. See deMorgan,
1924, p. 74, Garrod and Bate, 1937, p. 121, Braidwood and Willey, 1962,
p. 333, Schwabedissen, 1962, p. 260, Pittioni, 1962, p. 218; deSonneville-
Bordes, 1960, p. 497—500; 1963 for specific statements of this generali-
zation.
   4, There was a marked increase in the exploitation of aquatic resources
and wild fowl. This statement scarcely requires documentation since it is
practically a definiens of the Mesolithic (cf. Gabel, 1958, p. 661).
   5. There was a “trend” toward small game hunting. Braidwood (1962,
p. 332) notes that this phenomenon has traditionally been explained as a
response to the extinction of large mammals at the close of the Pleisto-
cene. He points out, however, that this trend occurs before the end of the
Pleistocene and characterizes Africa and India as well as Europe (see also
Gimbutas, 1956, p. 14). _
  6. The Mesolithic represents cultural degeneration when compared
318                                  Variability among Occupational Units
with the Upper Paleolithic. This is generally cited in the context of discus-
sions of the Western European materials and the loss of graphic arts (see
Osborn, 1919, p. 456; deMorgan, 1924, p. 73; Clark, 1932, p. 1; Sollas,
1924, p. 595; deSonneville-Bordes, 1960, p. 498). Reference is also made
to the less prestigeful activity of fishing and shellfish collecting, as op-
posed to reindeer hunting (Osborn, 1919, p. 457).
   These generalizations which summarize archeological observations
have been conceived by most European scholars in the following manner
(see Clark, 1962, p. 100):
   1. There are major changes in cultural remains which serve to differen-
tiate the cultural systems of the terminal Pleistocene from those of the
immediately post-Pleistocene period.
   2. This immediately post-Pleistocene period is further characterized by
major changes in pollen profiles, fossil beach lines, and the geomorphol-
ogy of major drainage systems.
   3. The demonstrable correlation between the dramatic cultural and
environmental changes at this time is evidence for the systematic articula-
tion of cultural and environmental systems.
   Therefore:
   a) Archeological differences observed between the terminal Paleolithic
and the Mesolithic can be explained by reference to environmental
changes.
   b) Differences not explained by reference to environmental changes
are the result of new social contacts; such social contacts were a result of
movement of populations in response to local climatic deterioration (for
example, the “desiccation” of North Africa cited by Clark, 1936, p. xiv).
  This argument is a relatively straightforward mechanistic approach and
is completely compatible with a materialistic, systemic approach to the
understanding of cultural change. The extent to which this approach
might be questioned and the particulars of its application tested depends
upon the degree to which: (1) equally radical changes in culture can be
demonstrated in the absence of analogous environmental changes, and/or
(2) major environmental changes can be demonstrated to vary independ-
ently of analogous changes in cultural systems.
   Such test situations can be found either at a contemporary time period
outside the area directly affected by the retreat of glacial ice or in the
same regions under similar environmental conditions at a different time
period. Researchers concerned with the initial appearance of food pro-
duction, as well as those workers operating in a variety of non-Western
European regions, are the ones to whom we now turn for an evaluation of
the explanatory approach commonly used on Western European mate-
rials.
  The shift from food-procurement to food-production has been ex-
amined by many scholars; Childe termed this change the Neolithic Revo-
lution. In The Dawn of European Civilization (1925) Childe suggested
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations —                                    319
that the investigation of the origins of the Neolithic and its spread into
Europe would be a major step in the understanding of the post-Mesolithic
history of Western Europe. In his New Light on the Most Ancient East
(1952) Childe offered a model to explain the beginnings of the Neolithic
Revolution. Until this point, several other workers had considered the
problems of understanding the conditions surrounding the origins of agri-
culture, and some offered idealistic progressions of conditions under
which man would have gained sufficient knowledge of plant and animal
biology to permit cultivation (Darwin, 1875, pp- 326-27; Roth, 1887).
Others offered mechanistic generalizations about the conditions under
which man would have been most likely to have implemented his know-
ledge (Tylor, 1881, p. 214; deCandolle, 1959). Childe’s consideration of
the problem was the most influential, since he presented a series of prop-
ositions specific enough to be tested through the collection of paleoenvir-
onmental and paleoanthropological data:
   Food production—the deliberate cultivation of food plants, especially cere-
   als, and the taming, breeding and selection of animals.      . .was an economic
   revolution. . .the greatest in human history after the mastery of fire. . . . The
   conditions of incipient desiccation. . .would provide the stimulus towards
   the adoption of a food-producing economy. Enforced concentration by the
   banks of streams and shrinking springs would entail an intensive search for
   means of nourishment. Animals and men would be herded together in oases
   that were becoming increasingly isolated by desert tracts. Such enforced
   juxtaposition might promote that sort of symbiosis between man and beast
   implied by the word domestication (Childe, 1951, pp. 23-25).

   If it was Childe who first provided a set of testable propositions as to
the conditions under which food-production was achieved, it was Braid-
wood who actively sought the field data to test Childe’s propositions. For
a short history of the Iraqi-Jarmo project, the reader is referred to Braid-
wood and Howe       (1960, pp. 1-8); we shall simply summarize            the find-
ings of Braidwood and his co-workers with specific reference to the valid-
ity of the oasis theory and to the materialistic approach to the understand-
ing of culture change. In discussing the oasis theory Braidwood states:
   So far this theory is pretty much all guess-work, and there are certainly
   some questions it leaves unanswered. I will tell you quite frankly that there
   are times when I feel it is plain balderdash (1951a, p. 85).

Braidwood also questioned the relevance of the postulated environmental
changes to the origins of food-production:
   There had also been three earlier periods of great glaciers, and long periods
  of warm    weather in between.    ..   . Thus the forced neighborliness of men,
  plants and animals in river valleys and oases must also have happened
  earlier. Why didn’t domestication happen earlier too, then? (1951a, p. 86).
Braidwood has made the above point on numerous occasions, but it is in
more recent publications (Braidwood and Willey, 1962, p. 342) that the
320                              Variability among Occupational Units
comment is less directly aimed at the oasis theory and more toward
questioning the role of environmental change in bringing about food-
production.
  Braidwood’s work in the “hilly flanks” zone of the Fertile Crescent was
carried out over a number of years and involved the collaboration of a
number of scientists from the fields of zoology, paleontology, geology,
palynology, paleobotany,    etc. Their investigations had been directed
toward the identification of the physical effects of domestication on
plants and animals and the documentation of the environmental events of
the period between 10,000 B.c. and the appearance of “settled village life.”
The climatological-environmental results have allowed Braidwood to gen-
eralize:
   It seems most unlikely that there was any really significant difference be-
  tween then and now in the general land forms and rainfall patterns (1952b,
  pail:
  In southwestern Asia. . .our colleagues in the natural sciences see no evi-
  dence for radical change in climate or fauna between the levels of the
  Zarzian and those of the Jarmo or Hassunah phases (Braidwood and Howe,
  1960, p. 181).
Discussing specifically the relationship between environmental            change
and the beginnings of food-production, Braidwood states:
  We   do not believe that the answers     will lie within the realm of environ-
  mental determinism and in any direct or strict sense. . . we and our natural-
  science colleagues reviewed the evidence for possible pertinent fluctuations
  of climate and of plant and animal distributions. . .and convinced ourselves
  that there is no such evidence available. . no evidence exists for such
  changes in the natural environment. . .as might be of sufficient impact to
  have predetermined the shift’to food production (Braidwood and Howe,
   1960, p. 142)

  Thus Braidwood argues that: (1) environmental conditions analogous
to those at the close of the Pleistocene had occurred previously without
having brought about food-production, and (2) there is no evidence to
support major climatic changes in the Near East of sufficient magnitude
to have “predetermined the shift to food production.” These observations
are not only directed against the oasis theory but also against the argu-
ment   that food-production       constituted   an   alternative   adaptation   to
changed environmental conditions at the close of the Pleistocene. Braid-
wood also argues against the causative role of environmental change in
his consideration of the applicability of the term Mesolithic to non-Euro-
pean areas (Braidwood and Willey, 1962, p. 332). Garrod (1932) called
the Natufian of Israel a Mesolithic industry, and the appropriateness of
this terminology has been questioned by Braidwood:
   . . .the usual conception of the Mesolithic is as a cultural readaptation to
  post-Pleistocene environments    but the conception has become     an awkward
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations                                  32]
  one, on a world wide scale, since as we have just seen, there is evidence that
  the same trends toward readaptation and intensification of collecting activi-
  ties had begun to manifest themselves in certain areas before the conven-
  tional date for the end of the Pleistocene. One of us is of the opinion that
  there was no Mesolithic sensu stricto, in southwestern Asia, at least (Braid-
  wood and Willey, 1962, p. 332).

There is also increasing evidence that there were cultural changes parallel
to those occurring in Western Europe in regions where there were no
correlated major climatic changes (see, for example, Perrot, 1962, pp. 147,
151-53).
  Braidwood presents a strong case that there was major cultural change
in areas where environmental change was minor or absent, as well is in
areas such as Western Europe where environmental change was marked.
This, together with the fact that earlier interglacial warm periods were
not accompanied by drastic cultural changes of analogous form, is suf-
ficient to invalidate the argument that the magnitude of environmental
and cultural change can be expected to vary directly in a simple stimulus-
response pattern. These data also raise questions about the positive corre-
lations claimed for the form of environmental and cultural changes.
  Braidwood, however, is not completely consistent in his application of
these findings. He argues against the causative role of environmental
change in the Near East, yet for such an explanation for the cultural
changes observed in Western Europe (Braidwood and Willey, 1962, p.
341). We do not propose here that there is no relationship between
environmental and cultural change in Western Europe but rather argue
against the direct and simple causative role of environmental change in
view of Braidwood’s own findings. What we must seek is a set of explana-
tory variables which will be valid on a world-wide scale at the terminal-
and post-Pleistocene periods.
   If Braidwood rejects environmental change as the principal explanation
in the Near East, what does he propose instead? After apologizing for
Childe’s “materialistic philosophy of history” (Braidwood and Howe,
1960, p. 7), Braidwood offers his “nuclear zone” theory:
  In my opinion there is no need to complicate the story with extraneous
  “causes.” The food producing revolution seems to have occurred as the
  culmination of the ever increasing cultural differentiation and specialization
  of human communities. Around 8,000 B.c. the inhabitants of the hills around
  the fertile crescent had come to know their habitat so well that they were
  beginning to domesticate the plants and animals they had been collecting
  and hunting. . . . From these “nuclear” zones cultural diffusion spread the
  new way of life to the rest of the world (1960a, p. 134).
A nuclear zone is defined as follows:
  A region with a natural environment which included a variety of wild plants
  and animals, both possible and ready for domestication ... (Braidwood,
  1963, p. 106).
322                                   Variability among Occupational Units
  In his statements Braidwood proposes that cultivation is the expected,
natural outcome of a long, directional evolutionary trend, limited only by
the presence in the environment of domesticable plants and animals. This
is clearly an orthogenetic argument (see Simpson, 1949, pp. 130-59 fora
critical discussion of orthogenesis).The vital element responsible for the
directional series of events appears to be inherent in human nature; it is
expressed by Braidwood in such phrases as “increased experimentation”
(1963, p. 106) and “increased receptiveness” (1963, pp. 97-98, 137—38).
These behavioral traits made it possible for man to “settle into” his envir-
onment   (Braidwood and Reed, 1957, p. 20), and they serve as the basis
for Braidwood’s taxonomy of subsistence-settlement types (1960b, pp.
143—51) in which three long-run trends can be seen: (1) increased
localization of activity within the territory of a group, (2) more specific
exploitation of the habitat, and (3) increased group size. (For a playful
treatment of Braidwood’s frame of reference see Binford and Binford,
1966.) It is when we have these trends, based on inherent human nature,
operating in the context of a “nuclear zone” that things begin to happen:
  Now my hunch goes that when this experimentation and settling down took
  place within a potential nuclear area... where a whole constellation of
  plants and animals possible of domestication were available ...the change
  was easily made .. . (Braidwood, 1963, p. 110).

The explanation for absence of food production during earlier inter-
glacial periods is that: “culture was not ready to achieve it” (Braidwood
and Willey, 1962, p. 342).
   It is argued here that vitalism, whether expressed in terms of inherent
forces orienting the direction of organic evolution or in its more anthro-
pocentric form of emergent human properties which direct cultural evolu-
tion, is unacceptable   as an explanation.   Trends   which   are observed   in
cultural evolution require explanation; they are certainly not explained by
postulating emergent human traits which are said to account for the
trends.
   In summary, post-Pleistocene research began with the question of
whether or not Western Europe was populated between the close of the
Pleistocene and the first appearance of the later Neolithic settlements.
When this question was answered affirmatively, emphasis shifted to the
question of continuity—were the “intermediate” populations indigenous
or were they intruders? In seeking to solve this problem scholars were
involved in the methodological question of what archeological data could
be cited as proof or disproof of continuity. As local sequences became
better documented, this question was dropped, and there was an increas-
ing tendency to view variability as a direct response to local environments
which had radically changed with the retreat of the ice. This stimulus-
response reasoning was generalized not only for the European foraging
adaptation but was also used to explain the origins of food-production
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations — |                          323
(the propinquity or oasis theory). Field investigation in the relevant parts
of the Near East showed that dramatic environmental change did not
characterize the crucial periods of time. The oasis theory has fallen into
disfavor, and Braidwood’s nuclear zone theory has tended to replace it.
We have sought to demonstrate in our analysis that this theory is based
on a kind of vitalism and a postulation of causal factors which are incap-
able of being tested. We also propose that current explanations for the
form and distribution of post-Pleistocene cultures in Europe are implic-
itly, and often explicitly, based on simple and direct environmental deter-
minism which the data from non-European parts of the world tend to
refute. What follows is an examination of post-Pleistocene data within a
different theoretical framework and the formulation of explanatory hy-
potheses which, it is hoped, are both more generally applicable and also
testable.
   If our aim is the explanation of cultural differences and similarities in
different places and at different times, we must first isolate the phe-
nomena we designate “cultural.” Culture is all those means whose forms
are not under direct genetic control (that is, extrasomatic [White, 1959, p.
8]) which serve to adjust individuals and groups within their ecological
communities. If we seek understanding of the origins of agriculture or of
“the spread of the village-farming community,” we must analyze these
cultural means as adaptive adjustments in the variety of ecosystems
within which human groups were participants.
  Adaptation is always a local problem, and selective pressures favoring
new cultural forms result from non-equilibrium conditions in the local
ecosystem. Our task, then, becomes the isolation of the variables initiating
directional change in the internal structuring of ecological systems. Of
particular importance is understanding the conditions which favor the
rearrangement of energy-matter components and their linked depend-
encies in a manner which alters the effective environment of the unit
under study.
  The term “effective environment”      (Allee et al., 1941, p. 1) designates
those parts of the total environment which are in regular or cyclical
articulation with the unit under study. Changes in the effective environ-
ment will produce changes not only in the boundaries of the ecological
community but also in the internal organization of the community. Both
of these changes in tum set up conditions favoring adaptive adjustments
among the components of the community. In dealing with sociocultural
systems and in trying to understand the conditions under which such
systems undergo adaptive change, we are necessarily concerned with the
effective environment of a given system.
   Cultural systems relate man to habitat, and an equilibrium can be estab-
  lished in this relationship as in others. When an equilibrium has been estab-
  lished culturally between man and habitat, it may be continued indefinitely
  until it is upset by the intrusion of a new factor (White, 1959, p. 284).
324                                  Variability among Occupational Units
  If we hope to understand culture change in general, and the changes of
the post-Pleistocene period in particular, we must seek the conditions
which have brought new factors into play in the effective environments of
the cultural systems at the close of the Pleistocene.
   Before undertaking our analysis, one further distinction needs to be
made—the distinction between functional and structural differences in
ecological niches. Functional differences are those which result from dif-
ferences in the form of the elements of a system and which do not neces-
sarily imply differences in the kind of articulation which exists between a
cultural system and the ecological community of which it is a part. Struc-
tural differences refer to communities made up of non-analogous com-
ponents which are integrated in different ways. In citing functional vari-
ability between niches, we are referring to differences in the form of the
gross environment in which ecological communities occur; in such cases
there would be no necessary structural differences in the organization of
the ecological communities of the system, but only in the form of their
environments.   A case in point might be two     cultural   systems, both of
which are solely dependent upon terrestrial resources within their home
ranges and neither of which possesses the technological means for food
storage or circulation beyond the locus of procurement. If one such sys-
tem were located in a tropical rain forest and the other in a temperate
deciduous forest, we would observe numerous formal differences between
the cultural elements in the two systems, yet both can be said to occupy
similar ecological niches within their habitats. Despite obvious differences
in raw materials, the form of implements, differences in phasing of activ-
ities, and even in social organization, all such differences are explicable
directly by reference to differences in gross environment. Therefore, we
would term these differences functional, not structural.
   Structural differences in ecological niches, on the other hand, refer to
differences in the modes of integration between cultural and other com-
ponents within ecological communities. Such differences imply a different
set of relationships between the cultural unit and the variables in the
gross environment with which the cultural unit is articulated. Cultural
systems which occupy different ecological niches would therefore have
different effective environments. An example of two cultural systems in
the same gross environment but occupying different ecological niches
would be the commonly        occurring   case where horticulturalists    and
hunters and gatherers live side by side. Each cultural group is in articula-
tion with quite different elements of the gross environment and is inte-
grated with the environment differently. Such cultural systems would be
subject to qualitatively different types of selective pressure.
   We would argue that understanding the selective pressures favoring the
adoption of adaptive means as radical and as new as animal husbandry
and cultivation in the post-Pleistocene requires the application of the
ecological principles outlined above. A first step would be to determine
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations |                      325
whether food-production constitutes a functional variant of analogous
ecological niches in different environments, or whether it is a structurally
new adaptive means in an ecological niche not previously occupied by
cultural systems.
   Braidwood’s nuclear zone theory is an argument for the former inter-
pretation; the differences between the post-Pleistocene cultures in the
hilly flanks and elsewhere are explicable by reference to formally unique
elements in the plant and animal populations of the piedmont regions of
the Near East. Childe’s position is a statement of the latter interpretation,
and he cites changes in the physical environment as the cause for bringing
about new structural relationships between plants, animals, and men. Our
argument also favors the second interpretation but with demographic,
rather than gross environmental, variables responsible for the generation
of pressures favoring new ecological niches.
  At certain times and places in the course of culture history, the threat of a
  diminished food supply, coming from an increase of population through
  immigration, or from a decline in local flora due to climatic or physiographic
  change, was   met   by various   measures   of cultural   control over   plant life,
  which collectively, we call agriculture (White, 1959, p. 285).

  White's citation of population increase through immigration as a rele-
vant variable in explaining the appearance of agriculture is a radical
departure from traditional interpretations.
   In the traditional approach, changes and variation in the available food
supply have been cited as the major factors which regulate population
equilibrium systems (Childe, 1958, p. 98; Dumond, 1965, p. 310).
  Man must eat to live at all; food is perhaps the one absolute and overriding
  need for man. In early and primitive societies the quest for food was and is
  the most absorbing preoccupation for all members of the group. The en-
  largement of the food-supply was therefore presumably the indispensable
  condition for human progress (Childe, 1944, p. 12).
  The community of food-gatherers had been restricted in size by the food
  supplies available (Childe, 1951, p. 61).

Similar statements have been made by Braidwood (1963, pp. 121—22),
among others.
   The inference about population dynamics to be made from these state-
ments is that populations will grow until the food requirements of the
group begin to exceed the standing crop in the local habitat. No popula-
tion could ever achieve a stable adaptation, since its members would
always be under strong selective pressure to develop new means of get-
ting food. This assumption of the available food supply as the critical
variable in population dynamics has prevented consideration of popula-
tion variables themselves as possible sources of disequilibrium.
   Recent studies in demography have argued strongly against the direct
control of population density by the availability of food.
326                                   Variability among Occupational Units
  We have the strongest reasons for concluding... that population density
  must at all costs be prevented from rising to the level where food shortage
  begins to take a toll of the numbers—an effect that could not be felt until
  long after the optimum density had been exceeded. It would be bound to
  result in chronic over-exploitation and a spiral of diminishing returns
   (Wynne-Edwards, 1962, p. 11).

  Long term population equilibrium... implies some      kind of restraint...    .
  “Food supply” offers a quick answer, but not, I think, the correct one. At
  any rate, a forest is full of game for an expert mouse-hunter, and a Paleo-
  lithic man who stuck to business should have found enough food on two
  square kilometers instead of 20 or 200. Social forces were probably more
  powerful than mere starvation in causing men to huddle in small bands
   (Deevey, 1960, p. 6).

Most demographers agree that functional relationships between the nor-
mal birth rate and other requirements (for example, the mobility of the
female) favor the cultural regulation of fertility through such practices as
infanticide, abortion, lactation taboos, etc. These practices have the effect
of homeostatically keeping population size below the point at which di-
minishing returns from the local habitat would come into play. (See Carr-
Saunders, 1922; Wynne-Edwards,       1962, 1964; Birdsell, 1958, 1968;
Deevey, 1960; Hainline, 1965; Dumond, 1965; and Halbwachs, 1960).
   The arguments of demographers are supported by a number of recent
ethnographic studies which document the abundance of food available to
even marginal hunters. Some cases of importance are J. D. Clark (1951)
on the Barotse, Lee (1965) on the !Kung Bushmen, Woodburn (1968) on
the Hadza, and Huntingford (1955) on the Dorobo. Similar conditions of
relative abundance have been reported for Australia. For example, life on
the Daly River in the Northern Territory led McCarthy (1957, p. 90) to
generalize: “for the uncontaminated bush native the food problem hardly
exists.” Ease in food procurement is also reported for Armhemland
(McCarthy, 1957, p. 90; McCarthy and McArthur, 1960, pp. 145-93).
Quimby has described the truly impressive quantities of food obtained in
the course of a single year by a Chippewa family in the Lower Peninsula
of Michigan in 1763 (Quimby, 1962, pp. 217-39). In a quantitative
study of food intake by the Onge hunters of Little Andaman, Bose (1964,
p. 306) states: “The region surrounding Tokebuea can supply more food
than the requirement of the local people.”
   These data suggest that while hunting-gathering populations may vary
in density between different habitats in direct proportion to the relative
size of the standing food crop, nevertheless within any given habitat the
population is homeostatically regulated below the level of depletion of
the local food supply.
   There are two corollaries of the assumption that population size is
regulated almost exclusively by food supply which we also need to ex-
amine. The first corollary is: Man would be continually seeking means for
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations                            327
increasing his food supply. In other words, there would be ubiquitous and
constant selective pressure favoring the development of technological in-
novations, such as agriculture, which serve to make larger amounts of
food available to a group. There is a large body of ethnographic data
which suggests that this is not the case.
  Carneiro (1957) in his study of the Kuikuru, who are horticulturalists,
demonstrated that these people were capable of producing several times
the amount of food they did. A small increment in the amount of time
devoted to planting and harvesting would have brought about substantial
increases in the available food, yet the Kuikuru chose not to do this.
Enough food was produced to meet local demands, and it was at that
point that production stopped. Equilibrium         had been reached, and
neither population nor production increased.
   In writing about the Southeastern United States, Caldwell concerned
himself with the question of why no effective early prehistoric agriculture
was developed in the region. He concluded:
  We have suggested that so many natural foods were available that to place
  any reliance on cultivation. ..might have seemed risky or irrelevant. The
  hunting-gathering pattern was developed to a peak of efficiency and jelled,
  so to speak, in the very heart of eastern cultures (1958, p. 72).

   If we recognize that an equilibrium system can be established so that
populations are homeostatically regulated below the carrying capacity of
the local food supply, it follows that there is no necessary adaptive pres-
sure continually favoring means of increasing the food supply. The ques-
tion to be asked then is net why agricultural and food-storage techniques
were not developed everywhere, but why they were developed at all.
Under what set of conditions does increasing the supply of available food
have adaptive advantage?
  The second corollary to be examined concerns leisure time: It is only
when man is freed from preoccupation with the food quest that he has
time to elaborate culture. A fairly representative statement of this corol-
lary has been made    by Childe   (1951, p. 61) and is cited above. Also,
Braidwood writes:
  Proper village life now came into being, and with it a completely new kind
  of technology. This latter depends on the fact that time now became avail-
  able for pursuits other than that of simply collecting food (Braidwood and
  Braidwood, 1950, p. 189).
Braidwood reiterates the same argument in more detail in another place
(1963, pp. 121-22). The view of the hunter constantly involved in
scrounging a bare subsistence and existing on the brink of starvation has
recently received some rather pointed comments by Sahlins:
  Almost totally committed to the argument that life was hard in the Paleo-
  lithic, our text books compete to convey a sense of impending doom, leaving
  the student to wonder not only how hunters managed to make a living but
328                                      Variability among Occupational Units
  whether, after all, this is living. The spectre of starvation stalks the stalker in
  these pages. His technical incompetence is said to enjoin continuous work
  just to survive, leaving him without respite from the food quest and without
  the “leisure time to build culture” (1968).
  There is abundant data which suggests not only that hunter-gatherers
have adequate supplies of food but also that they enjoy quantities of
leisure time, much more in fact than do modern industrial or farm work-
ers, or even professors of archeology. Lee (1965), Bose (1954), McCar-
thy and McArthur (1960), and Woodbum (1968) have shown that hunt-
ers on a simple level of technology spend a very small percentage of their
time obtaining food. On these grounds we can reasonably question the
proposition that cultural elaboration is caused by leisure time which is
available for the first time to agriculturalists.
   In rejecting the assumption that hunter-gatherer populations are pri-
marily regulated by the available supply of food, we put the problem of
the development of new types of subsistence in a different light. As long.
as one could assume that man was continually trying to increase his food
supply, understanding the “origins of agriculture” simply involved pin-
pointing those geographic areas where the potential resources were and
postulating that man would inevitably take advantage of them. With the
recognition that equilibrium systems regulate population density below
the carrying capacity of an environment, we are forced to look for those
conditions which might bring about disequilibrium and bring about selec-
tive advantage for increased productivity. According to the arguments
developed here, there could be only two such sets of conditions:
   1. A change in the physical environment of a population which brings
about a reduction in the biotic mass of the region would decrease the
amounts of available food. The previous balance between population and
standing crop is upset, and more efficient extractive means would be
favored. This is essentially the basis for Childe’s propinquity theory.
   2. Change in the demographic structure of a region which brings about
the impingement of one group on the territory of another would also
upset an established equilibrium system, and might serve to increase the
population density of a region beyond the carrying capacity of the natural
environment. Under these conditions manipulation of the natural envir-
onment in order to increase its productivity would be highly advan-
tageous.
   The remainder of this paper is devoted to the exploration of this second
set of conditions. The first step of our analysis is to build models of
different types of population systems under different conditions. One
such type of system is termed a closed population system (Hyrenius,
1959, p. 476) in which a steady state is maintained by internal mech-
anisms limiting numbers of offspring at the generational replacement
level. Techniques    such as abortion,      contraception,    abstinence,   and in-
fanticide serve to lower the birth rate and increase the mortality rate so
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations                            329
that a given population would be homeostatically regulated at a given
size or density.
   The second type of system, the open population system, is one in which
size and/or density is maintained by either the budding off of new groups
or by the emigration of individuals. This would be an open system of the
donor type. If the size or density of the system is altered through the
introduction of immigrants from other population groups, we have an
open system of the recipient type.
  Given these two types of population systems—closed and open, the
latter including two sub-types,   recipient and donor—we     can begin to
analyze differences in the ways in which the two system types can be
articulated in a given region.


                             Closed   Systems
We can identify the population of a region as a whole as a closed system,
yet find that within the region there would be some variability in op-
timum group size as a response to geographical differences in the regional
distribution of resources. Further, each local group within the region may
operate periodically as an open system, since we would expect some
variability in the degree to which local groups have achieved equilibrium.
There would therefore be some redistribution of population between
groups which would promote a more uniform and steady density equilib-
rium system over the region as a whole.
  We would expect selection favoring cultural means of regulating pop-
ulation to occur in situations where the density equilibrium system for the
region as a whole was in fact a closed system, and where there were
significant imbalances in the losses and recruits for the local subsegments
of the regional population. There would be differential selective advan-
tage for cultural regulation of population growth between two closed
population systems in different environmental settings if there were dis-
crepancies between the actual birth and death rates on the one hand and
the optimal rates for maintaining population size on the other.


                      Open Systems, Donor Type
We would expect to find this type of population system in areas which
are not filled to the point at which density dependent factors are brought
into play. The peopling of a new land mass, such as the New World or
Australia, would be an example of such a situation in which there would
be positive advantage for this type of system.
  The rate of expansion of open donor systems into uninhabited territory
has been discussed in the literature, and models for this type of expansion
have been built (Bartholomew and Birdsell, 1953; Birdsell, 1957, 1958,
1968; Yengoyan,   1960). Birdsell has made two observations which are
330                                  Variability among Occupational Units
particularly relevant here. First, the budding off of new groups occurs
before optimum local population size has been reached (Birdsell, 1957, p.
54). This observation demonstrates the role of emigration in bringing
about and maintaining equilibrium and also shows that the unit on which
selection for emigration operates is a subunit of the local population, since
conditions favoring segmentation appear before the regional population is
under pressure from density dependent factors.
  Second, the adaptation of any given sociocultural system will determine
in part the locus of selection within the social system and the particular
selective advantages for different fertility rates. Birdsell writes:

  In a population stabilized at the carrying capacity of its given environment,
  some limitation on procreative activities naturally filter down to the level of
  the biological family. These may be examined most profitably in terms of the
  requirements which affect the spacing of the natal survivors. Generalized
  hunters with their requirements of high mobility present the most exacting
  model. Australian data indicate that the inability of a mother to carry more
  than one child at a time together with her female baggage impose the first
  insurmountable barrier to a large number of children. Strongly reinforced by
  an equally limiting incapacity to nurse more than one child simultaneously
  imposes a minimum of a three-year spacing upon children designed for
  survival. Since human female reproductive physiology does not reliably pre-
  vent conception while still nursing, children are frequently conceived and
  born which cannot be reared. The result is systematic infanticide (1968).

   We have seen that two frequent means of maintaining homeostasis are
emigration and cultural regulation of births and deaths. The relative im-
portance to any group of one of these means vs. the other will be condi-
tioned by such factors as mobility requirements of the group. Another
conditioning factor would be the type of articulation between segments of
the population which can directly affect the ease with which budding-off
can occur. A third factor would be the degree to which the region as a
whole is occupied which would affect the expectations of success in the
establishment of daughter communities.


                     Open Systems, Recipient Type
This type of system could occur under only two sets of conditions; the
first would be where there is the expansion of a donor system into an
uninhabited region. The frontier of the region would contain a number of
population units which could, for a short time, serve as recipient systems.
Their change from recipient to donor systems would depend upon the
extent to which optimal densities were achieved locally and the frontier
continued to advance.
   The second set of conditions promoting systems of the recipient type is
more relevant to the consideration of early agricultural developments.
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations                              331
This is the situation in which two or more different kinds of sociocultural
systems occupy adjacent environmental zones. If the adaptation of one
sociocultural unit is translatable into the adjacent environmental zone, it
may expand into that zone at the expense of resident systems. Cases of
this type have been cited by Kaplan (1960) as examples of the Law of
Cultural Dominance, and a specific instance referred to by Sahlins are the
Tiv and the Nuer (1961). We would expect expansion of the dominant
system until the zone to which the system was adapted was occupied; at
this juncture there would be selection for increased efficiency of produc-
tion and/or for increased regulation of the birth rate.
   A different kind of situation would obtain in the case of sociocultural
systems occupying adjacent zones if the adaptation of the more rapidly
growing group is not translatable into the adjacent zone. Population
growth within the area occupied by the parent group might well be so
great that daughter communities would frequently be forced to reside in
an environment which is incompatible with their particular cultural adap-
tation. There could be a number of effects under these circumstances.
  From the standpoint of the populations already in the recipient zone,
the intrusion of immigrant groups would disturb the existing density equi-
librium system and might raise the population density to the level at
which we would expect diminishing food resources. This situation would
serve to increase markedly for the recipient groups the pressures favoring
means for increasing productivity. The intrusive group, on the other hand,
would be forced to make adaptive adjustments to their new environment
(for an example of this situation see L. R. Binford, 1968). There would be
strong selective pressures favoring the development of more efficient sub-
sistence techniques by both groups.
   It should be pointed out, however, that such advantage does not insure
that these developments will inevitably occur. In many cases these prob-
lems are met by changes which might be called regressive in that the
changes in adaptation which occur may be in the direction of less com-
plex cultural forms. Examples of this sort of change can be seen among
the hunter-gatherers of the non-riverine tropical forest zones in South
America. Steward and Faron write of the Siriono and Guayaki:

  These Indians retreated . . . to inaccessible regions where they largely
  abandoned horticulture to rely on a predominantly hunting and gathering
  subsistence. Other enclaves of nomads isolated in the tropical forests and
  interfluvial regions may also have experienced similar deculturation   (1959,
  p. 378).

Lathrap has offered the possibility that perhaps all of the less sedentary
South American groups are “the degraded descendants of peoples who at
one time maintained an advanced form of Tropical Forest Culture”
(1968).               “
  While in these examples the adaptations along population frontiers
332                                    Variability among Occupational Units
were   in the direction   of less complexity,    it is in the context      of such
situations of stress in environments with plant and animal forms amen-
able to manipulation that we would expect to find conditions favoring
the development of plant and animal domestication. Such situations
would be characterized by disequilibrium between population and re-
sources which, in turn, would offer selective advantage to increases in the
efficacy of subsistence technology. Rather than seeking the locus for the
origins of agriculture in the heart of a “natural habitat zone,” we would
argue that we must look to those places where a population frontier or
adaptive tension zone intersects a “natural habitat zone.” This means that
archeological investigations might well concentrate on those areas within
the natural habitat zone where there is an archeologically demonstrated
major shift in population density. The presence of such a shift might well
indicate a population frontier where rapid evolutionary changes were
taking place.
   Another archeological clue to be exploited is the degree to which set-
tlements are characterized by sedentism. The frontier zones would be
expected between regions which differed widely in the degree of seden-
tism practiced by resident groups. In those areas with highly sedentary
population, problems of transport of young and belongings would be
reduced. Reduced mobility of social units in general and in the daily
routines of females in particular would in tur reduce the selective ad-
vantages accruing to cultural means of controlling population growth.
Therefore,   under   conditions   of increased   sedentism   we    would    expect
population growth. A consequence of such growth would be the increased
relative importance of emigration as a mechanism for maintaining the
local group within optimal size and density limits.
   Therefore where there is a marked contrast in degree of sedentism
between two sociocultural units within a relatively restricted geographical
region, there would be a tension zone where emigrant colonies from the
more sedentary group would periodically disrupt the density equilibrium
balances of the less sedentary group. Under these conditions there would
be strong selective pressure favoring the development of more effective
means of food production for both groups within this zone of tension.
There would also be increasing pressures against immigration, given the
failure to develop more effective extractive technologies.
   It is proposed here that it was in the selective context outlined above
that initial practices of cultivation occurred. Such selective situations
would have been the consequence           of the increased        dependence    on
aquatic resources during the terminal and immediately post-Pleistocene
period. Not all portions of rivers and shorelines favor the harvesting of
fish, molluscs, and migratory fowl; it is with the systematic dependence
on just these resources that we find archeological remains indicating a
higher degree of sedentism in both the Archaic of the New World and the
terminal Paleolithic and Mesolithic of the Old World. This hypothesis is
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations |                             333
lent strong support by the fact that it is also in the terminal Paleolithic-
Mesolithic and Archaic that we find, associated with increased sedentism,
evidence for marked population growth and for the development of food-
storage techniques, the latter being functionally linked to the highly sea-
sonal nature of migratory fowl and anadromous fish exploited as food
crops (for an example of the importance of anadromous fish see L. R.
Binford, 1964).
   Since the systematic exploitation of these food sources (and of mark-
edly seasonally available terrestrial forms as well—for example, reindeer)
characterized adaptations of this time range in a wide variety of envir-
onments, we would expect that tension zones, with their concomitant
selective pressures favoring increased subsistence efficiency, would be
widely distributed also. This expectation is in accord with the empirical
generalizations that: (1) There were a number of independent loci of the
development of cultivation techniques—the Near East, Asia, and the
New World—and all the developments of these techniques occur within
the time range in question; and (2) These loci were distributed across
widely different environmental types—root crops in the tropics and ce-
reals in semi-aridlands, for example.
   The widespread nature of conditions favoring increased subsistence
efficiency also accounts for the rapid transmission and integration of con-
tributing innovations from one cultural system to another. Many authors
have cited the rapid “diffusion” of cultural elements as characterizing the
immediately post-Pleistocene period.
  Finally, in the traditional view the “Neolithic Revolution” is character-
ized by the appearance of a number of traits which are thought to be
linked to the shift to food production. The manufacture of ceramics and
textiles, relatively permanent   houses, and craft specialization are only a
few of those frequently cited (cf. Braidwood, 1963, pp. 122-23). These
traits constitute part of the definition of the “village farming way of life,”
and the assumption is that they originated in the “nuclear area” from
which they spread as a complex, the spread being achieved by diffusion,
stimulus diffusion, and/or migration. As more data have been accumu-
lated, it becomes increasingly clear that these traits are not mutually
dependent; indeed, it seems to be quite clear that ceramics, for example,
were first used in the Old World in coastal Japan (Griffin, 1961, p. 92),
with a cluster of radiocarbon dates averaging ca. 7000 x.c. This is about
the same time that effective grain agriculture was initially practiced in the
Near East (Mellaart,    1961, 1963; Hole, 1966; Young and Smith, 1966),
and the occupations in question have yielded no ceramics. Given our
model, such traits insofar as they are functionally linked to sedentism
and/or food production would be expected to appear in a variety of
regions as the result of numerous independent but parallel inventions.
  Further utility for the model presented here can be shown by the
degree to which it provides explanatory answers for a series of questions
334                                          Variability among Occupational Units
posed by Braidwood           and Willey—questions        which      cannot. be satisfac-
torily answered within the traditional framework.
  Why did incipient food production not come earlier? Our only answer at the
  moment      is that culture was       not yet ready to achieve it (Braidwood          and
  Willey, 1962, p. 342).
  We believe that a more complete answer is possible. The shift to the
exploitation of highly seasonal resources such as anadromous fish and
migratory fowl did not occur until the close of the Pleistocene. This shift,
probably linked to worldwide changes in sea level, with attendant in-
crease in sedentism, established for the first time conditions leading to
marked heterogeneity in rates of population growth and structure of the
ecological niche of immediately adjacent sociocultural systems. This new
set of conditions brought about, in turn, conditions favoring improved
subsistence technology. It was not that culture was unready, but rather
that the selective conditions favoring such changes had not previously
existed.
  What were the . . . cultural conditions favoring incipient cultivation or
  domestication? Certainly there is nothing in the archeological record to
  indicate that those few instances          of cultural build-up    and elaboration,    as
  manifested by the varying art styles of the upper paleolithic from western
  Europe into Siberia... provided a favorable ground for incipient food
  production. On the contrary, those instances of incipient cultivation or do-
  mestication of greatest potential are found in contexts of a much less spec-
  tacular character        (Braidwood    and Willey,   1962, p. 343, see also Willey,
      1966, pp. 141—42).

  According to our model, we would expect to find the selective situation
favoring “incipient cultivation” in “contexts of a much less spectacular
character’—in those tension zones where less sedentary populations are
being moved in on by daughter groups from more sedentary populations.
These are the areas where the development of greater productive means
is most advantageous.
      The perplexing question of what kinds of natural environmental settings
  were most propitious for the early development of incipient food production
  is by no means solved. Nevertheless, the data on hand suggest that generally
  semi-arid regions ... with adequate but not overabundant collectible food
  resources were the hearths of the most important beginnings of cultivation
  and domestication (Braidwood and Willey, 1962, p. 342).

  If we look at the semi-arid areas where the crops referred to (wheat
and barley in the Old World; maize in the New World) were developed,
it turns out that they are adjacent to areas which already supported
settled (that is, sedentary ) villages whose populations depended in large
part upon aquatic resources. The Natufian of the Near East (Kenyon,
1959; Perrot, 1960, 1962) and the coastal settlements of Mexico and Peru
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations                                  335
(Willey, 1966, p. 144; see also Flannery and Coe, this volume) are cases
in point.
  The explanation of the distribution noted above of the hearths of
domestication of most economically significant crops within semi-arid re-
gions lies in the nature of the seeds produced by the plants in such
regions. Seeds of xerophytic plants normally have low moisture require-
ments and can therefore remain viable without being subject to rots
which attack many other kinds of seeds. Their economic value also lies in
the fact that semi-arid regions are areas with low diversity indices
(Odum,      1954, p. 281), which means     that there will typically be many
individuals of a given species within a very limited space.
   We would like to note in passing that the post hoc evaluation of some
“beginnings of cultivation” as “most important” (because of the ultimate
economic significance of the crops produced ) and the limitation of ques-
tion-asking to these instances has served to prevent the recognition of the
general conditions under which cultivation may have been initiated.
   How did the new elements spread into Europe; how shall we conceptualize
   the nature of the cultural mechanisms of “diffusion” and the spread of new
   “influences” through a vast area of already functioning cultural and environ-
   mental adaptations? (Braidwood and Willey, 1962, p. 347).

  While wheat and barley might have constituted “new influences” in
Europe, it has been suggested above that cultivation arose as a response
to similar pressures many times and in many places. Given the existence
of the selective situation favoring food production and the response to
this adaptive situation occurring in a number of places, including Europe,
the adoption of easily storable high-yield crops such as wheat and barley
becomes     readily understandable.   However,    it is important not to con-
found the adoption of specific crops with the “spread of the village-
farming way of life.”
  If the model presented here has value above and beyond that of a
logical exercise, it must be tested by the formulation of hypotheses and
the collection of data. While the outlining of a program of research is
beyond the scope of and irrelevant to the aims of this paper, a few
predictions follow which, if borne out by field research, would empirically
validate some of our assertions.
   1. Evidence for the initial domestication of plants and animals in the
Near East will come from areas adjacent to those occupied by relatively
sedentary forager-fishers. One such area is that adjacent to the Natufian
settlements in the Jordan Valley. These settlements have yielded evidence
of heavy dependence upon fish and migratory fowl (Perrot, 1960, p. 20)
and the architecture suggests a sedentary way of life. The areas just
beyond these villages would have received “excess” population and would
therefore have been areas of disequilibrium in which adaptive change
would have been favored. Intermontane valleys and foothills which sup-
336                                        Variability among Occupational Units
ported migratory hunters far removed from the kind of villages described
above will not yield information on the earliest transition to dependence
on food production, regardless of the density of wild ancestors of domes-
ticates.
   2. Evidence for independent experimentation leading to the develop-
ment of agriculture as well as animal domestication will be found in
European Russia and south-central Europe. We would expect the relevant
areas to be adjacent to those where there was effective exploitation of
anadromous fish and migratory fowl. Such areas appear to be the rivers
flowing into the Black Sea (Clark, 1948b, p. 50).
   3. As further research is carried out in Europe, Asia, and the New
World, there will be evidence for numerous independent innovations
paralleling forms appearing in other areas. Post-Pleistocene adaptations
are viewed as the result of the operation of local selective pressures, and
the development of food production is one instance of such adaptations.
Parallel innovations can be expected where structurally similar ecological
niches were occupied, regardless of differences in the general form of the
environment.
   In conclusion, it is hoped that the theoretical perspective offered here
will serve to generate a new series of questions, the answers to which may
increase our understanding of the major cultural changes which occurred
at the close of the Pleistocene.


                                      References

ALLEE,     W.   C., A. IX. Emerson,    O. Park,    T. Park,   and Kari   P. SCHMIDT.
  1949. Principles of animal: ecology. Philadelphia and London: W. B.
  Saunders.
BARTHOLOMEW, GEorRGE A. JR., and J. B. BrrpsELL. 1953. Ecology and the
   protohominids. American Anthropologist, 55 (2): 481-98.
BrnrorbD, Lewis R. 1964. Archaeological and ethnohistorical investigations of
  cultural diversity. Microfilm, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan.
        1965. Archaeological systematics and the study of culture process.
   American Antiquity, 31(2): 203-210.
      . 1968. An ethnohistory of the Nottoway,          Meherrin and Weanock       In-
  dians of southeastern Virginia. Ethnohistory, Vol. 14, No. 3-4 (whole num-
  ber).
Binrorp, Lewis R., and Satty R. Brnrorp 1966. The predatory revolution: a
   consideration of the evidence for a new subsistence level. American Anthro-
   pologist, 68 (2), Part 1: 508-512.
BIRDSELL, JOSEPH B, 1953. Some environmental and cultural factors influencing
   the structuring of Australian      aboriginal populations.    American   Naturalist
   (Supp.; May—June) 87 (834): 171-207.
——. 1957. Some population problems involving Pleistocene man. Cold
  Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, 22: 47-69.
     . 1958. On population structure in generalized hunting and collecting
   populations. Evolution, 12(2): 189-205.
      . 1968. Some predictions for the Pleistocene            based upon equilibrium
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations —                                              337
  systems among recent hunters. In Richard B. Lee and Irven DeVore (Eds.),
  Man the hunter. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Bosr, SARADINDU.     1964.   Economy      of the Onge of Little Andaman.            Man    In
  India, 44(4): 298-310.
Braiwwoon, R. J. 195la. Prehistoric men.        (2d ed.) Popular Series, Anthropol-
  ogy No. 37, Chicago: Chicago Natural History Museum.
     . 1951b. From cave to village in prehistoric Iraq. Bulletin of the Amer-
  ican Schools of Oriental Research, 124: 12-18.
     . 1952a. From cave to village. Scientific American, 187 (4): 62—66.
     . 1952b. The Near East and the foundations for civilization. (Condon
  Lectures.) Eugene: Oregon State System of Higher Education.
     . 1960a. The agricultural revolution. Scientific American, 203: 130—41.
     . 1960b.    Levels   in prehistory:    a model     for the consideration        of the
  evidence. In Sol Tax (Ed.), The evolution of man (Vol. 2 of Evolution after
  Darwin). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
     . 1963. Prehistoric men. (6th ed.) Popular Series, Anthropology No. 37,
  Chicago: Chicago Natural History Museum.
Braiwwoop,      R. J., and Linpa    Bramwoop.         1950. Jarmo: a village of early
  farmers in Iraq. Antiquity, 24(96): 189-95.
Braipwoop, R. J., and CHartes A. REED. 1957. The achievement and early
  consequences of food production. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quanti-
  tative Biology, 22: 19-31.
Brarpwoop, R. J., and Gorpon WILLEY. 1962. Conclusions and afterthoughts.
  In R. J. Braidwood      and G. R. Willey      (Eds.),    Courses      toward   urban life
  Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Braipwoop, R. J., and Bruce Howe. 1960. Prehistoric investigations in Iraqi
  Kurdistan. Oriental Institute Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, no. 31.
  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
     . 1962. Southwestern Asia beyond the lands of the Mediterranean lit-
  toral. In R. J. Braidwood and G. R. Willey (Eds.), Courses toward urban
  life. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Breuit, H. 1921. Observations suivantes: M. Cartilhac, La question de l’hiatus
  entre le Paléolithique et le Néolithique. L’Anthropologie, 31: 349-55.
     . 1946. The discovery of the antiquity of man. Journal of the Royal
  Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 75(1): 21-31.
Brown, JoHN ALLEN. 1888. On some small highly specialized forms of stone
  implements, found in Asia, North Africa, and Europe. In Journal of the
  Royal   Anthropological     Institute    of Great    Britain    and    Ireland,    18(2):
  134—39.
    . 1892.     On   the continuity of the Palaeolithic          and Neolithic      periods.
  Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland,
  22(1 and 2): 66—98.
Burkitt, M. C. 1925. The transition between Palaeolithic and Neolithic times,
  ie. the Mesolithic period. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society of East
  Anglia, 5(1): 16-33.
CaLpweE.L,    JosepH R. 1958. Trend and tradition in the prehistory of the
  eastern United States. Memoir no. 88, American Anthropological                    Associa-
  tion, vol. 60(6), Part 2. Springfield: Ilinois State Museum.
Carneiro, RoBert. 1957. Subsistence and social structure: an ecological study
  of the Kuikuru Indians. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan.               (Mimeo-
  graphed.)
Carr-Saunvers, A. M. 1922. The population problem: a study in human evo-
  lution. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
338                                           Variability among Occupational Units
Cumpr, V. Gorvon.          1925. The dawn of European               civilization.    New   York:
  Alfred A. Knopf.
——. 1931. The forest cultures of northern Europe: a study in evolution and
  diffusion. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and
  Ireland, Vol. 61, Part 2: 325—48.
     . 1937. Adaptation to the postglacial forest on the north Eurasiatic
  plain. In G. G. McCurdy (Ed.), Early man. Philadelphia and New York: J.
  B, Lippincott.
      . 1944. Progress and archaeology. The Thinkers                Library, No.      102. Lon-
  don: Watts and Co.
     . 1951. Man makes himself. New York: Mentor Books, New American
  Library.
      . 1952. New light on the most ancient East. London: Routledge and
  Kegan Paul. (4th ed.)
      . 1956. The new Stone Age. In Harry L. Shapiro                   (Ed.), Man, culture,
  and society. New York: Oxford University Press.
Crark, J. DesMonp. 1951. Bushmen hunters of the Barotse forests. The North-
   ern Rhodesia Journal, 1(3): 56—65.
      . 1962. Africa south of the Sahara. In. R. J. Braidwood and G. R. Willey
   (Eds.), Courses toward urban life. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Ciark, J. G. D. 1932. The Mesolithic age in Britain. Cambridge, England:
  The University Press.
     . 1936. The Mesolithic settlement of northern Europe: a study of the
  food gathering peoples of northern Europe during the early post-glacial
  period. Cambridge, England: The University Press.
      . 1948a. Fowling in prehistoric Europe. Antiquity, 22(8): 116—30.
      . 1948b. The development of fishing in prehistoric Europe. The Anti-
  quaries Journal, 28: 45—85.
      . 1963. A survey of the Mesolithic phase in the prehistory of Europe and
   Southwest Asia. Atti de 6 Congresso internazionale delle Scienze preissto-
   riche e Protostoriche, 1: 97-111. Rome: Collegio Romano.
CoutiL,    L.   1912.   Tardenoisien,      Capsien,    Getulien,    Ibero-Maurusien        Inter-
   getulo-Néolithique,     Tellien “Loubirien,        Geneyenien.      Congrés International
  @ Anthropologie       et d’Archéologie     préhistorique,    14th session,        1: 301-336.
  Geneva.
Cumont, M. 1907. Quelques mots au sujet de Tardenoisien et de la transition
   du Paléolithique au Néolithique. Sociéte Royale Belge d Anthropologie et de
  Préhistoire,. Bulletin, 26: ccv-ceviii.
Darwin, Cuarces R .1875. The variation of animals and plants under domes-
  tication, Vol. 1. (2d ed.) London: Murray and Sons.
Dawkins, WiLLI1AM Boyp. 1894. On the relation of the Palaeolithic to the
  Neolithic period. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great
  Britain and Ireland, 23: 242—54.
DECANDOLLE, ALPHONSE L. P. P. 1959. Origin of cultivated plants. (Reprint of
   the 2d ed., 1886.) New York: Hafner.
DrrEvey,   Epwarp       S., Jr. 1960. The human          population.     Scientific American,
   203(1): 194-204.
Dicsy, Aprian. 1949. Technique and the time factor in relation to economic
  organization. Man, 49: 16—18.
     . 1962. Time the catalyst: or why we should study the material culture
  of primitive peoples. The Advancement of Science, 19(80) : 349—57.
Dumonp, D. E. 1965. Population growth and cultural change. Southwestern
  Journal of Anthropology, 21(4): 302—324.
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations                                                  339
eee            EmiLte.   1897—98.      Morphologie     sociale,   L’année   sociologique,    2:

GaseL, W. Criecuton. 1958a. The Mesolithic continuum in western Europe.
  American Anthropologist, 60 (4): 658—67.
——. 1958b. European secondary Neolithic cultures. Journal of the Royal
  Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 88(1): 97—107.
     . 1960. Seminar on economic types in pre-urban cultures of temperate
  ne peat arid,          and    tropical   areas.   In Current    Anthropology,     1(5—6):

Garrop, D. A. E. 1932. A new Mesolithic industry: the Natufian of Palestine.
  Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland,
  62(2): 257-69.
Gannon, D. A. E., and D. M. A. Bate. 1937. The Stone Age of Mount Carmel,
  eg         at the Wadi El-Mughara, Vol. 1. Oxford, England: Clarendon
    Tess,
Gimputas, Marrya. 1956. The prehistory of eastern Europe. In Hugh Hencken
  (Ed.), Harvard University, Bulletin No. 20. Cambridge, Mass.: American
  School of Prehistoric Research, Peabody Museum.
     . 1963. European prehistory: Neolithic to the Iron Age. In Bernard J.
  Siegel (Ed.), Biennial Review of Anthropology 1963, Stanford: Stanford
  University Press.
GrirFin, JAMEs B. 1961. Comments in Edmonson: Neolithic diffusion rates.
  Current Anthropology, 2(2): 92—93.
Hartpwacus,     Maurice.       1960.   Population    and society, introduction      to social
  morphology. Translated by Otis Duncan and Harold W. Pfautz. Glencoe,
  Ill.: The Free Press.
HAINLINE, JANE. 1965. Culture and biological adaptation. American Anthropol-
  ogist, 67(5), Part 1: 1174—97.
Herve, Grorces. 1899. Populations               Mesolithiques     et Néolithiques   de TEs-
  pagne et du Portugal. Revue Mensuelle de L’Ecole d Anthropologie de Paris,
  9(Series no. 1): 265—80.
Hote, Franx. 1966. Investigating the origins of Mesopotamian civilization.
  Science, 153(3736) : 605-611.
Huntincrorp,      G. W.    B. 1955. The economic         life of the Dorobo.      Anthropos,
  50: 605-684.
Hyrenius, Hannes. 1959. Population growth and replacement. In P. M.
  Hauser and Otis Duncan (Eds.), The study of population: an inventory and
  appraisal. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kapian, Davin. 1960. The law of cultural dominance. In Marshall D. Sahlins
  and Elman R. Service         (Eds.), Evolution and culture. Ann Arbor: University
  of Michigan Press.
Kenyon,    KATHLEEN       M. 1959. Some observations on the beginnings of settle-
  ment in the Near East. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of
  Great Britain and Ireland, 89: 35—43.
Koztowsk1, Leon. 1926. L’Epoque Mésolithique en Pologne. L’Anthropologie,
  36: 47—74.
LaTHrap,    DonaLtp W.         1968. The hunting economies          of the Tropical Forest
  Zone of South America: an attempt at historical perspective. In Richard B.
  Lee, and Irven DeVore          (Eds.), Man the hunter. Chicago: Aldine Publishing
  Company.
Ler, R. B. 1965. Subsistence ecology of [Kung Bushmen, Microfilm. Ph.D.
  dissertation, Berkeley: University of California.
pe Lor, Baron A. 1908. Contribution a l’étude des temps intermédiares entre
340                                          Variability among Occupational Units
  le Paléolithique et le Néolithique, XIII Congrés International dAnthropolog-
  ie et d Archéologie préhistorique, Monaco, 1907, 1: 422—23.
McCartny,      Freperick       D, 1957. Habitat, economy,      and equipment of the
  Australian aborigines. The Australian Journal of Science, 19: 88—97.
     . and Marcart McArrtuur. 1960. The food quest and the time factor
  in aboriginal economic life. Records of the American Australian Scientific
  Expedition to Arnhemland, 2: 145—94.             Parkville, Australia:   University of
  Melbourne, University Press.
MacCurpy, GrorcE Grant. 1924. Human origins: a manual of prehistory. (2
  vols.) New York: D. Appleton.
MELLaAaktT, JAMES. 1961. Excavations at Hacilar: 4th preliminary report. Ana-
  tolian Studies, 11: 39—75.
        . 1963. Excavations at Catal-Hiiyiik 1962: 2d preliminary report. Ana-
  tolian Studies, 13: 43—103.
MENGHIN, Oswa.Lp. 1925. Die mesolithische Kulturentwicklung in Europa.
  Deutsches Archiologisches Institut, Rém.-Germ., Komsn. Bericht., 17: 154.
pEMorGAN, JACQUES JEAN Marie. 1924. Prehistoric man: a general outline of
  prehistory. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
DEMoRTILLET,        ADRIEN.    1896. Les petits silex taillés, 4 contours géométriques
  trouvés en Europe, Asie et Afrique. Revue de [Ecole dAnthropologie, 6:
  376—405.
DEMorTILLET,        GABRIEL.    1885.   Le préhistorique,   antiquité de Thomme.     (2d
  ed.) Paris: C. Reinwald.
OseRMaIER, Huco. 1925. Fossil man in Spain. New Haven: Yale University
  Press.
Opvum, EvceEne P., and H. T. Opum. 1959. Fundamentals of ecology. (2d ed.)
  Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
OsBorn,     HENRY     FarrFIELD.    1919. Men   of the Old Stone Age, their environ-
  ment, life and art. (3d ed.) New York: Charles Scribner.
PERROT, JEAN. 1960. Excavations at "Eynan (’Ein Mallaha). Preliminary report
  on the 1959 season. The Israel Exploration Journal, 10(1): 14—22.
        . 1962. Palestine-Syria-Cilicia.     In R. J. Braidwood     and G. R. Willey
      (Eds.), Courses toward urban life. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Prette, Ep. 1895a. Etudes d’ethnographie préhistorique. L’Anthropologie, 6:
   276-92.
        . 1895b. Hiatus et lacune vestiges de la période de transition dans la
      grotte du Mas-d’Azil. Bulletin de la Société d Anthropologie de Paris, 6(4th
      series):235—67.
Prirtion1, RicHarp. 1962. Southern middle Europe and southeastern Europe.
   In R. J. Braidwood and G. R. Willey (Eds.), Courses toward urban life.
   Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Pirr-Rivers, A. Lane-Fox. 1906. The evolution of culture and other essays.
   Edited by J. L. Myres. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Qumpy, Grorce I. 1962. A year with a Chippewa family, 1763-1764.
      Ethnohistory, 9(3): 217-39.
 Rortu, H. Linc. 1887. On the origin of agriculture. Journal of the Royal An-
   thropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 16(2): 102—136.
 SAHLINS, MARSHALL. 1958. Social stratification in Polynesia. Seattle: University
   of Washington Press.
       . 1961. The segmentary lineage: an organization of predatory expan-
    sion. American Anthropologist, 63(2), Part I: 322—45.
        . 1968. Notes on the original affluent society. In Richard B. Lee and
    Irven DeVore (Eds.), Man the hunter. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Com-
    pany.
L. R. Binford Post-Pleistocene Adaptations —                                               341
SCHWABEDISSEN,      HERMAN.       1962. Northern continental Europe. In R. J. Braid-
  wood and G. R. Willey (Eds.), Courses toward urban life. Chicago: Aldine
  Publishing Company.
Stimpson, Georce Gaytorp.               1949. The meaning of evolution. New Haven:
  Yale University Press.
DE SONNEVILLE-BorbDES,          Denise.    1960. Le Paléolithique supérieur en Périgord,
  2. vol. Bordeaux: Imprimerie Delmas.
——.     1963a. Upper Paleolithic cultures in western Europe. Science, 142
   (3590): 347—55.
——.      1963b. Le Paléolithique supérieur en Suisse. L’Anthropologie, 67
   (3—4): 205—268.
Sotias, W. J. 1924. Ancient hunters, and their modern representatives. New
  York: Macmillan.
STEWARD,     JULIAN H., and Lours C. Faron.                 1959. Native peoples of South
  America. New York: McGraw-Hill.
TROELS-SMITH,      JORGEN.      1953.     Ertebdlle culture-farmer     culture, results of the
  past ten years’ excavations             in Asmosen     Bog, West Zealand. Aarboger for
  nordisk Oldkyndighed of Historie, pp. 1—62. Copenhagen.
Tytor, E. B. 1881. Anthropology. London: Henry Holt.
Vavitov, N. I. 1951. The origin, variation, immunity and breeding of culti-
  vated plants. Chronica Botanica, Vol. 13, No. 1/6.
VreLLe,     EpMonp.      1890. Pointes       de fleches typiques de Fére-en-Tardenois
  (Aisne). Bulletin de Société Anthropologique de Paris, 1(6th series):
  959—64.
WaTERBOLK, H. T. 1962. The lower Rhine Basin. In R. J. Braidwood and G. R.
  Willey (Eds.), Courses toward urban life. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Com-
   any.
Wine, Leste A. 1959. The evolution of culture. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Wittey, Gorpon R. 1966. New World archaeology in 1965. In Proceedings of
  the American Philosophical Society, 110(2): 140—45.
Witson, THoMas. 1894. Minute stone implements from India. In Report of the
   U.S. National Museum, 1882. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
  Office.
Woopsurn, JAMES. 1968. Background material on the Hadza of Tanzania. In
  Richard     B.   Lee    and    Irven     DeVore      (Eds.),   Man   the   hunter.   Chicago:
  Aldine Publishing Company.
Wynne-Epwarps,           V. C. 1962. Animal dispersion in relation to social behav-
  iour. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd.
       1964. Population control in animals. Scientific American, 211(2):
  68—74.
YeNGoYAN, Aram A, 1960. Preliminary notes on a model of the initial populat-
  ing of the Philippines. Anthropology Tomorrow, 6(3) : 42—48.
Younc, T. C., and P. E. L. Smiru.             1966. Research in the prehistory of central
  western Iran. Science, 153 (3734): 386—91.
                                        ei                                                                                                                     -

    a                                                       [a                      na                                                                     siete          :
7           vy                                  bf                   a         :                                                             °                 Pepin
                 ,                                      :                a,         a                                   me                       Ciceierar
                                            7               :                        -_               @,                Td                                           >        ail
                                                    :                           ie                                      a.


                               pols                                            aa            al               PT        es
                                                                                                                                                                               —
              _

             :                 tabs                                                                       — araieion
                     at        ee                                                    aut                      ee                                 ¢                 eer   wit

                          7 -                                       ' n              a8 86                    i          fp                           ins                na
              aie              w                            -                                 :           =    ~                    en
                                                                                                                    .

                          Le                                             Teg                 pawgdetins                                  go® tan
                          , NOs                                 Pinta                         (use                      Si                           “a
                     -              _                           at       nae             i                              ‘=

                     3                          Gp0®ee                              “Sigegin                                    reeenr aaa
                               x        :           jyTse                          Fae            et          Wer                                2
                          ~~                                                                          Poids
                           &                                                                                   od                            wu
                          _—_ 7.                                                                  ’            2                         awe
                                                    7                                                                   -



                          dt                                             ae                                         wee wey
                               : ve                         =             wwe                         _       . 7
                     i.           :                                                           :                 —


                                   aah                                               =                              |
                                   ao                           5                             ;                                                          the




o                                                                         —                                                              -

                               a                H                                        -
”                         hi                                                                                                    F

7                                                                                                                           ;
_           oho P              (fe                                                                    %

7

                                                        ~
                                                        ~                                                                                            me

        %

                                   a4




                                                                                                                                    L)


                                                                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                  %                                                  ,~


                                                se
                                                =
                                                                     PART IV




                                                           Discussion




The anthropologists whose comments constitute this section of the book
were invited to comment only on certain portions of the complete sym-
posium at Denver. The comments of Lee, DeVore, and Fried were made
with reference to the papers of S. R. Binford, Sackett, L. R. Binford,
Winters, and Hole. The comments of Dozier, Aberle, and Harris were
made with reference to the papers of Flannery and Coe, Longacre, Hill,
Whallon, and Deetz. The purpose of soliciting the comments of these non-
archeological anthropologists was to get their response to the kinds of
approaches used and to insure that there would be the very essential
feedback maintained between students of living cultures and students of
extinct ones. Their comments were especially gratifying in that they went
far beyond the content of the symposium papers and further elucidated
the nature of the relationship between anthropological subdisciplines.



Comments by Richard B. Lee
As a social anthropologist who has been interested in problems of arche-
ological reconstruction and more generally in the problems of the evolu-
tion of human behavior, I hope to offer one or two suggestions about how
social anthropology can be of use to the archeologist and how the arche-
ologist can make richer inferences from his own data.
   First of all it appeared to me in listening to several of the papers that
perhaps this symposium entitled “Social Organization of Prehistoric Com-
munities” had been misnamed. Sally Binford’s and Sackett’s papers were
intriguing examples of the current highly sophisticated methodologies
                                   343
344                                                                   Discussion
I felt that they stopped far short of inferences about social organization.
Perhaps these papers should have been put into a symposium entitled
“Human Behavior Patterns of Archeological Significance.”
  On the other hand, L. R. Binford’s concluding paper is a strange bed-
fellow because it goes far beyond the discussion of social organization to a
consideration of total socioecological adaptation in the post-Pleistocene.
Thus, he considers one of the basic questions that informs the humanities:
the transformation of the human condition brought about by the onset of
agriculture and animal domestication. So, in this respect it goes beyond
the scope of the symposium, and of course it raises exciting questions for
many of us.
   I am going to make two comments now on the Paleolithic materials.
First of all, I think that we    need for this earlier period the kind of
synthesis that Lewis Binford has offered us for the later post-Pleistocene
period. One of the important ways that social anthropologists can assist in
this task is to get down to the long overdue job of developing a general
statement about the ecology, subsistence, and social organization of con-
temporary hunting and gathering peoples.’
  Another way that we can assist is to undertake more ethnographic
studies of hunting and gathering peoples, with archeological questions in
mind. DeVore and I attempted to do this between 1963 and 1965 in our
research among the !Kung Bushmen of Bechuanaland. What we found
may be of interest to archeologists. We were impressed that the !Kung
have a very substantial subsistence base largely made up of vegetable
foods and small mammals, but that there would be almost a total loss of
this evidence to the archeologist. !Kung campsites are subject to very
rapid destruction, and after ten or fifteen years the evidence of the set-
tlement pattern disappears and the evidence for the substantial vegetable
food base rots away. Therefore, by doing Bushman archeology, I think
one would radically underestimate the level of their subsistence. One
would infer that life among the Bushmen must have been nasty, brutish,
and short, whereas it is in fact delightful, as DeVore and I can attest.
   This leads into a second point about the synthesis that is yet to be done
on the subsistence and ecology of contemporary hunting and gathering
peoples. One thing that we can say right off concerns the importance of
meat. In the world ethnographic sample of food-gathering societies, only
the Eskimos    are primarily mammal      eaters, and we        are not even   sure
about them because fish among the Eskimo may have been of equal
importance with mammals. Virtually all the rest of the societies in the
sample have a subsistence base primarily of vegetable foods and/or
marine resources. This is a very marked contrast to the Paleolithic
peoples. The latter appear to be much more successful big game hunters,
  * An attempt at synthesizing hunter-gatherer materials was made by an interna-
tional panel of scholars at the symposium, “Man the Hunter,”    Chicago, April 6-9,
1966 (Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company, 1968).
Discussion                                                               345
and, I would think that the Dordogne cultures, for instance, would fall
quite outside the range of variation of known food-gathering peoples. In
light of this, I think that the archeologists could be much more intrepid in
their reconstruction of Paleolithic social organization. What their material
suggests to me is very substantial group sizes and a high level of social
complexity for late Paleolithic man.
   One starts with the question: What are the implications of the regular
hunting of large numbers of large mammals? First of all, it requires a high
level of social organization to organize a game-drive or to attack and kill
an animal as large as an elephant. Second, and even more important, it
requires a large number of people to butcher, transport, cook, and con-
sume the many thousands of pounds of meat that would be derived from
such hunting activities.
  The contemporary !Kung Bushmen are a case in point. They live in
small groups of ten to thirty people, and they specialize in hunting small
mammals non-cooperatively. Practically all the mammals they kill can be
consumed within the local group. However, when a large animal, such as
a gemsbok or wildebeeste is killed, providing 200 to 300 pounds of meat,
visitors from far and wide come in to consume and to share in the good
fortune of the local group. I would predict, if large game were regularly
killed by the !Kung Bushmen, that instead of people visiting back and
forth every second day, the present small groups would tend to combine
into substantially larger groups, simply in order to consume the meat that
is available. Let us make a simple calculation: one gemsbok with 250
pounds of meat, will in fact feed forty !Kung Bushmen for three days. An
elephant yielding ten times as much meat as a gemsbok would provide,
instead of 120 man-days of meat, something on the order of 1,200 man-
days of meat! This quantity of meat would feed 400 people for three days.
Such a calculatidn would necessarily imply much larger groups for Pale-
olithic hunters than, for instance, occur among the !Kung Bushmen, and
these larger groups would display much greater residential stability.
   I am reminded of the old chestnut about the Eskimo hunter who goes
out on the iceflows, and by a great stroke of fortune manages to harpoon
and kill a whale. By organizing his dog team and by dint of great effort
he manages to drag this enormous carcass back to the igloo. He knocks on
the door of the igloo, and he calls to his wife, “Dear, dear, come and look
what I have.” His wife crawls out of the igloo, takes one look at this hulk,
and says, “You clean it, and I'll eat it!” In other words, Paleolithic arche-
ologists would do well to consider Brecht’s dictum: “Erst kommt die
Fressen, dann kommt die Moral.”
   Finally I want to propose that we should offer as an option in the
graduate anthropology program something called “interpretive arche-
ology.” In this scheme, each archeology graduate student would be re-
quired to spend three to six months doing an ethnographic field study,
preferably after he has had archeological field experience and preferably
346                                                               Discussion
that have been developed for the analysis of Paleolithic assemblages, but
in a living culture that is somehow related to his archeological work or
related to the kinds of interpretive problems he is dealing with. Person-
ally, I can’t help feeling, for instance, that if every African prehistorian
spent a field season working with the Kalahari Bushmen (or with Austra-
lian aborigines), this experience would immeasurably enrich his under-
standing of all levels of African prehistory. I cite as an example Francis
van Noten, a Belgian archeologist, who first excavated an early Bushman
site with a carbon date of 4700 BP, and then came to our field station at
Dobe, Bechuanaland, where he spent three weeks studying Bushman
settlement patterns. At the end it was not possible for him to say “I
learned this, this, and this,” but the experience certainly enlarged his
understanding at an intuitive level.
  Here is an example of another kind of ethnographic project that arche-
ologists could usefully carry out. Deetz’s paper considers the problem of
how residence and descent rules may be inferred from archeological evi-
dence. It would seem to me that an archeology graduate student could
very usefully go into an ethnographic field situation and study the actual
fit between the observed post-marital residence pattern and the distribu-
tion of stylistic techniques and technology. My guess is that no discern-
able correspondence could be demonstrated between, for example, an
uxori-matrilocal rule of residence and the spatial distribution of pottery
types, but I would be delighted to be proven wrong!


Comments by Irven DeVore
As a non-archeologist, I warmly applaud the shift in emphasis in arche-
ological thinking in recent years as evidenced, for example, by the papers
in this symposium. In the past we were presented with lithic industries
which, to judge by their descriptions, were copulating, hybridizing, evol-
ving, adapting, and producing offspring. The modern emphasis on the
meticulous excavation of living floors is not only an exciting development
within archeology, but is also rapidly creating an atmosphere in which the
ethnographer and the archeologist may enter into useful discourse.
   I want to amplify some of the points Richard Lee made with regard to
the Bushmen study and archeological interpretation. I trust it is unneces-
sary to state that we view the Bushmen study not as a study of living
Paleolithic fossils but as an opportunity to test some assumptions about
correlations between observed behavior patterns and the artifactual
materials that are left behind to reveal those patterns.

RECONSTRUCTION   OF SUBSISTENCE ACTIVITIES
Sally Binford has called attention to the analysis of “tool kits” as a means
of revealing much more about the actual hunting activities of hominids
than is possible from the interpretation of either tool types or total assem-
blages. That the ability to reconstruct the activity of a hunter or hunters
Discussion                                                                347
at a given time and place would yield extremely important information is
obvious, but what can then be made of this information to predict the
entire subsistence pattern is less straightforward.
   Lee has carefully documented the tool kit that a Bushman hunter uses
in pursuit of game, and it is a very complex kit (Lee, 1965). When a
hunter leaves in the morning he may well be carrying a spear, a bow and
arrows, a digging stick, a throwing stick, and a flexible 12—14-ft. pole
used for snagging spring hares in their underground burrows. Under his
arm will be a pouch containing snares, an arrow-poison kit, gum mastic,
fire sticks, a knife, an ostrich eggshell canteen, and so on. Hunting is a
complex activity; even though you may hunt for days or weeks without
killing an animal, you must be prepared to kill or capture anything from a
hare to a 2,000-lb. eland.   A woman’s kit is far simpler; a pair of stones to
crack mungongo nuts, a leather pouch to carry foodstuffs, and a digging
stick comprise the essentials. If these two kits are projected backward in
time to a pre-iron period, all of the woman’s kit would have disintegrated
in an excavation site except the stones, but the range of chipped stone
projectiles and cutting edges would be impressive. The abundance and
complexity of the hunting artifacts would suggest that hunting had been
the basis of the economy (and that the nut-cracking stones were used to
extract marrow). Quite the opposite is the case, but it happens that the
important nut-and-vegetable subsistence of the Dobe area Bushmen is
extracted by a very simple, largely perishable, tool kit.
  That the ordinary site yields only a small, imperishable fraction of a
culture’s total impedimenta will hardly be greeted by archeologists as a
revelation, but I am suggesting something more. Increasingly large sam-
ples of the “hunting artifacts” and bone debris on the living floors of early
man will naturally lead to more sophisticated analyses of hunting tech-
niques and the prey animals, but these data may also divert attention
from consideration of the broader aspects of subsistence. Bushmen groups
orient to vegetable supplies and water, and after these requirements are
met the hunters find what game they can in the area. Lee has already
mentioned the importance of vegetable and marine resources in the sub-
sistence of living hunter-gatherer peoples, and a comparably vegetarian
diet is universal among Old World monkeys and apes. Even though both
primates, and, with rare exceptions, living hunter-gatherers depend heav-
ily on a vegetable subsistence base, our textbooks treat human prehistory
as a series of stages of more and more efficient hunting. Yet it seems
unlikely that the women, the young, and the aged sat idly by during more
than a million years of male hunting activities. We believe that a more
balanced view of living hunter-gatherers will offer a better perspective on
prehistory.

LIVING FLOORS           :
Archeologists now speak of “activity specific” areas within a living site as
early as the Middle Pleistocene at such sites as Ambrona and Torralba.
348                                                                     Discussion
Lee has already pointed to the necessary size and presumed complexity of
a social group capable of routinely killing elephants, and in these Spanish
sites   there   is evidence   of some   40—50   butchered   elephants     (Butzer,
1964). The Dobe Bushmen will not tackle an elephant, but their camp-
sites can reveal much more to the archeologist than the ethnographic
literature implies. As everyone knows from the literature, and a brief visit
would confirm the impression, a Bushman campsite is disappointingly
ephemeral—a series of flimsy grass huts around campfires. But it is soon
apparent to the observer that the Bushmen are carrying out a series of
activities whose diversity is comparable to those in middle-class suburbia.
These activities can be described in objective terms (eating, sleeping,
defecation, etc.), but for the present illustration suffice it to say that in
these simple hunter-gatherer camps one finds the functional equivalents
of a bedroom, a kitchen, a sitting room, bathroom, storage closet, pantry,
den, doghouse, and even a patio barbecue pit. The “den” is the dance
circle where Bushmen gather with visitors. Wart hogs and other such
delicacies may be cooked in the skin and this tends to be a smelly busi-
ness. The sensible chef digs his roasting pit (his “barbecue pit”) some
twenty yards outside the camp circle. These routine activities, then, tend
to occur in specific areas, and these areas can be plotted by their charac-
teristic debris.
   The relocation of a campsite may owe more to olfactory considerations
than is sometimes appreciated. As L. R. Binford has already mentioned,
people defecate and the accumulation of these waste products may be-
come noisome. Thus the Bushmen may move             a camp, not for some tidy
ecological reason such as shifting game herds or drought, but because, as
they say, “the place stinks.” Even hunting success may create problems. A
typical reconstruction depicts the hunters camped beside a dead elephant,
happily hacking away. This may be reasonable in near-freezing weather,
but it is intolerable in the tropics. In 1964 an elephant was killed in the
Masai Amboseli Reserve, Kenya. After 24 hours in this climate the bub-
bling carcass could be both heard and smelled for hundreds of feet in all
directions; the smell of putrefaction could scarcely be borne at 1,000
yards downwind, and the winds were variable. Presumably our ancestors
were not oblivious to this situation, and one might postulate an olfactory
theory of shifting human occupation. Perhaps this will serve as an ex-
ample of the “intuitive level of understanding” Lee is asking archeologists
to seek in the ethnographer’s camp.
   A dead elephant is outside the experience of most of us, whether arche-
ologist or otherwise. What amazed me was the number of animals at-
tracted to this mountain of rotting flesh. There were thirteen lions (who
seemed as eager to eat people as to work at the carcass), a great many
hyenas and jackals, and over 350 very persistent vultures and marabou
storks. From the simple fact of a dead elephant, then, one can make some
calculations about the size of the group that could be supported by its
Discussion               |                                                   349
flesh, the minimum number of adults necessary to separate an individual
from an angry and protective herd, surround and dispatch it (and then
fight off competing predators);and, perhaps, arrive at some notion of the
effect of the carcass on the location of the campsite.

CONCLUSION

The methodological expertise evident in these symposium papers is the
envy of social anthropologists. One is struck not only by the impressive
amount of material being excavated, preserved, and analyzed, but also by
the amount of information derivable from these efforts. As archeologists
go beyond the analysis of tool types and assemblages to reconstruction of
the tool makers and their life patterns, they will increasingly engage the
interest of their colleagues. While the social anthropologist may be
scandalized by reconstructions of ancestral systems of residence and de-
scent, he should       recognize   that contemporary   studies in social anthro-
pology have not always offered archeologists a very wide range of alter-
natives for dialogue. Indeed I would echo Lee’s statement that, bold as
archeologists may now consider themselves to be, I feel they are being
unnecessarily timid, and wish they would extend their reconstructive
necks still further.
   I realize that a predictable result of this widespread sticking-out-of-
necks would be wholesale decapitation. As an alternative, I would hope
that archeologists could offer not one, but a range of possible interpreta-
tions and models based on their data—models which would be at least in
some respects empirically verifiable independent of archeological evi-
dence. In a different context, S. L. Washburn suggested one way in which
these alternatives could be offered. This would involve not only making a
clear distinction between the data from an excavation and the interpre-
tation of these data, but would also involve giving some sort of confi-
dence limits to interpretations and reconstructions. Crudely, the prehis-
torian could say that on the basis of material “A,” I place considerable (90
per cent?) confidence in the conclusion that “X” is true, but the interpre-
tation of material “B” is much less straightforward and I would suggest at
only the “20 per cent level” that “Y” occurred. This approach has the
advantage of taking the more controversial aspects of archeology out of
the realm of personal invective and ad hominem argument, while at the
same time allowing us to discuss the necessarily controversial aspects of
reconstruction which will surely continue to be of the most interest to the
profession at large.
                                    References

Burzer,   Kart W.      1964. Environment   and archeology. Chicago:   Aldine Pub-
   lishing Company.
Ler, Ricuarp B. 1965. Subsistence ecology of [Kung Bushmen. Unpublished
   Ph.D. thesis. Berkeley: University of California.
350                                                               Discussion


Comments by Morton H. Fried
I will be brief because my expertise falls far short of that displayed by the
other discussants, not to mention the speakers. I am going to make six
points, all quite brief and programmatic. My comments, of course, repre-
sent only one sociocultural anthropologist’s reaction to what some arche-
ologists are doing at the present time. Since I am considering certain
aspects of that work which I consider exciting and of which I approve,
my message should be scanned for encouragement rather than wisdom.
  First, what have some    archeologists been up to recently? Well, they
have been getting wordy, as prolix as their sociocultural brethren, and this
does not excite me, although I am in no position to disapprove. Actually,
my first point is somewhat more serious, for I would like to note and
loudly cheer the continued collapse of archetypal thinking among arche-
ologists. Almost gone are such procrustean notions of my youth as the
core cultures or the flake cultures. I must confess now to having harbored
certain subversive images when I was a graduate student and forced to
submit to a number of archeology courses. One image involved an ancient
hominid type who I imagined squatting over his work as he bashed out a
stone tool. After laboring long and intently he rose and with an expression
of ineffable sadness chucked away the neat object of his labors. One close
enough to hear and understand him would have caught his plaintive
remark: “I’m not allowed to use that, it’s flake and I’m core.”
  These papers have universally shown disdain for the rigid categorical
thinking that mars much of the earlier archeology and makes it incompat-
ible with what we know about the dynamics of culture. While culture has
its own laws of conservation, it is an unusually volatile realm and the
notion of static, homogeneous archeological cultures is impossible to fit
with current theoretical models of culture. As a by-product, we also viti-
ate the requirement that major cultural changes in the remote past oc-
curred to the tune of genocide, which may be seen ultimately as a projec-
tion of the world we know into the past we must reconstruct.
   Second, these papers universally avoid anything that might be called,
for want of a better term, “organic thinking.” Nowhere, I believe, is there
a reference to “race” or even ethnic groups or populations. What we are
told about is culture, the dynamics of culture, and social systems and the
dynamics of such systems. This is closely linked to the first point that I
made, for the archeological emphasis is located in the realm of culture
and not in some hypothetical realm of racial biology. Fundamentally, the
intrinsic assumption is that ideas can spread wide and more or less rapidly
depending upon sociocultural circumstances. Acting upon assumptions
such as this, we can see that there is no theoretical gulf between arche-
ologists and sociocultural anthropologists, but essentially a difference of
data.
Discussion                                                               351
   My third observation has to do with archeological method. Those of us
who have not had a primary investment in archeology but who have
dutifully kept contact by reading monographs or serving on dissertation
committees have sometimes been pained by the detailed empiricism of
the field archeologist. But now the painstaking methods of recovery and
reporting are beginning to pay off: fellows, you were right! Intricate,
comprehensive    summaries   of living floor contents are infinitely more
meaningful and useful than the intuitive epitomizations that take us back
to archetyping. Dependence upon itemization of the contents of living
floors, however boring to the reader in quest of the fast generalization,
has its rewards. Those who pursue this method, I believe, are on the verge
of revolutionizing our detailed understanding of the logic and flow of
prehistory. This is being done by constantly increasing the probability
coefficients of statements that were originally made as speculations, and
the increasing reliability of these statements is a direct function of the
energy that has been put into site inventories, or so it would seem to an
observer from outside.
  My fourth point is that archeology, like certain other fields, is now in
possession of a “synthetic theory.” I mean by this exactly what Julian
Huxley meant when he applied it to biology: you have come upon a
theory and a method that are the integrated product of several disci-
plines. Like biology, archeology has had its wedding with statistics and
with ecology.
   This leads me to the fifth point, which acknowledges the mutual rela-
tions between archeology and comparative ethnography. I use the latter
phrase instead of ethnology, because it better conveys the emphasis upon
the detailed inventory, which is parallel to the detailed inventory of living
floors already mentioned. I should also like to endorse Mr. Lee’s sugges-
tions about ethnographic training for archeologists, even at the risk of
further elaborating the graduate program. In all of this, however, I think
a distinction should be drawn between an archeology informed by com-
parative ethnography and an archeology dominated by sociocultural an-
thropology. Obviously, the data of archeology and the discipline-specific
theories of archeology must take first place in this exchange.
   Since the question has been raised, I cannot refrain from commenting
on the relation between archeology and contemporary ethnographic expe-
rience. Everyone is aware that contemporary marginal cultures occupy
environmental niches that are in most cases probably quite different from
those occupied by the hunters and gatherers of the past. What is more,
certain processes of sociocultural development, particularly in the area of
polity, are probably much different under derived and induced condi-
tions, as opposed to those which transpired under pristine conditions. This
is not to say that Bushman culture cannot reflect things of great value and
interest to the archeologist, but does suggest that the reflecting edge must
be held at the proper angle to avoid distortion.
Gow                                                                    Discussion
  Finally, my last point has to do with an ancient philosophical conflict
presently reviving once again in more than one subdiscipline of our
anthropological complex. It seems to me, in the conflict between materi-
alistic and idealistic approaches, that the archeologists have swung back
to the former. Some may argue that archeologists never really departed
from materialism, since their data are of such nature as to encourage a
materialistic approach. We did not hear in the preceding comments very
much about ideas, values, or desires; we did hear about stinking elephant
carcasses and how camps will be moved to avoid them. We heard about
the contents of tool kits and their limitations, and things of this kind.
While I am certainly not willing to cast out the humanistic approach with
its various benefits, I think that there is a time for various research strat-
egies and that this is the time to stress the painstaking recovery and
description of whole sites which are then presented in their complexity
rather than as epitomes of limited value and less limited error.


Comments by Edward P. Dozier
I am not going to comment on methodology or techniques explored or
expressed in the papers of the participants. I want, instead, to say some-
thing about social units and the types which may occur in prehistoric
sites.
  I note that our speakers have searched for, or have tried to infer only
unilinear type organizations in the sites that they have worked. This is
probably because they are dealing with the former habitations of simpler
societies and, therefore, do not expect to find other types of social units.
Or, perhaps, they have simply taken a cue from social anthropologists
who have devoted so much attention to the study of kinship units. How-
ever, I feel strongly that non-kinship units were present in some of the
groups reported on, particularly those in Mesoamerica. I think that a
search for non-kinship units should be made in these groups. What the
social anthropologist is particularly concerned with is: “What are the
corporate aspects of the particular prehistoric society?” I believe this is
the same question—-or at least related to it—-that Deetz raised in his
paper. As far as kinship organizations are concerned, we are restricted
essentially to two broad types of social units: unilinear organizations or
ramified,   bilateral   descent   groups.   We   cannot   assume,   however,   that
given evidence of corporateness in house or ceramic remains we are deal-
ing with kinship units. We must still resolve this either by reference to
surviving groups in the area, or by other means, for corporateness may
exist in kinship units as well as in non-kinship units.
  In many of our societies today, in North America as well as in Meso-
america,    non-kinship sodalities are extremely important; these organiza-
tions provide integrative functions and have corporate features. The fact
that these units are represented in living indigenous peoples in the neigh-
Discussion                                                        353
borhood of some of the sites reported in the symposium would indicate
that they have deep historical roots.
   As a social anthropologist, non-kinship organizations are the kind of
units I would like to have archeologists look for. This is simply because I
believe that particularly in Mexico, but also in parts of the Southwestern
United States, such units are of primary importance among the contem-
porary Indian populations. I would like to make a plea to social anthro-
pologists that we begin to study non-kinship organizations with the same
fervor we have devoted to kinship units. If we do this, we will have a
model for the archeologists to aim at and, hence, to have them seek
evidence for both types of social structures.

Comments by David F. Aberle
My general remarks and specific comments are restricted to the papers
that were read at the session for which I was asked to serve as a discus-
sant: those by Flannery and Coe, Struever, Longacre, Hill, Deetz, and
Whallon. The papers are characterized by freshness, enthusiasm, sophisti-
cation in the use of quantitative methods, and an informed and sensitive
use of the concepts of social anthropology and of cultural ecology as
applied to ethnographically recorded cultures. They afford a promise of
new,   cooperative    intellectual   endeavors    requiring   the collaboration     of
archeologists and ethnologists and providing rewards for both. And they
also open the possibility of a kind of sequential analysis that is often
difficult in ethnology for lack of adequate historical information. In this
respect, archeology may well advance ethnological thinking, whereas in
some other respects, archeology depends on ethnological theory.
   There are two problems about work of the sort represented in these
papers. The first lies in the area of methods. These papers show more
sophisticated use of statistics than is characteristic of a good deal of work
in ethnology, but in the drafts I saw some did not make entirely clear
why a particular statistic was chosen, nor what it did. In ethnology (and
in archeology, for that matter), although the situation is changing, there
are a good many of us who have little enough background in statistics. As
a result, data analysis surrounded by a sufficient number of tables is likely
to be accepted because of the figures, whether they are understood or
not, or rejected in spite of the figures, because they are not understood. It
behooves those who use novel or complex statistics to inform us quite
carefully as to what they are doing, and why, so as to maximize the
chance for the spread of the techniques and for their critical evaluation.
  The second problem lies in the area of theory, or perhaps of concepts,
since theory in ethnology has a limited development at present.’ On the
one hand, the archeologist will have to keep very much abreast of current
   1 By “theory” I refer to generalized propositions stating relationships between two
or more classes of phenomena.
354                                                              Discussion
theory and concepts, or we will have the usual spectacle of the use of
ideas outworn in one field as the basic assumptions of another. This is a
familiar problem to anthropologists in general: many economists, political
scientists, and psychologists start with working assumptions borrowed
from the anthropology of twenty or more years ago and are startlingly
invulnerable to efforts to update them. It is notable that the authors of
these papers are relatively young and recently trained in ethnology. Petri-
faction has had no time to set in, but it is an ever-present possibility. On
the other hand, efforts to use the “fancier” types of ethnological concepts
may lead to difficulties, particularly as these concepts demand moving
several steps away from the data. As Morton Fried points out, there are
advantages to a material perspective in this kind of work.
   I come now to specific comments. The paper by Hill provides a find-
ing surprising to me. He says that the pottery in the kivas was relatively
uniform and he suggests therefore that each kiva was attached to a par-
ticular matrilocal cluster. In such modern matrilineal, matrilocal pueblos
as the Hopi towns and Zufii, kivas are made up of members of a number
of clans, thus cross-cutting clan membership. If the kivas are in fact made
up of unrelated men, married to matrilineally related women       who form
matrilocal clusters, this has escaped the attention of ethnographers. One
might therefore expect that if these prehistoric pueblos moved in the di-
rection of modern pueblos, later horizons would show less uniformity of
kiva pottery. Whether or not data of this sort emerge, we find in the
archeological picture a form of social organization that differs signifi-
cantly from known ethnological types.
   Whallon’s illuminating paper brings out the point I referred to above
about sequence analysis. And it also raises a point of significance about
the interpretation of residence patterns. His paper shows increasing fixity
of matrilocal residence over time. Now it is perfectly true that evidence of
some degree of matrilocality at any one point of time is a poor basis for
inferring matrilineal descent, whether the data are archeological or ethno-
logical. There are at least four possible interpretations of such a pattern.
The group may be moving toward matrilineality via matrilocality; it may
have once been matrilineal but have lost matrilineal descent groups with-
out losing a matrilocal bias; it may have a statistical preference for matri-
locality without either a dogma of residence or a dogma of descent; or it
may be matrilineal and matrilocal. But a pattern of increasing tendency
over time toward matrilocality would seem to reduce us to two possibili-
ties: that the system was matrilineal with increasing matrilocal prefer-
ence, or that it was moving toward matrilineality via matrilocality. This at
least reduces some of the static. Change over time, then, would seem a
more powerful tool for social inferences than analysis of single sites in a
restricted time range.
   But Whallon’s interpretation of his data does raise a problem: that of
“fancy” theory. His interpretation is concerned with degree of corporate-
Discussion                                                                355
ness. This is a concept exceedingly difficult to operationalize in ethnology,
and perhaps of dubious value, since it tends to use a unidimensional
quantitative concept to cover a multitude of dimensions (for example,
inheritance, residential fixity, jural responsibility, sharing, joint economic
activity, exclusive ritual activity, etc.). It would seem more profitable for
the moment     for him to remain somewhat        closer to his data, which do
indicate more fixity of residence and perhaps a larger number of people
in the fixed clusters. I would be reluctant to use a statistical measure
applied to artifacts to describe a condition (corporateness ) that has yet to
be satisfactorily quantified in ethnology.
  With respect to Struever’s paper, if indeed Hopewell is primarily non-
agricultural and is based on what he calls the harvesting of wild re-
sources, there is an interesting parallel with the Northwest Coast, where
cultural elaboration is clearly based on just such harvesting. In Hopewell
there is an elaboration of the mortuary pattern; in the Northwest Coast
there is a considerable elaboration of the potlatch complex surrounding
funerals. Indeed, up and down the Northwest Coast, and indeed among
those Alaskan Eskimo groups with relatively abundant resources, what-
ever else is elaborated, feasting and prestations in connection with death
show a rich development. Nor is this funerary elaboration simply a given
of all relatively well-off cultures; it is not found, for example, in Pueblo
culture, and there is no evidence that it was even at the climax of that
culture.
   The stimulating paper by Flannery and Coe does have some loopholes
from the point of view of ethnological theory and data. The authors seem
to assume to begin with that a kinship system is either unilineal and
egalitarian or non-unilineal, ranked, and ramifying. As I see it, this is a
misinterpretation of what Sahlins wrote, although a plausible (but I think
incorrect )extrapolation from what Kirchhoff wrote.
  Sahlins says, “A ramage then is a nonexogamous, internally stratified,
unilineal—in Polynesia, patrilineal—descent group. Distance from the
senior line of descent from the common ancestor is the criterion of strati-
fication. By this definition, segments of a ramage are also ramages”
(Sahlins, 1958, p. 140). He continues in a footnote: “At approximately the
same time that Firth applied the term ‘ramage’ to this distinct type of
organization, Paul Kirchhoff, in a brilliant paper, had isolated ramage
organizations and called them ‘conical clans’ in contrast to the ‘equali-
tarian clans’ as one finds, for example, among the Iroquois” (Sahlins,
1958, p. 140). Elsewhere Sahlins speaks of “localized, discrete, patrilineal
descent lines” as a contrast to ramified systems in Polynesia and con-
tinues, “The descent lines held titles. . . . Status did not depend—at least
not in the same way as in the ramified system—on distance from the
main line of descent, but rather on the traditional position of one’s title in
the territorial hierarchy of titles” (Sahlins, 1958, p. 181).
  In a paper that “modifies, in places extends, and generally develops”
356                                                              Discussion
(1957, p. 291, n. 1) the interpretative sections of Sahlins, 1958, Sahlins
changes his definitions and terms slightly. “A ramage is a common de-
scent group internally ranked by a principle of genealogical seniority.
Succession . . . is by rule of primogeniture. . . . Every line is ranked
according to the respective birth order of ancestral figures, and every
individual in a ramage holds a different rank—one precisely proportion-
ate to his distance from the senior line. This is the outstanding indicative
feature of ramages” (1957, p. 291). “A truncated descent line is a small
localized common descent group. It differs from a ramage by absence of
internal ranking according to genealogical principles. Although descent
lines supply chiefs in territorial units, succession is determined primarily
by leadership qualifications, not by rule of primogeniture. Correspond-
ingly, distinction of senior and junior line is not made” (1957, p. 292). He
continues by pointing out that villages involve sets of truncated descent
groups. When a descent group within a village divides, genealogical ties
eventually are forgotten. But descent groups of different villages are often
affiliated by ties of ancestry. When this occurs, the different descent
groups thus affiliated are not mutually ranked. Thus the fundamental
political units of societies with ramages are the ramages themselves. The
fundamental political units of societies with truncated descent lines are
villages governed by councils of titled men, these offices being held by
the leaders of the various descent lines. Villages in turn are grouped into
districts ruled by similar councils (1957, pp. 292-93, paraphrased).
“Neither exogamy nor endogamy are indicative features of ramages and
truncated descent lines. Both are agamous” (1957, p. 293). Furthermore,
these units may be either patrilineal or non-unilineal. “In the present
discussion internal ranking and segmentary features of descent groups are
at issue and ‘ramage’ and ‘truncated descent lines’ are discriminated prin-
cipally by these criteria” (1957, p. 293). He continues, “Characteristics of
lineality . . . are not features with which we are directly concerned at the
moment” (1957, p. 293). Finally, the presence and absence of redistri-
bution are not at stake. Both kinds of units redistribute (1958, passim;
1957, p. 295). It is clear throughout his 1957 paper that Sahlins’ typology
is oriented   to Polynesian   social forms, and that he is not    concerned
whether his typology can be carried over to other areas unchanged        (cf.
1957, pp. 291, 299).
  Flannery and Coe, however, say, “The first type of social organization
was the ‘descent line,’ or simple ‘unilateral exogamous clan’ of Kirchoff.
. . . These we might describe as corporate groups united by actual (or
fictionalized )common descent through the male or female line, all mem-
bers of a given lineage being regarded as equals. The second type of
social organization was the ramified system, ‘ramage, or ‘conical clan’ of
Kirchhoff ...,   which   is not really a clan at all....It is based   not on
unilateral descent but on primogeniture; individuals are ranked in status
according to their distance from the direct line of descent from an ances-
Discussion                                                          357
tor at the apex of the ramified system” (Flannery and Coe, this volume,
p. 274).
  Thus they contrast egalitarian, exogamous, unilineal units with inter-
nally ranked, non-exogamous, non-unilineal units; they equate the former
with Kirchhoff’s equalitarian clan and Sahlins’ descent line, and the latter
with Kirchhoff’s conical clan and Sahlins’ ramage.
   But Sahlins’ contrasts do not involve unilineality versus non-unilineal-
ity, do not involve exogamy versus agamy, and do not involve egalitarian-
ism versus ranking. They involve depth of genealogical reckoning, as-
signment of rank, and community composition. Neither group as defined
for Polynesia is exogamous, and neither group is egalitarian. The “descent
line” or “truncated descent line,” however, does not assign rank on the
basis of genealogical position. Its leaders, however, have rank within the
descent group. The exogamous equalitarian clan of Kirchhoff appears
only in a footnote; this unit is not used by Sahlins to analyze Polynesian
data.
   I now take a step beyond Sahlins’ argument. Not only are there ram-
ified unilineal and non-unilineal, agamous, genealogically ranked units in
various parts of the world, but there are also at least the following:
ramified, unilineal, genealogically   ranked   units exogamous   in the main
but with special, agamous marriages for those of high status, and uni-
lineal, exogamous, genealogically ranked units, whose high-status figures
contract marriages only with high-status figures from other units. Thus
neither unilineality nor agamy are critical for the analysis of ramified,
genealogically ranked units.
   Now all of this does not undermine the analysis of Flannery and Coe.
Their simple contrastive pair, however, does necessitate an unnecessarily
complex argument to show that the lowland Maya were organized with
patrilineal exogamous clans and redistribution and stratification. It is not
that they have contructed    an improbable model for the lowland Maya,
but that they have found a problem in accounting for redistribution and
stratification and exogamy as a package where no problem exists: there
are many systems that combine      all three features. They have not, then.
used Sahlins’ theory, either as stated in his 1958 book or in his 1957
article, with sufficient precision, nor have they taken into account living
ethnographic examples that would have entitled them to arrive at the
same conclusions with less elaboration. (There is a problem in accounting
for the transition from egalitarian clans with little or no redistribution to
less egalitarian units with considerable redistribution, but the problem is
that of breaking out of egalitarianism, not out of unilineality or exo-
gamy.)
  They also argue—and this is a different point—that a system of re-
ciprocity, as opposed to a system of redistribution, could not have ade-
quately organized the exchanges of durable and perishable products in
the Mexican highlands. They propose that two solutions were available
358                                                              Discussion

for this: the market system of the Mexican highlands and a redistributive
system.
   Here they ignore ethnological evidence that indicates—unfortunately
for the neatness of their theory—that exceedingly complex exchange
systems involving basic foodstuffs can, in fact, be based on reciprocity.
The trading system of Manus and the kula ring are cases in point (and
the kula ring does not depend on redistribution, even though some of the
systems involved in the kula ring were redistributive). Hence one can
argue only that markets and redistribution are among the mechanisms
that make possible the circulation of goods that they see as adaptive for
the region, but not that these are the sole mechanisms. So far as I can see,
we still have no empirically substantiated theory—in this paper or any-
where else—that will account for the origin of redistribution.
   But the reason for raising these strictures is not to criticize Flannery
and Coe. It is only to point out that the kind of archeological interpreta-
tion attempted in this and other papers in this volume will require con-
stant interaction between ethnologist and archeologist; it is a concrete
example of a general point raised earlier in my comments.
   To turn briefly to Deetz’s paper, it would appear that inferences about
residence can be made with some security under some conditions, but not
others. Inferences of matrilocal residence seem fairly secure. But evidence
of clustering of attributes of equipment made by men         could indicate
either patrilocal or avunculocal residence, and the inferences about lineal-
ity to be made under these conditions would take one in opposite direc-
tions—toward patrilineality or matrilineality. Nor would the failure of
women’s implements to show clustering forbid us to consider matriline-
ality, since in avunculocal systems the co-resident women    may be drawn
from several descent groups.
   Finally—although I am personally interested in inferences about resi-
dence and descent—it must be said that these variables are not always
the most interesting ones. There is a sense in which such variables as
ranking, hierarchy, organization, and so on,       variables that cross-cut
matriliny, patriliny, and non-unilineal descent    groups, are of equal or
greater importance, especially in the context of evolutionary and ecolog-
ical considerations (cf. Fried, 1957, which introduces concepts for the
comparison of unilineal units, many of which can, without strain, be used
for non-unilineal ones as well).
  Thus, to say that the Kaska and the Tsimshian resemble each other in
being matrilineal is true enough, but what is omitted from consideration
by that statement   is the existence   of organized, internally ranked, lo-
calized unilineal groups in the case of the Tsimshian and the absence of
such units in the case of the Kaska. And many parallel instances could be
cited. It is, of course, this sort of problem with which Flannery and Coe
are concerned.
  I return finally to analysis of sequence. This, it seems to me, is a
Discussion                                                                    359
peculiar strength available to archeology and not so often to ethnology.
Insofar as ethnology examines a culture at a single point in time, prob-
lems arise as to whether particular features are, as it were, required by an
ecological situation, or merely permitted. We do not know whether, given
the technology, this is a “climax” culture or not. Increased time in the area
alone, and time and increased population combined, might well produce
changes, but we are often in no position to deal with these issues. What
seems to emerge to some degree from Whallon’s, Struever’s, Longacre’s,
and Hill’s papers, as well as from such important earlier work as that
of Wedel on the Plains, is a picture of increased specialization of produc-
tion, increased community size, decreased number of suitable locations,
given the increased specialization and increased size, and perhaps in-
creased competition for suitable sites. This parallel development for nu-
merous areas invites further analysis and comparison and promises to pro-
vide us with new empirical and theoretical approaches in the areas of cul-
tural evolution and ecology to which archeology will make a unique
contribution.


                                   References

Frrep, Morton H. 1957. The classification of corporate unilineal descent
   groups. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 87: 1-30.
SAHLINS, MarsHALL D. 1957. Differentiation by adaption in Polynesian soci-
   eties. Journal of the Polynesian Society, 66: 291—300.
       . 1958. Social stratification in Polynesia. Seattle: University of Washing-
   ton Press:


Comments by Marvin Harris
I have to express my apologies for assuming to be able to contribute
something here, suffering from the double handicap of not being an
archeologist and not having had the opportunity to have read these fas-
cinating papers before composing these comments. I am extremely moti-
vated to encourage the type of analysis which has been attempted by the
authors of these papers. I could comment on certain specific extrapola-
tions from archeological data to social organization with respect to some
of the individual papers which I have heard. For example, I think that the
treatment of Marshall Sahlins’ hypotheses concerning the distinctions be-
tween ramified and unilinear types of structures should have been
brought up to date by reference to additional attempts to establish a more
sophisticated typology of unilineal descent groups. Various other sugges-
tions of this sort might be appropriate.
  Let me, however, proceed to what I consider to be a more important
type of comment which I personally can make, a comment on a much
more general level. Actually, it is in the form of an exhortation: Archeolo-
360                                                                Discussion
gists, shrive yourselves of the notion that the units which you seek to
reconstruct must match the units in social organization which contempo-
rary ethnographers have attempted to tell you exist.
   The problem in its widest scope, I think, is best understood in terms of
the epistemological principles that are involved in an operational ap-
proach to definition. As archeologists, you have a number of observational
procedures consisting of measuring instruments and the techniques
through which you push these measuring instruments. Out of these opera-
tions you are capable of defining entities whose reality, I assure you, is
every bit as well grounded as the entities which are now being discussed
at great length by ethnographers dealing with contemporary sociopolitical
systems. To set yourselves free, you have only to reflect upon the prodigi-
ous research effort now being expended by your colleagues in cultural
anthropology upon the attempt to state the cognitive rules by which
sociocultural systems are allegedly governed.
   There is no need for you to enter into the trap which has snared
generations of cultural anthropologists, by which they have been caught
in the delusion that an understanding of the regularities of historical
processes was to be derived from an analysis of the idea systems of
surviving primitive societies. On the contrary, since you cannot legiti-
mately hope to arrive at the sophisticated delusions of the componential
and transformational techniques, I suggest that you abandon the attempt
to reconstruct descent systems. What is being done by cultural anthropol-
ogists today is not be articulated with what is being done by archeolo-
gists; on the contrary, I am suggesting that you take the lead in the
following sense:
   You have knowledge of the material remains of populations, and thus
you can develop techniques for measuring variations in the demographic
and behavioral characteristics of such populations over long periods of
time in relationship to specific complexes of biological, natural, and cul-
tural features of their ecosystems.
   What advantage is to be derived from attempting to use this knowledge
for the identification of prehistoric patrilineal or matrilineal descent rules
or similar cognitive phenomena? The really important questions which
need answering are those which relate a population’s pattern of material
existence to its habitat over time periods sufficiently ample to shed light
on the interaction between technology, economic behavior, and the “etic”
organizations or groupings with which these are associated. The great
strength of archeology is that it can deal with groups which are defined
by the actual coming together and working together or living together of
specific individuals at specific times and places. It does not have to and
indeed cannot and should not deal with “emic” entities.
  Ultimately, what we seek I presume in common,         is the explanation of
the differences and similarities in sociocultural phenomena. You are in a
better position to provide such explanations because of your greater time
Discussion             |                                                   361
span and because you can be relatively free from the mystifications which
arise from the emic approach. You therefore ought not to permit your
activities to be compressed into the narrow compass of attempting to link
up with ethnographic data. Your operationally defined categories and
processes are superior to the unoperational definitions and categories of
much of contemporary cultural anthropology. It is for us in ethnology to
find the equivalents of your units among our emically contaminated data.
It is for us to link up descent rules, prestige formulations of stratification,
ideal moral imperatives and all other subjective actor-oriented ethno-
graphic categories with the durable and verifiable material conditions of
sociocultural systems.
                         ay
                          a




        ie         me                                   -gl
      ai, vi: ity de: evi                                 wk 4i                    me
-   Se dadelitnerya               ray w,                           aera
: Tapco    banfied, RS 4
   in   tuts ene or i nee                                                         —
~ gd!          1) rer?                           en                     _— if                       tat
tet PB Dee wey                            ea,        oo maines          hy    at ee
                                                                             helen        as


      a
                                      pennit avid                   a


                                                          kee
          Aye: ~         oxant                                          4
                                                                                                     a            Aas
                                                                                                                        2
          -        f)         >       ¥                        J   ih        at                1G         a                 %

         To   =e    :   as        ‘             i”         =       wees       a)     =r                       7
                                                               Contributors




David F. Aberle is Professor of Anthropology, University of British Columbia.
James E. Ayres is a graduate student in anthropology, University of Arizona.
Lewis R. Binford is Associate Professor of Anthropology, University of New
     Mexico.
Sally R. Biniford is Associate Professor of Anthropology, University of New
     Mexico.
Michael D. Coe is Associate Professor of Anthropology, Yale University.
George L. Cowgill is Associate Professor of Anthropology, Brandeis University.
James Deetz is Professor of Anthropology, Brown University.
Irven     DeVore is Associate   Professor    of Anthropology   and   Social    Relations,
        Harvard University.
Edward P. Dozier is Professor of Anthropology, University of Arizona.
Kent   V. Flannery is Assistant Professor of Anthropology, University of
     Michigan.
Morton Fried is Professor of Anthropology, Columbia University.
Marvin Harris is Professor of Anthropology, Columbia University.
James N. Hill is Assistant Professor of Anthropology, University of California
     at Los Angeles.
Frank Hole is Associate Professor of Anthropology, Rice University.
Richard B. Lee is Assistant Professor of Social Relations, Harvard            University.
William A. Longacre is Associate Professor of Anthropology,             University of
      Arizona.
James R. Sackett is Assistant Professor of Anthropology, University of California
      at Los Angeles.
Albert C. Spaulding is Professor of Anthropology and Dean of Letters and
      Sciences, University of California at Santa Barbara.
Stuart Struever is Assistant Professor of Anthropology, Northwestern University.
                                            363
364                                                                    Contributors
Robert   Whallon,   Jr., is Assistant   Professor   of Anthropology,   University   of
    Michigan.
Bobby Jo Williams is Assistant Professor of Anthropology, University of
    California at Los Angeles.
Howard D, Winters is Associate Professor of Anthropology, New York
    University.
