34                                        Archeological Theory and Method
explanation, the other that understanding lies rather in generalizations
derived from analyses of functioning social systems. The remainder of this
paper is an attempt to show that a consideration of the nature of explana-
tion, history, historical science, and anthropology leads to the dismissal of
these rival claims and to a satisfactory theoretical foundation for interre-
lating all types of anthropological data.
     My discussion of explanation is derived from a selective scanning of the
work of various philosophers of science, among whom the topic seems to
be a lively one. It is not true, however, that an appeal to philosophers is
an appeal to ultimate authority; the task of philosophy of science is to
describe in general terms what scientists do, not to legislate on what they
can or cannot do. But it is true that philosophers are impressively skillful
at their special business and that the problem at hand involves generaliza-
tions that are squarely within this area of special competence. The discus-
sion that follows is an attempt to apply a point of view especially associ-
ated with the work of Carl G. Hempel, and the essential features of the
matter are set out in Hempel (1962), Brodbeck (1962), Kaplan (1964),
and references cited by these authors.
   The issue which seems directly relevant here is whether or not there are
two kinds of explanations of the way in which the world works—historical
explanation with its appropriate body of data, and scientific explanation
with a second kind of associated data. If there are two fundamentally
different kinds of serious explanation, it may well be that both are appro-
priate for anthropology, depending on the nature of the data considered,
and there may be two anthropologies linked only by a common interest in
customary human behavior. If there is only one kind, then the interrela-
tionships of the various kinds of anthropology will have to be analyzed
on some other ground.           ‘
     The view which I find convincing is attractively simple: there is only
one kind of serious explanation, the nomological or covering-law explana-
tion. All serious explanations relate the circumstance to be explained to
relevant general laws or at least to empirical generalization. Explanations
may be deductive, in which case the covering law admits of no excep-
tions, or they may be probabilistic-statistical (or inductive, if you prefer),
in which case the covering law has the form of a frequency distribution.
Explanations may be causal (when they identify some more or less com-
plex set of antecedent circumstances as sufficient to produce that which is
to be explained ) or they may not be causal (when they refer to some law
of coexistence rather than to a law of succession; for example, the laws on
the volume, temperature, and pressure of gases, or the laws on the length
and period of a pendulum).Explanations may be complete, as in the case
of the universal covering laws of nomological-deductive explanations (all
relevant variables are taken into account), or they may be partial, that is,
account for the occurrence of the general class of circumstance to be
Spaulding Explanation in Archeology                                   35
explained but not of the narrow class to which the circumstance belongs.
The idea of completeness here refers only to some         selected aspect or
aspects of the event or thing to be explained; the notion of a complete
explanation of any particular event is self-defeating for obvious reasons.
  What has become of the historical explanation? The leading candidate
for a peculiarly historical explanation, the so-called “genetic explanation,”
can be shown to be nomological in character; the mere recitation of a list
of successive events is not an explanation at all unless there are implicit
laws or empirical generalizations linking the events. The list of prior
events which explains something must have been selected with some cri-
terion of relevance if the explanation is to be successful. “There is no such
thing as ‘historical’ explanation, only the explanation of historical events”
(Brodbeck, 1962, p. 254).
   If this disposal of the historical explanation is accepted, we can turn to
the problem of history, historical science, and anthropology with a new
point of view. As a first observation, it is not possible to link anthropology
and history on the basis of the common possession of a special kind of
explanation, nor is it possible to separate them on the ground that they
use different kinds of explanation. In fact, it is not possible to distinguish
between history and science at all by means of broad types of explana-
tion, and we can ask on what ground, if any, they can be distinguished.
The answer, is, I think, that history and science can be distinguished by
the degree of explicitness of the covering laws (or empirical generaliza-
tions )which make explanation possible. History and science share a set of
techniques for producing warranted or intersubjectively verifiable knowl-
edge, but the explanatory generalizations of history are characteristically
matters of common knowledge on human dispositions or motivations, and
they are quite properly implicit rather than explicit in the historical narra-
tive. It is for this reason that skillful historical narratives are so immedi-
ately satisfying; the historian and the reader possess in common       the im-
plicit generalizations that make sense of the narrative. Science, on the
other hand, has as its avowed goal the production of explicit, formal laws
to provide a basis for the deductive explanation of particular things and
events. In history, the stock of explanatory generalizations is given as
primitive concepts; in science, the search for increasingly broad explana-
tory generalizations is the characteristic preoccupation. History has a par-
ticularizing quality (note the phrase “for historical reasons”); science, a
generalizing one.
   All of this leads directly to the question of whether or not anthropology
is a science. There seems to be general agreement among anthropologists
that it is, at least by intention and aspiration, however short it may fall of
the deductive elegance of physics. The goal of anthropology is presum-
ably the explanation of the similarities and differences of customary be-
havior in all possible pairs of societies, past and present, and common
36                                          Archeological Theory and Method
knowledge of human         dispositions is clearly not equal to this task. Al-
though it may be true that anthropologists have not advanced very far
toward the goal of deductive elegance, it seems plain enough that they
are trying to point in this direction. Anthropologists are devising objective
measuring instruments, looking for association, and thinking about con-
necting generalizations.
  Granted that anthropology is a science, what are the implications of the
old idea that it is a historical science as opposed to some other kinds of
science? If “historical science” means a science in which successive trans-
formations of things and classes of events over a substantial span of time
is of fundamental importance, then it is apparent that anthropology is a
historical science, as Kroeber, Sapir, and others pointed out. The contrast
here is with laboratory science; the materials of anthropology are complex
and the processes are slow. The implication is that they must be observed
in the field and that description must be elaborate because of the com-
plicated interaction of the many variables in every social situation. Labor-
atory sciences, on the other hand, can isolate relevant variables and dupli-
cate processes under controlled conditions. Taken in this sense, there is no
reason to quarrel with the characterization of anthropology as a historical
science. The only point to be made is that a historical science is no less a
science for being historical.
   There is a second sense in which the adjective “historical” can be ap-
plied to anthropology. In this sense, the implication is that anthropology
is like history not only because of its preoccupation with successive events
but also because,     as is the case with history, already well-understood
human dispositions are adequate for explanation. This position in effect
either denies the status of a science to anthropology, as I have done with
history, or claims that there is no possibility of developing further explan-
atory generalizations, whatever the intentions of anthropologists may be.
In the second case, anthropology would be in a state of permanently
arrested development; new data would be simply more of the same thing
appropriately presented in particularistic, historical fashion. This latter
claim is a factual one; it can be refuted only by the discovery of more
laws or empirical generalizations. Social anthropology and the papers of
this symposium are representative attempts to refute this claim.
     Anthropology, like social science in general, can be contrasted with that
paradigm     of science,   classical mechanics,   in terms   of other aspects of
explanation. Clearly, anthropological explanations are characteristically
probabilistic-statistical rather than deductive, and they are partial rather
than complete. This is the penalty for dealing with anything so multidi-
mensional and unwieldy as human behavior, and there is no easy remedy.
Anthropologists are not forbidden, however, to strugglé toward covering
generalizations with greater powers of prediction and retrodiction. They
can strive to sharpen statements of the frequency distributions underlying
probabilistic explanations, to make explanations more complete. In the
Spaulding Explanation in Archeology                                       37
case of causal vs. non-causal explanations, have little to say simply
because I cannot think of any examples of non-causal explanations in
anthropology. In short, anthropology is a science not because it is just like
physics in every respect. It is a science because, or insofar as, it examines
its data with the object of discovering systematic interrelationships there-
in, and it is a successful science insofar as it is able to explain its data by
means of these interrelationships.
  I turn now to the question of whether or not there are profound differ-
ences among the various activities conventionally embraced by the term
“anthropology” as it is used in the United States. I have excluded the
possibility of distinguishing between activities on the basis of whether or
not historical explanation is a characteristic instrument by arguing that
there are no historical explanations and that probably all anthropological
explanations are causal, partial, and probabilistic. It is nevertheless true
that some aspects of anthropology appear to be historical in some mean-
ingful sense of the concept while others do not. Prehistoric archeology,
with its explicit interest in chronology and its heavy content of particular-
istic description, is the obvious choice to represent the historical branch of
anthropology. Social anthropology, with its stated lack of interest in his-
tory and its interest in functional relationships, is an equally obvious
candidate for a non-historical anthropology.
  Certainly archeologists consider their subject to have a strong historical
component. Archeology is, after all, the study of the past. The connection
with history is revealed by the term “prehistory” and by the linking of
anthropological and undoubted historical research through the common
employment of the technique called “archeology.” And it is archeologists
who keep asserting that the present can be understood only through the
past, although I am not aware that anyone making this claim has pro-
duced a respectable explanation of why we can understand the present
only in terms of the past or even an explanation of just what is meant by
the assertion. It seems that a discussion of the place of archeology within
anthropology might better begin by reversing the dictum and asserting
that the past can be understood only through the present. All studies of
the past are conducted by taking present objects (or present memories )
as relics of the past and drawing inferences as to past events from them.
The premises by means of which the inferences are drawn are based on
observations   of present things, events, and relationships. Moreover,      the
implied claim that the past influences the present has the magical quality
of action at a distance unless it is carefully qualified. All of this being the
case, archeologists must be regarded as primarily consumers rather than
producers of anthropological knowledge and theories. They illuminate the
past through application of this knowledge, and they are successful inso-
far as there is a good stock of knowledge to apply to their relics and
insofar as they are diligent in seeking out and applying this knowledge.
   Despite this undeniably dependent role, however, archeologists are not
38                                   Archeological Theory and Method
merely passive consumers of anthropological knowledge. This is so be-
cause they also apply non-anthropological knowledge to their relics to
produce plausible inferences as to relative and absolute age, ecological
circumstances, and other relevant dimensions of cultural variation. In so
doing, they contribute independent data to theories of sequence of forms
and rate of change of at least some aspects of customary behavior. The
chronological data are clues to the identification of antecedent and con-
sequent conditions in slow-moving cultural transformations. I conclude
that prehistoric archeology is indeed historical in the sense of having a
primary interest in objects of the past, but that this historicism is a benefi-
cent state that does not imply that archeology should be cast out from
either science or anthropology. Archeology is scientific to the degree that
it is anthropological, and it is anthropological to the degree that anthro-
pology can provide cogent premises for inferences about archeological
data. In fact, archeology as such is simply a technique (essentially dig-
ging holes in the ground or stooping over to pick up objects) which can
be employed in the service of anthropology, history, or amusement.
  Social anthropology, or an idealized version of social anthropology, is a
much closer approach to our polar type of non-historical science. In pur-
est form, the units of study are existing human societies, and the attri-
butes or variables in terms of which the societies are studied are the class
of behavioral events directly concerned with interpersonal relationships.
In conventional terms, social anthropologists study kinship and social
organization. A central activity of social anthropologists is the intensive
study of a society to produce a description of the social structure and an
analysis of the functions performed by the various elements of the struc-
ture, although completely satisfactory explications of the concepts of
structure and function do not seem to have been attained. It appears that
the goal of social anthropology is to achieve through comparative studies
a typology of social organization together with transformation rules for
successions of types. There are indications of a claim of logical priority of
social analysis, presumably on the ground that explanations of societies
are what anthropology is really about and that social organization is the
heart of the matter. There are (or were) also indications of a goal of
closure: an attempt to treat social organization as a closed system, a
system which could be described and explained solely in terms of interact-
ing social variables. This goal excludes historical (particularistic) studies
of efficient causes; identification of individual circumstances connected
with a social innovation are unimportant. What is important is why the
innovation is incorporated into the social system. Social anthropology as a
program for research is beyond criticism. If its researches succeed in
demonstrating an independent order of social phenomena explicable in
their own terms, then social anthropology is a new science. It might then
perhaps be considered a historical science in the sense that its phenomena
Spaulding Explanation in Archeology                                          39
are not endlessly repeatable in a laboratory, but its historicism would not
constitute any important link with archeology. Archeologists do not dig
up social structures, and social anthropologists would not speak of arti-
facts or relationships among artifacts.
   This discussion can be ended on a question of fact. As I interpret the
results of a hundred years of anthropology and something like forty years
of social anthropology, there is abundant evidence that social systems are
not closed systems. Instead, they are articulated at almost every point
with biologically and environmentally oriented behavior. Social anthro-
pology is a research specialty and a research program, not an independent
science. Social anthropologists speak of subsistence techniques and eco-
nomic principles because they must if they are to have adequate explana-
tions of social phenomena. Cultural ecology and cross-cultural investiga-
tions of associations between social and technological behavior are the
necessary link between the poles of archeology and social anthropology,
between artifacts and behavior.
   The papers in this volume are clear examples of explicit attempts to
explain observed regularities in archeological data by means of observed
regularities in social processes. The remarks of the commenters suggest
that the attempts do offer hope of an enriched science of anthropology.


                                   References

BropBEcK, May. 1962. Explanation, prediction, and “imperfect” knowledge. In
  Herbert Feigl and Grover Maxwell (Eds.), Scientific explanation, space and
  time. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Minnesota Studies in the
  Philosophy of Science, Vol. 3.
Hempet, Cart G. 1962. Deductive-nomological vs. statistical explanation. In
  Herbert Feigl and Grover Maxwell     (Eds.), Scientific explanation, space and
  time. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Minnesota Studies in the
   Philosophy of Science, Vol. 3.
KapLaANn, ABRAHAM. 1964. The conduct of inquiry. San Francisco: Chandler.
     (ce .                                                                                                                                                                                                 :                      7"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        td

     Sete attsance anata af coliap                                                                                                                                                   eee                                                       ‘
     pikes                                Gian                        ok sehtelly eG                                                                                                                                          i pai
                                                                               ila                                                                                                                                                      5      te
                                                            ens Huy ‘oeceuns |
     einai
      oT                              a                o         es                                                          « salto Gwate                                                                                                         ee
                              lank            oh             ie re                                                  wt                          deriva
~s                                        rere                                                                 er                                                               or?                                         eae
     esate                                    ite
                                                © Gh:                 yqqper’y
                                                                         2A Clngee Re, Seeaperd                                                                                                                                        Sa
 Saad                        jo               Goer + te “ens aie args                                                                                      Lert                                                                             evaay
     a                                         ee                                                                  Tiaste die as a ae heehee
                                                                                                                                                                        ‘ae Wh eta?                                                                          24,
     apeplen pies The gasrigete \ bee sete
         ms borage Oi. et                              ee                               wi ee                       ||                          ee)                                                        ae                         tet ty           Reagale
                                                   4         oie) Se                            yt                           soyene at.                                                           Cae! 5 --Done hee
         apie                            sen famvir                        ts                   san                          |a            1    ab 7                        a                         re                                ae     ee
                 b vitae RAUL
                            RG HP et bio Be                                                                                                              Rey                                               qi (ety toee
     —--                                       een                          dap os is. aptly                                                                                                                            eel eee
                                                                                                                                 i»    \ecoigtiat Segeeee                                                                                                        =
                                               iWpal Sa lap cater                                                                     a een GN          repel                                                                                           ya
     ia                           yoshi                          ": peal escorts                                                                     ot,           eMaigiah                                             Sar yaabegiy (ge
      PERN ROS Or                                                          awit                                                                 qtyage Med tee bali sh
             er                                io aie                                   per                                                Mm                  HOS                                    epee
         one                      a                                                                                                                                                           a            |                      :

     a            _               ame              _                                                                                       >                                :                         :

                             me                            Tae         |                        mpl                 Le,                                    j                        bese                           48




                                                                                                                                                                                      eee
             ae        de         os                        @e                              ]                        .                                                                            ‘            7


                                                                           let ates)                                                           veer                                 _pal ae

      Aho
                   wer                             pial
     ~~                           Seti        +s           ae Bok 4        --               .            5    =              '                                          >                 7           ~§                :
                              as                       les                                      ;                                                              RP —« Fx,                                                                %
     “ary lle                                  t ignated                                                                                                 a                                        Qe                    ow
      a iw.                                        (tera               we                           ««             shh»               herent
                 a          aia           vsAlegre                         2st                                       ac-H                                  SWAG,
                                                                                                                                                     re                         i     g


                                                                                                               i                               =                        At                        15                    a¢inden Pred


                             ee                                                                              enek



                                                                                    ;                    has                                    ¢                                   ub’:                       + eae                           er
             .                                                                  -                                  se                           7                                                     past" aia                                    +}. ie
                                               }                                                               ee                                              :                          + aoe                             cone Bag: gee)
                  :                            el                      1                                       Jveira.                              TV             heer                                    ee ere                              i 7, SA
                                                                                        =                                                      iia.                                                   othe, alr?                            pany             |
         .        ie                                                   :                                                 :             ;        .                  0)               (i.                   eee                               nae, oh                  7

             * coe:                                                         ‘i 4 sie                                                  A)       Gs                                   iaeaele ey
               tite                       @                                        ee                                            ae             bo                              aia                                                                y
                                                           rel              the                                      2                 ee aeeae
THREE                                                         JAMES DEETZ




                                    The Inference of Residence
                                                and Descent Rules
                                    from Archeological Data




The recent interest in the reconstruction of prehistoric social systems has
served to call attention to the nature and possible causes of patterning as
it is seen in archeological materials. Whether inferences are drawn con-
cerning social institutions based on settlement pattern, tool groupings
which indicate patterning that suggests particular activities, or the cluster-
ing of attributes indicative of the nature of social units, they all stem from
an awareness, perhaps implicit, of consistent and meaningful patterning
of certain modular units—houses, tools, or attributes. The purpose of this
paper is to make explicit the types of patterning encountered in archeo-
logical data, to suggest possible applications of these types to the refine-
ment of method, and to explore, in a preliminary way, the nature and
significance of patterning at the level of individual behavior as it relates
to the inference of rules of residence and descent.
   It is generally agreed that meaningful inference from the archeological
record concerning the cultural systems responsible for its existence de-
pends on an understanding of the manner in which culture is reflected in
its products. Behavior is a product of culture which is perishable and
therefore beyond recovery to the archeologist in a direct sense, but the
products of this behavior—sites, structures, artifacts—reflect behavior in
a systematic manner. By acknowledging how different levels and types of
behavior might affect their products, one is provided with valuable in-
                                     4]
42                                        Archeological Theory and Method
sights regarding the behavioral significance of archeological assem-
blages. Four levels of behavior, and their archeological equivalents, can
be defined and shown to have particular relevance to four types of infer-
ential problems.
   The first of these levels is that of the individual. Individual behavior is
reflected at the attribute level, since the patterning of attributes exhibited
by a group of similar artifacts results from similar patterned behavior on
the parts of a number of individuals. While this behavior is shared by
these individuals, as it would have to be if a pattern were to exist, it is the
individual alone who is responsible for combining, for example, side
notching with basal concavity on a projectile point. It is unlikely that
more than one individual was responsible, in a direct sense, for the attri-
bute configuration of any given artifact of the type commonly encoun-
tered in archeological analysis. For this reason, patterning of attributes at
the level of individual activity, is archeology’s only case of perfect associa-
tion. Neither rodent activity, incorrect excavation procedure, nor impro-
per laboratory sorting can destroy the association of cord-impressed deco-
ration and lip thickening on a rim sherd. This perfection of association
does not obtain with such an absolute guarantee at any of the three
higher levels of patterning to be considered.
  The second level of patterning is that which results from the actions of
members of various minimal groups of interacting individuals—lineages,
families, hunting groups, males, or females. Individuals grouped into such
aggregates share in sets of behavioral patterns which can be seen in the
patterned combination of artifacts as coordinate groups, as well as in the
attributes of these artifacts. Such artifact complexes result either from
individual or group action. Therefore, while only individuals are respon-
sible for attribute groupings, both individuals or groups of individuals can
produce artifact clusters. Unlike attribute groupings, artifact groupings
are vulnerable to mixing and imperfect recovery due to field and labora-
tory procedural error.
   The third level of patterning, that of the community, reflecting behay-
ior of a face-to-face group of individuals, and including in most cases a
number of minimal groupings as described above, is most frequently
observed in the patterning of individual sites at the level of a single
component. For example, the spatial arrangement of houses and the form
of their architecture are a function of behavior at the community level,
although one must also consider patterning at the individual and minimal-
group levels in forming coherent inferences.
   The fourth level is that of the entire society as a coordinate unit, and
behavioral patterning at this level is a function of those pattems which
are universal to the society as a whole. This level is seen archeologically in
settlement pattern, as the term is used by Chang (1958) distinct from
community pattern, as well as in certain aspects of patterning at the three
lower levels.
Deetz Inference of Residence and Descent Rules                              43
   Examples of each of these four levels will make their definition more
clear. At the level of the individual, recent studies of attribute patterning
in ceramics (Deetz, 1965; Longacre, 1964) have demonstrated that tight
clustering of attributes might result from the orderly transmission of be-
havioral pattern relating to pottery manufacture along female lines, per-
mitting the postulation of matrilocal residence, a social convention which
expectably would lead to such a phenomenon. Patterning of individual
behavior manifested in attribute patterning can also provide information
concerning culture-contact situations. During the excavation of a tanning
vat complex at La Purisima Mission, Lompoc, California (Deetz, 1963), a
series of beamers was recovered from the vat floors. These had been used
in the removal of hair from hides tanned for use in the mission ships, a
technology introduced to the Chumash neophytes living at the mission.
The particular attribute combination exhibited by these tools is quite
illustrative of the nature of aboriginal conversion to European practices.
The beamers are made from ribs; bone was a commonly used raw mate-
rial by pre-Mission Chumash for tool manufacture. While the material
was one familiar to the Indians, it was used to make a tool which formed
a part of an introduced technological process, although the general form
of the implement is similar to native ones used in similar activities, includ-
ing bone-sweat sticks. The ribs used, however, were from cattle, an intro-
duced animal. The pattern here is that of an aboriginally used raw ma-
terial (bone) from an introduced animal (cow) to fashion an aboriginally
known tool (bone beamer or scraper) to accomplish an introduced tech-
nological process (hair removal for vat tanning).
    Patterning in artifact groupings is demonstrated by several recent stud-
ies. At La Purisima Mission during the nineteenth century, male Chumash
neophytes were employed in a complex of roles introduced by Europeans
—farming, cattle herding, and various crafts in the mission shops—while
female neophytes continued in an occupational tradition not dissimilar
from the aboriginal one, involving food preparation and the production of
artifacts involved in this and related activities. Excavations in the neo-
phytes’ quarters (Deetz, 1963) produced data which provide a striking
demonstration of this differential shift in roles according to sex. While it is
known that nuclear families resided in the barracks, a classification of the
aboriginal artifacts according to activity by sex reveals that all artifacts
associated with male activities had vanished from the inventory of the
missionized Chumash, while female-associated artifacts were as numerous
as they had been in pre-contact and contemporary aboriginal sites. Bas-
kets, mortars, pestles, manos, metates, and comales formed the vast ma-
jority of the aboriginal assemblage,      while scrapers,   projectile points,
arrow-shaft straighteners, and chert flakes resulting from the manufacture
of stone implements were exceedingly rare. It was possible to determine
that one portion of the barracks had been used earlier in time, and this
earlier occupation produced almost all of the few male-associated artifacts
44                                        Archeological Theory and Method
recovered. One other aspect of these data is of significance to those infer-
ences regarding acculturation on a sexually differential basis. When one
considers the nature of the complete assemblage from the barracks struc-
ture, including European and aboriginal artifacts, it is obvious that in the
case of female material culture change, this was an additive process.
European objects such as pottery, scissors, and knives were added to the
aboriginal female tool kit, resulting in a complex actually somewhat richer
than before, while change in male material culture was largely substitu-
tive, with the European objects replacing rather than supplementing abo-
riginal items.
   Other examples of this level of patterning are to be seen in the recent
analysis of Mousterian sub-assemblages by Sally Binford (1965 and in this
volume) and in Longacre’s analysis of materials from the Carter Ranch
Site in eastern Arizona (Longacre, 1964). That the level of minimal group
behavior depends in part on individual behavior is shown by Longacre’s
demonstration that different ceramic attribute groups which are a func-
tion of individual behavioral patterning have spatial significance, in that
attribute clusters resulting from different modal individual behavior tend
to group in artifact clusters which are a function of the shared behavior of
segments of the community.
   Examples of the third level of patterning are provided by those artifacts
which represent an entire community, and are usually encountered in
settlement-pattern studies. The artifacts in this case are usually structures,
and their number and arrangement provide an indication of community
behavior. The clustering of houses and storage pits within tightly formed
defensive moats and palisades seen in the Middle Missouri Region late in
the eighteenth century reflects defensive behavior in the part of the com-
munity as a whole.            ;
   Chang’s study (1958) of the correlation between certain social systems,
classified according to residence and descent rules, and community layout
is another case which demonstrates the manner in which community be-
havior might be expected to reflect in the physical arrangements of mate-
rial objects.
   At the fourth level of behavioral patterning, that common to an entire
society, emphasis shifts to the nature of patterning of whole communities
into larger groups. The patterning seen in contemporary archeological
sites in a region is a reflection of the manner in which the society repre-
sented by those sites grouped its community units on the landscape, a
form of patterning which in its formal analysis might reasonably be ex-
pected to reflect certain aspects of the behavior of the members of the
society in certain universal categories. Examples would include the nature
of ceremonial center distribution in Middle America or the relationship
between seasonal camps and semipermanent villages in the Santa Barbara
Channel region of southern California. In the latter case, small camps in
Deetz Inference of Residence and Descent Rules                             45
the area inland from the foreshore suggest a seasonal division of the
larger communities into smaller more economically efficient units during
part of the year, probably during the dry summer months and early fall.
   The brief examples cited above are intended only to serve as an indica-
tion of the nature of the four levels of patterning inherent in archeological
data. What is of primary importance is the realization that different levels
require somewhat different analytical approaches, and that certain ques-
tions are better answered at certain levels of analysis. Basic to inferential
method based on the analysis of patterning is that the very term pattern
denotes repetition. Unless a number of examples of similarly patterned
phenomena can be produced, sound inferences cannot be drawn, since
the patterning must be demonstrated by numerous cases.
   The remainder of this paper will be concerned with patterning at the
lower two levels as it might permit the inference of rules of residence and
descent in prehistoric societies. While it can be argued with considerable
effect that to concentrate on the aspects of descent and residence in a
social system is at least potentially dangerous, in that it can lead to an
undesirable narrowing of perspective, certain recent archeological analy-
ses have been directed at the inference of either or both of these institu-
tions. For this reason, it is perhaps advisable at this time to inquire into
the possibility as well as the feasibility and practicality of such efforts. As
has been suggested above, residence might be expected to be inferred
from the individual level of patterning, that of attribute-clustering pheno-
mena. While unilocal residence is in a sense a group activity, the effect
which this practice might have on material objects would be the produc-
tion of a series of similar artifacts resulting from family-based microtradi-
tions of style, reflected in the attribute patterns produced by the individ-
ual. This assumption underlies both Deetz’s (1965) and Longacre’s
(1964) recent ceramic studies. It is also demonstrated by the patterning
observed in assemblages from historic Chumash sites in southern Cali-
fornia. In this case, objects manufactured by males, particularly projectile
points, exhibit a high degree of stylistic similarity within single sites,
although intersite formal variation is high. While one might explain such
variation as the result of different functions served by projectile points at
different sites, our knowledge of Chumash subsistence patterns would
suggest a highly homogeneous tradition within the area represented by
the sites in question. This is almost certainly true of two of the sites,
which are but ten miles apart, and located in identical environmental
situations. At most, functional differences would only be a matter of
virtually identical problems being met with alternate solutions and, as a
result, explaining the variation as primarily due to social factors is more
economical and efficient. In contrast to chipped-stone implements, made
and used by males, milling equipment and basketry are strikingly similar
throughout the entire range of the Chumash as they were known during
46                                      Archeological Theory and Method
the early nineteenth century. This pattern of high intersite variability but
low variation within an assemblage shown by projectile points, and of the
converse pattern seen in basketry and milling equipment is at least in
agreement with the known facts of Chumash social organization, which
was characterized by patrilocal residence and community exogamy. In
this case, highly distinctive microtraditions of projectile-point manufac-
ture might have been preserved by patrilocality, and similar isolated mic-
rotraditions in female manufacture prevented by a continuous circulation
of females between communities.
   This example serves to place emphasis on one important aspect of
inferring residence rules from modes of attribute patterning. It would
seem to be most urgent that one investigate patterning in objects known
or thought to have been manufactured by both sexes or, lacking this, to
investigate the nature of patterning of single-sex traditions over time. By
doing this, one avoids the difficult question: How much is enough? That
is, to what degree must one demonstrate clustering to be certain that
matrilocality or patrilocality has been reasonably established? A simple
statement that the patterning can be shown not to be random is not
sufficient, since theoretically one might expect a significant degree of
attribute association to result from bilocality, particularly if combined
with a unilineal descent rule, which might tend to bias residence in either
an uxorilocal or virilocal direction. Most bilocal situations could reason-
ably be expected to produce significant attribute clustering in both male
and female manufactures, particularly if accompanied by bilateral de-
scent and a nearly even distribution of uxorilocal and virilocal modes of
residence. To infer relatively rigid unilocality of either type in the absence
of a controlled chronological series, one must not only demonstrate clus-
tering of attributes in the products of one sex, but also a corresponding
lack of clustering in the products of the opposite sex. In this sense, uni-
local residence is an asymmetrical institution, and the existence and
degree of asymmetry must be shown.
   An alternative approach to the problem is provided by an analysis of
change in patterning in ceramic attributes among protohistoric Arikara
(Deetz, 1965). In this instance, although patterning in only female cul-
tural objects was considered, it was shown that over time this patterning
became more random, and was accompanied by a reduction in house size.
Furthermore, a reasonably sound historical reconstruction of later Arikara
kinship change was made to provide the necessary control. Even in this
case, however, one cannot say with certainty that residence was the sole
causal factor in attribute clustering, nor to what degree clustering must
occur to demonstrate matrilocality conclusively. The study does demon-
strate that as matrilocality became less frequent, association of attributes
became more random. No inference was formed from the data alone
regarding residence; two simultaneous aspects of change were demon-
Deetz Inference of Residence and Descent Rules.                      47
strated, and their probable systematic relationship suggested. Relative
degrees of clustering and association are indicated, but absolute frequen-
cies cannot be postulated as reliable indicators of unilocality.
   Inference of descent from archeological data, at least in terms of pat-
terning, is a much more difficult and complex problem. Unlike residence,
descent is a group function, and therefore fits the level of group behav-
ioral patterning described above. As such, it requires more meticulous
care in handling the data, since this level is subject to the problems of
mechanical mixing discussed earlier. Furthermore, descent is a subunit of
residence, in a sense, since some but not all unilocal societies have a
consistent residence rule Therefore the demonstration of residence rule
should be firmly established prior to the postulation of a rule of descent.
The study of unilineal descent systems is, of course, the focus of much of
ethnological theory, and many of the classics of ethnological writing treat
the subject. As yet, there is not unanimous agreement on just what is
meant by unilineal descent, or what purpose it serves in those societies
which utilize it. It is very likely that there has been a confusion of cause
and effect underlying much of the controversy in this area, and it can be
suggested that unilineal descent is but a manifestation of another process,
that of the formulation of clear-cut corporate groups which are structured
in such a way as to function efficiently in a certain rather special social
context. It is highly unlikely that a member of the most highly unilineal
society would in fact deny biological descent from both parents, but at
the same time, he would indicate that certain corporate rights and respon-
sibilities reach him through either his mother’s or his father’s side. In this
sense, descent is but a means to an end of corporate group formation, and
perhaps if the term descent had not become one of general usage, clearer
understandings would have been forthcoming more rapidly. Part of the
cause is historical; the first workers concerned with unilineal descent
worked in those areas, particularly Africa, where it was most clearly
developed, and only later did it become apparent that there is more than
one type of corporate kin group, and that unilineal descent is an organiz-
ing principle of only some.
   If unilineal descent is seen as a mechanism by which sharply bounded
corporate units are formed, then what must be demonstrated archeologi-
cally is a group concept of corporate participation. Even if a means of
accomplishing such an end were devised, it would not necessarily indicate
unilineal Cescent, but only corporate membership in one or another social
group, organized on the basis of residence, descent, or voluntary partici-
pation, to name but three possibilities. Conversely, the presence of an
extended family unit in the same dwelling over a long period of time,
using similar artifacts and perhaps sharing in a subsistence pattern from
the same parcel of land, does not necessarily indicate the existence of a
corporate concept. Unlike residence, which can be described in terms of
48                                        Archeological Theory and Method
purely physical and spatial relationships between people and objects,
descent, at least in its corporate sense, involves in its description certain
essential conceptual relationships between people and objects held by the
people and, as a result, there is a dimension of patterning which may well
not be reflected in the tangibles of archeological data.
   In conclusion, it is perhaps legitimate to ask why we are so concerned
with the reconstruction of prehistoric social systems at all. There is always
the danger of a certain method or area of inquiry becoming an end unto
itself. The true value of such inferences would seem to lie in the direction
of the ultimate benefit to general anthropological theory; the elucidation
of system and orderly process in culture, past and present. Until and
unless this type of inquiry is joined in a systematic fashion to the main
body of ethnological theory, the danger is always present of such recon-
structions entering the realm of ultimately sterile methodological virtuos-
ity. This should not happen, but it must be kept in mind at all times that
such a pursuit must relate in some way or another to the attainment of a
broader understanding of culture. There is every reason to be confident
that such will in fact take place but, at the same time, the possible pitfalls
should be kept in mind. At the present point in our progress in this
direction, perhaps the most significant value of recently gained under-
standing is that they indicate the nature of articulation between objects
and people, and man’s behavior in the larger sense. If this behavior is
social, all well and good, but it must be studied regardless of the realm of
culture it relates to. Studies such as those cited above, particularly in
relationship to residence patterns, are of less value in their present imper-
fect state to social reconstruction than they are to indicating the nature of
patterning and process in prehistoric cultures as shown by their material
remains. Only with refinement will they become truly incisive and truly
useful in the detailing of extinct social systems. However, though the
route will be a long and difficult one, the longest journey must begin with
a single step, and these first steps seem to lie in the right direction.


                                 References

BinForD, SALLY R. 1965. Social groupings and settlement systems in the Mous-
  terian. Presented at the Amercian Anthropological Association annual meet-
  ing. (Unpublished.)
Cuanc, K. C, 1958. Study of the Neolithic social groups: examples from the
  New World. American Anthropologist, 60: 298—399.
DeETz, JAMES. 1963. Archaeological investigations at La Purisima       Mission.
  Annual Report 1962—63, UCLA Archaeological Survey.
     . 1965. The dynamics of stylistic change in Arikara ceramics. Urbana: Uni-
  versity of Illinois, Series in Anthropology, no. 4.
ripe ce’ WituiAM. 1964. Archaeology as anthropology. Science, 144 (3625):
   1454—55.
FOUR                                                    SALLY   R, BINFORD




                                      Variability and Change
                        in the Near Eastern Mousterian
                                                 of Levallois Factes




As anthropologists we are concerned with cultural differences and similar-
ities. The most impressive schemes for the description of differences and
similarities in flint assemblages have developed in Old World prehistory,
partly as a function of the academic context of prehistory in Europe,
where it is considered a natural science and students are trained in the
basic skills of the natural sciences—among which is systematics (see
Sackett’s paper, this volume, for a complete discussion of this point). To
those trained in North America and familiar with the relatively unsyste-
matic treatment of projectile points and the lack of systematic treatment
of other kinds of flint materials, work such as that of the Bordes (Bordes,
1953a, 1961; deSonneville-Bordes,    1960) in France in dealing with total
flint assemblages in clearly defined, repeatable ways is all the more im-
pressive. Morphological and technological criteria have been explicitly
and consistently applied, so that total assemblage differences and similari-
ties can be expressed in precise, quantitative terms.
   Problems arise, however, in the explanation of differences and similari-
ties and in understanding changes through time. All too often prehistori-
ans view flint industries “evolving” through time, as though they con-
tained genetic materials and were capable of mutation. It is on the ex-
planatory level that anthropological concepts are particularly valuable.
Our basic concept is culture, and it is to the understanding of functional
                                     49
50                                        Archeological Theory and Method
variability and change within cultural systems that we wish to direct
attention. Because of the nature of the preserved material from Paleolithic
sites, systematic and consistent typologies are essential. But the descrip-
tion, however detailed, of assemblages does not constitute an explanation
of differences and similarities. Certainly one of the most productive as-
pects of prehistoric research in recent years has been the feedback and
mutual stimulation between European and American prehistorians. The
benefits to both groups and to prehistory have far outweighed the few
moments of misunderstanding and asperity between them.
   The major thesis of this paper is that assemblage variability does not
necessarily indicate either fixed local traditions (style) or evolutionary
change within cultural systems. The alternative of functional variability
must be considered. The distinction between stylistic and functional dif-
ferences, on the one hand, and evolutionary change, on the other, must
not only be a logical one but must be made operational through the
development of the appropriate methods of analysis.
   Two aspects of Paleolithic assemblages in the Near East will be dealt
with: first, variation within a single cultural level; second, change from
one cultural level to another. In examining variability between assem-
blages of the same broad culture type, our main purpose will be to sug-
gest an explanation for the observed variability which is not predicated
upon immutable     local traditions.   In the examination   of evolutionary
change, we shall offer an explanatory hypothesis which does not require
assumptions about the genetic qualities of stone artifacts or invoke migra-
tions of populations.


                              _ Variability
If we view lithic assemblages as sets of tools designed to perform specific
tasks, then differences between assemblages on the same broad cultural
level can be interpreted as reflecting: (1) differences in the jobs being
performed (Kleindienst, 196la, 1961b); (2) differential site utilization—
that is, a different settlement type (Beardsley et al., 1956); (3) replace-
ment of one functional unit of the assemblage for another—what is com-
monly termed stylistic variability (L. R. Binford, 1963); or (4) sampling
error.
   The specific use which we infer for a set of tools must necessarily be
tentative, but it is maintained that a functional view of artifactual mate-
rial is more in keeping with reality than a view in which variability is
interpreted as lithic mutation. A functional approach further forces us to
cope with several variables simultaneously when interpreting variability.
The determinants of the nature of a specific assemblage, or of its com-
ponents, are related in a complex way, and our mode of analysis must be
geared to dealing with multivariate causation.
S. R. Binford Near Eastern Mousterian of Levallois Facies                 51
   Factor analysis (Fruchter, 1954; Harmann, 1961) is designed to express
just such multivariate relations. It is designed to isolate from a matrix of
many variables those which consistently share mutual determinants. With
lithic assemblages we assume that these mutually determined units repre-
sent functional categories of tools, their specific functions being inferred
from the nature of the working edge of the implements and/or from
known ethnographic examples.
  In the summer of 1964 a factor analysis study was undertaken by L. R.
Binford and the author (Binford and Binford, 1966a) of one specific kind
of Mousterian   assemblage—the    Mousterian    of Levallois   facies     ( Bordes,
1953a, 1953b)—to determine what units might be isolated as “tool-kits”
and how these varied in their distribution.
   The data we used were the stone implements from Couches 2—8 of
Shelter I at Jabrud, Syria (Rust, 1950; Bordes, 1955) and from Mugharet
es-Shubbabiq,   a cave   site near Tiberias,   Israel   (S. R. Binford,     1966.).
Jabrud was excavated by Rust and the lithic material reanalyzed by
Bordes; Shubbabiq was excavated by the author and the tools analyzed
with Bordes’ assistance. They are, to the best of my knowledge, the only
Near Eastern assemblages of the Mousterian of Levallois facies which
have thus far been completely analyzed using the same criteria so that
intersite comparisons are possible.
   Despite the often bitter disputes about correlations of the Mousterian
sequence in Western Europe and the Near East (Bordes, 1955, 1960,
1962; Garrod, 1953, 1956, 1963; Howell, 1959, 1961), there is general
agreement that the Mousterian of Levallois facies is relatively late in the
Middle Paleolithic of the Near East. Thus, in our selection of data we
were able to hold three variables constant: typological consistency, gen-
eral geographical area, and relative time.
  The limitations of the data we used are: first, the absence of published
faunal material from Jabrud, the deeply stratified site in our sample.
Second, the major portion of the artifacts from Shubbabiq came from a
midden deposit in the rear chamber of the cave; thus, only one small
sample of artifacts could be tied in with features such as fire layers, which
could serve as a check on functional hypotheses. Despite these limitations,
our results provided useful information which can serve as a basis for the
formulation of hypotheses to be tested against more complete data in the
future.
   The factor analysis separated the 63 Mousterian artifact types (Bordes,
1953a) into five clusters. Factor I, the most inclusive of the factors, con-
sists of sixteen artifact types; those sharing the greatest degree of mutual
determinancy    are: borers, becs, endscrapers, atypical burins, and natu-
rally backed knives. Due to the absence of elements which seem to be
associated with hunting or butchering and the absence of heavy-duty
tools, plus our as-yet-undemonstrated proposition that when this factor is
BV:                                Archeological Theory and Method
dominant we have a base-camp type of settlement, we have interpreted
this factor as representing activities carried out around the home base—
manufacture of secondary tools and perhaps hide-finishing.
   Factor II appears to be the hunting and butchering tool kit; the domin-
ant types are points of all kinds, as well as almost every type of side-
scraper.
   The types diagnostic of Factor III which exhibit a high order of mutual
determinancy are: backed knives, naturally backed knives, end-notched
pieces, typical and atypical Levallois flakes, and unretouched blades. All
of these types, with the exception of end-notched pieces, can be seen as
fine-cutting implements, and their association with fire layers suggests
that this group of tools might have been used in the preparation of food.
   Factor IV has the most obvious relation to one of Bordes’ subtypes of
Mousterian assemblage, the denticulate {Bordes, 1953a, 1963). The ele-
ments in this factor are: denticulates and notched tools, scrapers with
abrupt retouch, raclettes, and truncated flakes. The specific use of this
group of tools is difficult to guess at; Bordes (1963, p. 47) suggests that
the denticulate Mousterian is associated with the processing of plant ma-
terials.
   Factor V’s tightly associated elements are: elongated Mousterian
points, discs, scrapers on the ventral surface, typical burins, and unre-
touched blades. The fact that only one kind of point and one kind of
sidescraper are represented in the diagnostic cluster suggests that this
group represents a more specialized hunting and butchering factor than
was seen in Factor II.
   The percentages in Figure 1 represent the degree to which the variabil-
ity in each assemblage can be accounted for by a single factor. At Shub-
babiq, with the exception of one small group of artifacts (Unit 8), the
assemblage as a whole is quite internally consistent, with the major part
of the variation being accounted for by Factor I and the rest shared by
Factors II and III. Units 5 and 6 exhibit a small degree of determinancy
by the denticulate factor (Factor IV), but otherwise fit the general pat-
tern well. Unit 8, with its very high loading on Factor III, the fine-cutting
or food preparation factor, is from a remnant deposit in the front of the
cave where there were three small fire lenses. The homogeneity of the
other units confirms the original hypothesis about Shubbabiq (S. R. Bin-
ford, 1966), based on Bordes’ method       of analysis and on Chi-square
testing of samples—that the cave was intensively occupied but that a
relatively short period of time seems to be involved.
  The hypothesis that Factor I would be associated with a base-camp
type of settlement is supported in this case by the consistent co-occur-
rence of Factors I and III, as well as by the nature of the site itself. The
cave is large, well-lighted, and well-protected against wind and remains
dry during the rainy season. The area within the limits of natural light
 S. R. Binford Near Eastern Mousterian of Levallois Facies
                                                                                                                               53




             PerRcentTace               GrapHws                 oF          Factor          DeTeRMINaNcy
                For       StTupiep      SamPres               oF      “Levartctois          Moustrerian”
                           SAMPLES       FROM           SHELTER             *;        YABRUD,      4YRIA
                          FEee
                                          Facroe              Facroe         Factor             Factor        CLA6SIFICATION
                                                                    ake          mr                           By    Boroes
                                                                                                              Femeassia

                                                                                                              Ferrasoe

                                                                                                              Fereassie

                                                                                                              DentricuLatre

                                                                                                              Feerassie

                                                                                                              Ty Pica

                                                                                                              Feeracsie

                                                                                                              DentTicuLare

                                                                                                              Feerassie



                  SamPLEee       FROM      MUGHARET                         ES —       6HUBBABIQC,         ISRAEL
    PrRovenience
   Unir    100                                                                                                TrPicaL
   Uner    lOOA                                                                                               Typical
   Unir    103-109                                                                                            Tr rPicaw
   Unit    1IS-lle                                                                                            TYPICAL

   Uner    17                                                                                                 Ty Picaw

   Unir    300-310                                                                                            Tyr Pica

   Unit    200- 208                                                                                                “F



                      SAMPLE      FROM      HOUPEVILLE,                     NEAR         ROVEN,          FRANCE

    Seme        Cisaiee   ore                                       | sears                      aa           Te PIiCcAL


                                                ScaAatce       iw    Peecentr

                                                ©   ©   W   S040 50 60 70 BO SC KO



                                                        Figure 1.


consists of almost 300 square meters of floor space.
   The samples from Jabrud were recovered from a trench averaging 3
meters in width and running the length of the shelter for about 22.5
meters (Rust, 1950; Plates 3 and 4). We estimate that approximately half
of the living space of the shelter at the time of the occupations of Couches
2—8 is represented. The determinants of the variability in the assem-
blages from these levels exhibit a great deal more variance than can be
observed at Shubbabiq. There are also striking differences in the factors
represented at the two sites. Nowhere in Jabrud does Factor I play the
dominant           role it does at Shubbabiq;                             in Jabrud, Factors               II, IV, and V
account for most of the variance. Factor III is absent in all the levels
except Couche 2, and this is the only level for which Rust mentions the
presence of fires (1950, p. 61). The entire configuration of the factors in
Jabrud 2—8 suggests various kinds of temporary occupations of the shel-
ter by specific work groups, and the large role played by Factors II and V
54                                      Archeological Theory and Method
would seem to suggest that the site was used for small hunting encamp-
ments. The relatively open nature of the site, its relatively small size (an
estimated average of 175 sq. m. of floor space at the time of these occupa-
tions), and the nature of the determinants of the observed variance all
support the hypothesis that Shelter I served as a temporary work camp,
rather than as a base camp.
   There is a general trend observable in the variation of Couches 2—8—
the replacement through time of Factor V by Factor II. Since both of
these factors suggest hunting and butchering, this trend could be interp-
reted as the replacement of one functional unit by another—that is, stylis-
tic change. However, since Factor II is a less complex tool kit, this trend
might also signify changes in hunting behavior along with the develop-
ment of more specialized tools. The current work at Jabrud being done by
Dr. Ralph Solecki should yield faunal data to confirm or refute our cur-
rent hypotheses.
   The factor analysis results from Jabrud and Shubbabiq demonstrate
that variability in a single culture type can profitably be examined within
a functional frame of reference. Variability between assemblages at the
same site may well represent activity variants, not necessarily “culture
change” or occupations by bearers of different “traditions,” and we must
develop analytical tools for distinguishing between these phenomena. Va-
riability between sites may represent differences in settlement type, not
necessarily regional traditions, and we must also make a distinction be-
tween these.


                                 Change
Let us turn to the second problem mentioned above—that of interpreting
change from one major culture type to another. The data under discussion
are those pertaining to the Middle-to-Upper Paleolithic transition in the
Near East.
   Dorothy Garrod has stated that the Emiran culture is transitional be-
tween the Levallois-Mousterian and Upper Paleolithic in the Palestinian
region of the Near East and asserts that the Emireh point is the hallmark
of this culture (Garrod, 1951, 1955). The type site consists of three shel-
ters in Wadi Amud, Israel, two of which yielded the artifacts by which
Garrod defines the Emiran.
   The Emireh point is known from several sites in the Palestinian area. It
is always made on a Levallois point, which may or may not be marginally
retouched, and it is characterized by the removal of small, subparallel
flakes at the base of the point on the bulbar side. The point always occurs
in very low frequencies and is known in several different contexts.
   At Abu Halka, Lebanon, there is some ambiguity about context. The
example there occurs in Layer IVf, which is termed Upper Paleolithic
because of the presence of the Emireh point (Haller, 1946, pp. 6—7). All
S. R. Binford Near Eastern Mousterian of Levallois Facies                 55
the artifacts illustrated from the level in question appear to be typical of
the Levallois-Mousterian (Haller, 1946, Plate I), but the percentages of
burins and endscrapers reported are exceedingly high for a Mousterian
assemblage. The possible interpretations of this situation are: (1) two
archeological horizons were mixed during excavation; (2) errors were
made in typology; or (3) this does in fact represent a “transitional” in-
dustry.
   Ewing reported the presence of Emireh points at Ksar ‘Akil, Lebanon,
one of which occurred in this site below the zone which Ewing termed
transitional; it was in the upper     portion   of the Levallois-Mousterian
(Ewing, 1947, p. 191).
  Two   Emireh    points were    recovered   from    Mugharet   es-Shubbabiq
(S. R. Binford, 1966 )—one from a disturbed level which yielded artifacts
ranging from Mousterian stone tools to Early Bronze sherds, the second
from an unmixed horizon of Mousterian of Levallois facies.
   Five Emireh points from el-Wad are illustrated in The Stone Age of
Mount Carmel (Garrod and Bate, 1937, Plate XXVI, Nos. 1—3, Plate
XXVII, Nos. 7 and 8). Three were in layer G, originally called Lower
Aurignacian, and two in Layer F, which was identified as Upper Leval-
lois-Mousterian. The report states that in places layer G was indistin-
guishable in appearance from F, which immediately overlay it, and, as it
contained a small proportion of Lower Aurignacian implements, it “can-
not be regarded as quite free from disturbance” (Garrod and Bate, 1937,
p- 23).
  After the identification of Emireh points at Abu Halka and Ksar ’Akil,
Garrod was led to reexamine her findings from el-Wad (Garrod, 1951).
The reexamination consisted of treating the lithic materials from layers F
and G as if they represented “an archaeological horizon containing an
industry with the same mixed characters as those of the Lebanese sites”
(Garrod, 1951, p. 121). The average thickness of layer F is 10 cms. while
layer G varies from 40 cms. to over 7 meters (Garrod and Bate, 1937, p.
23). The interpretation of materials from over 7 meters of possibly dis-
turbed deposits as though they represented a single archeological hori-
zon seems a doubtful procedure and one which would obscure rather than
clarify differences.
  Garrod’s original interpretation of the type site, the Emireh        shelters,
excavated forty years ago under far from ideal conditions (Turville-Petre,
1927), was that the deposits were disturbed. Yet the collection from these
shelters was made the type assemblage for the Emiran        (Garrod, 1955, p.
21). After field inspection of the remaining deposits in the large shelter at
Emireh, I am strongly inclined to agree with Garrod’s original interpreta-
tion of the site—that the deposits are disturbed and mixed, and that at
least two components are present.
  In summary,    at the sites under discussion the Emireh point occurs at
two locations—Ksar    ’Akil and Shubbabiq—in        clear Mousterian   context.
56                                               Archeological Theory and Method
At two other sites—el-Wad and Emireh—there is a good probability of
disturbance and/or mixing. Only at Abu Halka can there be said to be
anything “transitional” about the context. Skinner (personal communica-
tion, 1964) in his examination of this question has drawn up an even
longer list of Emiran ambiguities. In view of this, the value of the Emireh
point as a fossile directeur is open to serious question.
   It is further suggested here that the traditional emphasis on “transi-
tional industries” is open to question. If we view the change from Middle
to Upper Paleolithic         in an adaptive framework,          we   can   observe   that
several significant shifts occur. Anatomically modern man (Homo sapiens
sapiens )puts in his first appearance. New and more economical ways of
utilizing raw material rapidly become dominant—the consistent manufac-
ture of implements by punch-blade technique and a marked increase in
frequencies of composite tools. It is hypothesized that these changes were
predicated on new kinds of relationships between man and his environ-
ment, both physical and social, and that the changing relationships oc-
curred within the latter part of the Middle Paleolithic itself. The emerg-
ence of new biological and cultural forms is the end-product of adaptive
change, and it is in the nature of the basic adaptive changes that we will
begin to understand why and how new forms appeared.
   Although the currently available data are limited, the kinds of changes
which occurred within the social environment can profitably be examined
by techniques such as factor analysis which allow us to make inferences as
to settlement systems and the structuring of work groups. If new methods
of data collection and analysis are employed, we can certainly learn much
more about both the internal divisions of local groups and between-group
relations and how these might have changed throughout the Middle Pale-
olithic.
   Changes in man’s relations to his physical environment will be reflected
in subsistence activities, and there is an intriguing hint of such a shift at
Skhil, one of the Mount Carmel caves (Garrod and Bate, 1937). Accept-
ing Howell’s relative dating of Tabun and Skhul (1957), Tabian being the
earlier of the two, a marked change in the exploitation of game can be
observed through time.’ Tabiin yielded a fauna characterized by a wide
variety of species with no evidence of preference for any single form, but
with an increase in Bos fragments in the Upper Levallois-Mousterian
levels (Garrod and Bate, 1937, pp. 143-50). Skhul, the more recent site,
is described as follows:
     The most striking character of the collection from this deposit is the ex-
     tremely large number of Bos (Garrod and Bate, 1937, p. 149).

Certainly this suggests a shift from generalized to specific hunting, and it
is the systematic exploitation of a single species of herd mammals which
     ’ This is set forth in a more playful manner in Binford and Binford 1966b.
S. R. Binford Near Eastern Mousterian of Levallois Facies        57
characterizes much of the Upper Paleolithic. It is Skhal which also
yielded the remains of the Neanderthals which Howell terms “sapien-
sized” (1957).
   It is suggested that the place to see a “transition” is in the basic adapta-
tion itself and not in the technological means developed within the frame-
work of the new adaptation. The shift to specialized exploitation of spe-
cific kinds of game and the emergence of anatomically modern man were
probably achieved over a considerable period of time, whereas the adop-
tion of a more efficient mode of tool production might well have been
change of a quick, replacive nature.
   In dealing with lithic assemblages, we must distinguish between stylis-
tic change and functional change. The battleship curve is an excellent
model for dealing with style change, but the kind of technological
changes reflected in the assemblages of the Middle to Upper Paleolithic
of the Near East is of a completely different order and cannot be under-
stood in terms of the same model. Man does not continue to use less
efficient tools when newer and better ones are readily available. The steel-
point pen very quickly replaced the quill, and modern commercial airlines
do not continue to purchase piston engine planes instead of jets because
of “tradition.” These are two examples of more efficient technological
means quickly replacing older forms, and there is no reason to believe
that Paleolithic man made his artifacts half by Levallois-Mousterian tech-
niques and half by Upper Paleolithic techniques because of cultural con-
servatism. The isolation of the archeological horizons where the techno-
logical change occurred will not only be very difficult; it will tell us
almost nothing about how and why the underlying adaptive shifts took
place.
  Even more basic questions might be raised with respect to “transi-
tional” industries when the problem is understanding the change from
one major culture type to another. The assumptions underlying the search
for transitional industries appear to be not only that stone tools them-
selves somehow evolve but also that changes are more or less evenly
distributed through time and do not cluster. The first assumption and the
problems it raises are discussed by Sackett in this volume. The latter
assumption is often made explicit by American anthropologists in the
form of statements to the effect that culture is a continuum. The analyti-
cal problems arising from such an assumption have been discussed by
Spaulding (1957, pp. 86—87), who points out that while space and time
are indeed continua, cultural phenomena        are characterized by their ten-
dency to cluster in space and time:
   I am of the opinion that clustering of this sort is generally characteristic of
   cultural data and that the development of adequate scaling and analytical
   techniques for its study is the most important methodological problem con-
   fronting archeologists (1957, p. 87).
58                                           Archeological Theory and Method
     The pressing need for the development of scaling and analytical tech-
niques for studying the kind and degree of culture change involved be-
tween Middle and Upper Paleolithic can be readily seen in the extant
literature. A recent example is the article by Pradel (1966) and the com-
ments published with the article which exhibit the futility of attempting
to explain the observed differences in terms of migrations         (Gallus, 1966,
pp. 39-40; Echegaray, 1966, p. 41), transitional industries (Garrod,
1966, pp. 40—41; Freund, 1966, pp. 38—39), and lithic mutation (Brace,
1966, p. 37; Smith, 1966, p. 44). Almost all prehistorians agree that the
Mousterian and the early Upper Paleolithic are somehow different; some
see little difference (Bordes, 1961) and therefore assume lineally related
populations responsible for the two kinds of assemblage, while others
(Vogel, 1966, p. 46—47) assert that the change in lithic industries is so
marked and rapid that different populations must be involved.
   Until the Mousterian and the early Upper Paleolithic are both analyzed
in terms of units which are relatable to human activities (that is, tool-
kits) and their spatial distribution (settlement types and patterns), we
have no means for accurately measuring the degree of difference between
Mousterian and Upper Paleolithic cultural systems. The rapid adoption of
new technological means for flint-tool manufacture may mask underlying
similarities and differences in subsistence base, settlement pattern, and
social organization. It is only when these differences and similarities are
measured and compared that we can hope to explain the kind and degree
of change which took place.
   Two problems have been discussed—variability within a single culture
type and change from one culture type to another. It is important to
distinguish between these phenomena, since they are radically different
yet are often treated as though they were the same. Variability within the
same broad culture type, defined in terms of lithic assemblages, has often
been interpreted as reflecting culture change or as the expression of re-
gional traditions. It is suggested here that such variability must be inves-
tigated functionally—in terms of the activities represented and the struc-
ture of settlement systems. If structural change can be demonstrated in
these aspects of behavior in the past, then we have the basis for develop-
ing processual models for understanding changes in lithic assemblages.


                                    References

BEARDSLEY, R. K., et al. 1956. Functional and evolutionary implications        of
  community patterning. American Antiquity, 22(2), Part 2: 130—57.
Brnrorp, L. R. 1963. Red ocher caches from the Michigan area: a possible
  case of cultural drift. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 19(1): 89—-
     108.
BrnForp, SaLty R. 1966, Mugharet es-Shubbabiq: a Mousterian cave in Israel.
     Journal of the Israeli Exploration Society, 16(1 and 2): 18—32, 96—103.
S. R. Binford Near Eastern Mousterian of Levallois Facies                               59
Binrorp, L. R., and Sarty R. Binrorp. 1966a. A preliminary analysis of
  functional variability in the Mousterian of Levallois facies. American An-
  thropologist, 68(2), Part 2: 238—95.
      . 1966b. The predatoray revolution: a consideration of the evidence for a
  new subsistence level. American Anthropologist, 68(2), Part 1: 508-512.
Borves, F, H. 1953a. Essai de classification des industries “moustériennes.”
  Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique Frangaise, 50(8): 457—66.
      . 1953b. Levalloisien et Moustérien. Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique
  Francaise, 50(4): 226—35.
      . 1955. Le paléolithique inférieur et moyen de Jabrud (Syrie) et la ques-
  tion du pré-Aurignacien. L’Anthropologie, 59(5 and 6): 486—507.
     . 1960. Le pré-Aurignacien de Yabroud (Syrie), et son incidence sur la
  chronologie du Quaternaire en Moyen Orient. Bulletin of the Research Coun-
  cil of Israel, 9G(2 and3): 91—103.
     . 1961. Typologie du paléolithique ancien et moyen. Bordeaux: Imprimerie
  Delmas.
  i ap Sur la chronologie du paléolithique au Moyen Orient. Quaternaria.

——.    1963. Le moustérien a denticulés. Arheoloski Vestnik, 14: 43—49.
oa      C. L. 1966. Comments on Pradel’s paper. Current Anthropology, 7(1):

et        J. G. 1966. Comments on Pradel’s paper. Current Anthropology,
 (1): 41.
Ewine, J. F. 1947. Preliminary note on the excavations at the Palaeolithic site of
  Ksar ’Akil, Republic of Lebanon. Antiquity, 21(84): 186—96.
Freunp, G. 1966. Comments         on Pradel’s paper. Current Anthropology,        7(1):
  38-39.
Frucuter,    B. 1954.    Introduction    to factor analysis. Princeton:    D. van      No-
  strand.
Gauxus, A. 1966. Comments on Pradel’s paper. Current Anthropology, 7(1):
  39—40.
Garrop, D. 1951. A transitional industry from the base of the Upper Palae-
  olithic in Palestine and Syria. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute,
  81: 121—30.
     . 1953. The relations between south-west Asia and Europe in the Later
  Palaeolithic Age. Cahiers d'Histoire Mondiale, 1: 13—38.
      . 1955. The Mugharet el-Emireh in Lower Galilee: type station of the Emi-
  ran industry. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 85: 1—22.
      . 1956. Acheuléo-Jabroudien et “Pré-Aurignacien” de la grotte de Taboun
  (Mont     Carmel);    étude   stratigraphique   et chronologique.     Quaternaria,    3:
  39-59.
     . 1963. The Middle Palaeolithic of the Near East and the problem of
  Mount Carmel Man. The Huxley Memorial Lecture, 1962. Journal of the
  Royal Anthropological Institute, 93: 232—59.
     . 1966. Comments on Pradel’s paper. Current Anthropology, 7(1): 40-41.
Garrop, D., and D. Bate. 1937. The stone age of Mount Carmel, Volek
  Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hatter, J. 1946. Notes de préhistoire phénicienne: !Abou Halka. Bulletin du
  Musée de Beyrouth, 6: 1—20.
Harmann, H. H.          1961.   Modern    factor analysis.   Chicago:     University    of
  Chicago Press.
Howe tt. F. Ciark.      1957. The evolutionary significance of variation and vari-
  ties of “Neanderthal” man. Quarterly Review of Biology, 32(4): 330—47.
60                                              Archeological Theory and Method
      . 1959. Upper Pleistocene stratigraphy and early man in the Levant. Pro-
  ceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 103: 1—65.
     . 1961. Stratigraphie du Pleistocene supérieur dans l’Asie du sud-ouest.
  l'Anthropologie, 65: 1—20.
Kiernpienst, M. R. 1961a. Components of the East African Acheulian assem-
  blage: an analytic approach. Actes de 4° Pan-Africain Congres de Préhistorie.
     (Leopoldville, 1959): 81—111.
     . 1961b. Variability within the late Acheulian assemblage in East Africa.
  South African Archaeological Bulletin, 16: 35—50.
PraDEL,    L. 1966.    Transition   from   Mousterian   to Perigordian:   skeletal   and
  industrial. Current Anthropology, 7(1): 33—50.
Rust, A. 1950. Die Hohlenfunde von Jabrud (Syrien). Neumiinster.
DESONNEVILLE-Borves, D. 1960. Le paléolithique supérieur en Périgord. Bor-
  deaux: Imprimerie Delmas.
SmitH, P. E. L. 1966. Comments on Pradel’s paper. Current Anthropology,
  7(1): 44-45.
SpauLpinG, A. C, 1957. Review of “Method and theory in American archaeol-
  ogy.” American Antiquity, 23(1): 85—87.
TURVILLE-PETRE,       F. 1927. Researches in prehistoric Galilee 1925-26. London:
 British School of Archaeology in Jerusalem.
as y C. 1966. Comments on Pradel’s paper. Current Anthropology, 7(1):
  6—4
FIVE
                                                               JAMES      R. SACKETT




                                                 Method and Theory
                             of Upper Paleolithic Archeology
                                               in Southwestern France




The aims of this essay are to review the present state of method and
theory in Upper Paleolithic archeology and to examine some of the prob-
lems that must be met in attempting to design its future research stra-
tegy.’ Like the other essays in this volume, it is based upon the assump-
tion that the growing alliance between archeology and cultural anthropol-
ogy will not only prove mutually beneficial, but that indeed it will play a
determinant role in the future development of both disciplines. Unhap-
pily, despite the enormous wealth and importance of the cultural data for
which it is responsible, Upper Paleolithic archeology is less a part of this
alliance than any other major field of prehistory. Few of its actual prac-
titioners have but the most generalized notions of either modern culture
theory or the substantive data of ethnography, while most anthropologists
in turn know no more of it than is provided by brief summaries in out-
dated textbooks. Although directed primarily toward archeologists, the
following discussion will—it is hoped—suggest to both of these almost
mutually exclusive audiences that a synthesis of their respective formula-
  1A short draft of this paper was      read at the annual meeting of the American
Anthropological Association, Denver, 1965. Several developments since the present
version was written (June, 1966) indicate that much of its argument is not as original
as I believed. Particularly relevant is the appearance of Philip Smith’s Le Solutréen en
France (1966), which proposes.many aspects of the research strategy advocated here.

                                          61
62                                         Archeological Theory and Method
tions and analytic approaches may well be of profit to the scientific study
of culture history.
   The Upper Paleolithic (late Old Stone Age) consists of a relatively
diverse block of hunting and gathering cultures that occupied Europe and
the Near East during the latter half of the Final or Wiirm Glacial period,
Late Glacial extensions of which penetrated as far as western North Af-
rica and northern Asia. Although their precise genetic connections remain
undefined, all of these cultures appear to be historically related by their
common possession of distinctive stone-tool industries that are usually
dominated by advanced blade technologies. Wherever it appears, the
Upper Paleolithic seems to represent a qualitative advancement in re-
gional culture history as measured by elaboration of artifactual remains
and density of sites. The disparity between it and the preceding Mouste-
rian period is nowhere more dramatically expressed than in the periglacial
zone extending across mid-latitude Europe from the Atlantic Ocean to the
South Russian Plain. Here Upper Paleolithic societies seem to have
achieved levels of economic success and cultural complexity that were not
to recur until Neolithic times in the Old World and that have been rivaled
among historic hunters and gatherers perhaps only by such groups as the
maritime cultures of the Pacific Northwest Coast.
     In this paper we shall deal systematically with only one segment of this
Upper Paleolithic climax—the classic archeological sequence of the Peéri-
gord region of southwestern France, centering upon the modern depart-
ment of the Dordogne.’ This regional restriction will preclude examina-
tion of some of the most important achievements of Upper Paleolithic
archeology, such as the refined analysis of extremely informative open-air
sites in Russia (Boriskovski, 1965) and central Europe (Klima, 1962;
Rust, 1958), and even some of the most advanced research being con-
ducted in France itself (for example, Leroi-Gourhan, 1963; Leroi-
Gourhan and Brésillon, 1964; Escalon de Fonton, 1961). However, since
the Dordogne has traditionally played a leading role in the development
of archeological theory and method, this discussion should prove to be of
at least general relevance to Upper Paleolithic investigations throughout
mid-latitude Europe.
   Figure 1 provides an extremely simplified version of the Dordogne
sequence within its climatic and geological framework. The chronology is
based upon a radiocarbon regime that is very incomplete; subsequent to
20,000 B.c., the assigned dates may be no more than a millenium off, but
their likely range of error increases markedly for earlier periods. It should
be noted that the somewhat inconsistent terminology of cultural periods
  * The primary source for the Dordogne is de Sonneville-Bordes (1960), which in
both content and method furnishes the indispensible point of departure for all
research in this region.
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France                                            63




                 CuLTuRAL                                                                  a
                       aed nace                                                    Pbpb
                     AZILIAN




                                                                                   Leare       Wim




             Upeam    PkmiconDiaNn



                                                                                   Mioco-e     Wirem




            Upper     Paragourrnic            Sequence          of   THe     Dornoane
                      (Baszo      UPON   Movive   1960, 19663   Laviiie    1964)



                                             Figure 1.



and traditions partially reflects older historical interpretations that are
now widely questioned.
  The Dordogne sequence is based upon what is at present the world’s
richest concentration of Upper Paleolithic sites. The bulk of these are
rock-shelter or abri stations which have been uncovered in the talus of
limestone cliffs that dominate many of the valleys in this region. Although
intensive exploration has been restricted to the Dordogne and Vézére
river valleys, more than 150 such sites have been at least partially exca-
vated—a number that probably represents but a small fraction of those
64                                              Archeological Theory and Method
that remain to be discovered. These sites often yield several meters’ thick-
ness of occupation levels containing many thousands of stone implements
and vast quantities of kitchen and industrial garbage. Residence seems to
have continued the year-round in many of the levels, and often appar-
ently involved several neighboring rock-shelters simultaneously; in locali-
ties such as the Gorge d’Enfer and the Les Eyzies cliffs, buried occupa-
tion zones may actually extend more or less continuously for almost a
kilometer. Moreover, the region is richly endowed with open-air sites and
painted and engraved caves, both of which are ascribed to the same
peoples who inhabited the rock-shelters. In view of the sheer volume and
elaboration of their cultural remains, there can be little doubt that Upper
Paleolithic societies in the Dordogne achieved one of the most successful
hunting and gathering adaptations in culture history.
   The factors accounting for this success presumably stemmed from an
almost ideal combination of exploitative skills and environmental re-
sources enjoyed by Upper Paleolithic men in this region. Though serious
gaps and ambiguities remain in our knowledge of their technology, espec-
ially with regard to perishable manufactures and in specific areas such as
food storage and preservation, their extant artifacts and pictorial art
strongly suggest that Upper Paleolithic men possessed almost the entire
range of techniques and equipment found among historic hunters and
gatherers aside from those items that have only recently diffused from
semi-industrialized societies. This range seems to have included in at least
many cultural phases all of the specialized technology required for inten-
sive semi-Arctic land and riverine exploitation, such as tailored skin cloth-
ing, refined missile systems involving the throwing board and bow and
arrow, and fishing harpoons, leisters, and gorges.°
     The environmental side of the equation was dominated by an extremely
high biomass that apparently greatly exceeded the present carrying ca-
pacity of Arctic and sub-Arctic tundras and ‘steppes, which today exist
only at much higher latitudes (Butzer, 1964, p. 374). This mainly con-
sisted of large populations of herbivores such as reindeer, horse, and
bison, in addition to a variety of birds and fish, the latter including
anadromous forms like salmon. The region also provided rich sources of
workable stone, housing in the form of numerous rock-shelters immedi-
ately accessible to water, and a variegated landscape that was particularly
well suited for pedestrian big-game hunting. This heterogeneous topo-
graphy of wind-swept plateaus and sheltered valleys may itself have been
a dominant factor in the economic success of Paleolithic hunters. Exposed
simultaneously to generally severe continental and relatively mild oceanic
weather conditions, it apparently accomodated a variety of contiguous
micro-environments among which the principal game animals could usu-
     * See J. G. D. Clark (1952)   for a general survey of Upper Paleolithic technology
from the perspective of subsequent culture history.                                   ;
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France               65
ally find suitable conditions for regional occupation regardless of seasonal
variations and even the long-range climatic oscillations represented in
Figure 1 (Bouchud, 1959).
  While the preceding may be a reasonably valid sketch of Upper Paleo-
lithic man-land   relationships   in the Dordogne,     one   can only speculate
about the details of the economic practices involved and the broader
cultural contexts within which they operated. For there exists no signifi-
cant body of literature that is directly concerned with the systematic
analysis of Old Stone Age cultural patterns and the processes that deter-
mined them. Frequent and occasionally penetrating cultural inferences
are in fact drawn by most archeologists, but these generally remain iso-
lated and particularistic, most often based upon archeological facts taken
out of context and explained in terms of ethnographic facts equally out of
context. Their emphasis moreover is heavily oriented toward “humanistic”
considerations of the more spectacular artifactual remains such as burials,
Venus figurines, and cave art. Little rigorous analysis is devoted to such
areas   as the functions   of stone    and bone tools, demography,     and the
seasonal distribution and availability of food resources—precisely those
topics that must first be understood if prehistoric cultures are to be recon-
structed (much less, if their art and ideology are to be interpreted in a
meaningful context).As a result, the more basic questions of Upper Pale-
olithic life remain unanswered        and, in fact, seldom asked. For example,
what precisely were the subsistence techniques of Upper Paleolithic for-
agers, what population sizes and densities might they support, and with
what kinds of settlement patterns were they associated? Or again, do the
successive Upper Paleolithic artifact complexes refer to distinct types of
economic and social organization, or do they merely reflect stylistic varia-
tions within a single cultural tradition? Indeed, were it not for their
apparent associations with distinct types of hominids, most archeologists
would be hard pressed even to suggest a testable hypothesis accounting
for the obviously different levels of economic success achieved by the
Mousterian and Upper Paleolithic cultures in general (however, see
Bordes, 1960).
  Now, it could be argued that the deficiencies of current archeological
interpretation in the Upper Paleolithic, as in other fields of prehistory,
largely indicate no more than that other research tasks have necessarily
had greater priority. In fact, the artifactual and stratigraphic complexity
of the Dordogne have necessitated that primary concern be given to
purely descriptive classification, that is, typological definitions of arche-
ological assemblages and the construction of a regional sequence of cul-
tural phases. Nevertheless, this alone cannot explain the general lack of
interest in the kinds of questions raised above. For archeologists have not
even obtained the organized data upon which interpretations of cultural
pattern and process could be systematically tested once the basic require-
66                                       Archeological Theory and Method
ments of descriptive classification are met. Only a handful of artifact
assemblages representing all of the rock-shelters that have been excavated
to date are in any manner complete, well documented, or accompanied
by adequate provenience and paleoenvironmental information. Hence,
regardless of what research objectives may be given priority, it would
seem that prehistorians in the Dordogne have generally failed to employ a
culturally meaningful frame of reference for either the collection or inter-
pretation of their data.
   This of course does not mean that research has evolved in a theoretical
vacuum, but rather that its primary frame of reference has traditionally
lain in another area. From the pioneer work of Gabriel de Mortillet
(1869) down through World War II, research strategy was strongly in-
fluenced by the notion that the archeological record was best approached
in the same manner that earlier had proven successful in interpreting the
fossil record. Just as paleontologists subdivided organic history according
to successive forms of index fossil organisms, so prehistorians attempted
to define and order their archeological data in terms of artifact fossiles
directeurs—qualitatively diagnostic tool forms whose restricted strati-
graphic distributions were believed to delineate major culture blocks and
their principal evolutionary subdivisions. In the hands’ of gifted typolo-
gists (Bourlon, Bouyssonie, and Bouyssonie, 1912), a refined excavator
 (Peyrony, 1933), or a subtle culture historian (Breuil, 1912), this ap-
proach furnished a useful classificatory tool through which the French
sequence became established as the model for Upper Paleolithic research
throughout the Old World. Yet regardless of its general utility in space-
time systematics, the continued acceptance of this approach undoubtedly
retarded the development of sophisticated cultural reconstruction and
interpretation.
   First, the similar manner in which archeological and paleontological
fossiles were conceived inevitably fostered the assumption that culture
history was   amenable   to an organic, or at least a natural, evolutionary
model. This was clearly implicit in even the classificatory schemes of
Denis Peyrony, the Dordogne’s most brilliant traditional prehistorian. In
his revolutionary Les industries “aurignaciennes” dans le bassin de la
Vézére (1933) and continuing to dominate his subsequent papers (for
example, 1939, 1948) was the attempt to equate artifact fossiles, cultural
stages, and geological horizons as narrowly as possible into mechanical
systems whose parts articulated with almost robotic precision. Further,
when the patterns of culture dynamics reflected in these schemes could
not be “explained” as concomitant expressions of change in the natural
universe, they were attributed to behavioral expressions of biological dif-
ferences among human groups. Thus Peyrony maintained that a racial
split within Homo sapiens was sufficient to account for the simultaneous
occupation of the Dordogne by two distinct cultural traditions over sev-
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France               67
eral millenia.‘ Hence, it is not surprising that the writings of Peyrony and
his contemporaries nevertheless expressed strong if particularistic interest
in archeological evidences of art and ritual. A “humanistic” concern with
prehistoric ideology and esthetics was in effect predictably the focus (and
extent) of traditional interest at the detailed level of cultural inference, as
it was precisely these aspects of culture that most obviously eluded syste-
matic explanation within an organic frame of reference.
  A second and equally unfortunate consequence of the fossile approach
was that, by assuming a one-to-one correlation between cultural and nat-
ural stratigraphy, it led prehistorians to underestimate           grossly the com-
plexity of the archeological record. The minimum excavation unit recog-
nized by the best researchers was no less than an entire archeological
couche, an artifact-bearing zone of distinct sedimentary composition that
very often incorporates a number of discrete occupational subdivisions. At
the same time, sampling techniques concentrated only upon the data that
were required to obtain a sequential ordering of couche-specific archeo-
logical horizons: artifact assemblages were collected with no regard to
vertical and horizontal tool distributions within strata, and little paleoen-
vironmental data were systematically recovered other than the macro-
faunal remains that were considered to be primary chronological indica-
tors. Moreover, there was a strong tendency to overlook the more banal
areas of typology in favor of the established fossiles that were believed
capable of providing at once an adequate definition of both the formal
contents and genetic affiliations of assemblages—a procedure that of
course only intensified the analytic circularism inherent in traditional sys-
tematics. Thus the application of sampling techniques designed to meet
only the limited requirements of fossile classification prevented accumula-
tion of the organized body of information that we previously noted must
underlie culturally meaningful analysis in archeology.
   However, during the past fifteen years,        a number of fundamental inno-
vations in the techniques of data collection and analysis undoubtedly
signal a dramatic shift in the research strategy of Upper Paleolithic arch-
eology. Under the leadership of Frangois Bordes, excavation techniques
have approached the limits of micro-stratigraphic control in which com-
plete and fully documented artifact assemblages are segregated according
to the minimal sedimentary components that can be discerned in archeo-
logical couches    (for example, Bordes, 1958, Fig. 2). At some sites, as in
the ambitious research program conducted by Hallam Movius at the Abri
Pataud   (see below), detailed stratigraphic control is complemented by
   *Even more extreme organic models were adopted during this era for earlier
cultural stages, as in the so-called parallel phyla theory of Lower and Middle Paleo-
lithic evolution. Here the confusion of biology and culture often became intense, with
divergent hominid lines being held responsible for distinct cultural traditions at the
same time that archeological terminology frequently hinted at the practice of sexual
relations among stone tools. .
68                                           Archeological Theory and Method
horizontal dissection aimed toward determining the spatial relations of
tool distributions and architectural features over occupational surfaces.
Refined techniques are now available for obtaining detailed ecological
information from sedimentology (Bonifay, 1957; Laville, 1965) and paly-
nology (Lavocat, 1966), while paleontological analysis has been extended
both to micro-faunal remains and to such problems as the reconstruction
of hunting practices as these are reflected in the age and sex structures of
butchered animal assemblages (Bouchud, 1961). Equally revolutionary
advances have been made in descriptive classification. Of supreme im-
portance here has been the replacement of traditional systematics by
comprehensive typologies in which the entire range of artifactual varia-
tion found in the Upper Paleolithic may           be codified,    and the use of
descriptive statistical techniques for assessing and ordering archeological
assemblages. First introduced into Upper Paleolithic studies by de Son-
neville-Bordes and Perrot (1953) as an extension of techniques earlier
applied by Francois Bordes to the Mousterian Complex (1950), numeri-
cal taxonomy has rapidly become established as the foundation of archeo-
logical classification throughout Western Europe.’ To date it has pro-
vided the most thoroughgoing revision of traditional schemes in the Dor-
dogne itself, as is summarized in de Sonneville-Bordes’ monumental Le
Paléolithique supérieur en Périgord (1960).
   It is to be hoped that one day the results of these several lines of
investigation will be synthesized in an extensive literature devoted to
cultural interpretation in the Upper Paleolithic. No doubt this will emerge
only gradually, due to the vast expenditure of time and money that is
demanded by the new techniques of excavation and laboratory analysis.
Equally important, however, it will require the development of a more
viable interest in research strategy than is now apparent in the writings of
most archeologists. Aside from purely descriptive reviews              of the new
techniques, there is presently almost no concern expressed in print with
regard to general questions of theory and method. This silence is so
profound that an outside observer might well conclude either that archeo-
logists are naively assuming that their data—when available in sufficient
quantities—will automatically fall into culturally meaningful patterns or,
conversely, that there actually has been no rejection of the traditional
goals of fossile strategy. As for the latter, one prehistorian in an allied
field (Moberg, 1961, p. 26) suggests that nothing really has changed: the
quantitative procedures used in ordering assemblages, for example, sim-
ply represent the introduction of techniques that are current in the natu-
ral sciences, and are perhaps intended to reflect the same kinds of pat-
terning. And, in fact, the most ambitious attempt in the last decade to
explain Upper Paleolithic culture history is grounded upon an extreme
     * Escalon de Fonton and de Lumley, 1955; Bohmers,   1956; Laplace, 1964; Ronen,
1966.
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France        69
organic model whose mechanisms are allegedly verified by the facts of
primate history, the early Tertiary radiation of fissiped carnivores, and I.
Vavilov’s epicenter theory of plant domestication (Laplace, 1961, p. 66).
  Nonetheless, even a modest familiarity with the current literature indi-
cates that such examples are no more than individual expressions of conti-
nuity in the evolution of present research from that of the past. It is no
doubt true that interest in method and theory has been diverted by prag-
matic emphasis upon the immediate gain in refined descriptive classifica-
tion that is provided by the new techniques. But the general climate of
opinion is one of ambivalence rather than reaction; the traditional frame
of reference has been discarded by most students, but its successor has
not yet clearly emerged. Therefore, the remainder of this discussion will
be devoted to.a programmatic statement that will attempt to define the
nature of cultural interpretation in Upper Paleolithic archeology and the
kind of research strategy it might entail. What should be our research
objectives,   and with    what    analytic techniques      and interpretive    frame-
works ought we to be concerned in order to begin approaching them?
   With regard to the former, the design of future research strategy should
focus upon the complementary goals of (1) reconstructing the content
and structure of Upper Paleolithic cultural systems, and (2) elucidating
the processes that determined their form and mode of change. The term
system is employed here in L. R. Binford’s (1964) sense to emphasize
the view that prehistoric cultures were more than complexes of discrete
archeological traits and that to be understood they must be analyzed
structurally as systems of functionally interrelated elements. A cultural
system is posited by the archeologist from the sum total of his inferences
regarding the component technological, social, and ideological aspects of
all the activities that can be referred to it. Activities are culturally pat-
terned segments of human behavior that have received ordered expres-
sions in the archeological record. They are isolated and analyzed in terms
of clusters of associated elements—more specifically, the presence of non-
random variation in the complementary distributions of attributes and/or
classes of what Spaulding (1960) has called the “dimensions” of archeo-
logy: space, time, and form. Time and space define the loci of activities,
while the activities themselves are formally expressed by artifacts—
concrete manifestations of human behavior such as implements and archi-
tectural features—and       by paleoecological      remains.’ An “activity” is a
purely relative analytic unit that may range in scope from the manufac-
ture of a single artifact to the total lifeway of a community, and hence the
  6 While it is convenient to distinguish a paleoenvironmental order of formal data, it
should be noted that most if not all of its elements concretely express prehistoric
behavior patterns and are therefore artifactual in the strict sense of the term. Thus a
faunal assemblage recovered from an archeological site invariably reflects selective
cultural agents and does not provide a random sample of the animal communities that
actually existed in nature when the site was occupied.
70                                      Archeological Theory and Method
activities that can be identified with a specific prehistoric culture are
neither additive nor mutually exclusive categories. It is of course for this
reason that a systemic approach is required, since our analysis must obvi-
ously focus as much upon the functional articulations that once related a
variety of cross-cutting and overlapping activities as upon the contents of
the activities themselves.
   Aside from its emphasis upon a systemic view of culture, the above is of
course no more than an explicit description of what archeologists have
always done. The difference between one area or phase of prehistoric
research and another simply depends upon the kinds of activities that
receive paramount attention and the manner in which they are analyzed.
Therefore our problem may be stated as follows: assuming that present
data-gathering techniques provide reasonably complete information on all
cultural activities that are archeologically represented in the Upper Paleo-
lithic, upon what activities should cultural interpretation primarily focus
and in terms of what method and theory should their analysis be con-
ducted? An answer to this question must begin with the assumption of a
theoretical attitude regarding the nature of culture and the terms in
which it can most profitably be interpreted. The approach advocated here
is that of cultural ecology, which is based upon the proposition that the
content and structure of a cultural system are primarily, if not wholly,
determined by the technological procedures and sociodemographic ar-
rangements employed by its members in exploiting their environment.
Defined in its modern form by Julian Steward (1955), cultural ecology
has proved to be efficacious in a variety of interpretive studies in both
ethnology and archeology (see Sahlins, 1962; Helm, 1962). Due to its
wealth of materials directly reflecting man’s technological exploitation of
his environment, the Dordogne’ Upper Paleolithic should be particularly
amenable to analysis and interpretation oriented in terms of this ap-
proach.
   Given the perspective of cultural ecology, the initial focus of our pro-
posed research strategy should be directed toward those activities that
can be distinguished as primarily economic tasks; these by definition
involve the extraction of raw materials and their consumption either in
the form of food or implemental manufacture. Analysis of the artifactual
and paleoenvironmental components of such activities in the light of their
spatial distributions within and between archeological sites should enable
us to identify in at least general terms the nature of the tasks performed
and the composition of the groups undertaking them. Gradually from
such analysis should emerge a paradigm of the ecological adaption of
the cultural system under consideration, expressing how its integral tasks
were functionally related within a settlement pattern and population de-
mography through the year-round cycle of environmental exploitation
and occupation. This formulation should provide a background against
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France              me
whjch non-economic activities may then be projected for analysis, and in
turn related to each other and to the more explicit patterns of subsistence
and settlement. Ultimately, with continual readjustment to accomodate
newly incorporated information, the paradigm may be expanded to em-
brace the total range of inferences that can be deduced concerning the
economic,   social, and ideological aspects of the prehistoric cultural sys-
tem.
  Although the precise form such an approach will take must remain
obscure until adequate materials become available for testing, it is pos-
sible to anticipate some of the methodological problems that will be
involved. Obviously it will require an interdisciplinary effort in which
parallel studies in natural sciences like palynology and paleontology are
coordinated with each phase of the archeological investigation. This syn-
thesis has already begun to emerge        in the Dordogne       (for example,
Bouchud, 1961), and excellent precedents are available from other areas
of Paleolithic research (J. D. Clark, 1960; J. G. D. Clark, 1954). Equally
important, however, it will require a sophisticated use of the data and
theory of anthropology, especially as these relate to foci of cultural eco-
logical interpretation such as the demographic (Birdsell, 1968), residen-
tial (Chang, 1964), and social (L. R. Binford, 1964) correlates of sub-
sistence pursuits. Here of course the problems of research design will be
especially formidable. Anthropologists themselves are only just beginning
to achieve some amount of detailed predictive control in explaining living
societies, while—even at the level of cultural reconstruction—past failures
have revealed the dangers inherent in attempting to isolate specific eth-
nographic analogues for Upper Paleolithic societies. However, this phase
of the investigation can still proceed on the assumption of cultural uni-
formitarianism—the theoretical position that the basic form and articula-
tions of prehistoric activities were at least analogous to those found in
modern cultural systems and that both can be accounted for in terms of
similar processes. Unlike students of earlier Stone Age phases, we are
concerned with the cultural by-products of essentially modern forms of
Homo sapiens whose behavioral capabilities were presumably at least
equal to those found in the present races of men.
   In any event, it must be stressed that our analytic procedures will
themselves differ fundamentally from those of ethnography or social an-
thropology. While the investigation of an extant culture invariably pro-
ceeds in a systemic frame of reference, any one of its various com-
ponents or aspects may still be discretely identified and interpreted by
independent   observations   of human   behavior.   Thus,   ethnographers   ap-
parently seldom find it necessary to work with more variables than can be
intuitively controlled at one time. A prehistoric cultural activity, however,
is much more difficult to isolate as a discrete entity, due to the incom-
pleteness of the archeological record and the inherent ambiguity of its
72                                      Archeological Theory and Method
data. The definition and interpretation of an activity must therefore de-
pend as much upon an analysis of its relations to other activities as upon
its artifactual contents. Conversely, the validity with which it has been
formulated must itself be measured largely in terms of its analytic feed-
back, that is, the consistency it (or additional formulations based upon it)
may exhibit in articulating with these same activities in the paradigm of a
cultural system. It is obvious, therefore, that our investigation might pro-
fitably be conducted within a framework of multivariate statistical analy-
sis, without which it would be impossible to order systematically the large
numbers of variables whose covariance expresses the presence of activities
and their mutual relations.
   The kind of analytic approach suggested here is not unknown in other
fields of prehistoric research. Many of the essays in this volume provide
detailed examples of refined ecological interpretation, some of which in
addition incorporate multivariate procedures whereby activities are ana-
lyzed in terms of statistically significant associations among artifact
classes, or between artifacts and classes of paleobiological data, that ap-
pear in different loci which make up the settlement patterns of prehistoric-
cultures. However, the most suggestive examples for Upper Paleolithic
research are recent studies by the Binfords (S. R. Binford, this volume,
1965; Binford and Binford, 1966) and Leslie Freeman (1966) in which
factor analysis is used to partition Mousterian artifact assemblages into a
number of “tool-kits” that seemingly refer to aggregates of exploitative
and maintenance economic tasks and their associated residence patterns
which were to some extent spatially segregated. Redefined in this manner,
the assemblage types making up Bordes’ (1953) Mousterian Complex
may be viewed as primarily representing complementary structural poses
in the year-round subsistence pursuits of a single cultural system. The
capabilities for meaningful interpretation inherent in such an approach
are especially apparent in the most recent phase of this investigation
(Binford and Binford, 1966). In their recent unpublished research the
nature of the activities involved is more precisely defined by incorporat-
ing faunal and botanical evidence into the multivariate analysis, and
ethnographic inference is used in conjunction with the archeological data
in an attempt to outline the social and demographic correlates of eco-
nomic activities in a paradigm of Mousterian cultural ecology.
   At present there is available only one attempt to apply similar tech-
niques to the Upper Paleolithic: Robert Whallon’s (1963) unpublished
master's thesis on Dordogne Aurignacian I stone-tool assemblages. While
extremely provocative, Whallon’s results are nevertheless inconclusive, at
least in part because they are based on inadequate data that mainly
derive from fossile-oriented excavations. However, the accumulation of
large quantities of new evidence by modern data-gathering techniques
will not in itself guarantee that the Upper Paleolithic can be successfully
analyzed by the kind of research strategy proposed here. For there remain
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France            73
at least three problems in method and theory that must first be overcome
before we can be assured either that the new data are properly ordered or
even that they can provide the kinds of information that will be needed
for culturally meaningful analysis.
   First, the classifications and analytic procedures that are now used in
ordering artifactual data must be fundamentally revised. The available
comprehensive stone-tool typologies obviously mark a distinct advance
over traditional fossile classifications, and their quantitative application
has brought considerable refinement to both the comparison of archeolog-
ical assemblages and the construction of space-time ordering schemes.
But it is questionable whether any of them is in fact capable of systemati-
cally codifying the varieties of formal patterning inherent in archeological
assemblages that must be controlled if activities are to be consistently
isolated and interpreted. Taxonomists, perhaps still influenced by the
traditional paleontological model, appear to assume that artifact types are
in some manner natural units like species, and that consequently a single
typology is capable of serving all purposes. At the same time, the question
of what precisely types represent in behavioral terms is largely ignored
and the investigation of their functional employment is even discouraged
(Tixier, 1963, p. 17).
  No doubt such attitudes are both an effect and cause of the fact that
typologies continue to be designed solely by intuitive sorting procedures
that are incapable of systematically controlling the extremely subtle kinds
of patterning that are inherent in stone tools. This is apparent even in the
taxonomic structure of the typologies themselves. For example, detailed
typological subdivisions are usually recognized among “two-dimensional”
tool families like burins, whose formal variation may be codified in terms
of simple geometric relations on a single plane; but even more variable
“three-dimensional”      tools, like the carinate-nosed family of scrapers on
elevated blocks, usually receive only minimal subdivision.
   The best solution available to this problem entails replacing intuitive
type design by an approach known as attribute-cluster analysis, which
isolates typological categories by means of an explicit quantitative analy-
sis of the patterns in which formal attributes segregate non-randomly
(that is, cluster) among artifact samples.’ Although the specific statistical
techniques employed are quite different, attribute-cluster typology is pur-
sued in a framework of multivariate analysis which is basically similar to
that used in isolating cultural activities; indeed, a type defined by this
approach is in reality no more than a particularly discrete variety of
cultural activity. While attribute-cluster analysis has had several trials in
the New World, its only comprehensive application to the Upper Paleo-
lithic is found in an unpublished thesis on the Dordongne Aurignacian
   7 The term “statistical typology” is used frequently by Upper Paleolithic archeolo-
gists, but it refers to the quantitative applications of typologies in ordering assem-
blages and not to type design itself.
74                                         Archeological Theory and Method
tradition (Sackett, 1965). A brief article is however available on Aurigna-
cian endscraper typology that summarizes the major features of the
method and theory involved (Sackett, 1966). The study is based upon a
version of Spaulding’s (1953) non-parametric approach to isolating at-
tribute clusters, to which is added a procedure for controlling the higher
order interaction effects in multivariate analysis that presumably reflect
multiple-attribute contingencies. Although the application of such tech-
niques requires a considerable expenditure of effort, it does seem to yield
considerably enhanced refinement in typological discrimination when
compared with the intuitive procedures now used in designing artifact
classifications.
   For example, this analysis demonstrates that the Aurignacian end-
scraper categories recognized in the current typologies largely fail to
equate with the attribute clusters revealed by statistical analysis, even
when the attributes subjected to analysis are precisely those that were
used in defining the current types. Some of the latter appear to be intui-
tively idealized trait configurations that actually recur among only a mi-
nority of endscrapers, while others either fail to constitute mutually exclu-
sive units or express no more than random combinations of attribute
segregation. A second conclusion is that it should be possible to distin-
guish between what may be called stylistic and functional typological
variation, and that these to a great extent seem to provide cross-cutting
bases for type definition. Hence there is no single typology inherent in
endscrapers,   and the manner     in which   these tools are classified must
depend upon the way in which their typological categories are to be
employed in subsequent phases of research. Thus an endscraper typology
designed for space-time systematics would presumably be based upon
stylistic variables, as these provide the most sensitive reflections of his-
toric relations among archeological assemblages. On the other hand, an
analysis of economic activities among archeological sites would require an
endscraper classification that systematically controlled functionally signif-
icant typological variation. A third conclusion is that the behavior of lithic
attributes was strongly influenced by complex networks of mechanical
contingencies that seemingly originated in the raw materials and tech-
niques involved in stone-tool maufacture. In other words, a large degree
of attribute clustering in stone tools reflects neither stylistic nor functional
patterning, and in fact is not typologically significant in the usual sense of
the term.
   The last point is of particular interest, both because it greatly increases
the statistical difficulties of isolating meaningful stone-tool types and be-
cause it would appear to call for a reexamination of some of the theoreti-
cal assumptions that are currently employed in interpreting the meaning
of typologies. With regard to the latter, the type concept may not be valid
to the degree it involves the notion that types are the material expression
of mental models or templates, since lithic patterning seems to involve
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France           75
mechanical factors—as well presumably as motor habits—of which the
artisan himself may not have been aware. Hence, while it is possible to
isolate culturally meaningful typological patterns by attribute-cluster
analysis, their precise behavioral significance may in many cases remain
obscure.
  Similar and considerably more refined cluster analysis must of course
be pursued before a substantial body of new typologies can be designed
or before it can even be concluded that the varieties of patterning ob-
served in Aurignacian assemblages recur elsewhere. It is quite possible
that the interplay of stylistic, functional, and purely mechanical attribute
contingencies may in fact vary considerably among the Upper Paleolithic
cultural traditions over and above their more obvious differences in form
and relative frequencies of tools. In addition, it will be necessary to define
much more precisely the meaning of stylistic and functional variation in
stone tools and the manner in which these are to be identified in attribute
clustering.* The question of tool function is especially crucial in view of
the emphasis a cultural ecological approach places upon the reconstruc-
tion of economic tasks. Aside from the search for relevant ethnographic
parallels, what little analysis of tool function there is at present concen-
trates solely upon formal variation within artifact assemblages themselves.
Examples of this are Semenov’s (1964) microscopic investigation of the
stigmata of cutting-edge wear and the writer's ongoing statistical analysis
of breakage patterns in different categories of stone tools. While consider-
ably more work must be done along these lines, it would appear that the
results of such investigations are most often equivocal unless independent
confirmation is available. Obviously, the study of tool function must be
extended to contextual analyses that will focus upon the manner in which
attributes and classes of implements spatially covary both with each other
and with architectural features and paleoecological remains on the living
floors of archeological sites. If valid inferences are to be drawn con-
cerning the functional roles of tools in cultural activities, the tools must
ultimately be viewed in the actual matrix in which they were manufac-
tured and used.
   A second prerequisite for the proposed research strategy is a revision of
the present taxonomies and procedures that are used in the space-time
ordering of archeological assemblages. Unlike the Mousterian Complex,
which may be sufficiently uniform for all of its manifestations to be
   § One aspect of this definition must obviously concern the relativistic natures of
style and function themselves. For example, a split-based bone javelin head may be
considered a functional class of early Aurignacian assemblages;      however,   from the
viewpoint of the Upper Paleolithic in general, it might be regarded as but one stylistic
variant of this class—which it isomorphically shares with Gravette points, Magdalenian
harpoons, etc. Moreover, within any given tool, a single attribute may behave either as
a stylistic or as a functionable variable (aside from its mechanical contingencies with
other such variables), depending upon the context within which it is analyzed. Thus
marginal retouch on Aurignacian endscraper samples appears to be almost as sensitive
to temporal and spatial factors as a design element in ceramics.
76                                    Archeological Theory and Method
profitably analyzed in terms of a single ideal culture type, the Upper
Paleolithic seems to incorporate extreme formal heterogeneity over time
and space that strongly suggests the presence of both a number of distinct
types of cultural systems and a considerable amount of micro-evolution-
ary change within systems. However, it may be questioned whether these
could be isolated with sufficient precision by current ordering techniques
even if adequate data and refined typologies were available. Although
assemblages are presently ordered on the basis of quantitative assessment
of their artifact inventories, the statistical methods involved are of limited
value. They are restricted to purely descriptive techniques such as graphs
and tabled artifact percentages, while the analysis of interassemblage
frequency variation remains a purely qualitative operation that allows
only intuitive control over the effects of sampling error. Another weakness
in the current approach is that the artifact-type frequencies used in order-
ing are usually calculated as percentages of the total artifact assemblage.
Yet the latter often may not be representative of their respective levels,
since most assemblages are the product of restricted and somewhat arbi-
trarily placed excavations within occupation zones whose tools are by no
means horizontally distributed at random. Hence the interassemblage fre-
quency variations that are used in ordering may be due as much to
differential sampling as to temporal and spatial factors. Finally, it should
be noted that the principles of seriation are incompletely appreciated by
many taxonomists, who—when direct stratigraphic evidence is lacking—
often design essentially organic schemes of culture change in which tem-
porally sensitive artifact frequency shifts are attributed to a speciation
model of evolutionary radiation (évolution buissonnante ).
   Experiments with the Aurignacian materials discussed previously
(Sackett, 1965, 1966) suggest that fairly rigorous space-time ordering can
be obtained for lithic assemblages which is at least analogous to, if not as
refined as, those which New World archeologists have designed for cer-
amic traditions. Aside from employing an artifact typology that was spe-
cifically designed to reflect what is presumably stylistic formal variation,
the approach adopted in this study differs from current systematics in two
fundamental ways. First, relative artifact-type frequencies are calculated
not from the total assemblage but rather from restricted groups of tools
that—it is hoped—refer to the same broad functional category. In other
words, the popularity of a specific endscraper type is measured in terms
of the frequencies of other endscrapers, and is completely unaffected by
the numbers of such tools as burins and points. This procedure serves
both to reduce the effects of skewed assemblage sampling noted above
and to provide a basis for confirming assemblage variations by means of a
number of independent tests (since endscrapers, burins, points, etc., are
treated as distinct statistical universes). Second, assemblage comparison
and ordering are conducted in terms of a quantitative measure of formal
likeness and tested within a framework of statistical inference. This is
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France        Tt
achieved by combining the seriation matrix technique designed by Rob-
inson (1951) and Brainerd (1951) with the use of independent Chi-
square goodness-of-fit tests for determining the role of sampling error in
the frequency variations of gach pair of assemblages indexed in the ma-
trix. By these means it is possible to obtain simultaneously both a precise
mathematical expression of the formal differences among assemblages
and a statement of the degree to which each of these differences is statis-
tically significant.
   While such procedures may never attain the level of control required
for delimiting the archeological expressions of self-conscious social
groups, they still afford considerably greater refinement in assemblage
ordering than is now generally available. Moreover, they also provide
important auxilliary information about cultural continuities and discontin-
uities and the demographic patterns of settlement that help elucidate
many problems of cultural interpretation. For example, assuming that the
rate of stylistic change was constant, the results of the above study sug-
gest that Aurignacian societies underwent no marked temporal changes in
the intensity of their occupation of the Dordogne. This conclusion directly
contradicts both the traditional and most current ordering schemes, which
indicate a progressive diminution of the numbers of Aurignacian sites
over time—a result of assuming that the postulated stages of Aurignacian
evolution were of equal length. In reality, two-thirds of all Dordogne
Aurignacian temporal variation falls within stage I, while stages III and
IV cannot statistically be distinguished either from each other or from
stage II.° The spatial aspects of social demography may also be illumin-
ated by these techniques. In this case the Aurignacian results suggest that
it may be possible to define subregional stylistic zones that correlate
highly with river valley systems, presumably a reflection of both the areal
distributions of some kind of social frontiers and the ecological factors
that may have determined them.
   Finally, aside from sophisticated typologies and space-time ordering,
the analysis of Upper Paleolithic cultural systems will require a body of
evidence that is not only well documented but moreover representative.
Although current excavation techniques are sufficiently refined to guar-
antee the former, there remains the question of sampling procedure: how
are we to ensure that our evidence represents the full range of activities
archeologically expressed in Upper Paleolithic societies? This undoubt-
edly will call for systematic investigation of the spatial distributions of
activities both within individual sites and among the site complexes that
make up the settlement patterns of cultural systems.

   °Excluded from this analysis is the enigmatic Aurignacian V stage, known at
present from a single assemblage (Laugerie-Haute). Aside from the fact that it
stratigraphically succeeds the entire Upper Périgordian block, its tools fail to equate
with the attribute cluster types which accomodate all other Aurignacian assemblages
from the Dordogne that have been tested.
78                                        Archeological Theory and Method
   Our understanding of the localization of activities within sites is ex-
tremely limited because of the excavation techniques that were tradition-
ally employed in fossile-oriented research. While archeologists have long
been aware that artifacts and features are not randomly distributed with.
in occupation levels, there are few examples—such as the Solutrean “hut”
excavated by Peyrony (1932) at Fourneau du Diable—in which horizon-
tal patterning was systematically recognized and described. However, this
kind of information is of extreme importance to cultural interpretation
since there is much evidence to suggest that Upper Paleolithic rock-
shelter occupations may simultaneously have incorporated most of the
activities that were segregated among a number of different localities in
Mousterian     times. Thus, in comparison    with those of the Mousterian,
Upper Paleolithic sites tend to be considerably larger in extent and more
often occupied the year-round; their associated tool assemblages at once
indicate both exploitative and maintenance      economic activities; and cer-
tain tasks that one might expect to have been carried on elsewhere—such
as reindeer butchering—often took place in the habitation sites them-
selves. In fact, the only food preparation task that has been clearly dem-
onstrated not to have occurred in the rock-shelters is salmon cleaning and
drying (J. G. D. Clark, 1948, p. 48).
   The wealth of information that is actually to be found in rock-shelters is
indicated by preliminary reports of the excavations at the Abri Pataud
(Movius, 1965). Although no detailed review has yet appeared concern-
ing the full range of activities represented at this site, initial study of the
hearth and artifact distributions at least reveals that their residential asso-
ciations may vary dramatically from one level to the next. In the Péri-
gordian VI level, for example, hearths are aligned in 2-meter intervals to
form so-called “long house” patterns of occupation, while in underlying
Aurignacian horizons occupational debris tends to concentrate about iso-
lated hearths that are more or less randomly distributed. Furthermore,
Movius has been able to demonstrate how the relative frequencies of
exotic raw materials and manufacturing debris complement the age and
sex structures of butchered reindeer assemblages in indicating that the
various residence types at this site appear to represent different patterns
of seasonal exploitation.
     Future investigation may similarly demonstrate that considerable varia-
tion exists in the spatial distributions of economic tasks and residence
patterns that make up the settlement systems of Upper Paleolithic cul-
tures. This is suggested by what appear to be marked differences in the
intensity and localization of rock-shelter occupation in the various Dor-
dogne cultural traditions. Summarizing information provided by de Son-
neville-Bordes (1960), the Lower Périgordian is represented by relatively
thin and areally dispersed layers, while the Aurignacian replaces it mas-
sively with intensive occupations and a tendency to cluster in more or less
contiguous rock-shelters in narrow valleys or cliff faces. The Upper Peri-
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France                   79
gordian in turn appears in somewhat thinner occupation levels that are
generally evenly dispersed throughout the region. The Solutrean exhibits
an especially interesting temporal development, being represented by rel-
atively few but intensive occupations in its earlier phases and them seem-
ingly fragmenting into dispersed settlements later on (see also Smith,
1964, p. 91). Finally, the Magdalenian recurs intensively in a great num-
ber of sites, many of which were previously unoccupied, with perhaps a
progressive trend toward settlement along low-lying riverbanks.”
   In addition to much more detailed information of this kind, an under-
standing of Upper Paleolithic settlement patterns will also require consid-
eration of the numerous open-air sites in the Dordogne, which only re-
cently have begun to receive systematic attention. Excavation of open
stations in the Bergerac area by F. Bordes and J. Guichard (Bordes and
de Sonneville-Bordes, 1966), and in the Isle Valley by J. Gaussen       (1965),
are revealing a hitherto unsuspected dimension of Upper Paleolithic
economics and demography. In this connection, it may prove that the
development of new techniques for isolating and interpreting prehistoric
activities will depend largely upon such sites. This is due to their mode of
habitation, which presumably involved shorter occupation spans and less
spatial restriction than was the case in rock-shelters, and which resulted in
considerably more explicit horizontal patterning of artifact complexes.
Spatial segregation of activities is particularly clearcut in the Isle Valley
sites, whose artifacts associate with cobblestone “pavements” that obvi-
ously define regular architectural features (Sackett, 1967).
   Now, since Upper Paleolithic settlement patterns varied over space and
time, and since most of our archeological assemblages probably express a
variety of different kinds of activities, we are faced with extremely com-
plex decisions about excavation procedure. Should we concentrate upon
the complete recovery of a relatively few occupation levels in order to
refine our techniques for distinguishing the multiple activities that were
engaged in by individual residence groups? Or, rather, ought we to con-
centrate upon randomly sampling a large number of sites hoping to in-
crease our knowledge of the total variety of activities and demographic
patterns that occurred in the Upper Paleolithic as a whole? Circumstances
and the personal inclinations of individual students will probably dictate
both courses. Nevertheless, given the enormous cost in funds and time
that is required for refined     excavation,   the development    of culturally
meaningful sampling techniques is of paramount importance in the de-
sign of future research strategy.
  Especially when outlined so briefly, a programmatic statement such as
this can intend only to provoke further discussion, not wholesale agree-
ment. Indeed, in a field as viable and diverse as Upper Paleolithic arche-
ology, it should neither be expected nor desired that research strategy will
   ©The Aurignacian V and “Proto-Magdalenian phases are presently known from but
a single and two occupations respectively.
80                                                 Archeological Theory and Method
develop according to any single formula. It is to be hoped, however, that
this paper has demonstrated that long-range goals are of immediate con-
cern. The present absorption of archeologists in data collection and de-
scriptive classification is obviously not wrong in itself, as these must nec-
essarily precede meaningful cultural analysis. At the same time, however,
it should be equally apparent that both the methodology and degree of
sophistication with which these more fundamental tasks are approached
are determined by the kinds of assumptions we make regarding the na-
ture of Upper Paleolithic cultural systems and the means we plan to use
in pursuing their interpretation.



                                         References

Binrorp, Lewis R. 1962. Archaeology as anthropology. American Antiquity,
  28: 217-25.
      . 1964. A consideration of archaeological research design. American
   Antiquity, 29: 425—41.
BINFoRD, SALLy R. 1965. Social groupings and settlement systems in the Mous-
   terian. Presented at the American Anthropological Association annual meet-
   ings. (Unpublished. )
Brnrorp, Lewis R., and Satty R. Binrorp. 1966. A preliminary analysis of
   functional variability in the Mousterian of Levallois facies. In J. Desmond
   Clark and F. Clark Howell (Eds.), Recent studies in paleoanthropology.
  American Anthropologist, 68(2), Part 2: 238-95.
BIRDSELL, JOSEPH. 1968. Some predictions for the Pleistocene based upon equi-
  librium systems among recent hunters. In Richard B. Lee and Irven DeVore
   (Eds.), Man the hunter. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Boumers, A. 1956. Statistics and graphs in the study of flint assemblages.
  Palaeohistoria, 5: 1—6.
Boniray, EucENE. 1957. Les sédiments détritiques grossiers dans les rem-
  plissages des grottes. Méthode d’analyse morphologique et statistique. L’An-
  thropologie, 60: 477-61.
Borpes, Frangois.       1950, Principes d’une méthode d’étude des techniques de
  débitage et de la typologie du Paléolithique ancien et moyen. L’Anthropol-
  ogie, 54: 19-34.
      . 1953. Essai de classification des industries “moustériennes.” Bulletin de
  la Société Préhistorique Francaise, 50: 457—66.
——.       1958.   Nouvelles   fouilles    a Laugerie-Haute      Est.    Premiers    résultats.
  L’Anthropologie, 62:205—44,
      . 1960.     Evolution   in the Paleolithic    cultures.   In Sol Tax       (Ed.),   The
  evolution of man (Vol. 2 of Evolution after Darwin). Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press.
Borpes,    FRANcoIs,    and DrenisE      DESONNEVILLE-BorpDEs.         1966.   Protomagdale-
  nien ou Périgordien VII? L’Anthropologie, 70: 113-22.
BorisKovskI, P. J. 1965. A propos des récents progrés des études paléolithiques
  en U.R.S.S. L’Anthropologie, 69: 5—30.
Boucuup, JEAN. 1959. Le milieu et la vie pendant le Paléolithique moyen et
  supérieur. Bulletin de la Société d'Etudes et de Recherches Préhistoriques et
  Institute Pratique de Préhistorie. Les Eyzies. 9: 10—5.
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France                              81
——. 1961. Etude de la faune              du gisement      des Cottés     (Haute-Vienne).
  L’Anthropologie, 65: 258—70.
Bourton,    M., A. Bovuyssonie,     and J. Bovyssoniz.        1912.    Grattoirs   carénés,
  rabots et grattoirs nucléiformes. Essai de classification des grattoirs, Revue
  Anth ‘opologique, 22: 473—86.
BrainerD, G. W. 1951. The place of chronological ordering in archaeological
  analysis. American Antiquity, 16: 301—13.
Brevi, Henri. 1912. Les subdivisions du Paléolithique supérieur et leur signi-
  fication. Compte-Rendu de la XIVe Session, Congrés International d’Anthro-
  pologie et d’Archéologie Préhistoriques, Geneva. Lagny: E. Grevin.
 Burzer, Karv. 1964. Environment and archeology. Chicago: Aldine Publish-
   ing Company.
CHANG, Kwan-cuin. 1962. Typology of settlement and community patterns.
  Arctic Anthropology, 1: 28—41.
Cuark, J. D. 1960. Human ecology during Pleistocene and later times in Africa
  south of the Sahara. Currnt Anthropology, 1: 307-24.
esa, J. G. D. 1948. Fishing in prehistoric Europe. Antiquaries Journal, 28:
     —85.
        1952. Prehistoric Europe: the economic basis. London: Cambridge
  University Press.
     . 1954. Excavations at Star Carr: an early Mesolithic site at Seamer near
  Scarborough, Yorkshire. London: Cambridge University Press.
EscaLon DE Fonton, Max. 1961. Informations archéologiques:                    Montpellier
   (Grotte de La Salpetriére). Gallia Préhistoire, 4: 291-95.
EsCALON DE Fonton, Max, and H. pe Lumtey. 1955. Les civilisations de la
  Mediterranée septentrionale et leurs intercurrences. Le complexe Montadien.
  Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique Francaise, 51: 379—94.
FREEMAN, LesLtre G. 1966. The nature of Mousterian facies in Cantabrian
  Spain. In J. Desmond Clark and F. Clark Howell (Eds.), Recent studies in
  paleoanthropology, a special publication of the American                Anthropologist,
  68 (2) Part 2: 230—37.
GaussEN,    JEAN. 1965. Le Paléolithique supérieur de la Basse Vallée de l'Isle.
  Centenaire de la Préhistoire en Périgord (1864—1964). Numéro Special du
  Bulletin de la Société Historique et Archéologique du Périgord, pp. 47—54.
HELM,   June. 1962. The ecological approach in anthropology.              American Jour-
  nal of Sociology, 67: 630—39.
Lapiace, Georces. 1961. Recherches sur l’origine et évolution des complexes
  Leptolithiques. Le probléme des Périgordiens I et II et ’hypothese du syn-
  thétotype aurignaco-gravettien. Essai de typologie analytique. Quaternaria, Ls
  153—240.
       1964.    Essai   de   typologie    systématique.     Annali     dell’Universita   di
  Ferrara, Sezione XV, 1: 2.
Lavitte, Henri. 1964. Recherches sédimentologiques sur la paléoclimatologie
  du Wurmien recent en Périgord. L’Anthropologie, 68: 1—48, 219—52.
Lavocat, R., et al. 1966. Faunes et flores préhistoriques de l'Europe occi-
  dentale. “L’Homme et ses origines,” Atlas de Préhistoire, vol. UI. Paris:
  Boubée.
Leror-GourHAN, ANDRE. 1963. Chatelperronien et Aurignacien dans le Nord-
  Fst de la France (d’aprés la stratigraphie d’Arcy-sur-Cure, Yonne). Bulletin
  de la Société Méridionale Spéleologie et de Préhistoire, 6-9: 74—84.
Leror-GourHAN, ANDRE, and M. BrésiLton. 1964. Le site Magdalénien de
  Pincevent (Seine-etMarne). Bulletin de [Association Frangaise pour [Etude
  du Quaternaire, 1: 59—64.
82                                                             Archeological Theory and Method
MoserG, Cari-AxeL. 1961, Mangder av Fornfynd, Kring Actuella Tendenser I
  Arkeologisk Metodik, Acta Universitatis Géthburgensis, LXVII: I. (Sum-
  mary: Trends in the present development of quantitative methods in arche-
  ology).
DE een tee GapriEL. 1869. Essai d’une classification des cavernes et des
  stations sous abri fondée sur le produit de lindustrie humaine. Bulletin de la
  Société Géologique de France, 2: 583-87.
Movius, Hattam L., Jr. 1960. Radiocarbon dates and upper Paleolithic
     archeology        in central           and    western    Europe.    Current     Anthropology,      1:
     155-91.
       . 1965. Upper Perigordian and Aurignacian hearths at the Abri Pataud,
     Les Eyzies (Dordogne). Miscelanea en Homenaje au Abate Henri Breuil, 11:
     181—96.
        . 1966. The hearths of the Upper Périgordian and Aurignacian horizons
     at the Abri Pataud, Les Eyzies (Dordogne), and their possible significance.
     In J. Desmond Clark and F. Clark Howell (Eds.), Recent studies in paleo-
     anthropology. American Anthropologist, 68(2) Part 2: 296-325.
Peyrony,           Denis.     1932.    Les gisements          préhistoriques   de Bourdeilles       (Dor-
     dogne). Archives de l'Institut de Paléontologie Humaine, Mémoire 10.
       . 1933. Les industries “aurignaciennes” dans le bassin de la Vézere.
     Aurignacien       et Périgordien.            Bulletin   de la Société Préhistorique Francaise,
     30(10): 543-59.
——.         1939. Les Grimaldiens                 en Périgord. L’Anthropologie,        49(6):     702—8.
     708.
       . 1948. Le Périgordien, ’Aurignacien, et le Solutréen en Eurasie d’aprés
     les derniéres fouilles. Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique                          Frangaise,   45
   (9-10) : 305—28.
PRADEL, Louis. 1961. La Grotte des Cottés, commune de Saint-Pierre-de-Maille
   (Vienne). L’Anthropologie, 65: 229-70.
Rozerts, J. H. Zuni daily life. Laboratory of Anthropology, Notebook,
  deposits. American Antiquity, 16: 293-301.
ee            AvRAHAM.        1965. Observations sur l'Aurignacien. L’Anthropologie, 69:
            —86.                                    ‘
Rust, ALFRED.               1958.     Die     Jungpalaolithischen       Zeltangen    von     Ahrensburg.
   Neumiinster.
SACKETT, JAMES R. 1965. Aurignacian culture in the Dordogne: a study in
  archeological systematics. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University.
     . 1966. Quantitative analysis of Upper Paleolithic stone tools. In J.
  Desmond Clark and F. Clark Howell (Eds.), Recent studies in paleoanthro-
  pology, a special publication of the American Anthropologist, 68(2) Part 2:
  356—94.
     . 1967. Solvieux: an Upper Paleolithic open-air site in southwestern
  France. In preparation.
SAHLINS, MarsHatt D. 1964.                        Culture    and environment.       In Sol Tax     (Ed.),
  Horizons of anthropology. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
SEMENOY, S. A. 1964. Prehistoric technology. Translated by M. W. Thompson.
  London: Cort, Adams and MacKay.
SMiTH, Pump. 1964. The Solutrean culture. Scientific American, 211:
  86-94.
     . 1966. Le Solutréen en France. Publications de l'Institut de Préhistoire
  ie YUniversité de Bordeaux, Mémoire No. 5. Bordeaux: Imprimeries
    elmas.
Sackett Upper Paleolithic Archeology in Southwestern France                   83
DE SONNEVILLE-Borpes, Denisr. 1960. Le Paléolithique supérieur en Périgord.
  2 vols. Bordeaux: Imprimeries Delmas.
DE SONNEVILLE-BorbeEs,   Denise, and J. Perrot.    1953. Essai d’adaptation des
  méthodes statistiques au Paléolithique supérieur. Premiers resultats. Bulletin
  de la Société Préhistorique Francaise, 50: 323—33.
     . 1954—56. Lexique typologique du Paléolithique supérieur. Bulletin de
  la Société Préhistorique Francaise, 51: 327—35; 52: 76—79; 53: 408—412,
  547-59.
SPAULDING, ALBERT C, 1953. Statistical techniques for the discovery of artifact
  types. American Antiquity, 18: 305-313.
     . 1960. The dimensions of archaeology. In Gertrude E. Dole and R. L.
  Carneiro (Eds.), Essays in the science     of culture:   in honor of Leslie A.
  White. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.
STEWARD, JULIAN H. 1955. Theory of culture change. Urbana: University of
   Illinois Press.
TIXIER, Jacques. 1963. Typologie de l’Epipaléolithique du Maghreb. Centre de
   Recherches Anthropologiques Préhistoriques et Ethnographiques, Mémoir 2,
WHALLON, RosBert. 1963. A statistical analysis of some Aurignacian I as-
  semblages from southwestern France. Unpublished master’s thesis, University
  of Chicago.
