                                                                    PART UI




                                     Investigating Variability
                               in the Archeological Record:
             Variability among Occupational Units




In the previous section we emphasized the study of variability within a
single occupation unit. In this section we shift to a different compara-
tive framework, one in which a number of archeological components (or
their attributes) are studied, and explanations are sought for observed
differences and similarities. The assumption underlying the discussion of
single-site variability was that the occupational episodes were of suffi-
ciently short duration to allow for systemic stability for the period repre-
sented by the archeological remains. If the remains suggested occupations
of considerable duration, or showed internal variability which contra-
dicted the assumption    of stability, then the examples   would   be more
appropriately discussed in this section.
   The assumption underlying the analyses in this section is that observed
differences between occupation units are to be attributed either to change
within a system or to systemic independence for the units under study.
Where we can justify this assumption, our explanations for observed dif-
ferences take the form of arguments regarding processes which operated
in the past to determine changes and to promote diversification among
cultural systems.
   In formulating explanations, we are constantly faced with a dual prob-
lem. On the one hand, archeological observations must be shown to be
relevant to conditions -which existed in the past; this is a problem of

                                    171
172                                 Variability among Occupational Units
archeological theory. On the other hand, once we have documented the
operation of cultural or ecological processes in the past, we seek to de-
velop arguments regarding the relevance of certain variables to these
processes; the concern here is with general anthropological or ecological
theory.
  An example of the first problem—the relevance of archeological obser-
vations to past conditions—can be seen when we note that much of the
variability among occupation units (between-site variability) may de-
rive from spatial differentiation in activities which may have varied sea-
sonally or with respect to other periodic events within a stable system of
adaptation (see Winters, 1963; Binford and Binford, 1966; Thompson,
1939). There is also the possibility that directional changes through time
may not always indicate systematic cultural change or replacements; they
may well be due to successional phenomena—that is, to changes pro-
duced in the site itself by an earlier occupation which then limits the
nature of succeeding occupations     (for example, see Binford, Binford,
Whallon, and Hardin, 1966). Other sources of variability can be simple
sampling error (L. R. Binford, 1965), cultural drift (L. R. Binford, 1963),
or from a particular form of sampling bias produced by data collection
techniques (Deetz and Dethlefsen, 1965). These different sources and
kinds of variation between occupation units make it absolutely essential
that we develop significant arguments of relevance and means for veri-
fication.
   The papers in this section range along a scale from an almost exclusive
concern with explaining archeological observations per se to an equally
exclusive theoretical concern. The papers by Whallon and Winters at-
tempt to develop techniques for measurement and arguments of rele-
vance for archeological observations. Winters proceeds to tests of confi-
dence for his propositions by recourse to ethnohistorical data, a proce-
dure we have seen used in the previous section by Williams and Longacre
and Ayres.
  The papers by Hole, Flannery and Coe, Struever, and L. R. Binford
exemplify archeological concern with documenting and trying to explain
change in or diversification among cultural systems. Here the appropriate
analytical framework is ecological, and interest centers on the recognition,
isolation, and measurement of variables external to the cultural system
under study. The ecological relationships between components of the
cultural system and the biophysical or sociocultural variables of the sys-
tem’s environment become the focus of investigation. In these presenta-
tions the emphasis has shifted from arguments of relevance for archeolog-
ical observations among variables of the extinct systems to an emphasis on
arguments   of relevance for ecological or sociocultural relationships in
explaining culture change. The papers have a secondary concern with
operationalizing the measurement of variables using archeological data.
  The four papers in question (Hole, Flannery and Coe, Struever, and L.
R. Binford) are themselves arranged in a general progression from lesser
Variability among Occupational Units                                           173
to greater theoretical concern. Hole asks a question of the archeological
record from the Near East which has not been thoroughly explored previ-
ously. The only available information consists of observations made with
very different problems in mind. At such an initial stage of investigation,
Hole proceeded by perusing the data on the culture history of the period
under study. He then offers a substantive inventory of observations he
considers relevant to what is known of forms of ethnographically docu-
mented social organization for societies analogous to those represented
archeologically. His principal concern is with the relevance of the record
insofar as it can document certain variables he considers significant in the
past organizations and relevant to discussions of change.
   Flannery and Coe are more explicitly involved with theoretical argu-
ments which elucidate the relevance of the variable of “microenviron-
mental heterogeneity” to observed differences in socioeconomic organiza-
tion of a number of independent cultural systems. They explore the prob-
lem of how to operationalize measurement of this critical variable as well
as others postulated to co-vary with it.
   Struever documents a series of marked changes in human adaptations
to a particular geographical zone. He is particularly concerned with docu-
menting the nature of the ecological relationships between the local en-
vironment and the occupants of the habitat. He justifies this emphasis by
arguing that culture is man’s extrasomatic means of adaptation and that
changes in culture must be viewed as changes in the adaptive niche
occupied by a cultural system. This is another example of archeological
investigation of variables justified as relevant through a theoretical argu-
ment on the nature of. culture. Struever concludes by stating that he has
not explained the observed adaptive change; he has, however, been
highly successful in explicating the nature of the successive niches occu-
pied by populations in the region. The next step in this intellectual feed-
back system will undoubtedly be the construction of explanatory models
for the documented changes of niche; such explanatory models and the
design for testing them are based on evolutionary theory—the framework
for understanding structural changes through time.
  The final paper (L. R. Binford) is almost exclusively concerned with
the nature of cultural systems of adaptation and the conditions under
which such systems might be disrupted, producing a situation in which
evolutionary change would occur. This paper discusses at the theoretical
level the problem which Struever’s analysis introduced—under what con-
ditions do “maximizing adaptations” occur.


                                    References

BinrorpD, Lewis R. 1963. Red ocher caches from the Michigan area: a possible
  case   of cultural   drift.   Southwestern   Journal   of Anthropology,   19(1):
  89—108.
174                                     Variability among Occupational Units
     . 1964. Considerations of archaeological research design. American An-
  tiquity, 29(4): 425—41.
Binrorp, Lewis R., and Satty R. Binrorp. 1966. A preliminary analysis of
  functional variability in the Mousterian of Levallois facies. American An-
  thropologist, 68(2) Part 2: 238—95.
Binrorp,   Lewis   R., SALLy   R. Brnrorp,    ROBERT   WHALLON,   and   MARGARET
  Harpvin. 1966. Archaeology at Hatchery West. Southern Illinois University
  Museum, Archaeological Salvage Report no. 25.
DEETZ, JAMES, and Epwin DETHLEFSEN.          1965. The Doppler effect and archae-
  ology: a consideration of the spatial aspects of seriation. Southwestern Jour-
  nal of Anthropology, 21(3): 196—206.
TuHompson, DonaLp F. 1939. The seasonal factor in human culture, illustrated
  from the life of a contemporary nomadic group. Proceedings of the Prehis-
  toric Society (London), no. 10, pp. 209—221.
WinTERS, Howarp D. 1963. An archaeological survey of the Wabash Valley in
  Illinois. Ilinois State Museum Reports of Investigations, No. 19.
ELEVEN                                                 HOWARD      D. WINTERS




                       Ualue Systems and Trade Cycles
                                                 of the Late Archaic
                                                       in the Midwest




This paper is a composite of two papers delivered at the 1964 and 1965
meetings of the Society for American Archaeology at the University of
North Carolina and the University of Illinois. It represents an attempt to
develop the techniques for interpreting economic data from the analysis
of the artifactual material of prehistoric societies. The data used are
derived   from   published   reports   on sites of the Indian   Knoll   Culture,
namely Indian Knoll (Webb, 1946), Carlson Annis (Webb, 1950a), Read
(Webb, 1950b), Ward and Kirkland (Webb and Haag, 1940), Chigger-
ville (Webb and Haag, 1939), and Barrett and Butterfield (Webb and
Haag, 1947).
   I should like to acknowledge my indebtedness to Professor Webb for
the help that the foregoing monographs have provided both in present
and past research efforts. Although in many respects, the publications
may prove frustrating when attempts are made to use them for current
problems, the vast quantities of information contained in them remain
invaluable and stand as      a monument      to Professor Webb’s   genius. It is
perhaps overly easy today to see how a more adequate presentation might
have been accomplished,       but we    should   all ponder whether     our own
efforts will have the same utility after two or three decades as his have.
   Although ten carbon-14 dates are available for Carlson Annis (six
dates) and Indian Knoll (four dates )—(Johnson, 1951; Libby, 1952), the
                                       175
176                                  Variability among Occupational Units
Indian Knoll Culture can hardly be said to be dated adequately. Dating
was by the solid carbon method, with its potential sources of error, and
shell was used for two of the Carlson Annis samples, Furthermore,          at
Carlson Annis there is a case of dates that are the direct reverse of the
stratigraphic position of the samples dated. But a number of dates on
antler suggest a temporal position for the two sites within the third mil-
lennium B.c. Our own guess based upon the rate of accumulation for
similar shell middens in the Wabash Valley (Winters, 1968) would be
that the time span of the Indian Knoll Culture should be on the order of
ca. 2500 to ca. 2000 B.c.
   It should be remembered also that the sites are not single component
middens. Earlier Archaic, and even Paleo-Indian, materials are present, as
well as Woodland and Mississippian artifacts. But quantitatively, the
other components are minor in the massive concentration of artifacts
assignable to the Indian Knoll Culture. Most of the Woodland and Missis-
sippian manifestations are superficial and suggest little more than utiliza-
tion of the sites as camps or farmsteads. And only at Butterfield is there
earlier Archaic material present in sufficient quantity to pose a serious
statistical problem. (Our data for the latter site should be treated with
considerable circumspection since it has not been possible to sort many of
the earlier Archaic artifacts from the Indian Knoll artifacts in the pub-
lished report.)
   The origins of the study go back to an earlier analysis undertaken by
the author to secure comparative material from the Green River sites on
the nature of the settlement systems in that area. Tentatively it was
concluded that a settlement system of the Riverton type (Winters, 1963,
1968) was also operative in the Green River area. Thus, the sites are no
longer viewed as discrete units by the author, but as elements in three
settlement system units of the Indian Knoll Culture. The first of these,
termed the Ward Unit, is known from a settlement, the Ward Site, a base
camp, the Barrett Site, a specialized collecting camp, and Kirkland, a
hunting camp; the second, termed the Read Unit, is known from Read, a
settlement, and Carlson Annis, a base camp; the third, termed the Chig-
gerville Unit, from Chiggerville, a settlement, and Indian Knoll, a base
camp.
  It was noted during the quantification of data for the interpretation of
the settlement system of the Indian Knoll Culture that conch shell seemed
to follow a cyclical pattern of appearance and disappearance at Carlson
Annis, Read, and Indian Knoll, the three sites for which adequate quanti-
tative data were available for these artifacts. Subsequently, it was decided
to investigate this regularity of patterning somewhat further to see how it
correlated with variations in population and utilitarian items. These vari-
ous units of raw data will be introduced as we develop the major themes
of this paper: difference in “value” of categories of artifacts, variations in
sex and age association of certain artifacts of “special value,” preliminary
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                  Nhe
conclusions   about the meaning      of differentials   in the distribution of
wealth, cyclical fluctuations in imported raw materials, and observations
on the possibilities of a trade network within which the Indian Knoll
Culture was an element.
   Utilizing burial tables and summary artifact tables, we were able to
assemble data basic to our analyses on the following subjects:
  1. Sex linkage of artifacts, derived by listing associations with only
those burials definitely identified as to sex.
   2. The vertical distribution patterns of artifacts that were associated
only with burials, or artifacts that had only insignificant quantitative
expression apart from the latter context.
   3. Proportions of each artifact in burial or midden association.
   4. Association of artifacts by age groups.
   5. A rough estimate of population fluctuation through plotting of buri-
als by 6-in. levels, a procedure that will be discussed in greater detail
later.
   First of all, we shall consider the contexts of particular functional cate-
gories of artifacts, as they relate to burial or midden association (Table
1). One group consisting of general utility implements, weapons, fabricat-
ing and processing tools, domestic implements, and woodworking tools
was present with burials only in low percentages of the total recovered at
the site, often being only 1 to 2 per cent of the total and rarely exceeding
10 per cent of the total.
   A few anomalies exist within the group, of course. As a general rule,
one can say that the earlier the excavation and reporting of the site, the
grosser the level of the anomalies. There seems to have been an improve-
ment in excavation techniques as time went on, and there were certainly
greatly improved standards of reporting. In defense of any implication of
inadequacy within the foregoing, it should be realized that the rather
curious figures for hammerstones at Barrett, Butterfield, and Kirkland
might well be duplicated in excavations and publications in 1966. There
are any number of archeologists, including a sprinkling of eminent fig-
ures, who are still unable to distinguish a mano from a hammerstone
unless the shaping and wear are too obvious to be ignored, and who solve
their laboratory storage problems by returning from the field with the
few selected hammerstones or manos that have struck their fancy.
   As examples of the anomalies, the following are noted: At Barrett 50
per cent of the total sample of two grooved mauls was in burial associa-
tion, a not very impressive statistical determination when we compare the
data for Carlson Annis and Indian Knoll where none of the respective
samples of 129 mauls and 11 mauls were found in burial context. And
similar observations pertain where other high percentages of 50 per cent
or more occur for items such as hammerstones (Kirkland—two speci-
mens), abrading stones. (Barrett—two; Butterfield—one), whetstones
(Ward—one;   Indian Knoll—three); reamers    (Carlson Annis—one).
                                                                                                              s1owleey ‘ST
                                                     dN          dN
                                                                                                      sIosIouy Uopoy ‘TT
                                                     xX          x
                                                                                                      SIOSIOUT I9Aveg ‘OT
                                                     xX          xX
                                                     xX          xX                                     spstyO Tepey '6
                                                     xX          x                                               SIF “8
                                                     xX          xX                                            soe “L
                                                                                                                  SMV ‘9
                                                     x           xX
                                                                 dN
                                                                                            so[poon pure surg seddop *g
                                                     dN
                                                                                                            +se3n0y ‘Pp
                                                     dN          dN
                                                                                                                  (A “€
                                                                                                          souo}s}ou
                                                     dN          0
                                                                                                     souo}s SUIPeIqy “
                                                     dN         0'00T
                                                     0          9G                                            siMd 1
                                                                                             Bupssav01g pup duyvowqny
                                                     dN          0                                        sproxpur[AD *6
                                                     xX          x                                          syooysty *8
                                                     x           xX                                   soppueH PepY *L
                                                     xX          x                                      syooH PepY "9
                                                     xX          x                                  TPS SAM BeRY 'S
                                                                  0d                               au07s ‘SAM PERV ‘FP
      OTT
      eT                                             x           x                                     yay “sq ‘fora '¢
                                                                                                      auog “s}q ‘lorg ‘S
             0                                       xX          xX
                                                    6G          9°6                                  yoyO “Iq ‘ford T
          60                                                                                                   _ suodva
                                                                00%                 se               4SOUO}SIOUIUILHY “PF
                                                     00S
          0 60                                                                                        s[NeJ, PeAoosy *¢
                                            0
                                              dN      dN         dN                  dN
                                                                                     8G                      siodei9g *G
                               70           L‘0       0         TG
  Oe 80
                                                                                                               SOATUY *T
                               a                     Lot        Esl         VG
                                      peo
                                                                                                          hyyun wsauaxy
                      0                     0
youy unpuy ayrasassiyo        s1uuy                punyy   =pjarfsazing   YaLwg
                                                                                  M PID
                            uosj1DD
                                      ee            eS     SS           SS          rh
ee               ee       ee
                                      uounoossy joung ur syovfysy fo adDzuaowad ‘T 2190.1
ite i
e     ee e
                                     )
                                     panurzudy
                                     (foaj12a0
                                                                                                                               BPATO ‘sprog ‘p
                                                                                KMPM OM


    0'00T            0';O00T
                     dN                                                                        KM                           RyeuIsiey ‘speag ‘¢
                         dN                                                                                                   eso[houy ‘speeg °%
                           8°66
                           c'6                                                                 Kx                                 Set] pen “1
                          0°00T
                          ¥'86
                                                                                                                                            “1124S
                                                                                                                                                 suidireyy
                                                                                                                                                 *¢
                           ILS
                           dN                                                                  KX                                    sjuepuag ‘fF
            0          é                                                        KK                                                                  “¢
                                                                                                                                                    ‘sautuery
                                                                                                                                                    ‘Flog
                       0°00T
                                                                                               KKK
                       0'00T                                                                                                      osiq] ‘sprog °Z
            0          é                                                        mK                                             Ivpnqny, ‘speag ‘T
            0        dN                                                                                                                     :auog
                                                                                                                                     sjuepue ‘fF
     0'0F            dN                                                                                                        PIOUNID ‘sprog "¢
                           dN                                                                                              [80D jeuueyD ‘sprog ‘g
                    L’99
     OTs
                                                                                                                                        sprog ‘T
     L96           dN                                                                                                                       :auoys
                                                                                                                                                     SLNANVNUC
                                                                                                                                         sodig "p
           4         dN                                                                                                           sdny youon ‘¢
                     d
   0°00T
                                                                                                                                        soMeY “S
   0'00T             dN                                                                                                                  sayy ‘T
   0'00T             dN                                                                                                                [p1uowalayn
                                                                                                                                          SOXY 'T
      Lt              0                                                                                                             BUIyLONpoo MA
                                                                                                                                                    *¢
                                                                                                                                                    _souoysde'T,,
                                                 TT 0 0
      ST             dN                                                       8'F         0                                                      *Z
                                                                                                                                                 Souo}s]NN
      eg             0                                                      dN            dN         fOr
                                      suuy
                                                                                                                                                 ‘T
                                                                                                                                                 sepsed
                                                          uospi0g
      OT
      unrpuy ouy
aypasadaiy
                      0
                                 9
                                                                    pooy    0             oe               ya.iog PID M,                 INSAULOG
                                                                       playuoung puny
                                                                        =
ee cee Set ee e
                                                                                                s[00} SuppIoMpoom 9q Aypenjoe Aeur pu ‘sapdueyoor poddryo s.qqaM 0 puodsai109+
                                                                                                                                                     sourut Auvul sapnpour ATpa}qnopuy) »
                                                                                                                                                                    eyep snonsiquiy = ¢
                                                                                                                                                ureyz20un uoyeAiasoid yo Aoenbepy = X
                                                                                                                                                                       yuasaid oN = IN
                                                                                           dN             dN                     dN                                            sprog€
                                                                                                                      0001
                                                                                                                         0'00T

    dN          dN                                                                                                                                                          syuvpuad °%
                                                                                           dN             dN                               dN
                                                            dN dN
   0'00T        dN                                                                                                                                                               sivg ‘|
   0'00T        dN                                                                         dN             dN                          dN
                                                                                                                                                                                 :waddog
                                                                                 dN        xX              xX                                                                  SRezde h
   00S          dN                                                                                                                                                                :LapyqUuy
                                                                                                                          dN
                dN                                          dN                   dN        x               xX                                                         dyouoy ‘ssury “ET
                         u0sjDD




   0'00L                                                                                                                                                              dyqouoy ‘sostq *ZT
                                                                         dN                x               xX        0'00T
   0'00T        dN
                                                                                                                    dN                                             youor ‘eyjaumnjoD ‘TT
                                                                                                           xX
                                                                                 dN dN
                                                            dN                             x
                            swuuy 0°00T o-o0t 0'00T 0°00T




   0'O00T       dN
                                                                                                                    dN                                              youon ‘ssnjdieq ‘OT
                                                                                           x               X
                                                                      0°00T
   0'00T       0'00T
                                                                                                                                 dN                                 youon ‘sya3105 *6
   0'00T       0'00T                                        dN                             x               x
                                                                                                                     0'00T                                         youon ‘syuepueg *g
                                                                                           x               xX
                                                                         dN dN
   0'O0T       0'O0T
                                                                                                                    dN                                       youon feorneyds ‘sprog ‘2,
                                                            dN                             x               xX
                                                                    ped 0'00T

   0'O00T       dN
                                                                                                                     gL8                                      youon ienqny, ‘sprog "9
    o'86       0'00T                                                                       xX              x
                dN                                          dN            dN               x               xX        0001                                                [reed ‘sprog ‘¢
    0';O0T
ouN uprpuy anrasadsiyD                                                                   puny4y     =pjayjszauing                dN                                      (‘p.auoo ‘says )
                                                                                                                YaLwwg
                                                                                                                                                           (panuyuogj—'T 21901 )
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                    181
These may be compared to such sites as Carlson Annis with 222 hammer-
stones, and Indian Knoll with 316 abrading stones and 78 reamers, none
of which were in burial association.
   There are curiously high percentages for beaver and rodent incisors at
Read and Indian Knoll, and an equally curious dearth of such items at the
other sites, with the data for Barrett and Ward inadequate for reliable
interpretation of the occurrence of incisors. Of course, there were only
three such items at Read, in contrast to the 28 recovered from Indian
Knoll. But Webb (1946, p. 298) points out that “except for having a sharp
cutting edge [these artifacts] show no evidence of having been worked.”
Only very careful checking would have identified the incisors as artifacts
if they had occurred in the midden. A check of the faunal analysis for
Indian Knoll by Skaggs (in Webb, 1946, pp. 334—39) failed to disclose
any mention of beaver incisors in the midden, although beaver mandibles
are mentioned. But there is a remarkable lacuna in the reporting of teeth
in the list, for that matter, with the sole exception being two cottontail
rabbit teeth. In the light of our own experience with Midwestern shell
middens, the bone sample seems to be rather unusual.
  Stone atlatl weights, prized by collectors for their workmanship and
often exotic materials, seem to display extreme variability, with per-
centages ranging from zero for the two at Kirkland to 57.1 per cent for
the fourteen at Barrett. Other components of atlatls also show similar
wide   swings   in their proportional   representation   in burial   association,
with ataltl hooks, for example, having a range from 11.8 to 100 per cent,
and atlatl handles, from 21.4 to 100 per cent. But again, the very high
percentages correlate with the rarity of the item at the site, with those
sites having atlatl components in abundance consistently showing much
lower percentages.
   We cannot even begin to explain the variability of the items pertaining
to the atlatl. Utilization of exotic raw materials does not seem to be
involved, since the limestones, sandstones, and various igneous rocks are
common to the Midwest. A few examples may have been manufactured
from materials not immediately available in the lower Ohio Valley area,
but these are in a decided minority. At this point, it can only be suggested
that atlatl components vary sufficiently from other items in the first cate-
gory to consider the possibility that they might better be considered as a
special subcategory.
   Finally, there are two categories, shell atlat] weights and copper pins,
awls and needles, which, with the exception of a copper aw] at Carlson
Annis, are never found outside of burial association. We suspect that the
important variable here is the raw material involved, not the basic func-
tion of the artifact. In both cases, the imported copper and conch shell
may have added an intrinsic value to these items beyond their basic
utilitarian properties. If this be the case, these exceptional items within
the functional categories of general utility tools, weapons, and fabricating
182                                Variability among Occupational Units
and processing tools should be considered for our present purposes with
the Class III artifacts to be discussed below, not with the Class I artifacts
where their functional counterparts appear.
   A second group consisted of items which we have argued elsewhere
(Winters, 1968) to be of the sort properly included in the category of
ceremonial equipment, that is, flutes, rattles, and pipes, all of whica, with
the exception of conch shell cups, were made from local raw materials
and in the pattern of localized Midwestern styles. To these may be added
cups made from imported conch shell, which we consider ceremonial
items because of the special contexts in which they occur in late Archaic,
Woodland, and even historic times. (We have excluded computations for
medicine bags since those not in burial association are represented by
animal bones which would in all likelihood have simply been included
with the faunal sample recovered from the midden.)        Items in this cate-
gory generally occur only in burial association, and rarely fall below 75
per cent of the specimens recovered at any site.
  A third group consisted of items which have been termed ornaments. In
terms of proportional representation with burials, there are at least two
subdivisions, one consisting of ommaments manufactured from bone and
the other of items manufactured from imported raw materials such as
copper and conch shell. A third subdivision might be created for stone
ornaments, but the data on raw materials are inadequate for analyzing
the types or sources of raw materials. In other respects, these stone items
show much the same percentage as that of the subdivision for ornaments
of imported raw materials, although the former tend to be somewhat lower.
   While ornaments in general occur in rather higher frequencies in burial
association than the artifacts of the first group, antler and bone ornaments
such as tubular beads, disc beads, pendants, and hairpins tend to occur
more frequently in the midden than in burial association. An unexplained
exception to this observation is found in the case of perforated canine
pendants.
  Both conch shell and copper stand in marked contrast to the preceding
subdivision. Normally, burial association is 100 per cent with only 13 per
cent of the 52 recorded observations (Table 1) falling below 98 per cent.
There would seem to be decided differential in the mode of disposition of
ornaments. There may be many factors leading to differences in disposi-
tion of tubular bone beads and tubular shell beads, or bone disc beads
and shell disc beads, but there still remains the simple fact that beads
made of local raw materials tend to be disposed of rather casually, while
those that are made of imported raw materials tend to occur in special
context and only rarely in the midden debris.
   Furthermore, to emphasize the point, with the exception of atlatl
weights there was no diversion of imported marine shell for the manufac-
ture of utilitarian artifacts, quite unlike sites of the Florida area adjacent
to the sources of much of the marine shell. Rouse (1951) in his publica-
tion on the survey of the Indian River in Florida, an area which he notes
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic               183
has less variety of shell artifacts than southern Florida, records chopping
tools, which   constitute   the majority of shell artifacts,   including    celts,
gouges, chisels, and picks. The use of Busycon as a hammer                 is also
recorded. Along with these, of course, there occurs an assortment of cups,
dippers, beads, and pendants.
  One obvious objection to the previous observations is that sampling
error may be a significant factor. The sites in question are shell middens,
and they were not excavated with the best recovery techniques. While
admitting that the sample does not conform to present-day standards, we
do not feel that it is necessarily unrepresentative, for the following reasons:
  1. Our own experience with Midwestern shell middens has been that
such middens     consist only in small part of actual shell accumulations,
which occur as lenses in the conglomeration of black soil, rock, and other
midden debris. In this respect, some observations of Webb are pertinent:
Of Indian Knoll itself he says, “While the site here is a shell ‘mound,’ shell
is by no means     the major constituent in the accumulation”      (1946). Or
again, “It will be remembered       that, at Indian Knoll, there was       a very
considerable midden deposit, but relatively a small amount of shell in the
midden”    (Webb    and Haag,    1940). Of Kirkland,    “Mussell   shells were
extremely rare and only noted by occasional fragments” (Webb and
Haag, 1940). Of Chiggerville, “Near the bottom of the heap there was
quite uniformly a stratum of concentrated shell. Between the shell lenses
there was black earth mixed with shell, which contained the usual refuse
material of a shell midden” (Webb and Haag, 1939). In connection with
Ward and Kirkland, “in Kentucky some shell-mound people lived on shell
mounds    but others having the same or similar cultural status lived in
villages [Ward and Kirkland]       quite removed from any shell accumula-
tion” (Webb and Haag, 1940). Of Barrett, “The midden material con-
sisted of many stones, scattered mussel shells, and worked and unworked
flint, and polished stone material” (Webb and Haag, 1947). And finally,
Butterfield, although classed as a shell midden, is described. in these
terms: “A result of this condition of extreme porosity and acid soil was the
poor preservation of human skeletons and other bone material.” But a few
lines later is the notation that “the presence of large quantities of mussel
shells in the midden suggest that there must have been a shoals here prior
to the damming of the river” (Webb and Haag, 1947). We do not know
quite how to reconcile these two statements, since if there were large
quantities of mussel shell present, the soil should not have been very acid.
   But one is left with the total impression that, while the quantity of shell
varied in the middens, at no site was there simply a dense homogeneous
mass of river mussels in which other shell artifacts might well disappear,
particularly since the material was double shoveled for at least some of
the sites in checking for artifacts. We should grant that small shell arti-
facts might be overlooked with such techniques, but we doubt very much
that the larger items would have been missed so consistently if they were
actually present in the middens.
184                                   Variability among Occupational Units
   Nor can we invoke differential preservation from soil factors to account
for the distribution pattern. With the exception of Butterfield, the state-
ment on which is ambiguous, soil conditions should have been ideal for
the preservation of both bone and shell, and the sites are indeed notable
for the quantities of bone artifacts which have been recovered from them.
While the sites vary considerably in the number and types of shell arti-
facts, such variability is perhaps best explained by the function of the site
within the settlement system, and hence quantitative and qualitative dif-
ferences in the activities associated therewith, than to preservation factors
per se.
   We feel that there is some reason, then, for postulating that the preced-
ing categories, with modifications, represent sets of artifacts that express
broad differences in their values based in part upon the functions to
which they were related in the Indian Knoll society, and in part upon the
raw materials from which they were manufactured.
   Using ethnographic parallels, we might then restate the categories in
terms of a value system for the Indian Knoll Culture:
   Class I. Items of personal equipment with value expressible only in
terms of the functional worth to the owner. This would include most
items classifiable as general utility tools, weapons, fabricating and process-
ing tools, and domestic implements, and ornaments manufactured from
locally available raw materials.
  Class II. Items   of personal equipment      but of a ceremonial     nature.
These items would generally have had no direct exchange value but
would possess an intrinsic value stemming mainly from their symbolic
nature. This would include artifacts generally classified as ceremonial
equipment, and any other artifacts which by context should be separated
from their normal class affiliations and considered as ceremonial equip-
ment.
   Class III. Items of equipment with special value. This would include
those items occurring in special, segregated context that are manufactured
from rare and/or imported raw materials; consists primarily of certain
classes of ornaments, but in the Indian Knoll Culture can also include
ceremonial and utilitarian artifacts manufactured from imported marine
shells and copper. A contemporary analogy for the latter case might be
found in gift shops that provide for the man who has everything items
such as gold toothpicks, gem-studded can openers, and a host of other
impedimenta the prices of which obscure the lowly, utilitarian function
of the artifact itself. The foregoing observation should not be taken as
meaning that the utilitarian function of the item was of no consequence.
Copper awls, for example, might be desirable because of their superiority
over their counterparts manufactured from other raw materials.
   It might be germane at this point to pause and consider the question of
why marine shell and copper have rarely been considered in archeological
reporting in any systematic way as items that may well have been associ-
ated with special value. An immediate factor has been the rather casual,
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic             185
and probably ethnocentric, manner in which some archeologists tend to
regard items such as shell beads and other small “trinkets.” For example,
in respect to the Indian Knoll sites themselves, the following revealing
comments were made in the discussion of burial associations:
     Relatively few [burials at Indian Knoll] had artifacts placed with them at
  burial (275 out of 879), and if one excludes burials having only beads (88
  burials), which are worn as body decorations and in part Attached to cloth-
   ing, there remain only 187 burials having artifacts which might be con-
  sidered as having been placed in the graves intentionally, from a desire to
  make a burial offering (Webb, 1946).

  In respect to Carlson Annis:

   Of the 390 burials only 215 had any artifacts of any kind in association. Of
   these, 158 had only shell beads, gorgets, awls, clothes pins, or hairpins, or
   other artifacts which were worn as personal adornments, and which may be
   regarded as part of the ordinary clothing of the deceased. These were worn
   buried with the dead as a matter of course and with no intention to make a
   burial offering (Webb, 1950).

  There would seem to be an a priori assumption that ornaments are
inevitably some sort of equivalent of ten-cent-store baubles. In respect to
dise and tubular shell beads, most archeologists have tended to follow the
position taken by Speck (1919) and others that wampum              as a limited
medium of exchange can be explained by European influence.
   Speck assumes an evolution in both function and form for shell beads.
Of form he states, “the Indians . . . were not capable of drilling the finest
tubular beads until they had acquired metal drills from Europeans”
(1919, p. 6). He concludes that the disc shaped beads must have been the
earlier type. Of function, “Deducing from the material presented a possi-
bility or two concerning the state of development through which
wampum must have passed, it seems reasonable to suppose that wampum
of the disc type was originally used in simple lengths or strings function-
ing primarily as a means    of ornamentation,    then as instruments of cere-
mony, negotiation, and as mnemonic documents. The substitution of cy-
lindrical beads assuredly came later as an improvement”          (1919, p. 22).
There is a certain ambivalence,     however,    in Speck’s discussions of disc
beads throughout his monograph, and at times he seems to imply that
these beads may have been items of special value prior to the historic
period, as one might gather from the preceding quotation.
  If such an interpretation were tenable, one might well view skeptically
any claims that prehistoric tubular and dise shell beads, or other artifacts
of exotic shell, could be interpreted as having any sort of special value
attached thereto. But Slotkin and Schmitt (1949) in their reexamination
of the evidence relevant to wampum have demonstrated that stylistically
wampum can be traced from the late Archaic of some three to four
millennia ago through subsequent Woodland and Mississippian manifesta-
tions into historic times, and that the evidence from early documentary
186                                   Variability among Occupational Units
sources points to wampum’s having been used in eastern north America
at the time of European contact as a limited medium of exchange for such
diverse purposes as bride price, remuneration for special services, com-
pensation for injury, and in ritual gift exchange.
  Having established that there is substantial basis for postulating au-
tocthonous systems of limited media of exchange in eastern North Ameri-
ca in early historic times, and the fact that in late Archaic times there
were classes of artifacts that sort contextually according to their functions,
the raw materials from which they were made, and the remoteness of the
sources of those materials, it would be interesting to compare the contexts
of artifacts from sites pertaining to the cultures cited by Slotkin and
Schmitt in their wampum study with those of the Indian Knoll Culture to
see to what extent the contexts of historic artifact categories and raw
materials correspond to or differ from those of the Archaic sites. Unfor- .
tunately, historic sites with both large midden excavations and burial
samples are unavailable in the literature for the critical areas of the
Northeast and the Atlantic coastal areas, and we shall turn instead to the
Hardin Site (Hanson, 1966), an early historic component of the Fort
Ancient Culture located on the Ohio River in Kentucky. The bulk of the
midden materials at the Hardin Site can be assigned to the aforemen-
tioned culture, although the presence of eighteen sherds of Watson cord-
marked and Watson plain, which tended to be concentrated in a small
area of the site (Hanson, 1966, p. 109), along with some fifty stemmed
and notched projectile points (Hanson, 1966, Fig. 50) indicate minor
utilization of the area by earlier Woodland and Archaic groups. Both the
paucity of the earlier artifacts and the diversity of their types point to
little more than utilization of the area for small and temporary encamp-
ments over a period of several thousand years. Hence, we doubt that
debris from the earlier occupations could appreciably affect the reliability
of our sample and, of course, none of the material specifically assignable
to the earlier components has been included in the calculation of percent-
ages. Moreover, unless special preservation factors were present, we
should be very surprised if any of the burials or artifacts made from
organic materials could pertain to the Archaic occupations of this open
site, particularly since there seems to be no indication of shell midden
zones or lenses assignable to an Archaic occupation.
   Hanson assigns the site to the Shawnee and estimates the dates of
occupancy as ranging from 1500 to 1675 a.p. Limited contact with a
distribution network involving European trade goods is shown by the
presence of brass artifacts, but Hanson (1966, p. 175) argues convinc-
ingly that “The European brass fragments and artifacts found at the
Hardin Village Site were probably the result of trade with other Indians,
who acted as intermediaries, rather than directly with Europeans.” Thus
we assume that the traditional precontact values of the Fort Ancient
people still prevailed during the period of occupancy of the Hardin Site,
since little evidence exists for any profound change in the way of life of
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                                 187
the village inhabitants during their residence at the Hardin Site, with
their indirect contacts with the outer world of the European settlers being
expressed only in the appearance of a few ornaments of brass.
   When the contexts of the artifacts from midden and burial association
at the Hardin Site are listed (Table 2), the parallels between the historic
site and the prehistoric Archaic sites are remarkable. But again we must
note that there is some ambiguity as to the source of the raw materials for
the shell artifacts. Some are clearly of marine origin as specified in the
text (Marginella beads, large barrel-shaped beads, rectangular gorgets,
engraved shell gorgets, pear-shaped gorgets, conch columella pendants),
others appear from the illustrations to be local riverine mollusks (“hoes,”
spoons, and possibly the shell scrapers),while still a third group cannot
be identified specifically as to source from either the text or the illustra-
tions (disc beads, small barrel-shaped beads, circular gorgets, diamond-
shaped gorgets, three-holed gorgets, imitation claw pendants, tear-shaped
pendants,     rectangular       pendants,    and an    engraved     mollusk).     Many,    or
most, of the last group may well be marine shell, however, since we have
rarely seen examples of such ornaments in the Midwest that were manu-
factured from local mollusks, and we shall assume for the present that the
Hardin Site artifacts correspond to the Midwestern norms.

                Table 2.    Context of Artifacts at the Hardin Site
                                                       Percentage   Percentage    Percentage
General Utility Tools                       Quantity   | Midden      Pits, etc.     Burials
Chert Scrapers                                297          89            4             fl
Scrapers, Shell                                  3        67           =             33
Leaf-shaped Knives                             19         74             5           21
Trianguloid Knives                              9         56            ll           33
Circular Knives                                 3        100           —_            —
Lunate Knives                                   %,       100           —             —
Hammerstones                                   15         60           13            27
Disc Choppers                                   6        100           —             _
Weapons
Projectile points:
  Fine Triangular                             702         83               6         11
  Crude Triangular                            228         87               6          7
  “Tear-shaped”                                 8        100           _—            _
  Antler                                       42         81            12            4
Bone Fishhooks                                  8         62            13           25
Fabricating and Processing Equipment
Bipointed Drills                               42         88               5          a
Flaring Based Drills                           17         83               6         11
Stone Picks                                     1        100           —             —
Sandstone Saw                                   il       100           —             —
                                               29 |       87           10             3
Whetstones
Splinter Awls                                  64         75           1l            14
Turkey Bone Awls            ;                  32         78             9           13

                                                                       (Continued overleaf)
188                                      Variability among Occupational Units
         (Table 2.—Continued)
                                                Percentage   Percentage    Percentage
Fabricating and Processing         Quantity     | Midden      Pits, etc.    Burials
 Equipment
Deer Bone Awls                           18        83           17            —
Antler Chisels                           19        90            5             '5,
Antler Punches                           22        ae            5            18
Bone Punches and Needles                 12        92           —_             8
Racoon Penis Bone Punches                 5        40           20            40
Bone Flakers                              6        67            a            33
Gouges or Beamers                       143        90             6            4
Antler Scrapers                           8        62            13           25
Pottery Spindle Whorls?                 196       100           —             —
Sherd Pottery Smoothers                 145       100           _—            —
Pottery Anvil                             il      100           oe            —_
Domestic Equipment
“Anvils” (pitted manos)                  11        64            18           18
Grinding Stones                           5        40            40           20
Shell Spoons                             25        —             88           12
Pottery Pestles                          42       100            —            =
Pottery Spoon                             1       100            =            ==
Pottery Cup                               1       100            —            _
Woodworking Equipment
Celts                                    65        86                5         9
Beaver Incisor Chisels                    3       100            —            —
Digging Equipment
Stone Hoes                                4        25            25           50
Shell Hoes                                2)       50            —            50
ORNAMENTS
Bone:
  Pendants                                6         50           —            50
  Drilled Dog or Wolf Teeth         :    66        36            14           50
  Drilled Bear Teeth                     ili}      82            18           —
  Drilled Elk Teeth                        il      —_            —           100
  Beads (tubular, bone)                 211        74            10           16
  Beads (barrel-shaped)                 147        30              1          69
  Collar                                   1      100            —_           oo
  Pins                                     9       Shy           oy           56
Pottery:
   Pendants                                I      100            —            —_
   Ear Plug                                il      —_           100           —
Ground Stone:
  Pendants                                9         78           22           —_
  Gorgets                                 2         50           —            50
Shell:
  Pendants      (claw)                   54           a          —            93
  Pendants      (geometric )              3        100           —            —
  Conch Columella Pendant                1          =            —_           100
  Gorgets (plain, mask, and engraved)  60             3          —             97
  Beads (barrel shaped)               214           —            =            100
  Disk Beads                          765             x          —_—         99.6
  Marginella Beads                    336             x          —           99.7
  Engraved Mollusk                       1         100           —             a
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                                   189
         ( Table 2.—Continued )
                                                      Percentage   Percentage    Percentage
Copper:                                    Quantity   | Midden      Pits, etc.     Burials
  Pendants                                       1        _—           —            100
  Beads (rolled)                              120           2          —             98
  Beads (flattened)                              5        20           —             80
  Bracelets                                     2         —            —           100
  Tubes                                         9         22           —             78
Brass:
  Beads    (rolled)                            28        a            —            100
  Beads    (flattened)                         22        —            —            100
   Bracelets                                     1       —            —_           100
   Tubes                                        4        —            —            100
  Coils                                         9        —                x             x
  Wire Fragments                                2       100           —             _—
Ceremonial Equipment
Stone    Pipes                                 23        Ti           —_            23
Pottery Pipes                                   5       100           —             ==
Bone Rasps                                      2        50           50            —
Whistles     or Flutes                          1        89           iol           —-
Pottery Rattles                                 1       100           —             oe
Pottery Effigies                                3       100           —             —
Skull Cap Ladle                                 1        a           100            —
Recreational Equipment
Discoidals                                      4        75           —             25
Drilled Deer Toes                               2       100           —             —
Bone Gaming Pieces                           113         wil          12            107

Miscellaneous
Stone Balls                                     1       100           —_—           ——
Altered Concretions                             2       100           —             _
Drilled Terrapin Carapace                       1       100           _             _—
Unworked Copper Scrap                           1       100           —             _
Pottery Balls                                   1       100           —             —
Pottery Rings                                   1       100           —             —
x = Quantities not specifically assigned



  As Table 2 shows, items that correspond to our previously defined Class
I artifacts rarely occur in any numbers outside of the general midden,
while Class III artifacts, which are limited at this particular Fort Ancient
site entirely to ornaments, rarely appear in other than burial context.
Hanson is led to remark of shell artifacts in general that “Of a total of
1,464 shell artifacts, 35.1 percent of the nonceramic artifacts, only sixteen
came from the general midden. Significantly, nearly all were for decora-
tive purposes” (1966, pp. 155-56). Once more, a remarkable dichotomy
in context can be shown to exist between artifacts of imported marine
shell and more obviously utilitarian objects such as the 702 fine
triangular points (83 per cent in the midden, 11 per cent with burial),
the 297 chert scrapers (89 per cent in the midden, 7 per cent with burials Ds
190                               Variability among Occupational Units
and the 145-pottery smoothers (100 per cent in the midden). And, as in
the Indian Knoll Culture sites, a considerable contrast also exists within
the category of ornaments between those of local raw materials such as
bone, pottery, and stone and those made from exotic raw materials,
whether they be marine shell, copper, or brass. Or one might note the
contrast between the contexts of mussel shell spoons (12 per cent in
burial association) and those of marine shell pendants, gorgets, and
beads, which for most types range from 93 per cent to 100 per cent in
burial association.
  There   are,   as   one   might   anticipate,   anomalies   and    inconsistencies
within some of the categories of raw materials. For example, one should
note the high frequency of the 147 barrel-shaped bone beads in burial
association (69 per cent) and the midden linkage of the three geometric
shell pendants (100 per cent) or the two pieces of brass wire (100 per
cent). Notably, as with the geometric shell pendants and the brass wire,
many of the anomalies involve artifacts that are rare or unique at the site,
thus making it difficult to assess whether we are dealing with chance or
accidental disposition of the artifacts rather than with the patterned social
behavior inferrable from the artifacts represented both by large numbers
and wide distribution within the site.
   While the contextual patterns of Class I and Class III artifacts are very
similar for both the Indian Knoll Culture and Hardin                sites, there is a
considerable divergence in respect to Class II artifacts. Consistently at the
Hardin Site, pipes, rasps, flutes, rattles, etc., appear predominantly in the
midden, although among these items, only pipes could be considered as
anything other than exceedingly rare. We shall not even attempt to de-
cide whether the disparities arise from a faulty assignment of artifacts to
the category of ceremonial in this site of the Fort Ancient Culture, a shift
from ceremonial to more secular associations of such items, or sampling
errors that might arise from special disposition of ceremonial equipment
beyond the village peripheries or, even, the possibility that such equip-
ment might be associated only with the larger and more specialized Fort
Ancient towns and villages. (At this point, one might raise the question as
to where such known items of historic Shawnee ceremonial equipment as
turtle shell rattles are in this putatively Shawnee site. Was this musical
instrument with its millennia-old record in eastern North America [Winter,
1968] an innovation among the Shawnee within the historic period, or is
sampling error a factor, or should the evidence be reviewed for the as-
signment of the Fort Ancient Culture village to the Shawnee?) The prob-
lems raised by the contextual disparities between the two cultures in
respect to Class II (ceremonial) artifacts go far beyond the purposes of
the present analysis, however. Suffice it to say that for the categories that
do concern us the parallels between the proveniences of artifacts manu-
factured from local raw materials and from exotic, imported raw materi-
als are such that they suggest similar attitudes towards these commodities
on the part of the late Archaic Indian Knoll Culture and the proto-historic
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic         191
and historic Fort Ancient Culture, although we cannot infer any direct
continuity in such attitudes during the intervening centuries of Woodland
occupations in the Kentucky area of the Ohio Valley.
   Obviously, though, the interpretations of Slotkin and Schmitt on the
context of marine shell, copper, and brass in sites of the Fort Ancient
Culture cannot be used to verify our own conclusions about the value of
marine shell and copper in the Indian Knoll Culture. All that can be said
is that our interpretations do not conflict with data from the early historic
period prior to the time that acculturation had seriously modified the use
of wampum as a limited medium of exchange, or with historic records
that report marine shell as an item of considerable value.
   Nor do we go so far as to propose that assignment of special value to
marine shell in the Indian Knoll Culture carries with it an implication of
usage as a medium of exchange, although we should not be particularly
surprised had it served such a function. All too frequently, the Archaic
peoples, who were greatly diversified culturally through space and time,
are treated as though they were a homogeneous array of hunters and
gatherers, and as though they were idiots savants capable only of chang-
ing styles of artifacts, producing an occasional nicely ground piece of
stone, continuously foraging for a precarious and uncertain subsistence,
and in general doing little beyond surviving as noble and unspoiled primi-
tives. The complex technology and way of life of both the Indian Knoll
and Riverton Cultures belie such an interpretation, and we should be very
much surprised if the level of complexity was not close to that of succeed-
ing eastern cultures prior to the advent of cultures of the Mississippian
Pattern.
  But to move from pejorative declamation to more productive considera-
tions, if we   are correct   in our assumptions   about the special value of
marine shell imported from Florida and coastal areas of the Southeast and
copper from the Great Lakes area, there remains the problem of establish-
ing techniques for estimating the comparative values of the various cate-
gories of artifacts. One way would be to construct a rough scale of values
for shell and copper artifacts in terms of the amounts of raw material
contained therein. Such a scale is defective, of course, in that we have no
way at present of estimating the accretion of value that may result from
the expenditure of labor in the manufacturing process or of ascertaining
the value that may accrue through such factors as the associations and
ownership of the specimen. And in historic exchange systems, such as the
kula ring, the value of a particular shell item depended in no small part
on the history and associations of the shell item in its exchange circuit.
Nor have we worked out experimentally the precise quantities of various
artifacts that could be manufactured from shells of different size, so that
our ranking will be rather more subjective than it should be.
   Another problem has been adequate identification of the raw materials
used in the manufacture of the many shell artifacts listed in Table 3.
For example, Webb states in his discussion of small disc beads that
192                                          Variability among Occupational Units
“Seemingly large conchs were cut into strips of the desired width. These
in turn were cut into squares, and then these squares were drilled, cen-
trally. From these, the disc beads were formed” (1946, p. 137). But there
is no way of ascertaining whether all such beads were manufactured from
conch, or whether local mussel shell was used for some. Webb’s statement
on composite shell atlatl wieghts also leads to difficulties in the interpre-
tation: “composite shell weights made of bivalve shells, or sections of
conch shells, were worked into prismoidal forms having straight edges, or
convex edges like the varied stone forms” (1950a, p. 89). But actual
identification for individual composite weights is rare. For better or
worse, we shall treat disc-shell beads as derivative from conch, and shall
drop composite shell weights from our analysis as an item too surrounded
by ambiguity.
  For some items, such as shell discs and rings there is rarely any infor-
mation one way or the other, and these will also be omitted from the
analysis.

  Table 3. Large Shell Artifacts in Sites of the Indian Knoll Culture

                     Artifact                 Depth in Feet             Context
      Barrett:
      Marine gastropod gorgets (4)                15          YA, Male burial 1
      Marine gastropod gorgets (4)                1.5         YA, Male burial 44
      Drilled conch rectangle                     3.1         YA, Male burial 47
      Tubular shell beads (3)                     3.9         YA, Male burial 77
      Marine gastropod gorgets (4)                1.8         YA, Male burial 100
      Marine gastropod gorgets (4)                1.6         YA, Male burial 116
      Tubular conch columella beads    (6)        2.2         C, Female? burial 136
      Conch columella (32)              ‘         nS          Ad., Male burial 156
      Conch shell pendant 4                       2.3         il        ?   burial 157
      Tubular shell beads (2)                     lee         YA, Male burial 215
      Broken conch shell (cup?)                   1.6         Th     ?  burial 372
      Conch shell cup                             ail         YA, Male burial 381
      Shell (unident.) pendants (2)               DAS}        YA, Female burial 216
      Ward:
      Shell atlatl weight > *                       2         A, Male burial 118
      Tubular shell beads b (2)                     P         A, Female burial 163
      Conch gorget                                  ?         A, Female burial 188
      Shell (unident.)   disc *                     P         A, Female burial 234
      Conch gorget                                  P         C,    ?       burial 383
      Kirkland:
      Conch gorgets (2) ¢                           ie        A, Female burial 12
      Conch pendant                                 g         A, Female burial 12
      Carlson Annis:
      Triangular conch pendants (3)               2.4         Ad.,    ?    burial 44
      Tubular shell beads 4 (X)                   6.3         Te        burials59
      Tubular shell beads (X)                     all         Ce? Se burialstioil
      Conch pendants (5)                          3.0         YA, Male burial 146
      Tubular shell beads (2)                     5.5         C, Male? burial 177
      Perforated shell (unident.) disc d *        5.5         C, Male? burial 177
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                                193
     ( Table 3.—Continued )
                    Artifact             Depth in Feet        Context
   Shell (unident.) pendant                  5.5       C, Male? burial 177
   Tubular shell beads (X)                             Ad.,    ? burial 190
   Tubular shell beads (X)                             I, Male burial 220
   Conch dise (2)                                      I, Male? burial 229
   Shell (unident.) pendants (2)                       I, Male? burial 229
   Conch ear plugs (2)                                 I, Male? burial 229
   Tubular shell beads (X)                             C, Female? burial 230
   Conch pendants (X)                                  Ad.       ?          burial 236
   Conch dise pendant                                  Ad.,          ?
                                                                   burial 236
   Tubular conch bead                                  YA, Male burial 256
   Shell ear plugs (2)                                 Ad.,   ? burial 274
   Conch ear plugs (2)                                 i      ? burial 290
   Shell (unident.) discs (2) *                        ii     ? burial 290
   Shell (unident.) atlatl weight *                    Es        ?         burial 290
   Conch pendants (5)                                  ie        ?         burial 309
   Conch shell (bead?)                                 The    ?  burial 309
   Conch (Fasciolaria gigantea) cup                    Ad.,   ? burial 335
   Conch ear plugs (2)                                 Ce      ? burial 341
   Shell (unident.) pendant                            AD.,    ? burial 350
   Shell (unident.) pendants (2)                       C, Female burial 360
    Conch ear plug (1)                                 ACs         Duras.
   Conch   pendant                                     Ad.,    ?   burial 385

   Read:
   Tubular shell beads ¢ (6)                           YA, Male burial 1
   Conch section ( gorget?)                            iF     ? burial 24
   Conch gorgets      (3)                              SA, Male burial 66
   Conch gorget                                        J.        ?         burial 70
   Chiggerville:
   Conch ear plugs (2)                                 ug.       ?         burial 58
   Conch gorget                                        1;        ?         burial 60
   Conch composite atlatl weight *                     qT;       ?         burial 60
   Conch gorget                                        I,        ? burial 61
   Shell (unident.) pendantf                           I      ?   burial 76
   Tubular shell beads (9)                             C, Male? burial 30
   Conch gorgets (2)                                   J, Male           burial 25
   Shell (unident.) pendants (6)                       A, Female burial 43
   Shell (unident.) rings (11)               OL        Ad., Female burial 47
   Conch   gorget                                      A, Male burial 63
   Tubular shell beads (80)                            A, Female burial 79
   Shell (unident.) pendant                       vt
                                                  Uy
                                                  Vw
                                                  Vv
                                                  UU   A, Female burial 73

   Indian Knoll:
   Shell (unident.) pendant                            I, Male? burial 33
   Conch pendants (2)                                  YA, Male burial 55
   Shell (unident. ) atlatl weight *                   Y, Female burial 56
   Shell (unident. ) atlatl weight *        wp L
                                             DA
                                              Go
                                              00
                                              Hy       Y, Male burial 58
   Shell (unident.) pendant                            SA, Male burial 123
   Marine shell atlatl weight *                        MA, Male burial 218
   Shell (unident.) pendants (4)                       Ad., Male burial 236
   Conch (Busycon perversum) container      0bp
                                             by
                                            WO
                                            to bu      Ad., Male burial 236

                                                        (Continued overleaf)
     194                                   Variability among Occupational Units
     (Table 3.—Continued )
                   Artifact                  Depth in Feet        Context
   Tubular shell beads (38)                      3.0       YA, Female burial 237
   Conch cup                                     3.0      YA, Female burial 237
   Fasciolaria gigantea (Kiener)   shell         3.0      YA, Female burial 237
   Curved shell (unident. ) pendants             4,1      I, Female? burial 257
    Conch (Busycon perversum) cup                8.3      YA, Male burial 310
   Tubular shell beads (14)                      2.0      Ad., Female burial 315
   Conch pendants (3)                            2.0      Ad., Female burial 315
   Conch pendant                                 2.1      I, Male? burial 337
    Shell (unident.) pendants (4)                Sis      I, Male? burial 339
   Conch   shell                                 ol        C, Female? burial 354
   Conch pendants (4)                            2.1      Ad., Male burial 395
   Curved shell (unident.) ornament              1.9      Nb, Male? burial 434
   Conch shells (cups?) (2)                      2.9      G, Male burial 439
   Shell (unident.) pendants (2)                 6.8      I, Female? burial 445
   Tubular shell beads (2)                       6.8      I, Female? burial 445
   Shell (unident.) rings (3) *                  6.8      I, Female? burial 445
   Tubular conch beads (2)                       3.2      C, Male? burial 503
    Conch pendant                                rail     I,   Female? burial 512
    Conch pendant                                4.6       C, Female burial 515
    Conch earplugs (2)                           4.6      C, Female burial 515
    Tubular shell beads (4)                      4.7      I, Male? burial 517
    Composite shell (unident.) atlatl weight *   6.0      YA, Female burial 560
    Composite shell (unident.) atlatl weight *   6.7      YA, Male burial 561
    Shell (unident.) ornaments (gorgets?) (2) 7.7         YA, Male burial 561
    Tubular shell beads (51)                  Salk        C, Female? burial 571
    Shell (unident. )rings (12) *             Sed         C, Female? burial 571
    Tusk shaped shell (unident. )
       ornaments (2)                             5.6       YA, Male burial 575
    Shell (unident. ) strip pendants (2)         4.9       I, Female? burial 579
    Conch strips (2)                     :       5.0       I, Male burial, 610
    Conch shell squares (33)                     5.0       I, Male burial, 610
    Large conch sections (2)                     5.0       I, Male burial, 610
    Curved shell (unident.) pendants (2)         Sys)      YA, Male burial 661
    Conch pendants (3)                           4.3       YA, Male burial 687
    Shell (unident.) pendants (2)                6.0       YA, Female burial 696
    End whorl (conch?) pendant                   15        YA, Male burial 697
    Tubular shell beads (3)                      Suri      YA, Female burial 708
    Tubular shell beads (6)                      oe        Nb, Female? burial 721
    Shell (unident.) pendants (2)                BS)       Nb, Male? burial 729
    Tubular shell beads (7)                      2.9       Nb, Male? burial 734
    Curved shell (unident.) pendants (2)         4.3       YA, Male burial 744
    Shell (unident.) disc, perforated *          Bil       YA, Female burial 761
    Conch gorgets (4)                            2.2       I, Female? burial 767
    Conch gorgets (4)                         3.4          Ad., Male burial 769
    Tusk shaped shell (unident.) pendants (1) 2.2          YA, Male burial 827
    Composite shell (unident. ) shell
       atlatl weight *                        7.6          YA, Male burial 853

    * Used only as specified in text.
    a. The list on p. 20 (Webb and Haag, 1947) notes five pendants from five burials
and a pair of tooth-like shell pendants from a single part Their trait list on p. 42
lists six long, slender conch pendants. One pendant is listed for Burial 157, and
apparently the pair of tooth-like pendants are the pair listed for Burial 216. This
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                             195
leaves four conch pendants from four burials unaccounted for, and the possibility that
a sixth was found in the midden.
  b. Tabulation of burial artifacts on p. 84 (Webb and Haag, 1940) also lists shell
atlatl weight for Burial 438. No mention is made of this item in the description of the
burial on p. 438, and only one shell atlatl weight is listed in the trait list on p. 104.
Note also that the same trait list gives five tubular shell beads, but no tubular bone
beads. Two tubular shell beads are noted in the burial list, along with two tubular
bone beads ( Burial 406). It is possible that these should have been shell beads.
  c. Three conch gorgets are mentioned in the trait list on p. 104 (Webb and Haag,
1940), so there may be an additional gorget from the midden or some other context.
  d. As usual, there are inconsistencies in counts of artifacts with burials at the site.
The trait list on p. 305 (Webb, 1950a) lists two large conch shell discs and one
perforated conch shell disc. The burial list has a conch disc pendant (Burial 236), a
perforated shell disc (Burial 177), two conch discs (Burial 229), and two shell discs
(Burial 290). And the same trait list on p. 304 mentions 16 strings of short tubular
shell beads and three strings of long tubular shell beads. Of these, only seven could be
located in the burial listings. Probably the others were recorded simply as shell beads
in the burial tabulations.                                                              ;
   e. Twenty-one tubular shell beads are listed in burial association in the trait list on
p- 383 (Webb, 1950b), but only the six with Burial 1 can be identified as such on the
burial tabulation sheets.
   f. All eight of the pendants from the site were in burial association. The three
triangular pendants and three tusk shaped pendants illustrated in Fig. 15 (Webb and
Haag, 1939) are marine shell (ibid., p. 25). So, at least six of the eight pendants with
the burials must be of marine shell.
   g. As with the other sites, there are many discrepancies in the tabulations and
descriptions of artifacts for the Indian Knoll Site. They are too numerous to record
here. Wherever possible, we have corrected errors in the burial description. For
example, the description of Burial 721 (Webb,     1946, p. 196) does not include the six
tubular beads that are illustrated in Fig. 23C and mentioned in the description of the
illustration on p. 207. In the case of Burial 237, the description mentions only cut
conch shell, but illustrated in Fig. 25B is a conch shell cup and in Fig. 30 a Fascio-
laria gigantea (Kiener) shell, both of which are mentioned on p. 213 in the discussion
of the illustrated artifacts from Burial 237. Many similar corrections were made by
checking all references that we could find to a particular burial.

   In the case of other items, where adequate identification is not pro-
vided in the trait lists or burial tabulations, internal textual evidence is
sufficient to warrant the assumption of marine shell as the raw material.
For example, tubular shell beads are very rarely given adequate classifica-
tion. But Webb (1946) states that, “these were made from the columella
of large conch shells.” Similar statements pertaining to perforated or
notched strip pendants, curved pendants, and tooth-shaped pendants
both in the Indian Knoll (Webb, 1946) and Chiggerville (Webb and
Haag, 1939) reports permit a similar assumption about the use of marine
shells as raw material. In the latter report, Webb and Haag comment
that, “The shell artifacts are, with very few exceptions, made from sec-
tions of marine conchs.” There are also supplementary indentifications in
figure descriptions, artifact analyses, and discussions of individual burials.
   Other difficulties have arisen from discrepancies in quantitative data
and the use of two or more referrents for a single type of artifact in
various reports. For “conch” shell, we have tried to resolve some of the
quantitative discrepancies by internal analysis of the textual material,
where illustrations, detailed discussions of features, or of particular cate-
196                                  Variability among Occupational Units
gories of artifacts have permitted resolution of the problem in one way or
another. Insofar as possible, we have also tried to standardize terminology
after having checked illustrations and descriptions of the artifacts in ques-
tion. Hence, in Table 3 the reader will not always find an item designated
by the term given to it in the original burial description. There remains a
residue of conflicting quantitative statements that could not be resolved,
and many of these are noted in notes appended to Table 3. Some items in
the table could not be used simply because of vague description or frag-
mentary condition of the artifacts; for example, Burials 354 and 439 at
Indian Knoll simply have the notation “conch shell.” It is impossible to
decide whether these are whole shells, cups, or smaller artifacts.
   Nor has it been possible to use marine shells such as Marginella and
Olivella, which are rare in sites of the Indian Knoll Culture, being re-
ported only for Carlson Annis and Indian Knoll. Of the fourteen strings of
Marginella reported for Carlson Annis (Webb, 1950a, p. 304), it has been
possible to identify only ten strings in burial association (Burials 59, res
103, 130, 155, 230, 233, 234, 266, and 362), and for none of these is the
quantity given. Of the four groups reported for Indian Knoll (Webb,
1946, p. 235), only the one group of Marginella apicina (Menke) in
association with Burial 571 is mentioned. While data are provided for the
one string of Olivella beads at Indian Knoll (Burial 1), no indication is
given in the Carlson Annis report as to which burials were associated with
the three strings of Olivella mentioned.
   One item of interest that was noted during the checking of the data on
the associations of Marginella and Olivella is that none of them has been
reported with adults. At Carlson Annis, Marginella beads were found
with one newborn, two infants, three children, three juveniles, and one
adolescent, while at Indian Knoll, the association is with a child. The one
record for Olivella at Indian Knoll is with a newbom. It would be inter-
esting to see if this pattern is borne out by the other unreported strings in
burial context. (In passing, another shell item, not of marine origin,
should be mentioned as a possible item of trade and special value at the
Indian Knoll site. This was a group of beads made from Lithasia obovata
[Say], riverine snail species having as its present-day habitat rivers of the
Tennessee region. The necklace was in association with an infant—an
interesting parallel to our previous observations on Olivella and Margi-
nella.)
   But at best, the following attempt at interpreting the distribution of
items of special value in the Indian Knoll Culture must be understood as
an exercise in method, rather than any definitive statement on the subject
of the context and quantitative occurrence of imported marine shell
within the culture. Such can be accomplished only with thorough re-
analysis of the original collections made by Webb and his associates.
   Our attention will perforce be centered upon the shells loosely desig-
nated as conchs by archeologists, including whelks such as Busycon per-
versum and band shells such as Fasciolaria gigantea (Kiener), for which.
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic          197
abundant specific identification or good presumptive evidence is avail-
able. For such shells and their derivatives, the following rough scale of
ranking by arbitrary points is proposed:
      150 points—Whole shells
      100 points—Shell cups and atlatl weights
       50 points—Shell gorgets and rectangles
       25 points—Shell pendants, earplugs, tusk-shaped ornaments, discs
       10 points—Tubular shell beads and shell rings
        5 points—Unmodified columella
        ? points—Disc shell beads

Of course some items such as gorgets vary from examples that are simply
cut to shape, the edges ground off, and perforated for suspension, to rare
examples that are engraved with geometric motifs. The latter might have
greater value than the former, but we are unable to allow for variables of
this type. And, ultimately, we are unable to decide upon a relative point-
ranking for disc shell beads, since these have a range from small to large,
and are not usually so distinguished in the burial tabulations. Considera-
tion of the ranking of disc beads in our arbitrary scale must await clarifi-
cation of the size range and quantitative disposition of these beads.
   One might also question the appropriateness of assigning the same
values to derivatives of both Busycon perversum and Fasciolaria gigantea,
in view of the disparities in size. This issue will be avoided for the present
on the pragmatic grounds that the application of our value scale will not
be affected to a significant degree by such a potential variable, there
being only two examples of Fasciolaria, one with an adult female at
Indian Knoll, the other with an adolescent of unknown sex at Carlson
Annis.
     Our first application of the scale will be to an analysis of burials which
have been definitely identified as to sex, with the results as given in Table
4.
     The range for males was from 10 to 200 units of shell, with an average
of 98 units. For females, from 20 to 800 units, with an average of 185
units. The average for females is distorted, however, by the two burials
with extraordinary value ratings; if these were not included, the average
would be only 79 for females. Thus, while females could be associated
with quantities of marine shell far in excess of any male, as a rule they
were less frequently provided with marine shell and, in terms of the
arbitrary value units, on a scale somewhat        less than that of males. For
example, of the 503 burials definitely identifiable as to sex (children and
adults) at Indian Knoll, 14 of the 283 males (4.9 per cent) had large
marine shell items in association, while 5 of the 220 females (2.3 per
cent) were so accompanied. (If one were to assume that all the items
from Indian Knoll were marine shell in Table 3, the respective figures
would be 17 [6.0 per cent] for males and 8 [3.6 per cent] for females.)
Or in respect to disc shell beads which have not been used in our previous
198                                         Variability among Occupational Units

            Table 4. Distribution of Shell Items, Value-scaled

                 MALES                                         FEMALES
                 Burial     Age     Value                       Burial   Age     Value
 Site             No.       Group   Units      Site               No.    Group   Units
 Barrett             il      YA      200       Ward                163      A      20
 Barrett            44       YA      200       Ward                188     A       50
 Barrett            47       YA       50       Kirkland             12     A      125
 Barrett           100       YA      200       Carlson Annis       360     Cc      50
 Barrett           116       YA      200       Chiggerville         43     A      150
 Barrett           156       Ad.     160       Chiggerville         79     A      800
 Barrett           381       YA      100       Chiggerville         73     A       25
 Barrett            att      YA       30       Indian Knoll        237    YA      630
 Barrett           215       YA       20       Indian Knoll        315    Ad.     215
 Carlson Annis     146       YA      [2S       Indian Knoll        SIS     CG      75
 Carlson Annis     256       YA        10      Indian Knoll        696    YA       50
 Read                 1      YA       60       Indian Knoll        708    YA       30
 Read               66       SA      150                                  Total 2,220
 Chiggerville        25        J     100
 Chiggerville        63       A       50
 Indian Knoll        55      YA"      50
 Indian Knoll       123      SA       25
 Indian Knoll       236      Ad.     200
 Indian Knoll       310      YA      100
 Indian Knoll       395      Ad.     100
 Indian Knoll       439       (G     200?
 Indian Knoll       561      YA      100?
 Indian Knoll       bytes    YA        50
 Indian Knoll       661      YA        50
 Indian Knoll       687      YA       75
 Indian Knoll       697      YA     3 DES
 Indian Knoll       744      YA        50
 Indian Knoll       769      Ad.     200
 Indian Knoll       827      YA       25
                             Total 2,855


computations, at Indian Knoll 48 of the 283 males (16.6 per cent) were
associated with these artifacts, contrasting with the 26 females out of 229
(11.8 per cent).
   There are also distinctions between the sexes (children and adults) in
other respects. Again using only burials definitely identified as to sex,
males tend to be associated with the largest items such as gorgets (27 of
the 30) and cups (3+ of the 4+). Males are also exclusively linked to
items such as conch columella and tusk-shaped pendants, while the items
unique to older females include conch earplugs and shell discs. A prepon-
derance of the tubular shell beads (137 of the 149) also occurred with
female burials. The only items divided about equally between the sexes
were the triangular and strip pendants, with 19 of the 35 associated with
males.
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic              199
   Similar procedures can be adopted for creating an arbitrary value scale
for copper artifacts. However, since there is no way of correlating the
marine shell and copper scales, the ranking units for copper will be desig-
nated as C-units.
                       200 C-units—Expanded-center gorgets
                       100 C-units—Small ornaments
                        50 C-units—Awls, pins, and needles
                        25 C-units—Large copper beads
                        10 C-units—Small copper beads
The arbitrariness of the scale must again be emphasized, since the neces-
sary research for determining actual quantities of copper in the artifacts
and the amount of labor involved in their manufacture has not been
performed.
   Before continuing our discussion of copper artifacts from the sites of
the Indian Knoll Culture, we must pause to examine problems recently
raised by Rolingson and Schwartz (1966) in their discussion of copper in
Kentucky sites. First of all, let us mark the notable differences between
the types of copper artifacts associated with the Indian Knoll sites and
those of northern cultures such as Old Copper and Frontenac. At the
latter sites, utilitarian implements predominate, while at the former, orna-
ments constitute 69 per cent of the thirteen copper artifacts from sites
along the Green River. (The percentage may be even higher if the two
pins from Barrett are actually ornaments rather than items of utilitarian
function. )Even in the nearby drainage of the Tradewater River, where
sites such as Morris (Rolingson and Schwartz, 1966) and Parrish (Roling-
son and Schwartz, 1966; Webb, 1951) produce copper, the emphasis on
ornaments is noticeable, with three copper gorgets and three sheet copper
fragments having been reported from Morris and a copper pin from
Parrish. Although the relationship of these latter very multi-component
sites to the Indian Knoll Culture    is obscure, the occurrence   of the ex-
panded-center copper gorgets at the Morris Site on the Tradewater River
and the Barrett and Indian Knoll sites on the Green River is interesting,
since to the best of our knowledge this copper artifact is unknown outside
of the lower Ohio Valley and its environs. In addition to these and other
examples reported by Rolingson and Schwartz (1966) for that area, an-
other gorget of the same style is present in the Peithmann Collection in
The Museum of Southern Illinois University. Little is known about the
provenience of this specimen, a surface find, but it is from the drainage of
the Big Muddy River, a tributary of the Mississippi, which joins that river
not far above its confluence with the Ohio. Thus, the copper artifacts that
we are discussing consist of items that relate primarily to the supra-subsis-
tence sphere and include a gorget type that is very limited spatially in its
distribution.
   Rolingson and Schwartz remark on the restricted distribution pattern,
200                                   Variability among Occupational Units
but conclude that a local origin for the gorgets is doubtful. The objects
suggest sufficient leisure for their manufacture, leisure time which should
also be evident in other ways at the sites. The context in which ceremon-
ial copper objects are found in Middle Woodland also suggests differenti-
ations in social rank, again not otherwise manifest in the Green River
region. Copper, in an unworked      state, available through trade, has not
been found in western Kentucky sites. These factors, then, suggest that
the copper gorgets were trade items (1966, p. 90).
  The final conclusion does not necessarily follow. First of all, there is no
anthropological principle which permits the interpretation of the type and
degree of cultural productivity as a direct function of leisure time. A
successful Tiwi elder may produce elaborate grave posts and intricately
crafted songs and dances, but these and the remaining assignments of his
leisure time will produce little and leave less to mark the choices that he
has made in such expenditures for supra-subsistence activities. Within the
statement of the authors there is a reflection of the myth current among
archeologists that leisure time is not available in quantity to primitive
hunters and gatherers, and the corollary that once leisure time is available
to human groups, an inexorable advance toward the complex behavior of
the urbanized elements of the Old World oikoumene is inevitable. The
essential difference between hunters and gatherers and sedentary cultiva-
tors is in the pattern of availability of the leisure time, not its presence or
absence. Thus, hunters and gatherers may have their leisure available in
smaller, less predictable, discontinuous units than would be the case in
sedentary societies, but we suspect that there would have been quite a
sufficiency of leisure time to the Indian Knoll craftsmen in their richly
endowed environment for producing some dozen or so copper artifacts,
without, however, expecting them to use their leisure time in a much
more extravagant fashion than the craftsmen of the Old Copper Culture,
who may be lauded for their industriousness in hammering copper, but
who seem to have lacked any spectacular initiative in other areas of
cultural florescence.
   In respect to the second proposition in the argument of the authors,
both the relevance and the documentation are obscure. That is, the posit-
ing of differences of social rank for individuals in Middle Woodland
societies elsewhere, and the lack thereof for individuals in the Archaic
Green River societies in general upon the basis of artifact associations
depends upon gratuitous assumptions. Both Woodland burials in the
Midwest and late Archaic burials in the Green River Valley differ widely
in the quantity and quality of grave goods (including copper artifacts)
that are associated with individual burials. If the assumption is to be
made that copious quantities and/or particular types of grave goods indi-
cate social ranking in Woodland cultures, then the same assumption must
be extended to Archaic cultures. But since no rigorous criteria have been
defined for evaluating from archeological data the significance of differ-
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                  201
entials deriving from statuses within an egalitarian system and differenti-
als deriving from statuses within a ranked system, it would be best to
drop the entire subject until archeologists are prepared to cope with it
effectively and objectively.
   Anent the third proposition in the statement, if raw copper is a valued
and rare import, it is not particularly surprising that it is missing as an
element of the Kentucky middens. The quantity of raw diamonds in the
New York City dumps probably does not warrant the screening of these
cultural residues.
  Finally, we must comment on the context of copper at both the Morris
and Parrish sites, since the artifacts were recovered from general midden
situations rather than special contexts, and assignment to a specific cul-
ture is difficult. Does the variation in context at these sites invalidate our
conclusions about the special context of copper in sites of the Indian
Knoll Culture? First of all we shall observe that neither site is particularly
notable for the number of burials removed, there being 28 at Morris and
133 at Parrish, and preservation of burials and artifacts made from or-
ganic materials was not at all good at Parrish. In view of the very consid-
erable inventory of lithic Archaic artifacts at each site, there would seem
to be a deficiency of burials if the numbers present in sites of the Indian
Knoll Culture, where preservation of bone and other organic materials is
good, are any indication. Nor is it possible to tell how many of the twenty-
eight burials at Morris belong with the sizeable Woodland and Mississip-
pian occupations. We conclude that the evidence is such that the context
of copper in the Tradewater River sites neither confirms nor denies our
assignment of special value to copper, since the chances for inadequate
preservation and later disturbance of Archaic burials at Morris and Par-
rish are such that it is impossible to reach any conclusion as to whether
the copper was or was not originally present in special context.
   Of considerable importance is the observation by Rolingson and
Schwartz (1966) that the Archaic associations of at least the expanded-
center copper gorget with Burial 1 at the Barrett Site are clear. We shall
add that the depths of other burials with copper artifacts at Barrett (for
example, Burial 43) and Indian Knoll (for example, Burial 248) and the
sparseness of later components at these sites would also point to the
probability that these burials pertain to one of the Archaic components at
these sites. However, Rolingson and Schwartz conclude from the similar-
ities of the Archaic copper gorgets to counterparts in stone in Early and
Middle Woodland cultures, the absence        of similar ornaments in other
Archaic sites in eastern North America,      and the lack of experimental
prototypes in the sites of the Green River Valley, that the gorgets are
“potentially Woodland objects in Archaic burials ... [and that] .”. . an
Archaic economy may have continued to live in the Green River region of
Kentucky after the development of a Woodland subsistence in surround-
ing areas” (1966, p. 91). For a number of reasons, we are disinclined to
202                                 Variability among Occupational Units
accept the content of this analysis. First of all, we are not particularly
impressed with the similarity of the copper gorgets to the expanded-
center stone gorgets of the Adena or Scioto Traditions. As a second point,
it is questionable that experimental prototypes would be necessary. That
is, precisely how much skill is needed to hammer and anneal copper into
a simple geometric shape once the basic technique is known, particularly
given both the possibility of infinite re-hammering on initially unsatisfac-
tory attempts and the fact that Indian Knoll craftsmen were accustomed
to handling reasonably sophisticated geometric shapes in stone and shell?
(Or, for that matter, one might ask where are the prototypes of the stone-
expanded center gorgets of the Adena Tradition, if prototypes are an
important consideration—or the prototypes of most prehistoric styles in
eastern North America, Archaic or Woodland?) As a third point, while
the association of the expanded-center copper gorget can be demon-
strated for the Archaic Indian Knoll Culture, no such association can be
shown for any Early or Middle Woodland culture in the Midwest or any
other part of eastern North America. We should be forced to conclude
that if they were being manufactured by Woodland groups, they were
being produced as export items to satisfy the tastes in copper artifacts of
their still culturally “Archaic” neighbors. And, finally, no matter how poor
the dating of the Indian Knoll sites may be, there are certainly no carbon-
14 dates from high or low in the middens that point to contemporaneity
of the Indian Knoll Culture with the advent or subsequent duration of
any of the known Woodland cultures of the Midwest. Our conclusions are
that the expanded-center gorgets (and possibly the other copper artifacts
as well) were made by the Archaic craftsmen of the second or third
millennium B.c. for the use of their Archaic contemporaries, and that they
were produced in the environs of the lower Ohio Valley.
  To return to our basic theme, it must be observed that the dearth of
copper artifacts in the Indian Knoll sites (see Table 10) precludes the
formation of any very definite conclusions about the context of copper
within the Indian Knoll population. Only three individuals are identified
as to sex, all from Barrett, where males are associated with copper oma-
ments having a total rating of 300 C-units and a single female with a
needle rating at 50 C-units. Men may have had control of the bulk of the
copper, particularly ornaments, while women      may have been limited to
lesser quantities and utilitarian implements, but the foregoing data are
definitely inadequate for reaching a firm conclusion.
  Another   type of data    can   be treated   somewhat   more   extensively,
namely the age groups with which copper appeared (see Table 5).
Fifty per cent of all copper artifacts are seen to belong with the non-
productive, pre-adolescent portion of the population, as well as 45 per
cent of the value units. It seems unlikely that the association with the
former group can be on the basis of personal activities or contributions to
the welfare of the group through economic endeavors on an adequate
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                                          203
e       a     re
 Table 5. Copper Artifact Appearance
eSa a

             Age Group                  No. of Items       C-units                Type
           New born (0)                      0                 0           _
           Infants (2)                       3               300           Omaments
           Children     (2)                  2               200            Ormaments
           Adolescents (1)                   1                50            Utility tools
           Adults     (5)                    4               550            Ornaments and
                                                                            Utility tools


scale. A more likely explanation would be that the association reflects
ascribed status, whether that status be engendered by psychological fac-
tors, sociological factors or a combination of the two.
   A similar examination of age groups for large marine shell artifacts
gives the results shown in Table 6.

                                      Table 6. Shell Appearance

  Age Group                 No. of Items     Value Units                           Types
Newborn (4)                      16               205        Pendants, tubular beads
Infants (21)                     80+             1410+       Pendants, tubular beads, discs,
                                                                   earplugs, gorgets, atlatl
                                                                   weights, cups?
Children     (13)                89+             1420+        Pendants, tubular beads, gorgets,
                                                                   earplugs, cups?
Adolescents     (12)             76+             1270+       Pendants, tubular beads, gorgets,
                                                               earplugs, discs, columella, cups
Adults (34)                     195              3975        Pendants, tubular beads, gorgets,
                                                                   atlatl weights, whole shells,
                                                                cups


Again, the pre-adolescent group is seen to be associated with a very
sizeable quantity of marine shell, having had placed with them some 40.6
per cent of the total items, or 36.6 per cent of the value units attributed to
the shell items. Actually, the percentages are low, since minimal counts
and value units are used for four infants, one child, and two adolescents,
the exact counts not being given, and three juveniles associated with four
items and 150-point value units are not included because of the inade-
quacy of age-group assignment.
  The types of artifacts associated with the various age groups tend to be
very similar, although earplugs tend to occur predominantly with infants
and children, ten of the thirteen examples being with this latter group, the
remaining three with adolescents. No examples are known with adults.
On the other hand, conch shell cups may be entirely an adult item, with
the two specimens designated by the inadequate description “conch shell”
    204                                       Variability among Occupational Units
    as possibilities reflecting the association of cups with infants and children.
      Data on disc-shell beads at Indian Knoll, the only site with adequate
    counts for age groups, differ somewhat from the preceding pattern, but
    again show that pre-adolescents were also receiving their share of these
    artifacts.

                      Table 7. Disc-shell Bead Appearance

                              Age                 Age
                            Group in          Group with        Total
                           Population            Beads          Beads
          Age Group       (Percentage)        (Percentage)   (Percentage)    Bead Count*
Newborn      (12)              6.5                21.8            1.6              296
Infants      (46)             24.7                22.0          22.9              4223
Children     (13)              8.9                LET            6.8              1252
Adolescents (14)               6.1                26.9          33.9              6241
Adults       (58)             53.4                IPT           34.6              6366
Total       (143)             99.6               100.7          99.8             18378

“Note the gross disparity between totals derived here from burial associations and the
summary tabulations of artifacts, for Indian Knoll in Webb’s    (1946) report.



      While only a relatively small proportion of each age group was pro-
    vided with disc-shell beads, adolescents and pre-adolescents were more
    frequently so equipped than adults, and about a third of all beads (31.3
    per cent )were with the pre-adolescents.
       All of the quantitative data on copper, large shell artifacts, and disc-
    shell beads point to the same obvious fact. Wealth as expressed in these
    items was being removed constantly from the society through placement
    with members of age groups who during their life span could not have
    contributed effectively to its procurement, hence producing a constant
    deficit that would have to be met through the activities of productive
    members of the society above and beyond their own personal require-
    ments. This point will become more significant when we examine the
    cyclical patterns of shell accumulation and diminution in the last section
    of this paper.
_     For comparative     purposes,     one    might exanvine    the roughly      contem-
    poraneous Frontenac Culture of New York (Ritchie, 1945). Conch shell is
    not particularly plentiful at Frontenac, but some fourteen items of conch
    are recorded with burials at this site, all of which are the burials of
    children, adolescents, or adult females, with shell being conspicuously
    absent from adult male burials. Six of the fourteen shell artifacts (a
    container, a piece of worked shell, and four circular, perforated pend-
    ants) are associated with adult females, one with an adolescent (pend-
    ant), and seven with children (all pendants). In terms of the rating
    system which we have been using, adult females are associated with 215
Winter Archaic Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                 205
of the 415 units at the site, or 51.8 per cent; adolescents with 25 units, or 6
per cent; and children with 175 units, or 42.2 per cent. (There is also an
infant with an oyster shell pendant which has not been included in the
calculations.) Frontenac and Indian Knoll are alike in the proportion of
imported    marine   shell that is provided   for the pre-adolescent   burials,
but are quite different in the apparent exclusion of males from association
with such Beigaben at Frontenac. Of course, such an exclusion does not
mean that males played no role in the control of the resource, since the
public display of the ornaments often may be linked to females, the
procurement and distribution to males, who apparently receive their satis-
factions from the control of wealth, with females serving as the observ-
able symbols of that wealth—a procedure not without parallels in con-
temporary American society.
  Before attempting a final assessment of the significance of the preced-
ing data, it might be well to consider for the Indian Knoll Culture other
types of artifacts in burial context to see if further light can be thrown on
possible similarities and differences in status and role of the respective
sexes.
   To summarize—and disregarding unique artifacts—the only artifacts
solely associated with males definitely identified as to sex were axes,
cannon bone awls, fish hooks, groundhog incisors, antler drifts, flakers,
antler chisels, and animal bones and jaws of several species (raccoon,
weasel,    wolf, deer, squirrel, groundhog,   fishes, snake,   drumfish,   etc.).
Such a list indicates the association of woodworking with males (axes
and, possibly, groundhog incisors); at least one type of fishing (fish-
hooks); certain manufacturing operations (cannon bone awls); flint
working (flakers and antler drifts); and the possession of certain types of
medicine bag contents (animal bones and jaws) assuming that Webb
(1950) was correct in his interpretation of these items.
  Predominantly in male association, but also found with females, were
weapons or components thereof (projectile points, atlatl weights, atlatl
hooks and handles); general utility artifacts (knives, scrapers); fabricat-
ing and processing tools (drills, various types of bone awls); certain
ornaments (bone hairpins); and items of uncertain function such as bone
pins. Generally speaking, men had a greater variety of artifacts in associa-
tion, with particular concentrations of fabricating and processing tools.
  For females, the only definitely linked items were domestic equipment
(nutting stones), certain ornaments     (bone beads), and an item of fabri-
cating and processing equipment (gravers). Pestles (domestic equip-
ment) were predominantly associated with females.
   It should be noted that the overlap in sex association, barring faulty
sexual identification, may be the result of inadequate functional identifi-
cation or misinterpretation of context. All too often all stemmed objects
with pointed blades are classified as projectile points, without distinguish-
ing through preparation and use characteristics those stemmed objects
206                                   Variability among Occupational Units
that are either prepared as knives or have been used as knives. Or, again,
the significance of a pestle may be ambiguous. That is, this item might be
included with a male without implying that the association indicates the
grinding of seeds or other foods on his part. The inclusion of a “mint”
copy might just as well indicate that the association was based upon his
role in the manufacture of these items, or in the instance of a heavily
battered specimen, his utilization of an artifact that has many of the
necessary characteristics of a hammerstone for the latter purpose, rather
than as a grinding implement. In short, our observations on context and
functional characteristics must be far more precise than they have gener-
ally been in the past if we are to use individual classes of artifacts for the
analysis of variation of status and role between the two sexes.
   But even with such possible defects in the data, the preceding differ-
ences point to little more than expectable differences in roles between the
sexes in a hunting and gathering society.
   Another and rather curious associational pattern involves the atlatl. As
Webb (1946, p. 330) points out, a very considerable number of females
are found with atlatl parts. Even using only adults, and those definitely
identified as to sex, ten (seven at Indian Knoll, one at Chiggerville, one at
Ward, and one at Barrett) of the 54 burials so identified with atlatl parts
were those of females. A figure of 18 per cent is rather surprising for an
item of equipment that one would expect to be basically an item of male
equipment in a hunting and gathering society.
  Webb (1946, p. 331) rejects the contention that the atlatl is a purely
ceremonial implement, hence sometimes associated with females because
of their role in ceremonial activities, on the grounds that there are too
many examples showing extensive wear from use, numerous              repaired
atlatl components, and far too many fragmentary remains in the middens.
Of course establishing that the atlatl is a utility implement does not prove
that all atlatls were functionally so identified within the culture, and the
earlier analysis in this paper of the association patterns of the atlatl indi-
cated that there are some peculiarities about the distribution of the atlatl
when contrasted with other utilitarian items. It would be interesting to
learn what the use characteristics of the atlatl parts with females may
have been, and if there are significant differences in respect to those with
males.
   But we join Webb in lacking enthusiasm for the interpretation of the
atlatl as a ceremonial item associated with females. Nor are we quite
willing to evoke a platoon of Amazons, or a succession of Boadiceas
defending the Green River mussel beds against the onslaught of intruders,
although history is legion with militant females who acquitted themselves
well in combat.
  Possibly the association relates to the transfer of the contents of a
corporate estate, and has nothing directly to do with the sex of the indi-
vidual per se. Or perhaps the answer is simply that some women were
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                                 207
hunters of one type of game or another.
   But none of these speculations can be seen as having any particular
merit, there being no evidence permitting substantiation one way or the
other. Of course, re-analysis of the Indian Knoll sites might provide data
suitable for eliminating some possibilities, and favoring others. But at the
moment, all that can be concluded is that the roles of females overlapped
those of males in some way, leading to occasional association with the
former of a weapon that one would expect a priori to be a symbol of male
activities.
  On the other hand, females do show rather high percentages in respect
to certain types of ceremonial equipment and burial practices. For ex-
ample at Indian Knoll, the percentages given in Table 8 were noted,
including in the samples all individuals definitely or tentatively identified
as to sex.


  Table 8. Ceremonial Equipment Appearance and Burial Practices

                                                        Males                 Females
   Ceremonial Equipment:*                          ( Percentage )          (Percentage)
          Medicine bags                                60                       40
        Turtle shell rattles                            50                      50
        Flutes                                          50                      50
   Burial Practices:
        With grave goods                               Oy)                      30.3
        Per cent of all burials with red ocher         37                       63
        Per cent of all burials with dog burials       67                       sk)

 *The rationale for assigning these items      to ceremonial        equipment   has been
 discussed at length in Winters, 1968.


  It seems obvious that females were receiving equal, or even greater
attention than males with respect to certain aspects of burial customs, and
that for some reason they were often associated with just as much cere-
monial equipment as males, with the equipment being identical for each
sex. We refuse to derive any very specific conclusions from such data, our
only purpose at the moment being to furnish some basis for speculating
that the females      of the Indian    Knoll culture were           more    than chattels,
since they shared access with males to certain types of equipment best
related to roles connected with the supernatural, and were accorded at
least as much attention in death as the males, even though an individual
male might surpass any female in total quantity of grave goods.
   The point might be further emphasized by noting in Table 9 the per-
centages of total burials with grave goods for each site, correcting where
possible for intrusive burials. (We are unable to compute percentages of
males and females for this item for the other sites because of lack of
data. )
208                                       Variability among Occupational Units

  Table 9. Burials with Grave Goods as Percentage of Total Burials

                           Sites               Percentage
                           Ward                   12.7
                           Barrett                25,1
                           Butterfield            10.5
                           Kirkland                abil
                           Chiggerville           30.7
                           Indian Knoll           30.8
                           Read                   30.8
                           Carlson Annis          44.6

   The reasons for the variability are undoubtedly complex but may relate
in part to function in the settlement system. The highest percentage are
from settlements and base camps, the lowest, from Kirkland, a hunting
camp. One can speculate that there might have been differential treat-
ment of the dead, depending upon the circumstance and place of death.
That is, if the Indian Knoll sample is at all representative, both males and
females with grave goods represent some small, specially selected seg-
ment of the population, whatever the basis for selection may have been.
Hence, we conclude that some females occupied special statuses of one
sort or another, as did some males, and that there was a considerable
sharing of the artifacts symbolic of those statuses. (A psychological ex-
planation of differentials in grief and the outward expression of that grief
hardly seems adequate to explain the consistently low selection rate for
either sex.)
   Throughout the preceding discussion, the term association has been
used without any implication that the placement of artifacts necessarily
means ownership by the deceased. Ethnohistoric examples point out the
perils attendant upon any such assumption. Lescarbot (in Slotkin and
Schmitt, 1949), states that “after they have laid the dead to rest, every
one makes him a present of the best thing he has. Some cover him with
skins of beavers, of otters, and other beasts: others present him with
bows, arrows, quivers, knives, matachias, and other things.”
  But we do assume that grave goods represent appropriate equipment
for the deceased in terms of the norms of the culture, and thus in general
reflect concepts of a society as they pertain to the statuses and roles of the
two sexes and the various age groups, regardless of the idiosyncratic
behavior of any individual member of the society. And it is with this
interpretation of the significance of grave goods that we now summarize
our conclusions about the distribution patterns of Class III artifacts from
the preceding data, granting that such “conclusions” in the present formu-
lation are very tentative, or even very nebulous, at best: (1) Males are
associated with the largest conch artifacts and, hence, may have con-
trolled the essential raw materials that constituted the “capital” for the
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                     209
manufacture of the various categories of conch artifacts, (2) There was a
continuous flow of such tranformed capital to both females, who as indi-
viduals could possess more wealth than males, and to non-productive, pre-
adolescent members of the society. (Conjectures as to the mechanisms of
such transfers can run the gamut of psychological and sociological expla-
nations, there being no clear indication from the archeological data of
how such distribution was effected.) (3) There was a constant drain of
wealth from the society through burial practices, with a continuing need
for replacement of the items in question, and this drain was accelerated
by the assignment of the special Class III artifacts to the newborn, in-
fants, and children, who were certainly unable to contribute towards a
replenishment of the supply, and probably by the assignment of the same
items to females, whose productivity was along lines other than the pro-
curement and transformation of such basic raw materials as marine shell
and copper. (4) Only a very small proportion of the population was
tangibly associated with the special artifacts, perhaps implying differen-
tials within the society in respect to the distribution of wealth among the
living. Such a statement carries with it no implication that the society was
ranked in rigid divisions, since in other respects the archeological data
suggest that the population was socially homogeneous and without great
differentials in the basic way of life of the individuals composing the
population.
   Moreover, there is a subsidiary observation that may be derived from
the data. Prior to the appearance of cultures such as Indian Knoll, there is
little indication, if any, of specialized craft activities in the Midwest. But
in view of the concentration of shell in the hands of a small segment of
the Indian Knoll population, we might assume that the working of shell
was also concentrated within the same population segment, and that we
have during late Archaic times the beginnings of craft specialization that
apparently became important during Woodland times. The association of
a shell-working kit with burial 610, an infant, indicates that the working
of at least some of the shell was taking place within the Indian Knoll
Culture,    no   matter   how   much   may   have   been   imported   as finished
products.
  Up to this point, a synchronic approach has been followed, with the
intention of interpreting general patterns within the Indian Knoll Culture,
rather than variations within the individual settlement system units or
through time. The inadequacies of the published data prohibit the consid-
eration of inter-unit variation on any adequate level, but it is possible to
consider the problem of change through time within individual sites with
the aid of burial records and the limited reporting of stratigraphic units
from Carlson Annis and Read.
   On the graphs shown as Figures | through 3, the following information
was plotted:
  1. A curve designed ‘to represent population trends based upon the
210                                   Variability among Occupational Units




                                 KnoLtw           Sire,                 OHS




                                  OBSERVED             FREQUENCY
                                 Br     ONE       Foot            LEVELS


                                                Nume@cre     of       BuRizis
                                 o—oO—0                Pee    Levei
                                                Numsee       of       Disc    SHELL
                                  ae                   Bn20s          Pee Lever
                                                NUMBER       OF       LARGE        MeRiINnE
                                  Lee      ad          Sune. r Arripacts Per
                                                       Levew




                                           PERCENTAGE FREQUENCY
                                           Br HA.e  Foor LEVELS


                                            Preecawt       of Jota            iti
                                                E4cH        Levee

       8R
                                            o—e—        Disc SHELL             Beans
                                            @--@--@     CONCH                ARTiFAcTs

      PERCENTAGES




              LS    225   3°35    4   45    5   5556    65        7    75      8    8&5   9
                                  LEVELS




                    Figure I. Indian Knoll Site Burials.
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                                          211




      PeRecenrTracEes




                   25524
                      3 @                   fF (S79)        HOMINIS     (2516   Ns) joN7hs
                                                     LeEvELSs
                         Imncoian             Knorr               Site,         OHS
                          PESCENTAGE     OF   BURIALS                           WITH
                             ASSOCIATIONS   BY   LEVEL
              O-—-@=-@ Bvei4ce       with    Disc    sumii   BSEADSG   &-@--@   % BEADS BY LeveL




      ”



      2yc
      )
      X
    ¢
          :

                   [ets           4. SUSN          TABS:       DWF il) 1215 41441510
                                                     Levers
                             Carrisonwn                 ANNI6G           MounDd
                                  PERCENTAGE    FREQUENCY
                                         By  CEevelW
              O--0—--0   DRILLS     , Ooo   =0 BURIALS,        © --@-@ LARGE    Marine Sri
              @—-@—@     BVKI4..5    WITH   disc    SHELL    BEADS


LAB       ELC.
                         Figure 2. Graphs of studied grave goods.
212                                   Variability among Occupational Units
numbers of burials per 0.5-ft. level. The rationale here was simply that,
other things being equal, the number of burials should be a function of
the population size at any given time. It might be argued that the use of
half-foot levels would lead to a distortion of population figures through
variation in the depth of the burial pits themselves, the actual point of pit
origin not being stated in the reports, only the depth below surface of the
bottom of the pit. We do not consider the foregoing a particularly crucial
problem. Middens of the Midwestern shell mound type tend to build up
through fairly uniform accretion over their expanse, although there may
be more rapid accretion on the marginal slopes where trash seems to have
accumulated in considerable bulk. And Archaic burial pits tend to be both
small and quite shallow. While Webb does not give detailed information
on dimensions of burial pits in his publications, those reported for Indian
Knoll (1946, p. 137) range from 0.5 to 1.2 feet in depth, with diameters
from 2.1 to 3.1 feet. At Ward (1940, p. 89) the depth of only one pit is
mentioned, the figure given being 0.5 ft. The overwhelming predomin-
ance of tightly flexed burials, as opposed to extended burials, is also
commented on by Webb several times. Our own experience with such
burials in shell middens of the Wabash Valley has been that the burial
pits are quite small both in diameter and depth, rarely being larger than
the absolutely minimal cavity needed for jamming the tightly flexed re-
mains into the ground. The illustrations in the various Indian Knoll re-
ports indicate similarly minimal pits. Hence, we doubt that there was any
great variation in pit depths, and shall assume that depths ranging from
0.5 to 1.2 ft. would be quite representative of the pits in general, with
most of them being nearer the latter figure. While the results shown on
the graphs from the plotting of depths of the bottoms of pits cannot be as
satisfactory as curves based upan the depth of pit origin, the amount of
error is probably not sufficient to vitiate the purposes of the graph.
   2. Percentages of total large shell artifacts (Table 3) by 0.5-ft. levels.
   3. The percentages of total disc shell beads, or entire units of beads for
those sites where individual counts are not available, by 0.5-ft. levels.
   4, Percentages of individuals associated with disc shell beads at Carlson
Annis and Indian Knoll per 0.5-ft. level.
   5. As a control device for Carlson Annis and Read, the only sites for
which the necessary information is available, the percentages of the total
of a midden-associated utility artifact by 0.5-ft. levels.
   Initially, we attempted to use one-foot levels, as shown in Fig. 1A. The
resulting graph simply showed normal curves for all items plotted for
Indian Knoll. But, assuming a 500-year span for the accumulation of the
larger Indian Knoll Culture middens, such units would be equivalent to
an approximate time span of a hundred years, an interval that might be
much too great to show more than the grosser types of variation in cul-
tural activities as manifested in artifactual remains, or events of a catas-
trophic nature with long-enduring results. Subsequent graphs using half-
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                 213
foot levels seem to indicate that the foregoing misgivings were correct.
While the curves for population continued to approach normal curves, the
graphs for shell artifacts showed wide swings above and below the popu-
lation curves. Utility artifacts, on the other hand, tended to conform to
the population curve, as in the case of bone awls at Read, or to show a
constant and continuous rise, as in the case of drills at Carlson Annis.
Thus, although the quantitative data used in plotting the frequencies of
shell artifacts are derived from the quantities of shell in association with
the burials used for the population curve, there is a pattern of variation
that does not conform closely to the population curve itself or to the
occurrence of utility artifacts in the middens. In other words, the curves
derived for shell artifacts are not solely the function of fluctuations in the
population occupying the site, but instead appear as a cyclical series of
maxima and minima that may vary in a fashion often directly opposite to
the trend of the population curve.
   The interpretation of the significance of the shell curves is difficult.
Barring the imposition of external factors that would lead to a regularly
recurring reduction in the procurement of shell in the society, a phenome-
non for which we are at present unable to provide even conjectures, the
source of the fluctuations might best be sought within the society itself.
One possibility might be the occurrence of special activities at century
intervals, with an accompanying demand for imported marine shell. But
such a conjecture would demand that two out of three, or three out of
four, generations concern themselves with the preparations or the after-
math of an event carried to its fulfillment by a third or fourth. Within a
semi-sedentary society, operating presumably only on oral tradition, such
repetitive long-range planning does not seem to provide a very satisfac-
tory basis even for conjectural explanation.
   Perhaps a more satisfactory answer can be found in generational pat-
terning. Assuming    a range of constantly present activities with which
marine   shell is associated,   either in connection   with the realms of the
living or of the dead, we might assume a two-generation span of intensive
accumulation of sufficient quantities of marine shell to serve the general
needs of the society, followed by the gradual depletion of the reserves
over a two-generation period to the point that renewed intensive accumu-
lation must begin again. We assume, of course, that some shell was being
procured at all times from foreign sources, whatever the procurement
mechanisms nay have been, but that the variation indicated by the shell
curves reflects the rate of accumulation, not discrete phases of acquisition
and non-acquisition. A complete breaking off of procurement for pro-
tracted intervals would hardly permit a relatively even pattern of contin-
uous variation.
  Another consistent pattern is found in the relative positions of the crests
of the curves for large shell and disc-shell beads, the crest for the latter
tending to lag behind that of the former. Here the explanation may be
214                                    Variability among Occupational Units




                                         PERCENTAGE         OF   TOTAIL
                                          OccURING     BY    LEVEL




                                                     BurRiacs
      )                                              Bone        Awts
      w)
      dhe                                             LarGce  ConcnH
                                                          ARTIFACTS
                                                      Wor TOTaA   SHELL
                                                          NECKLACES
      Z
      i)
      U
       Y
       w)
      Oo




                  [SOS
                    4a om TS ORNS
                            LEVeE\

                           Reap      Swett.     Mipoen


            Figure 3. Read Shell Midden, graph of studied materials.
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic           215
simply that the large shell items were manufactured rather quickly after
the importation of the basic raw materials, there probably being rather
little labor connected with the completion of the finished product, while
the shell beads, the production of which would have necessitated the
expenditure of a considerable amount of labor in their shaping, perforat-
ing, and grinding, were being manufactured over a somewhat longer time
from basic raw materials and perhaps from broken examples of the larger
conch artifacts as these became available.
   A final point to be made about the charts is that as Figures 2A and 2B
show, albeit Figure 2A less clearly, there seems to have been a noticeable
decrease through time in the number of burials associated with disc-shell
beads, primarily necklaces, as the proportional quantities of the beads
themselves rose. In other words, fewer and fewer people seem to have
controlled more and more of the shell beads through time. Control of this
form of wealth may well have been increasingly concentrated in the
hands of a smaller segment of the population—perhaps a prehistoric ex-
ample of the “rich get richer, the poor get poorer” or “he who has gets”
pattern of economic behavior.
   But returning to the problem of the fluctuations in shell procurement, it
might be well to examine how such a system might relate to the world
beyond the narrow confines of the Indian Knoll Culture in the Green
River and Ohio valleys.
   First of all, what are the actual sources of the imported shell? They are
all concentrated     in the southeastern coastal areas of the United            States,
with distribution patterns and other pertinent data as follows according to
Abbott (1954) and other authors:
  Pleuroploca gigantea Kiener' (Fasciolaria gigantea Kiener)—North
Carolina to both sides of Florida. Found in shallow water. Normally
about a foot in length, but may be as large as two feet.
  Prunum apicinum Menke (Marginella apicinum Menke )—North Caro-
lina to Florida, the Gulf States and the West              Indies. A shallow water
species.
   Busycon perversum Linne—Both sides of central Florida. Four to
eight inches in length. Occur in four to ten fathoms of water. Hence
are difficult to obtain, although they may be washed onto beaches by
storms.
  Olivella spp. Species not reported for Indian Knoll sites. Excluding the
West Coast species, the range of the several species in the genus is from
North Carolina to the West Indies, with two species localized to lower
Florida and adjacent islands.
  It is not possible to pinpoint the locus from which the shells derived,
although if they were being obtained from a single source, central Florida
  ‘ Taxonomic   designation in current usage given first, with obsolete form used in the
reports on the Indian Knoll Culture following in parentheses.
216                               Variability among Occupational Units
would have to have been the area, Busycon perversum being obtainable
only within that limited range. But even granting that each species was
obtained from its nearest possible source, none of the species could have
come from locations closer than six hundred miles by the most direct
overland route, and some would have had to have been derived from
sources as far away as 750 miles. Actual transportation routes, whether by
land or water, or both, must have been much longer.
   How then could the shells have been introduced into the sites of the
Indian Knoll Culture? Three major alternatives (and combinations
thereof ) present themselves:
   1. The Indian Knoll peoples (or portions of the population) regularly
left the Green River Valley and moved to coastal areas in the manner of
known historic tribes in their seasonal rounds. The main objection to this
proposal is that so far no sites attributable to the Indian Knoll Culture are
known from the coastal areas, and one might well expect fairly sizeable
middens to have accumulated during the some 500-year span that we
think must be assigned to the Kentucky sites. Furthermore, one might
also expect a rather more abundant range of marine species and other
exotic materials in the Kentucky middens had this pattern of “transhu-
mance” been a characteristic feature of the Indian Knoll cycle.
   2. Trading relationships were maintained with neighboring groups who
in turn received marine shells from their neighbors in a system that ulti-
mately linked the Indian Knoll area with the coastal sources of supply.
There are no basic theoretical objections to such a postulated exchange
system, the minimal requirements being only a supply of items acceptable
between groups for exchange and a basis for continuing reciprocity be-
tween trading partners so that the flow of goods is uninterrupted.
  The existence of such trading systems is very well documented for other
parts of the world. For example, the nomadic tribes of Australia maintain
trade networks that distribute a number of commodities over large areas.
The exchange of goods takes many forms, includes a wide variety of
commodities   and finished products,   and is accompanied     by short-term
and long-term balancing of accounts between the participants in the ex-
change system. Movement of goods is not random, but follows well de-
fined paths, usually along waterhole routes (Berndt and Berndt, 1964).
The system is so effective that Kimberley pearl shell is distributed from
one end of the continent to the other. Notably, in a ceremonial exchange
system such as the merbok,    trading partners in maintaining reciprocity
with each other may have to accept things for which they have no use in
order to keep the orderly flow of goods unimpeded.
   Even in somewhat more sedentary societies, elaborate exchange sys-
tems are maintained in a similar fashion. Uberoi (1962) in his brilliant re-
analysis of the kula ring has this to say, quoting in part from Fortes and
Evans-Pritchard (1940);
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                   217
  The islands of the kula ring are all “societies which lack centralized author-
  ity, administrative machinery, and constituted judicial institutions—in short
  which lack government—and in which there are no sharp differences of rank,
  status, or wealth,” ...The kula islands are all inhabited by small groups of
  people who make their living by use of simple tools. Technically expressed,
  the Massim have a rudimentary technology and a subsistence economy
   (p. 214).
  That the Indian Knoll peoples possessed a settlement system, a subsist-
ence base, and a level of technology sufficient for maintaining an ex-
change system in the fashion of the merbok or the kula ring seems beyond
question. Whether they did so, and how they did so are other questions.
The basic problem seems to be the nature of the commodities available to
the Indian Knoll people for exchange. The Green River area is not partic-
ularly well endowed with natural resources that would lend themselves to
a viable exchange system with their neighbors. Chert is present, but
neighboring areas are well supplied with this raw material and the Indian
Knoll cherts do not seem to have any special characteristics that would
place them in the class of “luxury” cherts. Nor do the various sandstones,
limestones, shells, and animal bones available to the Indian Knoll people
seem to be likely raw materials for exchange.
  A remote possibility is that in the manner of Australian trading part-
ners, the neighbors of the Green River peoples were willing to accept
items such as chert until they could be passed on to other groups in the
trading network. But these latter people in the Midwest and Midsouth
would also have had access to the same raw materials, so that there would
have had to have been a prolonged series of exchanges of relatively
worthless commodities for items of high value. And in the Australian
system, acceptance of an inutile item seems to be based on the knowledge
that it could be rapidly disposed of for some desired and useful item.
   Possibly copper was being passed on by Indian Knoll traders. But the
insignificant quantities in the Green River sites themselves (see Table 10)
hardly support the suggestion that copper could have furnished a basis
for the several centuries during which marine shell was being procured in
considerable quantity. It is possible, of course, that copper was such a
valuable item that a small amount would procure a large amount of shell.
  A final conjecture is that the actual exchange system was based upon
raw materials (pitch might be suggested as one commodity available to
the Indian Knoll peoples from local sources) or upon finished products
that have either gone unrecognized or have not been preserved in the
archeological record.
  Ultimately we reject this second method of procurement as an impor-
tant factor in the importation of shell by the Indian Knoll peoples, al-
though such an arrangement for an exchange involving marine shell from
the Indian Knoll area and copper from the north seems a fairly good
218                                         Variability among Occupational Units
possibility. Our reasons for rejecting it in the case of neighbors to the
south lie in the considerable and repetitive fluctuations in sites of the
Indian Knoll Culture of the imported marine items. The very essence of a
system based upon trading partners is the maintenance of regular and
continuous exchange, and we doubt that satisfactory and regular relation-
ships could have survived over several centuries of widely fluctuating
shifts in demand so evident within the Indian Knoll Culture itelf.
   A third possibility is that there were ties with a redistribution center
which provided raw materials or finished products for a number of inland
groups. Here the assumption would be that Indian Knollers were engaged
in regular trading expeditions, with the intensity of the trading varying
with the current demand. The significant flaw in such a proposal is that
no such centers have as yet been identified for the third millennium B.c.,
although the Indian Knoll] sites may in themselves have functioned as
such centers for the Midwest.



      Table 10. Copper Artifacts in Sites of the Indian Knoll Culture

  Site                         Artifact          Depth in Ft.       Context
  Barrett              Expanded-center gorget         1.5       YA, Male burial 1
  Barrett              Broken ornament               15         YA, Male burial 44
  Barrett              Needle                        1.2        YA, Female burial 6
  Barrett              Pin                           2.8        Ad, Female? burial 43
  Barrett              Pin*                           ie              ?
  Carlson Annis        Bead                           ie           Midden
  Carlson Annis        Double pointed awl             P            Midden
  Indian Knoll         Oval pendants (2)             0.8        I, Male? burial 632
  Indian Knoll         Spiraled end ‘ornament        44         I, Male? burial 248
  Indian Knoll         Ornament                       ,         G       ? burial 64
  Indian Knoll         Expanded center gorget         ?         YA      ? burial 103
  Indian Knoll         Ornament                       i         C       ? burial 185
       *In Webb and Haag (1947, p. 5), five burials with copper artifacts are
       reported, but burial tabulations record only four with copper.



  As a conjecture, since we tend to favor this last proposal, we shall
predict that such focal trading centers did exist, and that when they are
discovered, they will share many characteristics with the Poverty Point
site of the first millennium 8.c. (Ford and Webb, 1956). Poverty Point has
an array of imported raw materials, including copper (Great Lakes
area?), cherts (Midwest, Arkansas, Missouri), steatite and chlorite schists
(North Carolina), crystal quartz, novaculite, magnetite, and hematite
(Arkansas), and sandstone (Mississippi). The various minerals that are
so abundant in the Midwest apparently had a very different sort of value
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic           219
in the lower Mississippi Valley and the Gulf coastal plains where these
resources are lacking.
  Perhaps similar minerals were important in the chertless areas of the
deep South long before Poverty Point became an important focus of
exchange activities. (We doubt that the Poverty Point people could have
obtained their raw materials over any length of time by actual mining
operations in distant areas not under their control, and at least in the
Midwest the areas from which their imported commodities were obtained
were under the control of well-established groups long before the first
millennium 8.c.) If a number of groups were involved with such centers,
the cyclical fluctuations of demand for any one trading group would not
necessarily impair the functioning of the system itself.
   Although we cannot go beyond the level of conjecture in analyzing how
the Indian Knoll procurement system might have functioned, we can be
sure that elements of a trading system existed, having rejected extensive
and continuous population movements       as an adequate explanation, and
that marine shell and copper were being distributed over vast distances
within eastern North America by the third millennium B.c. It remains to be
demonstrated that cherts were an important commodity at that time, and
that they were being distributed to the chertless areas of the South. But if
such movement is demonstrable through future reconnaissance and exca-
vation, a very important contribution will have been made to archeologi-
cal theory, for from the Early Woodland cultures of the first millennium to
Mississippian times, the basic triumvirate of trade items in the Midwest
and adjacent areas consisted of chert, copper, and marine shells, particu-
lar types of the first item even being imported into areas abundantly
supplied with chert. (For example, in early sites of the Havana Tradition
such as Dickson and Pond in Fulton County, Illinois, 25 to 30 per cent of
the cherts were imported from southern Illinois in spite of the fact that
there were abundant supplies at the nearby Avon quarries. )
   But regardless of the nebulous and conjectural nature of the previous
arguments, we wish to emphasize here that there is good evidence that
the vast trade network that links the various regional traditions of the
Hopewellian Interaction Sphere (Caldwell, 1964) has its roots in the
simpler exchange systems of late Archaic cultures such as Indian Knoll,
regardless of whether chert was a component of the system at that early
time or not.
   Let it be emphasized in conclusion that we do not feel that we have
proved anything in the present paper. Our objective has been in the
nature of an exploratory operation in a search of techniques for the sim-
plest sort of interpretation of the economic sphere of prehistoric societies
and to indicate some hypotheses that suggest themselves. Only future
work with data collected specifically for studies with such emphases over
220                                           Variability among Occupational Units
a wide geographic range of contemporaneous cultures can permit analy-
ses refined to the point that they have a reasonably high degree of proba-
bility as to their conclusions.



                                       References

Axssortt, R. Tucker. 1954. American seashells. New York: D. Van Nostrand.
BerNDT, RoLanpD M., and CaTuerine H. Bernpr. 1964. The world of the first
  Australians. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
CaLDWELL, JosePpH R. 1964. Interaction spheres in prehistory. In Joseph R.
  Caldwell and Robert R. Hall (Eds.), Hopewellian studies; Scientific Papers,
  Vol. 12. Springfield: Ilinois State Museum.
Forp, JaMes A., and CLARENCE Wess. 1956. Poverty point. Archaeological
   Papers, 46, Part 1: New York: American Museum of Natural History.
Fortes, M., and E. E. Evans-Prircuarp. 1940.                     African   political systems.
   London, New York: Oxford University Press.
Hanson, Lee H., Jr. 1966. The Hardin Village site. Studies in Anthropology,
   No. 4, Lexington: University of Kentucky Press.
JoHNson, FREDERICK (Assembler). 1951. Radiocarbon dating. Memoir no. 8.
   Salt Lake City: Society for American Archaeology.
Lippy, WILLARD F. 1952. Chicago radiocarbon dates III. Science, 116(3025) :
   673-681.
Morcan, Lewis H. 1851. League of the Ho-De-No-Sau-Nee or Iroquois.
   Rochester, N.Y.: Sage and Bros.
Rircure, WiLi1AM A. 1945. An early site in Cayuga County, New York. Re-
  search Records, no. 7, Rochester. Rochester: Museum of Arts and Sciences.
Rouincson, MarTHA ANN, and Doucias W. ScHwarTz. 1966. Late Paleo-
  Indian and Early Archaic manifestations in western Kentucky                       Studies in
  Anthropology, No. 3. Lexington: University of Kentucky Press.
Rouse, Irvine.    1951. A survey ‘of Indian River archaeology.              Florida Publica-
  tions in Anthropology, No. 44. New Haven: Yale University.
SLOTKIN, J. S., and Kart Scumirr. 1949. Studies of wampum. American
  Anthropologist, 51(2): 223-236.
Speck, Frank G. 1919. The functions of wampum among the eastern Al-
   gonkian, Memoirs, Vol. 6, American Anthropological Association.
Usrrot, J. P. Sincu. 1962. Politics of the Kula Ring. Manchester:                   Manchester
  University Press.
Wess,    W.   S. 1946.     Indian   Knoll.   Reports in Anthropology,          4(3)    Part    1:
  Lexington: University of Kentucky.
      . 1950a.   The     Carlson    Annis    Mound.    Reports    in Anthropology,          7(4):
  Lexington: University of Kentucky.
     . 1950b. The Read shell midden.             Reports in Anthropology,           7(5):    Lex-
  ington: University of Kentucky.
WesB,   W.    S., and    W.   G. Haac.       1939.    The   Chiggerville    Site.   Reports     in
  Anthropology, 4(1): Lexington: University of Kentucky.
     . 1940. Cypress Creek villages. Reports in Anthropology, 4(2): Lexing-
  ton: University of Kentucky.
     . 1947. Archaic sites in McLean County, Kentucky. Reports in Anthro-
  pology, 7(1): Lexington: University of Kentucky.
Winter Value Systems and Trade Cycles of the Late Archaic                          221
Winters,   H. D.   1963.   An   archaeological   survey   of the Wabash   Valley    in
  Illinois. Reports of Investigations, No. 10. Springfield: Illinois State Mu-
  seum.
     . 1968. The Riverton culture. Springfield: Illinois State Museum.
ee   =)   «=>   le)    ¢

Weatendt
      ad              Oda4 OHS   OA
TWELVE                                             ROBERT    WHALLON,      JR.




                                                        Investigations
                                                of Late Prehistoric
                                             Social Organization
                                              in New York State




One of the important problems of archeology today is the understanding
of the interrelationships between the stylistic behavior of material items
and the structure of the sociocultural systems within which these items
were produced and in which they found their function. Although this
should be a problem of general anthropological interest, it is of particular
concern to archeology, which is dependent for much of its interpretation
on the analysis of style.
   The hypothesis that measurable relationships exist between style and
social organization is founded upon two basic assumptions. The first of
these is that style has many aspects and levels of behavior which may be
analytically distinguished and measured. Many of these aspects of style
are not intuitively obvious, and each aspect of stylistic behavior may
demand a separate and different method of analysis. The second assump-
tion basic to this hypothesis is that the nature of the diffusion of stylistic
ideas and practices, both within and between communities,         will be de-
termined by the nature of interaction among artisans. The aspect of style
concerned, the rate of diffusion, and the directions and limits of diffusion
will be conditioned by the kind, frequency, and channeling of interaction
among the producers of the stylistic material. These patterns of interac-
                                      223
224                                     Variability among Occupational Units
tion either define, or are the result of, the social organization of the
community or region, depending on the theoretical view of social organi-
zation adopted.
   The validity of the first assumption was demonstrated in a series of
rigorous analyses by Kroeber and Richardson (1940). Realizing, thus, the
complex and numerous aspects of behavior of even seemingly simple
stylistic features, Kroeber later discussed the impossibility of giving a
precise and simple definition of style (Kroeber, 1963, chap. 1). The
meaning of style has so many ramifications that an attempt at a compre-
hensive definition must either arrive at a vague, theoretical statement or
become involved in an extensive review of specific usages.
   In developing methods for the analysis of style in archeological mate-
rials, therefore, it has generally proved useful and efficient to adopt a
simple rule of thumb rather than to establish any rigorous definition.
Initial selection of attributes for analysis is made largely intuitively,
though often with consideration of experiences in previous analyses. If
these attributes then exhibit systematic patterns of behavior which can be
related to the influence of social, cultural, or individual factors rather
than to factors of function or of the physical environment, both the at-
tributes and their behavior are considered “stylistic.”
   The second basic assumption behind the hypothesis was first explicitly
developed by Deetz in his study of stylistic behavior in Arikara ceramics
(1965). It was hypothetically predicted that mutual associations among
stylistic attributes would tend to be particularly developed on items pro-
duced by women in a community with a high rate of matrilocal residence.
This pattern of stylistic behavior was theoretically attributed to the chan-
neling of interaction among the female artisans within the lines of these
matrilocal residence groups. Later, Longacre and then Hill utilized prac-
tically the same basic assumptions and hypothesis to predict and interpret
another aspect of stylistic behavior which they demonstrated for the ce-
ramics from two pueblo sites (Longacre, 1964; Longacre and Hill, this
volume).
                             Data from New York
To further develop this approach to the analysis of archeological materi-
als, and to extend the examination of its general validity, several aspects
of stylistic behavior were studied in the ceramics from a series of late
prehistoric sites in New York State." The two latest sites in this series
   *T would like to thank the many people who allowed me access to the collections
and data on which these analyses are. based. Dr. William A. Ritchie and Robert Funk
of the New York State Museum and Science Service were most generous in permitting
me to study materials both from previously published excavations, and from their
current investigations. Charles F. Hayes, III, and Daniel Barber of the Rochester
Museum of Arts and Sciences were very helpful in providing access to data and
collections stored in the museum. Charles F. Wray of West Rush, New York, very
kindly loaned his personal collection of pottery from the Factory Hollow site for the
purposes of this study.
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in New York State                225
were fully developed Iroquois, which allowed an ethnographic control of
interpretation at one end of the series.
   The chronological sequence of these sites is presented in Figure 1. It
will be seen that the majority of the sites fall within the Late Woodland
Owasco period or culture. This is the best-known archeological period in
New York. The documentation of most of these sites is extensive and is
amply discussed and illustrated in several of Ritchie's general publications
(1944, 1951, 1965) in addition to specific site reports. The materials from
these sites have been preserved virtually intact in the Rochester Museum




           FIGURE 1:         Sites and Chronology



                             Factory    Hollow

                             Garoga



                             Kelso               1390   100   (Y-1380)

              TRANSITIONAL
                             Bainbridge

                             Castle Creek        1435         (M-179)
                                                 1196         (M-493)



                                                 1298         (M-762)
                                                 1190         (Y-1174)
                                                 1125         (1-425)

                             Canandaigua         1140

                             Morrow



                             Levanna

                             Maxon - Derby       1100         (Y-1173)
                                                 1100         (M-1077)

                             Round     Top

                             Wickham

                             Carpenter Brook
226                                   Variability among Occupational Units
of Arts and Sciences and the New York State Museum. The quality and
quantity of information on these sites provide an indispensable foundation
for the types of analysis which we have undertaken.
   This chronological sequence is not based on stratigraphic evidence, but
is built on the seriation of pottery types. The Owasco pottery types and
the basis of most of this seriation were established by Ritchie and Mac-
Neish (1949) after long experience on the part of Ritchie in handling
materials of this period. Transitional and Iroquois types were defined by
MacNeish (1952). Some sites have since been added by Ritchie (1965),
and two sites (Morrow and Round Top) have been here inserted from
our analysis of the unpublished materials.
   Chronologies built on seriation may sometimes be deceptive if func-
tional or areal variations are confused with temporal change (cf. Brown
and Freeman, 1964, pp. 166—67; Deetz and Dethlefsen, 1965), but the
rapid typologic change in this roughly 400-year period and the general
agreement of the radiocarbon dates with the seriation lend support to the
argument that temporal change is the primary basis for this arrangement
of sites. It is not our intention to reexamine these previous analyses which
rely heavily on long and detailed experience, and we have accepted this
chronology as a reliable and adequate background for other investigations
of stylistic behavior.
   The discrete stylistic elements exhibited by each well-preserved rim
sherd were recorded for each site in terms of a consistent attribute list.
Actually, two attribute lists were used. One was applicable to all of the
Owasco and transitional ceramics, and although this list could have been
modified for use with the Iroquois pottery, also, it was quicker and easier
to devise a separate list. The use of two unconnected attribute lists was
not inconsistent with our approach, since we were concerned at every
step with stylistic behavior on a within-site level, and not with the tracing
of style elements through time.
   A number of different classes of attributes composed these lists. Certain
morphologically variable features of the sherds were included, such as lip
profile and collar shape. Vessel morphology was represented by lip orien-
tation and neck form. Technique of design execution was maintained
separate from the actual motifs present, and both technique and motif
were recorded in terms of their location on the vessel.
  As mentioned, the different aspects of the behavior of style are not yet
well enough understood to allow us to say in detail what classes of attri-
butes or what particular manner of structuring an attribute list will be
most relevant and appropriate for any given problem and analysis. The
best course therefore seemed to be to base our lists partly on previous
models (for example, Deetz, 1965, pp. 46-49; McPherron, 1963) and
partly on our own a priori judgments as to the significance and usefulness
of various classes of “stylistic” attributes. In subsequent analyses it was
occasionally apparent that these judgments had been mistaken.
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in      New York State            227


       A Stylistic Correlate of Between-Community Interaction
Our analyses began with a reevaluation of Deetz’s (1965) hypotheses and
analytic methods in terms of our data from New York. In the course of
this reevaluation a technique was discovered for exposing an aspect of
stylistic variation, not originally considered by Deetz, which seems to be a
reflection of the intensity of intercommunity contacts.
  The development, through relative isolation, of stylistic variations more
characteristic of individual villages than of a total style horizon or ceramic
type has previously been demonstrated (Cronin, 1962). These findings,
however,   were   based on the comparative     analysis of assemblages   from
several villages. The method we present here derives separate measures of
interaction rate from the analysis of individual assemblages, expresses this
measure as a single coefficient, and uses this coefficient for comparative
purposes. Comparisons between any number of sites are thus greatly
facilitated.
   Deetz predicted that if women      made the pottery, there would be a
greater tendency for attribute associations within an assemblage from a
matrilocal community than within one from a community with any other
rule of residence (Deetz, 1965, p. 2). His demonstration of patterns of
attribute association was based on the use of row and column percentages
from cross-tabulations of selected sets of stylistic attributes. The appro-
priate technique for the demonstration of non-random associations in a
cross-tabulation table, however, is the use of the statistic of Chi-square or
one of its several functions (DuBois, 1965, pp. 52-72, 312—21; Siegel,
1956, pp. 104—111).
   In an ideal, perfectly random case, the row and column percentages in
such a table are exactly the same as the percentages of the column and
row marginal totals. This is the basis on which expected values and prob-
abilities are calculated for these tables. The use of row and column per-
centages of co-occurrence for the analysis of attribute association there-
fore results in an ambiguous situation. Relative numbers of high and low
percentages do not necessarily demonstrate different degrees of non-
random attribute association.
  In fact, a comparison    of Deetz’s results with the results which were
predictable from his own data on the assumption of purely random asso-
ciations among attributes showed an uncomfortably close correspondence
and indicated that there was a strong possibility that another type of
stylistic variation was also being reflected in the analysis.
   It should be noted that these considerations do not disprove Deetz’s
hypotheses or models of stylistic behavior. As will be discussed below,
they proved to be valid and useful in the interpretation of certain of the
analyses of our materials from New York.
  If Deetz’s results, then, can be so closely approximated on the assump-
228                                   Variability among Occupational Units
tion of perfect random association of attributes in his data, we may ask
what other type of stylistic variation might also be reflected in his analy-
sis. There seems to be a real difference between the behavior of materials
from a matrilocal community and that of materials from a non-matrilocal
group. It can readily be seen from the above discussion of the relation-
ships between percentages within cross-tabulation tables and the percent-
ages of the marginal totals that at least one source of this difference may
be in different patterns of marginal percentages. It was necessary to
analyze these patterns separately from other aspects of style to see if they
formed a real and meaningful component of stylistic variation.
  The two contrasting patterns of marginal percentages which might
have accounted for some of the difference between these two situations
may be briefly characterized. The results obtained for the matrilocal situ-
ation indicated that in any class of attributes there was a tendency for a
few individual attributes of that class to be present in high frequencies
and for the other attributes to be relatively few. In contrast, the materials
of the non-matrilocal group tended to have a more equal representation
of all possible attributes within each class. If we imagine a class of attri-
butes in which only three different categories occur, the first situation
might be represented by a percentage distribution of 90 per cent—8 per
cent—2 per cent, and the second pattern by precentages of 45 per cent—
35 per cent—20 per cent.
  This difference has been termed here a difference in stylistic variability
or homogeneity. Complete homogeneity or lack of variability is easily
recognized in any class of attributes as the existence of only one possible
attribute which represents that class on all artifacts; for example, a single,
uniform motif which occurs on the lip surface of all sherds in an assem-
blage. Greater degrees of heterogeneity or variability depend, first, on the
number of attributes present in each class and, second, on the degree to
which all of these alternatives are represented in equal proportions in the
assemblage. The final measure which was devised for this aspect of stylis-
tic behavior takes both of these factors into account.
   Changing stylistic variability was not, however, the type of style behav-
ior hypothetically predicted to coincide with changing patterns of resi-
dence. Reasoning inductively from the nature of this type of stylistic
behavior and from the kinds of other changes correlated with variation of
this aspect of style, in Deetz’s analysis, and in this data from New York,
we would here hypothesize that changes in the degree of stylistic varia-
bility are primarily related to changes in the rate of interaction between
communities in a region.
   Rate of interaction as reflected in this aspect of artifact style is detect-
able only insofar as the inferred interaction affects the persons producing
the artifacts studied. When the artifact class under consideration was
certainly, or very probably, manufactured by members of one sex only,
two components of “interaction” may be distinguished. First, the rate of
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in       New York State             229
actual movement of individuals of that sex between communities, as de-
termined by the rules or customs of post-marital residence, will be a
primary component. This concern with post-marital residence in terms of
the movement of individuals from one village to another is not necessarily
related to the structure of within-village residence groups, which will be
considered later. This primary component would hypothetically be the
factor determining a basically high or low level of stylistic variability.
Superimposed on this basic level of variability will be relatively minor
trends and fluctuations which may be related to differential rates of sim-
ple intercommunication between villages.
   The process by which interaction rate affects the level of stylistic varia-
bility is diffusion, or, perhaps more closely defined, a process of regional
distribution of stylistic elements similar to the distribution of genetic traits
by gene flow: The greater the rates of “flow” within a region, the greater
will be the stylistic variability within individual communities. Stylistic
ideas, motifs, and techniques are all spread within a region by this
mechanism.
   If residence is generally not in the village of the bride, women will
move about among several villages, bringing with them all their charac-
teristic techniques and styles of pottery manufacture. Under this hypothe-
sis, the presence in a community of women who have come from several
different villages at marriage should create a situation of relative hetero-
geneity of style. Conversely, a high rate of village matrilocality should be
characterized by a greater stylistic homogeneity within each village.
   Similarly, greater or lesser rates of simple intercommunication between
villages should hypothetically allow greater or lesser rates of exchange of
ideas, or diffusion by copying. Stylistic variability should be affected
much less strongly by this type of diffusion than by the actual movements
of artisans.
   A central point in this conception of stylistic variability is the relation-
ship between the substantive content of a style and the degree of varia-
bility. We have tried to form a measure of simple variability irrespective
of any consideration of the actual substance of the style. As will be clear
in the course of the description of the results of our analyses, therefore,
there is no relationship at all between the attributes considered in any
case and the measure of variability derived from that case. For this rea-
son, the final coefficients of variability have been termed coefficients of
“basic” stylistic variability. We are able to compare such distinct styles as
early Owasco and Iroquois on the same basis. Considerations of the dif-
ferential frequencies of specific stylistic attributes are important in certain
problems of inferring the nature of regional interaction patterns (Cronin,
1962; Longacre, 1963, p. 83), but are not relevant to the analysis of rates
of interaction.
  In the analyses and interpretations presented below it is assumed that
the pottery from thesé sites in New York was made entirely by women.
230                                    Variability among Occupational Units
The   ethnography    of the Iroquois     and neighboring   groups   shows   a
uniform pattern of female manufacture of pottery, and the continuity of
stylistic development from Owasco through Iroquois periods (cf. Mac-
Neish, 1952; Ritchie, 1961, pp. 32—33;      1965, p. 303) supports the sup-
position that this pattern existed prehistorically also.
  After some preliminary analysis of the Owasco and Iroquois materials,
a satisfactory method of graphically determining the degree of stylistic
variability in any class of attributes was developed. Cumulative percent-
age graphs provided a good representation of this variability. In a cumu-
lative percentage graph, a maximum degree of variability produces a
straight, diagonal line across the graph. Complete homogeneity is indi-
cated by a single, almost vertical line rising to one hundred per cent at the
first attribute. The spacing of other lines between these two extremes,
then, provides a relative measure of variability.
  Five sites, two late Owasco and three post-Owasco, in our sample had
enough collared sherds that percentages of different collar shapes were
meaningful. The range of stylistic variability exhibited for this one attri-
bute class by these five sites is represented by the use of cumulative
graphing in Figure 2. In this figure it can be seen that the order of these
sites from more to less variability in collar shape is the approximate
chronological order. In a number of such cumulative percentage graphs, a
similar trend was noted.
   Several difficulties, however, appeared in the utilization of these graphs
for the definition of the changing degrees of stylistic variability between
sites. It was impossible to make decisions on constant and accurate cri-
teria as to greater or lesser variability between sites when the numbers of
attributes in the class being considered varied to any great extent between
these sites. In other words, degree of slope could not be handled simul-
taneously with a consideration of number of attributes when making
subjective comparisons between graphs. Where slopes varied slightly at
different points along closely spaced lines it was again impossible to rank
the different lines according to relative variability by inspection alone.
These problems were greatly compounded when more than a very few
sites were compared on the same graph. The most serious difficulty with
the use of cumulative graphs, however, was the inability to consider more
than one class of attributes at a time. No form of summary measure for
total assemblages or categories of attribute classes was possible. All of
these difficulties were removed by the use of a coefficient-type measure.
   The use of cumulative graphs provided the foundation for the calcula-
tion of a coefficient of variability. As we have mentioned, maximum
homogeneity and maximum heterogeneity of style form definite limits in
a cumulative graph. All intermediate degrees of variability fall some-
where between these two limits on the graph. Since these graph lines are
not continuous curves, but consist of straight-line segments between
points, the surface area of the graph can be divided into geometric fig-
Whallon        Prehistoric Social Organization in New York State                       931




    ro)re)|


                                                   Kelso
                                                  Garoga
                                                 Factory Hollow
                                               Canandaigua
                                              Castle Creek
     SS

           PURER
           REED
            Oe
             CRO
            SeR
          (2)




     nnoO




          2)

                                             FIGURE 2
                                             CUMULATIVE PERCENTAGE
                                             CURVES FOR ATTRIBUTES
     Ww(2)Pe                                 OF COLLAR SHAPE




     NOfo)




                               Attributes    in Order of Decreasing      Frequency
                          a    a        en        nm   er a tere   ere    mma ten eR
        tpSedeueet
          baste
       (2). Be  RM                 el   eo         CT              as
232                                         Variability among Occupational Units
ures, that is, right triangles and rectangles. The area which would be
included underneath a line representing maximum stylistic variability can
easily be calculated in this manner, and the ratio of this area to the area
included under any intermediate line may thus be used as a convenient
and accurate coefficient measure of the degree of variability represented
by such an intermediate line.
   The methods of deriving coefficients from cumulative percentage
curves have been considerably developed in the field of geography. A
series of applications of these techniques to the study of degrees of popu-
lation concentration is discussed by Wright (1937), who also explains in
detail the mathematical background for the derivation of various types of
coefficients. In our analysis we have used a modification of one of the
geographers coefficients (Wright, 1937, pp. 181-83).
   We have changed the direction of the coefficient so that higher values
of the coefficient represent greater degrees of homogeneity, and we have
utilized a constant maximum area to represent complete heterogeneity of
style. Normally, the degree of variability within an attribute class is calcu-
lated with reference to the maximum area of the graph that would be
covered in a situation of maximum variability for that class. This maxi-
mum area is obviously dependent on the number of attributes included
within that class. In other words, slope of the line, alone, is considered. To
eliminate this dependency on the numbers of attributes present in each
class, and to utilize this information at the same time, we used an arbi-
trary constant of twenty possible attributes per class. This had the effect
of somewhat increasing the coefficient in cases where few attributes
were represented and gradually decreasing it as the number of attributes
in a given line increased. As implied by our previous definitions of hetero-
geneity vs. homogeneity, this was the desired result, and it was incorpo-
rated in the value of the coefficient simultaneously with the measurement
of the relative slope of the line.”
   Coefficients of basic stylistic variability were calculated for each class
of ceramic attributes in the assemblages from every site. A single, total
  ? The formula actually used was:

                              Ga     — oe             2 ae
                                        p iN     1)
C = coefficient of homogeneity                   n, = the number of observed nominal
c = the distance from the x axis to the               categories represented in the cu-
      graph line at each successive point            mulative graph
p =   the total height of the cumulative        N = the total number of nominal cate-
      graph (here = 100.00)                          gories in the set making up the
                                                    scale, (here a constant of 20 was
                                                    used for comparison vs. less at-
                                                    tributes ).                       :
The value of the coefficient varies between 1.00, representing perfect stylistic homo-
genity, and .00, indicating the greatest possible degree of heterogeneity.
Whallon        Prehistoric Social Organization in New York State                                 933



       950— FIGURE 3
          ~—    Coefficients    of basic stylistic variability,               KelsoFactory
          ~     summary      averages for all attributes.                        eset

                                                                                      Garoga
       Paes                        Maxon.                    Bainbridge;
                        .Wickham    Derby

                                       Canandaigua,
          si"
       900—                                            p—! a

          — &
          i, let                  Be        No                Mae             Creek
       875—              Round

          ae                Top        aS


                                                             Chronological      Order
                                                           Early                  Late



  1000— FIGURE 4
          —     Coefficients of basic stylistic
          —     variability, average coefficients
                for techniques     only.                                              Garoga
                                                                       Kelso,——
                                   . Maxon.
                                                                                        Factory
                                    ee
                                                                                        Hollow
                  Wickham

          : a Top                          »Levanna                yl
   950—         Brook
                                                       éCanan-
                                                 a                 Va Creek

                                                            Chronological     Order
                                                          Early                   Late



  1.000 —                    egras BPP       Levanna                                  Factory,
                             Derby,                                                   Hollow
                Carpenter
                Brook                                              Castle
   973 *— Wickham
              ,                        Canandaigua*+-—_
                                                 9      Faia ,Creek
                                                                                Kelso


          :                        FIGURE 5                             \
                                                                             Garoga
                                                                             :
       950—                        Coefficients of basic
   :                               stylistic variability,             Bainbridge
          —     Round Top’         average coefficients for
                                   attributes of vessel
                                   morphology only.
                                                              Chronological     Order    .
                                                              Early              Late ova. %e
234                                    Variability among Occupational Units
coefficient was obtained for whole assemblages by averaging all of the
separate coefficients for the different attribute classes. This total coef-
ficient could be broken down into component parts by similarly finding
the average coefficients for various categories of attribute classes. The
change through time of levels of “basic stylistic variability” could then be
analyzed with simple, clear graphs. These graphs are presented as Figures
3 through 8.
   Brief inspection of these several graphs reveals that there are often
indications of a temporal trend in the level of stylistic variability. This is
true of the graph for total coefficients and for most of the graphs of the
components of this total coefficient. The significance of these apparent
trends can be evaluated by determining the correlation between an order-
ing of sites in terms of the calculated levels of stylistic variability and the
independently established chronological order. The statistic used for this
purpose was Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient, to which a level of
statistical significance may be assigned (Siegel, 1956, pp. 202—213;
DuBois, 1965, pp. 90—92, 228—29). We have used this method to deter-
mine whether the indicated trends are more meaningful than the many
fluctuations observed (Table 1).


Table 1. Correlations between Chronological Order of Sites and Site
    Order Established by Basic Variability of Various Categories
                            of Attributes

           Category of Attributes       Correlation       Significance
           Total Assemblage                 .600                05
           Decorative Techniques            345               N.S,b
           Vessel Morphology                125               N.S.b
           Decorative Motifs                .638               05
           Collar Shape                     TP                N.S.¢
           Lip Profiles                     ol                 01
           a From Siegel, 1956, Appendix, Table p. 284
           & N.S. = Does not reach a .05 level of significance.
           © Too few sites could be included in this category to apply
           this test of significance really meaningfully.


   The results of these evaluations show that there is a definite trend
towards increasing stylistic homogeneity through time. This trend is im-
posed on a generally high level of stylistic homogeneity throughout. The
total coefficients for whole assemblages (Fig. 3) exhibit this trend to a
significant degree. Attributes of decorative technique (Fig. 4) also have a
positive trend in this direction, but it is too weak to be put forward as
significant. In contrast, our attributes of vessel morphology show only a
random temporal fluctuation in variability (Fig. 5 and Table 1). Freed
from these levelling influences, decorative motifs (Fig. 6) and the two
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in New York State                          235


    .750—
         - FIGURE 6
         —     Coefficients of basic stylistic
               variability, average coefficients
   .925—       for motifs only.                                              walleye
         is
                                                                                   e




                                                                  Kelso,

                                                        Bainbridge;

                                                                       Garoga®


                    Wickham
                                                   Canandaigua




                                  Morrow,




   .800—:
        —     Carpenter
        -     Brook


   775—



                                               Chronological      Order
                                              Early                   Late




morphological features which show stylistic variation, that is, lip profile
and collar shape (Fig. 7 and 8), have a marked and significant trend
towards increasing homogeneity of style through time.
   Following the hypothesis we have established as to the meaning of
variation in stylistic variability, the generally high level of homogeneity of
style in all of these sites would seem indicative of a high rate, at least, of
village matrilocality. Even those attributes which show no temporal trend
236                                   Variability among Occupational Units
have high coefficient values. This interpretation is congruent with the
known social organization of the Iroquois and with inferences of basic
Owasco social organization. The existence of female work groups engaged
in horticulture has been interpreted generally (Aberle, 1961, pp. 660—61,
676), and specifically for the Owasco    (Ritchie, 1965, p. 296), as a caus-
ative factor in the development of matrilocal residence. The existence of a
basic pattern of matrilocal residence in Owasco times is further supported
by the Owasco-Iroquois continuity of large, multi-family houses (Ritchie,
1961, p. 35; 1965, p. 296) and by our analysis below of the degrees of
attribute associations in the ceramics of this series of sites.
   The general trend towards a slight increase in stylistic homogeneity
from early Owasco to Iroquois is interpreted as a reflection of a gradually
decreasing rate of social contact between villages. As discussed hypotheti-
cally above, rates of intercommunication are believed to be manifested in
stylistic variability through a process similar to that of “flow” in a genetic
sense. Decreasing variability is thus thought to reflect decreasing com-
munication.
   This interpretation of the trend observed in style behavior is again
congruent with other archeological facts. There are no known fortifica-
tions associated with early Owasco villages. Several sites, such as
Levanna, Round Top, and Maxon Derby, were directly open to attack. In
middle Owasco times, fortifications appear. There are surrounding
ditches at Canandaigua and Morrow and a single palisade at Bates. The
only excavated Owasco cemeteries, those at Canadaigua, contained six
males with projectile points embedded in their bones, and the similarity
between the points imbedded in these bodies and the points found in the
village debris suggests death at the hands of culturally similar enemies. In
late Owasco sites, fortification was increased as evidenced in double and
triple palisade lines at Castle Creek. Kelso, too, has double palisade lines,
and in late prehistoric Iroquois times multiple stockades         were   con-
structed, at least at Garoga, from much larger, heavy posts sunk deeply
into the ground (cf. discussion by Ritchie, 1965, pp. 280, 293).
  There was certainly a relatively large increase in aboriginal population
during the Owasco period. Ritchie’s observations (1965, p. 280) indicate a
progressive development of larger and more numerous villages. It may be
possible to relate the inferred decline in peaceful relations between vil-
lages to the pressure on resources caused by this population expansion. At
some point in the Iroquois period, the formation of the league must have
brought about a reversal in this trend, but this probably post-dates the
latest site in our sample. The probably concomitant movement of Iroquois
towns from their previous defensible positions to lowland, open sites has
been noted (Parker, 1922, p. 128), but in the Seneca area, at least, this
shift did not occur until approximately 1630 (Wray and Schoff, 1953, p-57).
  We have left some      fluctuations in the coefficients of basic stylistic
variability unexplained, but it is quite probable that with fuller data they
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in                New York State                       237


   750—be
                                                                     Kelso,

        .     FIGURE 7 of basic                                                  As
        . . Stylistic variability                                           G
              of collar shape                                                    aroga’. ieee, 6
   925—
                                                          Bainbridge,                  Factory
                                                                                        Hollow



                                               Castle    Creek,



                                    Canandaigua,


                                                         Chronological    Order
                                                       arly                  Late




              FIGURE 8                                               Factory         Hollow.
              Coefficients of basic
              stylistic variability
              of lip profile


                                                                            Garoga.

                                                Castle Creek,            Kelso

                         ~Round Top


                                           Morrow                    * Bainbridge
   .875 —                    Levanna,      A
             Carpenter
       _     Brook
        re                                            _— ‘Bates
                                                   Canandaigua
   350—                         Maxon-Derby




                                                Chronological     Order
                  v                           Early                  Late
                   Wickham
238                                  Variability among Occupational Units
might be related to such factors of regional interaction as relative isola-
tion from, or proximity to major routes of trade or communication. At this
point, however, we turn to another level of social interaction and another
aspect of stylistic behavior.

       A Stylistic Correlate of Within-Village Residence Pattern
Up to this point the validity of Deetz’s original hypothesis has remained
untested. His statistical methods were noted to be ambiguous in the dem-
onstration of his prediction that a greater degee of patterned attribute
association in ceramic material made by women would be characteristic
of style in a highly matrilocal group as compared to groups with any
other pattern of residence. A relevant statistical technique for the analysis
of attribute associations within an assemblage was mentioned, however.
We have applied this technique to our data.
  The statistic is Chi-square, a common and familiar one throughout the
social sciences   (Siegel, 1956, pp. 104-111;   DuBois,   1965, pp. 52—72).
Chi-square is calculated from cross-tabulation tables similar to those used
by Deetz. Cross-tabulations     were prepared, therefore, for all possible
combinations of attribute classes within each assemblage used for this
analysis. Each and every possible pair of individual attributes was thus
represented once in the total set of tables. The amount of tabulations and
computations involved in such an analysis is very large, and could not
have been done at all by hand in the amount of time at our disposal. Even
using a computer for all statistical manipulations as we were, it was
necessary to restrict the sample of sites for this part of the analysis to
seven. These seven were chosen, however, so that the full temporal range
of our original sample was represented, and at least one site was included
from every major archeological phase currently recognized.
  The value of Chi-square with the number of degrees of freedom (based
on the number of attributes in the tabulation) was calculated for each
table. We were not interested here, however, in the associations between
specific attributes. A summary value indicating the total tendency within
the whole assemblage for mutual associations between attributes was
desired.
   It was not possible to consider each table separately and then make an
accurate, summary judgment of the total degree to which attributes
tended to associate within an assemblage. We therefore took advantage of
the additive properties of Chi-square    (DuBois, 1965, pp. 69, 319). Chi-
square and its degrees of freedom are additive if the observations added
are independent. Since, for any site, every pair of attribute classes tabu-
lated produced a series of unique attribute combinations in the table, and
since all of the tables prepared were necessary to provide a complete
cross-tabulaion of all attributes recorded from the ceramics, we may
say that each table provides an independent indication of the total de-
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in New York State            239
gree of attribute association within the whole assemblage.
   Adding in this manner, total values for Chi-square and its degrees of
freedom     were       determined    for each site. These          total values, of course,
became very large. A function of Chi-square was therefore used. This
function is normally distributed, and has a calculable mean and standard
deviation (DuBois, 1965, p. 317). The degree of total attribute association
could thus be expressed in terms of standard deviations from an expected
mean value.
  These summary values for total tendency of attribute association are
plotted in temporal sequence in Figure 9. A very clear trend is apparent
in this aspect of stylistic behavior. Already in Carpenter Brook, the ear-




                       FIGURE 9
                       Index of attribute association
                       within selected assemblages
                       measured in terms of unit normal
                       deviates of added chi-square values.




      w oOo oO




                                                                               Factory e
                                                                                 Hollow
                 AAR
                 Pe
                 Oe
                                              Castle
                                              Creek    e




                         Levanna


                                          .

                                        Canandaigua




                        Carpenter
                   *    Brook


                                                           Chronological   Order
                                                       Early                  Late
240                                     Variability among Occupational Units
liest Owasco site, we obtain a value of five standard deviations from the
expected value. This clearly represents a significant degree of association.
The amount of attribute clustering slowly rises throughout all the pre-
Iroquois assemblages. Then, there is a sharp rise in the value of this
measurement with Garoga, the first Iroquois site. Factory Hollow is not
as high as Garoga, but is higher than any of the non-Iroquois sites.
   This analysis seems to confirm the basic hypothesis behind Deetz’s
predictions of stylistic behavior. We believe that it further adds a refine-
ment in method and interpretation which Deetz was not able to consider.
With the support of other archeological and ethnographic evidence, we
have interpreted the behavior disclosed in Figure 9 as demonstrative of
changes in size and in degree of integration of within-village matrilocal
residence groups.
   The high degrees of attribute association present in the Iroquois assem-
blages are congruent with Deetz’s hypothesis in that matrilineages, resid-
ing together in one or more longhouses, were the basic social units in an
Iroquois village (Goldenweiser, 1913, p. 468; Fenton, 1951, pp. 45—46).
The long, oval houses of the Owasco period and the Oak Hill phase have
also been interpreted as the possible residences of matrilocal, multi-family
social groups, perhaps ancestral to those of the Iroquois (Ritchie, 1961, p.
35; 1965, p. 296). Our results would        indicate that, in contrast   to the
Iroquois matrilineages, the Owasco residence groups were not as strongly
integrated and probably were simple extended families.
  The minor trends in the level of stylistic attribute association seem, on
the other hand, to be possibly related to the size of the residence groups.
In this analysis we selected the largest and best preserved assemblages
from our sample of sites. Unfortunately, these assemblages are not always
from sites for which good settlement pattern data are available, and a
direct comparison between house size and degrees of attribute association
was not possible. The gradual increase in this degree through Owasco
times, nevertheless, is roughly paralleled by a gradual increase for the
same period in the average size of house. The difference in the values
obtained for the two Iroquois sites also parallels a difference in the sizes
of the longhouses at these two sites.
   This aspect of stylistic behavior, like the measurement of basic varia-
bility, shows both major differences in level, and minor trends within
these levels. The former seems related to the degree of integration and
importance of co-resident groups; the latter seems to reflect the average
size of such groups.

                  Summary: Causes for Social         Change
In discussing the changes in intergroup relations inferred from the analy-
sis of stylistic variability, population expansion was mentioned as a pos-
sible causative factor. This in turn appears to be the result of certain
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in New York State                         241
changes in the subsistence base. By considering, also, the probable form
of late prehistoric subsistence economy, the data of Iroquois ethnography,
and the changes in regional interaction indicated by our first analysis,
some possible causes for the social changes inferred from the analysis of
attribute association may be found, and we may hypothesize in more
detail the exact nature of these changes.
  The form of subsistence seems to have been remarkably stable through-
out the period with which we are concerned.               A consideration of the
different types of Owasco sites and of their total artifact assemblages
allows the inference that the organization of economic activities charac-
teristic of the historic Iroquois was present in all essential details in the
early Owasco period (Ritchie, 1961, p. 31; 1965, pp. 275, 296, 300-301).
There seems to have been a slight shift in emphasis from hunting to
agricultural activities between the early and middle Owasco periods, but
the present evidence indicates that the relative emphasis on different
aspects of the economy remained stable from then on. There was, how-
ever,     a gradual   diversification   in the crops raised.   Corn   appears    first,
followed by beans in middle Owasco, and finally by squash in the Oak
Hill phase.
   It seems reasonable to interpret this gradual intensification and diver-
sification of the agricultural base as the primary cause of the increase in
population mentioned above.
  From our second analysis of stylistic behavior, a shift in the size and
importance of the residentially localized segments of the Owasco and
Iroquois villages has been inferred for the Oak Hill—Iroquois period. The
ethnographic sources indicate that one of the important cooperative func-
tions of these segments was agriculture (Stites, 1905, p. 31), and land was
communally       owned     by these or larger segments         (Fenton,     1951, pp.
42-43; Goldenweiser,        1913, p. 467). It might be argued that these social
units in the villages increased in size and integration in response to the
increasing importance of agriculture in the economy. Such an explanation
might not be unreasonable for the increasing size of these groups, but it
does not seem adequate to account for the inferred change in their degree
of integration. If we look at other functions of these groups, we find that
they are most important politically, in terms of the inheritance of sachem-
ships (Fenton, 1951, p. 45; Goldenweiser, 1913, p. 408). They also held
certain religious and ceremonial prerogatives of a minor nature (Golden-
weiser,     1913, p. 467; 1914, p. 368), and they were         apparently the im-
portant social units in the functioning of blood feuds (Snyderman, 1948,
  guy:
s Working backwards from these ethnographic facts, two possible expla-
nations for the Owasco-Iroquois change in the nature of these social
segments     are readily apparent.      There   is, first, the importance    of these
groups in blood-feuding. Blood feuds seem to have been one of the com-
mon reasons for entering the warpath, and the importance of the social
242                                  Variability among Occupational Units
units involved in blood-feuding may have grown in response to the gen-
eral increase in warfare in the region. This may be a partial reason for the
inferred changes, but a second possible explanation is more convincing.
   This second explanation also sees the changes in these subunits of local
communities as part of the social adaptation to the regional demographic
situation, but interprets the function of more rigidly structured descent
groups in terms of status ascription and the provision for specific and
permanent   governmental functionaries.   In proposing this possibility, we
are making an analogy between this pattern of change in social organiza-
tion and the process of development of “statehood” as outlined by Gear-
ing (1962). The differences between these two cases lie in the level of
complexity attained and the way in which power to control war-making
was institutionalized.
   In the development of the Cherokee “state” under intense pressure
from the whites, a leader arose who eventually obtained autocratic au-
thority largely through his importance in the direction of war and control
over the warriors. It is probable that this position of autocratic authority
could never have developed in the Cherokee case except under the heavy
pressure of white attack.
  In New York, under aboriginal conditions, the pressure of war was
probably not so intense. Yet, as warfare increased, an institutionalized
method of control very likely became more and more desirable. The
posession of titles by the descent groups in Iroquois society provided a
method whereby the governing officials formed a relatively permanent
council which was not under the control of the strongest and most active
men of the group, but was composed of older men with reputations for
judgment whose selection was controlled by the women (Goldenweiser,
1913, p. 468). When a title was vacant, a nomination was made by the
women of the appropriate lineage, and this nomination submitted to the
other chiefs for approval. Control of the council over warfare was gen-
erally only advisory (Snyderman,     1948, p. 13), but a final recourse   to
check a war party was available to the women in the form of a direct
order and warning against the expedition (Snyderman, 1948, p. 19).
   Considering the above facts of Iroquois ethnography, we are inclined to
propose the hypothesis that the developments in size and apparent rigid-
ity of structure and integration of the matrilocal (and matrilineal, at
least in the Iroquois sites )segments of local groups to two factors. Their
gradual growth in size seems primarily related to the growing importance
of agriculture. The apparently rapid increase in the importance and inter-
nal integration of these groups, between the Oak Hill phase and Iroquois
phases, seems the result of a change in internal organization which is
possibly related to the development of a local governing council com-
posed of men with permanent, titled positions pertaining to the various
matrilineages of the village.
  The adaptive advantages of this form of government were numerous,
Whallon Prehistoric Social Organization in New York State                            243
but it did not function at all importantly in agricultural activities. Its
important function lay in the making of decisions regarding the policy of
the group in questions of inter-group relations. Subsumed under this gen-
eral area of responsibility of course, was some degree of regulation of
warfare, which had been becoming a more                   prominent feature of inter-
group contact. These governments of village councils composed of per-
manent, titled “chiefs” opened the way for formal contact between groups
to negotiate and reduce the likelihood of wholesale warfare. Ultimately,
they formed the local basis for the organization of the Iroquois League.


                                     References

ABERLE, Davin F. 1961. Matrilineal descent in cross-cultural perspective. In
  David M. Schneider and Kathleen Gough (Eds.), Matrilineal kinship.
  Berkeley: University of California Press.
Brown,     J. A., and   L. G. Freeman,       Jr. 1964.     A Univac   analysis of sherd
  frequencies from the Carter Ranch Pueblo, eastern Arizona. American Antiq-
  uity, 30: 162—67.
Cronin, ConsTaNce. 1962. An analysis of pottery design elements, indicating
  possible relationships between three decorated types. In Paul S. Martin et al.
   (Eds.), Chapters in the prehistory of eastern Arizona, I. Chicago Natural
  History Museum, Fieldiana, Anthropology, 53: 105—14.
Deetz, JAMeEs. 1965. The dynamics of stylistic change in Arikara ceramics.
  Illinois Studies in Anthropology, No. 4. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
DrEeEtTz, JAMES, and Epwin DETHLEFSEN.         1965. The Doppler effect and archae-
  ology: a consideration of the spatial aspects of seriation. Southwestern Jour-
  nal of Anthropology, 21: 196—206.
DuBois, Pamtre H. 1965. An introduction to psychological statistics. New
  York: Harper and Row.
Fenton,    WiiuiaM      N. 1951. Locality as a basic factor in the development of
  Iroquois social structure. In William N. Fenton (Ed.), Symposium on local
  diversity in Iroquois culture. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin, 149:
  39—54.
GEARING, FRED.     1962. Priests and warriors, social structures for Cherokee poli-
  tics in the 18th century. Memoirs of the American Anthropological Associ-
  ation, No. 93. Menasha.
GOLDENWEISER, ALEXANDER A. 1913. On Iroquois work, 1912. Canada geologi-
  cal survey, summary report for 1912: 464—75.
     . 1914. On Iroquois work, 1913-14.         Canada geological survey, summary
  report for 1913: 365—72.
Kroeber, A. L. 1963. Style and civilizations. Berkeley: University of California
  Press.
Kroeber, A. L., and JANE RicHarpson.         1940. Three centuries of women’s dress
  fashions:   a quantitative     analysis.   University    of California    Publications,
  Anthropological Records 5, No. 2.
Loncacre,     Witi1am     A. 1963. Archaeology      as anthropology:       a case study.
  Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.               ;
     . 1964. Sociological implications of the ceramic analysis. In Paul S.
  Martin et al. (Eds.), Chapters in the prehistory of eastern Arizona, H.
  Chicago Natural History Museum, F ieldiana, Anthropology, 22: 155—70.
244                                     Variability among Occupational Units
MacNgisu, Ricuarp S. 1952. Iroquois pottery types, a technique for the study
  of Iroquois prehistory. National Museum of Canada, Bulletin 124.
McPueErRRON, ALAN. 1963, Programming the IBM 7090 for optimizing taxon-
  omy in archeology. Paper presented at the 62nd annual meeting of the
   American Anthropological Association, Chicago.
Parker, A. C, 1922. The archaeological history of New York, Part I. New York
   State Museum, Bulletins: 235—36.
Ritcuie, Witi1aM A, 1944. The pre-Iroquoian occupations of New York State.
   Rochester, N.Y.: Rochester Museum of Arts and Sciences.
      . 1951. Their mouths are stopped with dust. Archaelogy, 4: 136—44.
      . 1961. Iroquois archaeology and settlement patterns. In William             N.
  Fenton and John Gulick (Eds.), Symposium on Cherokee and Iroquois cul-
  ture. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin, 180: 27—38.
      . 1965. The archaeology of New York State. New York: Natural History
  Press:
RircHiz, WiLL1aAM A., and RicHarp S. MacNeisu. 1949. The pre-Iroquoian
  pottery of New York State. American Antiquity, 15: 97-124.
SIEGEL, SIDNEY. 1956. Nonparametric statistics for the behavioral sciences.
   New York: McGraw-Hill.
SmiTH, Watson. 1962. Schools, pots, and potters. American Anthropologist,
   64: 1165-78.
SNYDERMAN, GEoRGE S. 1948. Behind the tree of peace: a sociological analysis
  of Iroquois warfare. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
STiTEs,   SARA Henry.   1905.   Economics   of the Iroquois. Lancaster,   Pa.:   New
  Era.
Wray, CHARLES F', and Harry L. Scuorr. 1953. A preliminary report on the
  Seneca sequence in western New York, 1550—1685. Pennsylvania Archaeol-
  ogist, 23: 53-63.
Wricnt, J. K. 1937. Some measures of distributions. Annals of the Association
  of American Geographers, 27: 177—211.
THIRTEEN                                                              FRANK     HOLE




                            Evidence of Social Organization
                  from Western Iran, 8000-4000 B.c.




This paper is a trial essay designed to illustrate how archeologists can
make inferences about social organization, rather than a source of basic
data on the prehistory of Iran.‘ I have selectively drawn from a great deal
of unpublished data from recent excavations in the Deh Luran region of
Southwest Iran (Hole and Flannery, 1962; Hole, Flannery, and Neely,
1965) and supplemented this with information derived from surface sur-
veys and published reports concerning sites in southern and eastern
Mesopotamia and the flanking Zagros mountains. Nevertheless the gen-
eral picture is so spotty that I can say relatively little about the particulars
of social organization in western Iran during the later phases of prehis-
tory. What I can do is to show what lines of evidence are available, the
general nature and extent of the data, and finally the inferences that can
be made about social organization in Deh Luran at three “moments”
(liberally interpreted) in time: 8000, 6000, and 4000 B.c.
  There are three principal lines of evidence on which we can draw for
   1T should like to acknowledge help by Barbara Stark in the preparation of the
manuscript. Leo L. Anderson, Development and Resources Corporation, kindly made
facilities available to me in Iran and subsequently furnished me with copies of
unpublished reports that were made for Development and Resources Corporation and
the Khuzistan Water and Power Authority. Much of the success of the excavations in
Deh Luran depended on the hard work of Kent V. Flannery, James A. Neely, all of
our wives, and Hans Helbaek. For permission to work in Iran and for timely help I
should like to acknowledge the services of personnel in the Antiquities Services, Musée
Bastan, Tehran. The field work was supported by a grant from the National Science
Foundation.

                                          245
246                                   Variability among Occupational Units
inferences. First, knowledge of the paleoenvironment and the opportun-
ities and limitations it afforded, given certain technologies and subsis-
tence activities; second, the actual or inferred settlement patterns and
population size; and third, inferences about division of labor, status and
sex differentiation, craft specialization, and trade that can be made from a
study of artifacts.
  In making inferences about the archeological data, I depend largely on
ethnographic analogy, and very little on historical sources. We should
bear in mind, however, that the prehistoric context is that of a historically
unique situation which does not correspond in all particulars to any mod-
em community that we might wish to use in analogy.

                           The Cultural Setting
It is sound practice in reconstructing culture history to treat each area in
its own right; for this reason I deal specifically with sites near Deh Luran.
On the other hand, Deh Luran did not exist in a cultural vacuum. During
each of the three periods under study the people in Deh Luran shared in
technological and social developments that affected a wider area. At a
minimum, the cultural setting during each period included people living
in upper Khuzistan, southwest Iran, the mountain valleys of the Zagros
mountains, and the central plateau of Iran (See Fig. 1). By 4000 3.c. the
cultural context had expanded to include southern Mesopotamia and even
the western fringes of northern Mesopotamia and Anatolia.
   Considering Southwest Asia as a whole, at 8000 B.c. most of the people
were nomadic hunters; in a few places people settled in permanent vil-
lages and began to produce their food by planting crops and herding
animals. By 6000 3.c. there were perhaps hundreds of small villages of
agriculturalists and probably'relatively few people who subsisted solely
by hunting. Shortly after 6000 B.c., when simple techniques of irrigation
had been mastered, people began to settle southern Mesopotamia as agri-
culturalists. After this time, the population increased dramatically, new
areas were colonized, and some villages grew to towns or even cities as
the thresholds of civilization were approached.
   Looking back from the perspective of history, there was a development
of society from simple bands of hunters to class-stratified urbanites. In
view of this, a charting of history in Southwest Asia requires both a
definition of the changing techniques of subsistence and demographic
forms, and a recognition of the emergence of more complex forms of
society. It is to this latter task, as it pertains to a relatively small area of
Southwest Asia, that I address myself in this essay.

                          The Geographic Setting
From all that we have learned so far, the climate during the period in
question was essentially the same as today (Butzer, 1965; Van Zeist and
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 8.c.                                                     247




                                                                               CASPIAN       SEA




                                                       S                       ELBURZ      MOUNTAINS
                                    @ KARIM   SHAHIR   ee                                @ Tehran
                                                            \
             DESERT                                          %
                                                                                                    HIGH
                                                                                                   PLATEAU


                                                                          zy
                                                            Khorramabad    a
                                                        ~        e




      Land     above     1000   m

      PREHISTORIC           SITES
      Modern     Cites

               Kilometers




      Figure 1. Location of geographic                 areas and sites in Mesopotamia                        and
                western Iran.


Wright, 1963). This does not rule out minor fluctuations nor does it mean
that the environment was the same. In fact, we know full well that the
landscape has suffered severe changes for the worse in the 10,000 years
since our reconstruction begins. Ten thousand years of intensive exploita-
tion of the natural resources through farming, grazing and cutting of
timber have reduced much of the area to commercially worthless desert
or rocky, thorn-studded waste lands, but the potential ecological diversity
and wealth of resources              is apparent to the practiced eye even today
(Flannery, 1965).
  Deh Luran is part of the upper Khuzistan steppe, a natural grassland at
the verge of the desert and the Zagros mountains (see Fig. 1). Although
the summer climate ranks with the hottest and driest on earth, this steppe
land is important both for grazing and for dry farming. During the mild
winters up to 15 inches of rain fall, and the formerly parched earth turns
green with vegetation. With irrigation, crop yields can be increased by up
248                                    Variability among Occupational Units
to one-third. Moreover, as long as fresh water can be brought to the earth,
even the desert that stretches south from the steppe land is extraordinarily
productive. In Khuzistan, permanent and seasonal rivers provide water
for domestic and agricultural use and feed the swamps that alternate with
sand dunes and hard-packed desert. Available to hunters on the steppe
were deer, gazelle, onagers, and cattle and in the rivers and swamps pigs,
fish, clams, and migratory birds. Important even in prehistory were the
fabulous reserves of petroleum which oozed to the surface at many places
to provide natural asphalt.
   The mountain slopes and valleys to the north of Khuzistan were an
essential part of the environment of the Deh Luran steppe dwellers.
These upland regions were summer grazing lands for the animals that
wintered in Khuzistan, and throughout history they have served as pas-
tures for the flocks of the transhumant natives. Farming was seldom as
important as grazing in these areas, although at various times settlements
flourished. The mountains were also the source of oak, pistachio, and
almonds, as well as the wild ancestors of wheat, barley, sheep, and goats.
   Farther north and east, on the high central plateau of Iran is another
steppe-land and desert system that was not especially suitable for early
villagers but which was the source of readily available and easily worked
native copper.


                               Lines of Evidence
In this section I shall treat each of the three lines of evidence separately,
period by period. This is a useful way to approach the problem of infer-
ring social organization because it enables us to comprehend relatively
simple factors and to make interpretations from them; we see both the
evidence and the method of arriving at inferences in this way. Recogniz-
ing that this approach fragments the data, I shall synthesize the material
by period in the Summary.

ENVIRONMENT      AND   SUBSISTENCE

The bare facts of environment must be seen in light of subsistence pat-
terns and technology. At 8000 s.c. the natural environment had scarcely
been altered by man. We reconstruct a grassy Deh Luran valley with a
swamp in its lower portion covering about one-fifth of the available land
surface. It was not far from the edge of this swamp that people settled
during Bus Mordeh times, perhaps as the first permanent residents in the
area.
   Our reconstruction of the subsistence (based on studies by Dr. Hans
Helbaek ) shows that the villagers were principally engaged in collecting
wild plant foods such as wild alfalfa, spring milk vetch (Trigonella, a
small pea), canary grass, oat grass, goosefoot, and the fruit of the wild
caper. In addition, the Bus Mordeh folk planted small amounts of emmer
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 8.<c.         249
wheat and two-row hulled barley, both early forms of the modem hybrid
grains. Except for sickles, we see no evidence of special agricultural tools.
If the land was prepared for seed at all it was probably done with a
digging stick, but even without preparation, the mud flats at swamp’s
edge could have received seeds.
  Meat was obtained in two ways, by herding of goats and by hunting.
The former activity probably took at least some of the people seasonally
into the nearby mountains when the summer's heat had desiccated the
grassy vegetation. Since Deh Luran is situated within a few hour’s walk of
the high mountains, transhumance could have been accomplished easily.
Saimarreh,    a large, fertile, but isolated river valley, ideal for seasonal
grazing, lies just 59 km. north of Deh Luran.
   Hunting was probably as important for food as stockbreeding, and it is
just possible that most of the goats were kept for their hair or milk rather
than for meat. Gazelle, onager, wild ox, and pig were the most commonly
hunted beasts, but fish, mussels, and turtles, along with migratory water
fowl, were also taken from the swamp (faunal studies made by Kent V.
Flannery).
  In short, during the Bus Mordeh we are dealing with people who were
exploiting a broad spectrum of their environment for subsistence, and the
domesticates were only one aspect of a diversified subsistence economy.
Although the pattern suggests “incipient agriculture,” we should imagine
the activities were not greatly different from those practiced by hunters in
the same area for tens of thousands of years.
   If we pay attention only to subsistence, I think we would argue that
only a simple social organization is called for. Since flocks were probably
property, however,     it is likely that some   device of inheritance, perhaps
lineages, was used to keep them “in the family.” The amount of farming
does not suggest a need for ownership of land, and there is no activity
that I can imagine that would have required much central direction. At
most, I can imagine simple bands composed of lineages which, by anal-
ogy with hunters today, were probably patrilineal.

  At 6000 B.c. the people of the Mohammad           Jaffar Phase occupied an
area that had been in use for some 2,000 years by farmers and herders.
During this time patterns of cropping, fallowing, and grazing had prob-
ably developed and we see the beginnings of the use of crude stone hoes
to break the soil. Emmer wheat and two-row barley were still virtually
the only crops grown, but the sheer acreage under cultivation had prob-
ably increased. The patterns of exploitation are seen indirectly in the
vegetation.   We    infer that a great deal of the natural vegetation had
already been removed because we find pasture plants like plantain, mal-
low, vetch, oat grass, and canary grass in its place. In particular we find
great amounts      of the mesquite-like, woody, perennial legume, Prosopis,
whose fleshy pods are edible. Intensive grazing alone would probably
250                                  Variability among Occupational Units
have led to these botanical changes, but habits of cropping were also
contributory factors. To supplement agricultural crops, villagers still col-
lected wild rye-grass, goat-face grass, vetchling, and caper.
   Herding was probably more important economically than in the Bus
Mordeh, for now we find both sheep and goats that show in their skele-
tons clear signs of domestication. Nevertheless, hunting was still impor-
tant. In fact, the percentages of bones of domesticates    to wild animals
shows that there are relatively twice as many wild animal bones in the
Mohammad Jaffar as there were in the Bus Mordeh. What this may
suggest is that sheep and goats were being kept for their wool, hair, and
milk rather than for their meat. The same wild animals as before were
hunted and the pattern of exploitation cannot have been much different.
  In summary, we cannot infer very much about social organization just
on the basis of subsistence practices. The patterns must have been much
as they were during the Bus Mordeh Phase: relatively undifferentiated
communities organized into lineages. Men probably did the hunting and
women were responsible for gathering wild plants; the women may also
have done the farming as an extension to their usual food-gathering activ-
ities. Shepherds may have gathered Prosopis pods.

  By 4000 B.c. we see quite different patterns of subsistence. The most
important change was the establishment of simple but systematic irriga-
tion, even in places like Deh Luran where rainfall is usually sufficient to
support crops. Helping to increase the agricultural profits was a fully
modern complex of grains and animals. These included free-threshing
hexaploid wheat, emmer, six-row barley, and a variety of plants of lesser
importance such as peas and lentils. This complex of plants is significant
because it comprises even today the most important crops in the area, a
sign that the Bayat people had attained an optimum adaptation to their
environment.   Flax, another commercially important crop. in later times
was being grown, perhaps more for its oil than for its fibers. Important
additions to the livestock were cattle, soon (if not already) to be used as
draft animals, and dogs skeletally similar to the familiar guard dogs of the
area today. Skeletally modern sheep and goats were present and we infer
from finding evidence of textiles that they may have been kept partly for
their wool and hair.
   In spite of the balanced agricultural complex, hunting continued to be
important, as did the gathering of wild food from the swamp. Perhaps in
subsistence the people were never better off than during the Bayat Phase
when they had fully effective agriculture and stock breeding, and they
could supplement their diet with a variety of wild foods.
  With the new agricultural practices, there was possibly a revision of the
division of labor. As irrigation proved valuable, some men probably la-
bored at making the small canals and tending them (at least seasonally )
instead of spending the bulk of their time in hunting. If more land were
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 8.c.                 251
under cultivation, men were probably also pressed into duty at harvest
time. If draft animals were used to pull plows, we should be even more
confident that man’s role as hunter was beginning to lessen in importance
relative to farming.
   Unfortunately we have no evidence for either beer-making or the use of
milk for yoghurt or cheese, but all of these products could have been
developed by this time. One supposes that women, as today, were respon-
sible for the dairy products. This also goes for bread, which had probably
replaced gruel as a staple when bread wheat became available.
  Although our data suggest prosperity, we have not found any signs in
Deh Luran that the people stored food. On the other hand, given the
environment, one should be very much surprised to find that sufficient
resources existed for year-round maintenance on a hand-to-mouth basis.
If nothing else, the potential of irrigation farming suggests that there
must have been seasonal surpluses.
   Assuming agricultural surpluses, we can go farther with our inferences
by following the arguments made by Sahlins in his study of social stratifi-
cation in Polynesia (Sahlins, 1958). There, where social stratification is
related to production, the greater the surpluses the greater the degree of
stratification. Sahlins maintains this will be true so long as there is a
redistributional system.
  Still assuming surpluses, the question is, how were they depleted? In
Polynesia they were eaten and distributed at feasts or displayed until they
rotted. But there are other ways of disposing of them. The Indians of the
Northwest Coast destroyed their property, and we know from both arche-
ology and historical sources that food was used as offerings in temples in
Mesopotamia. The destruction of surpluses seems especially appropriate
where they are annual and predictable, but where annual surpluses may
be more doubtful, perhaps sacrifices or offerings are the more reasonable
disposition. Looking at southern Mesopotamia, we know that temples
were   centers for redistributing the economy’s   surpluses   (Hole, 1966).
After they were received in the temple warehouses, the surpluses were
partly distributed to support craft specialists, some of whom made goods
for use by the upper stratum of society.
   Before this chain of inferences goes too far, let me say that if we look
only at Deh Luran, there is no evidence for actual redistribution, but if
the Deh Luranis were keeping pace with neighboring areas, by 4000 B.c.
they were channeling some of their surpluses into temple centers. In fact,
the available evidence suggests that Deh Luran was not as far advanced
in social organization as southern Mesopotamia. This leaves us with the
probability that, as a minimum,     in all three periods dissemination    of
surpluses took the form of periodic slaughter of livestock for feasts on
ceremonial occasions.
  In summary,   during the Bayat Phase, subsistence patterns allow us to
infer a social organization of only the same complexity as earlier: a line-
252                                     Variability among Occupational Units
age organization and perhaps landholding bands.              On the other hand,
there are hints that the division of labor may have changed, principally to
draw men more actively into food production. There is no reason to
believe that much central authority was required to manage the simple
irrigation for which we have evidence.

SETTLEMENT   PATTERNS

Our second line of evidence is settlement patterns and population size.
Our data here are woefully meager in some respects and fairly rich in
others. They consist of a handful of test excavations coupled with exten-
sive surface surveys in west Iran and adjacent Iraq. We are particularly
short in excavations. Archeologists working in the American Southwest or
the Great Plains are accustomed to digging whole villages or at least
significant portions of them; in the Near East where mounds may be tens
of meters high and acres in extent containing remains of houses built of
sun-dried   mud,   one   seldom   digs a site extensively.    And   even   in sites
where large areas have been exposed, the subtle traces of architecture
have often gone unrecognized.
  Archeologists often base inferences about social organization on settle-
ment patterns (Wauchope, 1956, pp. 129—57; Willey, 1956). This is true
both where whole settlements can be stripped to show the layout of a
village and the relationship of different structures within it, and where
areas have been surveyed extensively enough to show the distribution of
sites. No site in west Iran has been entirely laid bare; therefore, I can only
make inference about the size of population in particular villages. How-
ever, since survey data are relatively fuller, I can make inferences about
the sizes and types of sites in each period and also—from the location of
villages—some inferences about subsistence practices.
   Inferring social organization directly from the size of a population is a
little known and relatively untested procedure but it is suggestive and
should not be ignored when we are grasping at inferential straws anyway.
Some years ago Raoul Naroll (1956) published a paper in which he relat-
ed population size to social organization and craft specialization. His rea-
soning was based on sociological studies which suggested that the admin-
istrative component of a society will increase in proportion to the size
of the society. In other words, as the number of people increases and
therefore also the potential relationships among them inevitably increase,
the structures for supervising these additional relationships will also
increase. By structures I refer to families, lineages, clans, sodalities,
councils, and the like. When Naroll tested this proposition with a sample
of primitive societies he found it to be true. For example, he found that
authoritative officials are necessary when the size of the group exceeds
500; 1,000 people require policing. I think most of us would also intuitively
recognize the validity of the proposition for our modern society (cf. Par-
kinson’s Law). At the present time, even though we cannot test the
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 8.c.             953
hypothesis with our own data, we shall consider it true and see where its
implications lead.
  The method I use to arrive at an estimate of the population of a village
requires some explanation. My data on the sizes of villages are derived
mainly from surface survey, admittedly a risky procedure when sites were
occupied for more than one period, but at least a maximum size is thereby
established. I then use an index to arrive at a possible range in the size of
the population. The index is based on the area of the village and the
estimated number of people who would have lived there. I use demo-
graphic data from two sources, a survey by Frankfort (1950) of modern
Mesopotamian towns and a survey by Gremliza (1962) of villages in
Khuzistan. Frankfort found roughly twenty houses per acre and between
six and ten persons per house. From this he deduced that there are
between 120 and 200 persons per acre in a modern town. Gremliza found
twelve houses per acre and about four or five persons per room, about
55 people per acre, less than half Frankfort’s findings. Frankfort’s data
are derived from cities where non-agricultural people live densely packed
into crowded quarters, a situation not to be expected in rural areas or in
prehistoric villages. For this reason, I shall use an index of twelve to
fifteen houses per acre and four to six persons per room in calculating my
estimates of population.
   In this section I shall depart somewhat from my previous presentation
and include data from areas outside Deh Luran so as to get a notion of
orders of magnitude.

   The Bus Mordeh settlement in Deh Luran is unique in the immediate
vicinity and we know of no others in Southwest Iran. This may be due to
the nature of the surveys and the fact that the small settlements of this
age are likely buried under subsequent accumulations of silt. The nearest
possibly comparable site is in the Kermanshah Valley, well into the moun-
tains at an elevation of about 4,500 feet. The preliminary report on work
in this valley suggests that Asiab was a camp of hunters (Braidwood,
1960; Braidwood, Howe, and Reed, 1961). In this same valley system
was also found a handful of preceramic open sites that are probably
comparable to Asiab. Zawi Chemi Shanidar (Solecki, 1964) in the moun-
tains of northeast Iraq at an elevation of about 2200 feet seems to have
been a camp of herders, and Karim Shahir (Braidwood and Howe, 1960,
pp. 52-54), also in northeast Iraq, may have been a hunters’ or herders’
camp. The latter two sites showed only the most tenuous evidence of
architecture, but Asiab had a large ovoid depression that may have been
some form of pit house.
  When we take later periods into consideration, the evidence seems to
show a relatively small population throughout the Zagros. All of the sites
are themselves small and they are widely scattered with respect to one
another. The Bus Mordeh settlement was probably not much larger than
254                                 Variability among Occupational Units
an acre, from which we would infer a population of between 50 and 100
persons.
   Basing our reconstruction of social organization on the distribution of
sites, each settlement must have been a separate band, perhaps holding
rights to certain territories. Since the Bus Mordeh village was relatively
permanent, even though it may have been used only seasonally, we
should expect that houses were regarded as forms of property to be
inherited in the family line. The size of the population would not suggest
any organizational groups beyond the family or lineage.
  Architectural evidence from various sites shows a variety of types of
dwellings;   in the Bus Mordeh   itself, there are very small rooms       con-
structed of slabs of clay, laid like bricks. The rooms, measuring some 2 by
 % meters, may have been for storage or pens rather than dwellings, but
of this we have no direct evidence. At the moment, the most we can say is
that we have absolutely no evidence for the differentiation of functions or
status on the basis of architecture.

  For the Mohammad       Jaffar Phase, we   can   draw   on substantial   data
from surrounding areas. In Deh Luran itself there may be one more site
of this age although this cannot be certain from our survey data alone. As
we noted before, negative demographic data must be used with caution.
It appears, however, that for Deh Luran, the population was not greatly
larger than previously. We do have better information for the excavated
Mohammad Jaffar village’s size, however; it could have been as large as
three acres in extent and may have contained 145 to 270 people.
   Additionally, we can bring to bear survey data from a nearby area of
Khuzistan, where Adams    (1962) found some 34 sites of an age immedi-
ately successive to the Mohammad Jaffar. Perhaps of greater interest than
the number of sites is the fact that they were all between two and five
acres in extent. This suggests a maximum size to allow for villages of
Mohammad Jaffar age, and accords well with our estimate of the Mo-
hammad Jaffar settlement in Deh Luran. Neither do these inferences
contradict data we have from other Mohammad Jaffar age sites (Jarmo,
Sarab, and Guran) excavated in the Zagros mountains.
   Using my index, a typical settlement contained between 100 and 450
persons. Although the absolute size of the population in Deh Luran is still
not very large, there may well have been more organizational units than
previously. Using Naroll’s results for what they are worth, we calculate
about five organizational types in a typical village. Translating this into
actual offices, there may have been a village council, made up of heads of
lineages, administering the largest of the villages.
   To supplement these data we have two other excavations in west Iran.
Guran in the Hulilan mountain valley is a fully settled village, apparently
with substantial houses and year-round occupation (Mortensen, 1963).
The picture here is very much like what we find in the Mohammad Jaffar
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 B.c.                 255
settlement. The site of Sarab, not far from Guran, is another case, how-
ever (Braidwood, 1960). There we did not find evidence for substantial
architecture nor for prolonged settlement. It appears to have been a
summer camp used by herders whose parent village, if any, might well
have been like Guran or Mohammad Jaffar.
  Some years ago, Braidwood’s teams surveyed the large Mahi-Dasht and
Kermanshah valleys and found about sixteen sites of Mohammad Jaffar
age (Braidwood,     1960). The distribution of these sites can only be de-
scribed as scattered, from which I infer that each village retained the
surrounding lands for farming and grazing. In other words, I suspect
some sort of corporate ownership of a territory large enough to support
the major subsistence activities. The major problem with this reconstruc-
tion is that we do not really know which of the settlements may have
been permanent and which were camps like Sarab. In view of the height
of many of the sites, I find it hard to believe that at least some of them
were not permanent villages with substantial structures suitable for year-
round occupation.
  It is probably significant that we did not find settlements of this age in
many valleys as we surveyed western Iran (Hole, 1962). We only found
them where there was a complex of good soil, sufficient rainfall for dry
farming, and plenty of surface water.     In many areas the earliest sites
pertain to the final period of our interest. From this we infer that during
Mohammad Jaffar times the population was not very great, and that
transhumant herding was more important in many areas than farming.
   With regard to the internal differentiation of villages, we are again
troubled by lack of architectural details. We have no evidence for build-
ings that show unusual function and certainly none that would indicate
differentiation of status.
   Settlement data thus lead us to the conclusion that the Mohammad
Jaffar people were living in autonomous villages composed of self-suf-
ficient, socially equal people.

  If we include data from outside Deh Luran, evidence for the Bayat
Phase, around 4000 s.c., is fuller. For this period we can use data from
Khuzistan and the Diyala plain where surface surveys (Adams, 1962,
1965) have yielded extensive information about settlement patterns and
land use. Our work in Deh Luran shows similar results but on a much
smaller scale. In brief, we find a large increase in the number     of sites;
three-fold would not be out of order for Khuzistan generally. In the
Diyala region east of Baghdad, where no earlier settlements were found,
there were 22 sites of this period. According to Adams, the Diyala was
settled by farmers moving out of southern Mesopotamia, a fact suggesting
that the density of settlement in the south was becoming uncomfortable
(cf, Buringh, 1957). That the people settled where rainfall could still be
used to advantage when supplemented with limited irrigation may indi-
256                                Variability among Occupational Units
cate that irrigation techniques had not yet developed very far, or that
population pressure was not severe.
   Such clustering of sites as we can discern is around shallow basins
where water would have stood, or along the edges of braided, meander-
ing streams. There is very little evidence in the distribution of sites that
cooperative irrigation projects were undertaken. In fact, Adams says that
the typical sites in the Diyala region are 10 to 20 km. apart, a distribution
that hardly suggests political or economic integration.
   We can hardly deny a large population increase between 6000 B.c. and
4000 B.c., but we see a curious thing; most of the additional population
settled in uniformly small villages. It looks as if there were an upper limit
to the size of a village that people preferred and when it was reached, a
group of people budded off to settle a new village on virgin lands.
  According to Adams’ Khuzistan data (Adams, 1962), most of the vil-
lages were two to five acres, but by 4000 B.c. a few settlements ap-
proached the size of towns—nine to twelve acres. In these we should
expect to find a population up to 800 persons, a sufficient concentration
to require some    organized authority—at least a village council.        From
settlement alone we can infer little more, for in west Iran we do not have
excavations that reveal buildings of sacred or public function nor build-
ings that might have housed an elite class. Unfortunately where we do
have towns with temples and presumably a priestly organization to run
them, we do not know the size of the population, the details of subsis-
tence, or the range of crafts that were practiced. Eridu in southern Meso-
potamia is said to have been about twenty acres in extent, but a large part
of that was taken up by the temples and subsequent settlements (Lloyd,
1948). Eridu may have been the largest settlement in the world for its
time, and we know of nothing in, west Iran comparable to it.
  In the Deh Luran valley for this period we are still faced with a lack of
evidence in architecture or settlement patterns for status differentiation
and occupational specialization. The increased size of the population still
does not suggest any particular pressure on the land. We should be sur-
prised as a consequence if we have anything more than self-sufficient,
autonomous villages in the economic sense, although surely marriage ties
must have linked the settlements with reciprocal obligations between
families.

ARTIFACTS

Our third line of evidence is inference drawn from the occurrence             of
artifacts in archeological sites. Study of these artifacts can reveal trade
items and their sources, evidence of craft specialization, perhaps sex or
status symbols, and ceremonial objects.
  During the Bus Mordeh Phase we have, in the presence of obsidian and
cowrie   shells, limited   but positive   evidence   of trade.   The   obsidian,
amounting to less than 1 per cent of the total chipped stone, probably
came from eastern Turkey, and the cowrie shells, used for beads, came
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 B.c.                    957
from the Persian Gulf. In the case of shells we should imagine that they
were passed on during sporadic and unpredictable times of contact be-
tween the Deh Luranis and peoples to the south. But obsidian may be a
different case. In view of the fact that this material occurs in all sites of
Mohammad Jaffar Phase agriculturalists in the Zagros, in some cases in
amounts up to 40 per cent of the total flint, I should think some sort of
regular trade must have been carried out. Deh Luran on the lowland
steppe appears to be out of the main stream of this trade, however. If we
seek a mechanism for ensuring continuous trade, we can probably find it
in the seasonal gathering of shepherds in mountain valleys along the route
where most of the obsidian seems to have been distributed. No merchants
or markets are implied by this trade.
   Other hints of similar interaction with peoples of the mountains can be
found in the presence in Deh Luran of emmer wheat and two-row barley,
both native to the mountains and therefore imports to Deh Luran. Al-
though I see no reason to think that the Bus Mordeh villagers were not
themselves cultivating these grains, the possibility remains that they could
have traded for them with the mountain folk.
   The artifacts give us no reason to think that the division of labor was not
that commonly found among hunting peoples: men hunt and women
gather and prepare wild plant food. Herding was probably done by men
and boys, farming by women. Proficiency in crafts, but not necessarily
much specialization, is seen in the flint chipping and manufacture of
stone bowls, matting and basketry, and ornaments.
   Some clues to the ritual or ceremonial activities of these people are
given by the presence of phallic objects and animal figurines. Both classes
of object could well have had magical significance, and I think it is
noteworthy that the figurines were of goats, the only domesticated ani-
mals kept by the villagers.There is no hint that there were notions of
formal religion or that there were even special religious practitioners.
Rather, I am inclined to see in these data a do-it-yourself magic of the
sort commonly found among primitive people today. This, of course,
would not necessarily preclude the presence of part-time shamans or
magicians.
  There are no artifacts that would contradict the impression that the Bus
Mordeh   society was   egalitarian.   We   find beads,   pendants,   and labrets
scattered throughout the deposits, but unfortunately we found no burials.
In view of what we find in the Bayat Phase, perhaps the mere presence of
oraments is significant—an indication that they were available to anyone
who chose to wear them.
  Taking into consideration the artifacts we have mentioned, the overrid-
ing impression is that the Bus Mordeh society was relatively undifferenti-
ated and egalitarian.

  There is slighty fullér evidence for the Mohammad          Jaffar Phase. Ob-
sidian was still being obtained, but at this time it comprised about 2 per
258                                   Variability among Occupational Units
cent of the total chipped stone, perhaps an indication that the line of
supply had become more dependable. In addition to obsidian, there are
beads of turquoise whose source seems to have been the northeast part of
Iran and, again, cowrie shells from the Persian Gulf. Also present is a
small amount of native copper hammered, cut, and rolled into shape
 (Smith, 1965). This material came from the Iranian plateau, probably
near the site of Sialk. A single seed of a lentil is the only evidence for new
mountain plants appearing in this phase.
   Perhaps significant in regard to trade and/or transhumance is the fact
that during our surveys in the Khorramabad Valley, we found sherds of a
type made by the Mohammad Jaffar villagers. These sherds were found
in caves, sites that had been used as shepherds’ camps. There were no
contemporary villages in the Khorramabad Valley. Along with the indige-
nous sherds in Deh Luran, we also turned up a few pieces of pottery that
seem to be imports, but we are at a loss to specify their origin. We should
imagine that they came from the south which is archeological terra incog-
nita at this period.
  Trade   items thus show    somewhat    wider   contacts   at this period, al-
though the amount of this evidence is not overwhelming. There is no
reason to think that any of these artifacts could not have been procured
through exchange by shepherds coming in contact seasonally with other
peoples.
  The division of labor was      probably essentially as before,     since the
major activities had not changed greatly. The only additional craft that
would require any new skills was pottery making and that, as Matson
(1965) has pointed out, can easily be viewed as a simple extension of the
housewife’s chores.
  Turning to the ritual or ceremonial practices, we have the continued
use of figurines and phallic symbols, but now, rather than animals, we
find crude human figurines and a great many stylized “figurines” that
might have been humans. Significantly, perhaps, we do not continue to
find goat figurines although goat herding was at least as important as
earlier. Still, nothing in these data suggests a basically different ceremon-
ial orientation from what we found in the Bus Mordeh.
   Some burials show an elaboration of personal ornamentation but no
unequivocal signs of rank or status. All the skeletons that we have found
were wearing beads and some of them had labrets and bell-shaped pubic
coverings. About all I would hazard at the present time is that there was
some sexual differentiation in apparel. The fact that turquoise beads oc-
curred with the burials suggests that the material was not overly expen-
sive and that rights to property of this sort were personal. From the
artifacts I infer that the Mohammad Jaffar people could indulge small
luxuries and cater to their individual whims in matters of dress, but I
cannot see any signs of rank or status differentiation.

  In some ways the Bayat people look colorless compared with the Mo-
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 8.c.               259
hammad Jaffar folk, for there are many fewer types of artifacts and
virtually no ornaments.
   The making of flint tools was much less important and less than 1 per
cent of the total chipped stone was obsidian. A recent analysis of some of
this obsidian indicates that it may have an Anatolian origin (Renfrew,
personal communication; Cann and Renfrew, 1964). Interestingly
enough, however, there is some evidence—in the type of stone and in the
technique of chipping—that finished flint blades were also imported, per-
haps a sign that the local craftsmen had given up the art of fine flint
chipping. A few copper pins from the Iranian plateau occur in these
contexts but not in sufficient numbers to suggest regular trade. Rare
sherds turn up that look as if they were derived from northwest Iraq or
Turkey, but the bulk of the “foreign” sherds seem to have their closest
links with southern Mesopotamia and Khuzistan. What we see, generally
speaking, is the opening up for the first time of contacts with the west as
well as with the Zagros mountain region. Unfortunately, we cannot spec-
ify the mechanics of exchange between these regions.
   When new methods for using the land had been invented, farming
became much more important economically and men were probably
drawn more and more into agricultural labor. The few burials we found
had grinding stones in association, probably a sign that the women looked
forward to an eternity of labor preparing food. Craft specialization is best
seen in the making of pottery, which, by this time, was done largely with
the wheel and fired to high temperatures. The wares are well-made,
standardized in style and design, and show considerable functional differ-
entiation. Storage vessels, drinking cups, cooking pots, and dishes are well
represented. However, there is no evidence that pottery was manufac-
tured for trade or export; I should think that women continued to pro-
duce it largely for their own families.
  The burials were remarkable for their lack of ornamentation, consider-
ing what we had found in the earlier phase. Perhaps this negative evi-
dence is significant in the sense either that ornaments could not be ob-
tained or, as seems more likely, that decoration was reserved for special
persons. Unfortunately, except for a few labrets scattered through the
deposits, we find no evidence that anyone was decorated. On the other
hand, we did find seals, which are usually interpreted as signs of individ-
ual ownership and this could be taken as a sign of burgeoning status
differentiation. What I refer to here is a difference between the producers
and those who organized and directed production and distributed the
surpluses.
  When we turn to evidence for ritual or ceremonial activities, curiously
enough, we find none; there are no figurines or phallic symbols. Consid-
ering data from other regions, I wonder if we are not justified in assuming
that religious practices have taken a different bent. I wonder whether the
personal, do-it-yourself magic of earlier times had not been replaced by a
less personal, more   formal   ritual presided over by trained. attendants.
260                              Variability among Occupational Units
Since we know, for example at Eridu, that contemporary peoples were
making offerings and sacrifices at temples, it does not seem wholly out of
the question that the Bayat folk may have been doing likewise. Obviously
we need far more     data than we   have, preferably positive rather than
negative.
  A study of the artifacts found in the Bayat Phase leads me to wonder if
there are not some status differences among persons and perhaps even
special offices. Otherwise I see a community of prosperous farmers most
of whom are equal to one another, although perhaps not as rich in arti-
facts or ornaments as in earlier times.


                                 Summary

BUS MORDEH PHASE, ABOUT 8000 B.c.
The Bus Mordeh villagers exploited a wide spectrum of their environment
as they practiced their diversified subsistence activities. In terms of eco-
nomic importance it would be hard to decide which activity contributed
the most, but we do know that they herded goats, planted emmer wheat
and two-row barley, engaged in extensive collecting of wild plant food,
hunted the wild ungulates of the plain—ox, onager, gazelle, and deer—
and obtained fish, clams, turtles, and migratory birds from the swamps.
 We know that the people resided in Deh Luran during the winter but we
 infer that they moved seasonally into the mountains with their herds
 when the hot dry summer began and the crops were harvested. We
 cannot imagine a much better example of what one might call “incipient
 agriculture.”
    The subsistence activities suggest that the people probably divided
 their labor much as modern hunting peoples do—the men hunted and the
 women collected and prepared plant food. Children and old people might
 have been employed in herding or collecting.
_ The Bus Mordeh folk lived in a small village, of no more than 200
 persons and probably half that many. Their small houses were of mud.
 There is no indication from our excavation in this settlement of rooms of
 diversified function or that any persons enjoyed larger or better built
 dwellings.
    Sites of this age are rare in the Near East and we can only conclude that
the population was fairly small. It seems likely, in view of the permanence
of the settlement, that the Bus Mordeh people held traditional rights to
the land surrounding the site but there is no reason to suspect that indi-
viduals held rights to certain fields. In fact, the agriculture was probably
so rudimentary and land so relatively available that ownership of fields
would not have been an issue.
   On the other hand, in the fact that there were houses of some perman-
ence and flocks of goats, I wonder if there might not have been some
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 8.c.                 261
corporate ownership of these tangible assets. One could easily imagine
that a lineage organization would be sufficient to keep such property in
the family. If there were lineages, I should expect them to have been
patrilineal by analogy with most hunting peoples today.
   The people engaged in a minor amount of trade for obsidian and
cowrie shells but this was not of an amount or economic consequence to
suggest that markets or commerce might have been a factor.
   Figurines of goats and phallic symbols suggest some sort of magical
practices but not the sort that would require any professional practition-
ers. Neither are there crafts that we should think complex enough to have
required full-time craftsmen.
    In all, I should think that family units were essentially self-sufficient
and that the most embracive social organization was the lineage. The
people were probably egalitarian with the major subdivisions of labor
based on sex and age.

MOHAMMAD JAFFAR PHASE, 6000 B.c.
At 6000 B.c. the people exploited the same broad spectrum of their envi-
ronment as before, but there is some evidence that their system of crop-
ping, fallowing, and grazing was beginning to have deleterious effects on
the landscape. We see this especially in the occurrence of the edible
Prosopis plant, a woody legume that favors a landscape from which the
natural vegetation has been removed either by repeated cropping or ex-
tended grazing. The agricultural techniques show some signs of innova-
tion; crude hoes were used to break up clods and more land was probably
under cultivation. Along with the farming, however, was the continuation
of herding, now of both sheep and goats. The probable pattern of trans-
humance into the mountains during the summer is underscored by our
finding Deh Luran type pottery in Khorramabad. These sherds were
found in caves that had been used by shepherds before people settled
down there as farmers.
   Hunting was at least as important as before and men must have spent a
large portion of their time in this pursuit. If this is the case, women were
probably doing most of the farming along with their other activities in
collecting wild foods.
   From our surveys we see some increase in population generally, al-
though we are not sure there was more than one village in the Deh Luran
Valley. At a maximum, the Mohammad Jaffar village covered three acres
and contained 270 people. This size of settlement seems to be typical of
the times and was not greatly surpassed until later. There is no evidence
that population pressure was a factor in social relations. In fact, where we
have good survey data, as for instance in the Kermanshah Valley, we find
that the sites are scattered. From this I infer that each village retained
rights to enough land surrounding it to ensure a comfortable subsistence.
Mountainous terrain for grazing was probably open to whomever wished
262                                   Variability among Occupational Units
to use it, although traditional territories must have been recognized.
   It would be interesting in this regard to know what became of the
hunters that used to live in the mountains. Did they give up the chase and
become farmers, or were they exterminated by herders whose flocks were
subjected to depredations by human hunters?
   Trade in obsidian and cowrie shells continued and, at least in the
former commodity, increased. Perhaps this reflects the additional links in
the chain that would have resulted from a larger population. Interestingly
enough, during this period we find both copper and turquoise, products
of the Iranian plateau. Although this suggests wider contacts, we are still
not dealing with regular trade, and certainly not with commerce.
   Excavations have not revealed any unusual building that would indi-
cate either public functions or status differentiation. The adornment of
burials shows that people wore many kinds of ornaments, but since all the
burials show this, we cannot see ornamentation as anything special. In a
few cases it looks as if we can distinguish men by their ornaments, but the
data are still too scarce to push very far.
   The only new craft is the making of pottery, a not very difficult recom-
bination of arts that had long been practiced by women. We do not see
any specialization here.
   A slightly different focus of magic or religion is suggested by figurines.
We still find phallic pieces, but instead of goats we now have human
figurines, some of them highly stylized. Although perhaps the focus has
changed, the essentially non-specialized nature of these practices is still
indicated.
   Viewing the phase generally, I see population being added in small-
village increments, none of which is large enough to require much gov-
ernment. I should think that each village was probably composed of
several lineages and, when necessary, group activities were presided over
by elders. The picture is that of the self-sufficient egalitarian community.

BAYAT PHASE, ABOUT 4000 B.c.
By 4000 3.c. subsistence patterns had changed considerably and with
them the general productivity had risen. Free-threshing hexaploid wheat
and six-row barley were the principal crops, and these were grown with
the aid of a simple system of irrigation on land that was prepared with
stone hoes. Along with sheep and goats, we also find the Bayat people
keeping cattle and using guard dogs. Some hunting and gathering was
also practiced, although wild cattle had evidently disappeared by this
time.
   Considering the more effective subsistence practices, I wonder whether
men were not drawn into agriculture much more than in earlier phases.
Setting up the irrigated plots, breaking the soil and harvesting the larger
areas under cultivation may have required the services of men. Women’s
tasks probably increased. They were no doubt engaged in preparing the
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 B.c.                 263
food and in gathering wild plants, but with the coming of bread wheats,
they would also have had to grind flour and make bread and perhaps
beer. Moreover, once the Deh Luranis had cattle, I should be surprised if
cheese and yoghurt were not being used. Textiles and spindle whorls
attest to the art of weaving, and sheep were probably being kept more for
their wool than for their meat. By this time women may have had enough
to do around the house without going out to till the soil.
   Although we do not find evidence of storage, the potential for produc-
ing considerable agricultural surpluses existed. Wherever there are sur-
pluses it is usual to dispose of them in a way that will enhance the
prestige of the giver or the good of the community. In early historic times
in Mesopotamia the preferred method of disposing of surplus was to
redistribute it through the temple both in the form of offerings and as a
means of supporting the temple and its officials. Since we have no evi-
dence yet of contemporary temples in Deh Luran, the specific disposition
of any possible surpluses will have to remain a question.
  I judge from surveys that at least a three-fold increase in population,
added in small-village increments, occurred in the 2,000 years following
the Mohammad Jaffar Phase. Most of the settlements were between two
and five acres but a few were between nine and twelve acres. These
latter, found in Khuzistan, were towns in which up to 800 people lived.
The size of these groups is certainly sufficient to allow, if not absolutely
require, additional governmental or regulatory groups on the order of
sodalities and councils. In Deh Luran itself we find only a few other
relatively small villages that may have been linked by marriage ties, but I
see no reason why they should have been linked governmentally.
  During the Bayat Phase, for the first time, there is contact with lands to
the west. Some of the sherds and obsidian look as if they had come from
Anatolia, other sherds as if from Mesopotamia.       Continued contacts with
the mountain and interior portions of Iran is indicated by the presence of
obsidian, and flint blades were probably being imported. If this is true,
the people were resorting to trade to supply a necessary tool.
   A greater degree of craft specialization than earlier is seen in the
making of pottery which by now was well-fired, wheeled, standardized,
and displayed a wide range of functions. Although the pots were well
made, I see no reason      to think that they were    imported; indeed they
display locally specific designs.
  A curious fact is the lack of ornaments in the Bayat deposits. Although
there were   scattered occurrences   of labrets and “studs,” there were no
beads and pendants. The few burials were interred without equipment,
except for grinding stones, a fact that gives us some idea about the peo-
ples’ notions of the role of women    in the after-life. On the other hand,
although “jewelry” is not present, we do find seals, engraved stones that
were used to make individual signs of ownership when pressed into wet
clay. This suggests that.some notion of property existed and that there
264                                    Variability among Occupational Units
may have been persons who had accumulated more than others. In con-
nection with this, I wonder if ornaments were not reserved for persons of
status.
   Finally, we can consider religious or magical beliefs. We found no phal-
lic objects, and only one fragment of a figurine, in this or any of the
phases intervening betwween the Mohammad Jaffar and Bayat Phases.
This suggests a different focus of expression and I wonder, by analogy
with other areas, if religion had become less personal and directed mainly
by semi-professional priests toward the pantheon of gods who controlled
natural events and, ultimately, agricultural productivity.
   In summary,   from the evidence in Deh Luran, I see little more com-
plexity of society than in the previous phase, but I should think that the
former divisions of labor between the sexes may have changed somewhat.
Each community was certainly self-sufficient economically and there is no
indication of any inter-village cooperation. The larger communities of this
time were likely directed by a council of elders and, to judge from certain
negative evidence, sumptuary goods may have been reserved for persons
of unusual status, a cut above the typical villager.
   It should be apparent from this brief summary that our data from Deh
Luran and surrounding areas are far too skimpy to allow many detailed
inferences about social organization. Still, I think we can see avenues to
pursue in future seasons of excavation that will lead to much more precise
insights into the nature of the society that for the first time in culture
history was called upon to adapt itself to agriculture and then to urban-
ism and finally to civilization.


                                 References

Apams, R. M., Jr. 1962. Agriculture and urban life in early southwestern Iran.
  Science, 136: 109—122.
     . 1965. Land behind Baghdad. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Braipwoop, R. J. 1960. Seeking the world’s first farmers in Persian Kurdistan.
  Illustrated London News, 237: 695—97.
Braipwoop, R. J., and B. Howe. 1960. Prehistoric investigations in Iraqi
  Kurdistan. Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, No. 31. Chicago: Uni-
  versity of Chicago Press.
Braipwoop, R. J., B. Howe, and C. A. Reep. 1961. The Iranian prehistoric
   project. Science, 133: 2008—2010.
Burincu, P. 1957. Living conditions in the lower Mesopotamian plain in
  ancient times. Sumer, 13: 30—46.
Butzer, Kart W. 1965. Physical conditions in eastern Europe, western Asia
  and Egypt. In Cambridge Ancient History, vol. 1, chap. 2. Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
Cann, J. R., and Cotin RENFREw. 1964. The characterization of obsidian and
  its application to the Mediterranean region. Proceedings of the Prehistoric
  Society, 30: 111-33. (This gives an example of the method, although data
  from Deh Luran are not included.)
Hole Social Organization in Western Iran, 8000-4000 x.c.                         265
FLANNERY, K. V. 1965. The ecology of early food production in Mesopotamia.
  Science, 147: 1247—56.
FRANKFORT, Henri. 1950 Town           planning   in ancient    Mesopotamia.     Town
  Planning Review, 21: 98—115.
Gremuiza, F. G. L. 1962. Ecology of endemic diseases in the Dez irrigation
  pilot area. (A report to the Khuzistan Water and Power Authority and Plan
  Organization, Government of Iran.) New York: Development and Resources
  Corporation. (Unpublished. )
Hore, Frank. 1962. Archeological survey and excavation in Iran, 1961.
  Science, 137: 524—26.
——.    1966 Investigating the origins of Mesopotamian civilization. Science,
  153 (3736): 605—611.
Ho.e, FRANK, and K. V. FLANNERY. 1962. Excavations at Ali Kosh, Iran, 1961.
  Iranica Antiqua, 2: 97-148.
Ho.e, Frank, K. V. FLANNeERy, and J. A. Neety.        1965. Early agriculture and
  animal husbandry in Deh Luran, Iran. Current Anthropology, 6: 105-106
Lioyp, Seron. 1948. The oldest city of Sumeria: Establishing the origins of
  Eridu. Illustrated London News, 213: 303—305.
Matson, F. R. 1965. Ceramic ecology: An approach to the study of the early
  cultures of the Near     East.   In F. R. Matson    (Ed.), Ceramics       and man.
  Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
MorTENSEN,   PepER.   1963. Excavations   at Tepe Guran,      Luristan.   Acta Arche-
  ologica, 34: 110—21.
NarROLL,   Raout.   1956. A preliminary index of social development.        American
  Anthropologist, 58: 687-715.
Sanins, M. D. 1958. Social stratification in Polynesia. Seattle: University of
  Washington Press.
SmirH, C. S. 1965. Metallographic study of early artifacts made from native
  copper. Paper presented at XI International Congress of the History of
  Science, Poland (mimeographed).
Sotecki, R. L. 1964. Zawi Chemi Shanidar, a post-Pleistocene village site in
  northern Iraq. Report of the Sixth International Congress on the Quaternary,
   Warsaw, 1961, 4: 405—412.
Van Zeist, W., and H. E. Wricut, Jr. 1963. Preliminary pollen studies at
   Lake Zeribar, Zagros mountains, southwestern Iran. Science, 140: 65—67.
Wavucnoper, Rosert (Ed.). 1956. Functional and evolutionary implications of
  community patterning. In Seminars in Archaelogy: 1955, Memoir No. 11,
  Society for American Archaeology.
Wutey, G. R. (Ed.). 1956. Prehistoric settlement patterns in the New World.
  New York: Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research.
FOURTEEN                                  KENT V. FLANNERY        AND MICHAEL       D. COE




                                       Social and Economic Systems
                                        in Formative Mesoamerica




Between 1500 and 800 s.c., Mesoamerica made the transition from semi-
sedentary food-collecting and primitive cultivation to the threshold of
early state formation. From central Mexico to northern Honduras, this
half-millennium was characterized by stable villages of pole-and-thatch or
wattle-and-daub houses, sometimes accompanied (by the end of the per-
iod) by mounds which enclosed high-status burials or served as platforms
for temples. At the start of this period, known as the Early Formative, a
social type previously unrecorded for North America came into being: the
sedentary village farming community.’
  A number of authors have already speculated on the social organization
which may have characterized the Formative village. All see it as being
on a “tribal” level of complexity, with some principal of clanship, presum-
ably based on descent, as the organizing factor in society. Pita Chan
(1955, p. 39), Wolf (1959, p. 57), and MacNeish (1964, p. 536) have all
tentatively suggested that descent may have been matrilineal.’ From the
comments by Willey, Ekholm, and Millon (1964, p. 456), we suspect they
  1 Although we accept full responsibility for the content of this paper, we wish to
thank Robert McC. Adams, Marshall D. Sahlins, Saul H. Reisenberg, and Stephen F.
Borhegyi for constructive criticism and suggestions. Nancy H. Flannery prepared all
the accompanying illustrations.
   * Matrilineality seems extremely unlikely to us, as it is practically unknown any-
where in Mesoamerica, least of all among the marginal groups like the Cora-Huichol,
Tarahumara, etc. who might conceivably have maintained some. vestiges of the pre-
civilized sociopolitical institutions of the region. So far as we know, all unilateral clan
systems in the area are patrilineal.

                                             267
268                                   Variability among Occupational Units
would reconstruct it as bilateral or patrilineal, The bases for these prev-
ious speculations have been certain aspects of material culture (like fe-
male figurines),or ethnographic data taken from codices or colonial doc-
uments, or ethnographic analogies drawn from cultures believed to be on
the same level of development as the Formative cultures of Mesoamerica.
We agree that ethnographic analogy is a useful tool, but that, as Clark
(1952) suggests, it must not be done indiscriminately: some reasonable
methodology must be applied.
  An excellent discussion of such methodology was presented by Sapir
(1916) half a century ago. Sapir was attempting to derive chronology
from the available ethnographic data on the American Indian. It is our
hope eventually to be able to put some ethnography into the available
chronology of the prehistoric American Indian.
  There are a number of methodologies through which one could ap-
proach a reconstruction of social organization in Formative Mesoamerica.
It could be attempted through studying the social systems of contempo-
rary or near-contemporary peoples on the margins of Mesoamerica, whose
way of life may bear some resemblance to that of the Formative. The
Cora-Huichol, Tepehuan, Lenca, Jicaque, and Tarahumara come to mind,
but with the exception of the latter group, they are poorly documented.
Alternatively, one could study the “internal marginals” in Mesoamerica,
like the Huave or Sierra Mixe, who may have participated only to a
limited extent in the “Classic” or “Post-Classic” civilizations of that region.
One problem is that it is extremely difficult, in the case of all these
“marginal” peoples, to sort out the cultural elements which diffused to
them at a late time level. Nor do we know to what degree they actually
represent “survivals” of a Formative way of life; though their technology
may in some ways hark back to that period, there is little guarantee that
their social organization has remained the same.
   Still another method has been applied in recent years with increasing
frequency. This is to examine the sociopolitical system of an area in the
ethnographic present in an attempt to isolate the ecological and economic
systems with which it is interrelated. This approach argues that sociopolit-
ical systems can be seen to function as adaptive mechanisms, and that
certain forms of society may be seen to occur repeatedly with certain
types of economy or exploitive production. This being the case, tentative
analogies can be drawn between peoples in like ecological situations using
like means of production. As pointed out by Clark (1952, p. 3), this can
be a dangerous game if the cultures involved are “far removed in time
and space” and with “no continuity of tradition” between them. It is made
correspondingly safer the closer the two societies lie in time and space,
and the closer their cultural relationship.
   One way of reconstructing the exploitive systems of Formative cultures
in various ecological areas is through a study of settlement patterns, com-
bined with examination of the plant and animal remains from archeologi-
Flannery/Coe Social and Economic Systems in Mesoamerica                269
cal sites. We attempted this in a paper (Coe and Flannery, 1964a), at the
close of which we advanced some theories about the possible conditions
under which the settled communities characteristic of the Mesoamerican
Formative first appeared. These theories had to do with the number and
spacing of the resource areas (or “microenvironments”) exploited by
communities which were either sedentary or well on their way to seden-
tism. Since the publication of that paper, a number of colleagues have
drawn to our attention some interesting parallels between our comments
on the exploitation of different resource areas in Mesoamerica, and Sah-
lins’ comments on the exploitation of different resource areas in Polynesia
(Sahlins, 1958). In this paper we would like to examine those parallels a
bit further, and to suggest how Sahlins’ approach enables us, using our
1964 paper as a take-off point, to present two models for consideration
with regard to the social organization of Formative communities. That
these models have at least a degree of historical reality will be shown by
their applicability to documented Classic and Post-Classic cultures in
Mesoamerica.


               The “Microenvironment Reduction” Process
In our 1964 paper we compared and contrasted the economies           of the
Early Formative period in the arid highland valley of Tehuacan, Mexico
(MacNeish, 1964), and the wet tropical Pacific coast of Guatemala where
we had excavated in 1962. Both areas had Formative villages in the
second millennium B.c., but we inferred from archeological data that the
Guatemalan coast had a higher density of stable villages with a larger and
more sedentary population. It was our suspicion that this had come about
(at least partially) because the early farmers of the Guatemalan coast
had supplemented their highly productive maize crop mainly with the
products of a single resource area: the lagoon and estuary system. Our
excavations produced mineralized corn cobs of Nal-Tel/Chapalote type as
well as cultivated avocados, but these domesticates were heavily supple-
mented with marine catfish, red snapper, gar, snook, crabs, oysters, mus-
sels, marsh clams, and other products of the estuary system. Products of
other resource areas were lacking; the Early Formative villagers of the
Guatemalan coast seemed to have remained stable and sedentary year-
round in a single “microenvironment” out of the eight we defined for that
part of the coast.
  In contrast to this, the early villagers at Tehuacan   exploited a whole
range of different resource areas, no one of which could be counted on
for sustenance throughout the year. There were mountain woodlands,
whose acorns and wild avocados ripened in September; cactus forests on
the lower mountain talus, whose fruits (like prickly pear) were available
in April; alluvial valley floors, where the rainy-season com farming was
done, and where the mesquite trees bore edible pods in July; and so on
270                                   Variability among Occupational Units
through several environmental zones. Long after villages of wattle-and-
daub houses appeared, MacNeish’s data (1964) showed extensive forays
into distant resource areas to supplement agriculture with wild products;
and these forays mitigated against fully sedentary life. Our 1964 article
concluded that a “reduction in the number and spacing of the microenvir-
onments needed for exploitation by a given community” was one factor,
at least, in early settled life.
   Unfortunately, we presented this in somewhat oversimplified form, a
situation we hope partially to correct here. First of all, there are many
methods of “microenvironment reduction” other than the one chosen by
the farmer-fishers of the coastal lowlands.     Second    (and here is where
Sahlins’ data may be relevant), the method chosen can have quite pro-
found effects on both the basic economy and the sociopolitical organiza-
tion of the Formative group in question. We would like to begin by
distinguishing two basic means by which “microenvironment reduction”
can be accomplished,     and two   different   kinds   of societies   which   can
result. Later we will refer to the ethnographic literature to see if there is
any indication that such societies ever existed in Mesoamerica.
   Figure 1 gives our first theoretical model. Let us suppose, for example,
that a pioneer band of Mesoamerican Indians arrives for the first time in
an ecological zone which contains four clear-cut microenvironments: a
tidewater lagoon, an oak woodland, a talus area of maguey and prickly
pear, and an alluvial plain. The band plants its corn on the alluvial plain
and supplements its harvest with wild resources gathered in the various
resource areas (Fig. la). At least two possibilities for settled life are open
to them.
   The first (Fig. 1b) results in what animal ecologists call a “contagious
distribution.” This term is used, among other things, to describe “aggrega-
tions on suitable but limited substrate” (Allee et al., 1949, p. 393). Here
the choice made by the band is to concentrate all its exploitive effort on
the one resource area which it deems most productive, largely ignoring
the others. In the case of our hypothetical band, let us suppose that they
settle on the edge of the tidewater lagoon, farming the surrounding flats
while developing a highly productive fishing technology. Villages begin
to appear along the shore of the lagoon; settlement is permanent there,
with the oak woodland and maguey/ prickly-pear habitats left vacant. As
daughter communities segment or “bud off,” they stay within the same
resource area, simply moving a convenient distance downshore from the
parent community. When the number of villages has reached, let us say,
eight, all eight will be concentrated in the lagoon microenvironment.
   The second type of “microenvironment reduction” involves a more bal-
anced distribution of settlement through all habitats—even those which,
taken alone, could not support a self-sufficient village. The point is that
self-sufficiency is not achieved (or even desired), because permanent
settlement is possible through cooperative specialization. A single village
 Flannery/Coe     Social and Economic Systems in Mesoamerica                           o71




                                     WITH Se Ses
                                    MAGUEY ANOPS EGA

                                                 LAGOON   -
                                              ESTUARY           %

                          &<                SYSTEM             a
                                                               ins“py
                         &   6                                      cA e
                      wo
                      oo                                             % %vA
                    & 2               a. Pioneer settlement             *,%




             b.. Contagious’ distribution                 c.Dispersed   distribution
                                 Figure 1. Theoretical models.


does not attempt to exploit all resource areas; each exploits the habitat in
which it is settled, and exchanges its products for those of other habitats.
To modify our hypothetical case, let us now imagine our eight villages
distributed two-to-a-resource-area (as in Fig. lc). The villagers in the oak
woodland zone hunt deer and collect acorns, trading nuts and dried meat
to the lagoon-side villages in exchange for fish and maize, or to the talus
slope area in exchange for cactus fruits, maguey fiber and pulque, and so
forth. Each village has reduced the number of microenvironments it must
exploit to one, yet it shares in the products of all zones. This is the kind of
situation which Sanders (1956) has already called “symbiosis.”
  What are the evidences that such choices were actually made in Forma-
272                                  Variability among Occupational Units
tive Mesoamerica? We offer Figure 2 as a sample. These are not theoret-
ical models, but actual settlement pattern maps showing Formative sites
known for identical time periods (1500 to 200 s.c.) on the Guatemalan
coast (Fig. 2a) and in the Tehuacan Valley (Fig. 2b). The Guatemalan
coastal map is probably as close as anyone will come to finding truly
“contagious” distribution of sites; although future survey will undoubtedly
recover additional villages upstream in the tropical forest, nearly all sites
we found (especially in the Early Formative) cluster along the estuary
system. In the Tehuacén Valley, MacNeish’s survey showed a complex
settlement system involving villages with temples, villages without tem-
ples, and seasonal camps    (MacNeish,   1964, Fig. 6). These were distri-
buted through a number of resource areas, with temple villages mainly on
the central alluvial plain.


                            Economic Systems
Certain obvious economic differences go hand in hand with these two
distinct modes of microenvironment reduction. In the case of the “contag-
iously distributed” villages on the Guatemalan coast, each household had
access to all means of production utilized in the area, and the exploitive
tasks performed by any one community were probably “carbon copies” of
the tasks performed by every other community. Probably there was little
movement of products from house to house or from village to village; at
least, faunal remains suggest little dependence on resources which would
not have been available to all villages (Coe and Flannery, 1964a). Nor
would there have been seasonal differences in surpluses between villages.
When the fish are running, all villages have fish; when the corn is ripe, all
villages have corn. Under such conditions, any “trade” is usually limited
to balanced reciprocity.
   In the “symbiotic” situation, the reverse is true. There are great differ-
ences between communities regarding access to specific resources and
performance of specific tasks, as can be imagined in the Tehuacan situa-
tion. When acorns are ripe, cactus fruits are not. When cactus fruits are
ripe, maize is not. Products move between households and between vil-
lages, and members of the same kin group may perform drastically dif-
ferent exploitive tasks should they happen to live in different resource
areas. We know for a fact that basic subsistence products and raw mate-
rials were on the move all over the highlands of Mexico in the Formative:
examples that come to mind include obsidian, as well as tropical products
traded into temperate parts of the Tehuacdn Valley, like cotton and za-
potes (MacNeish, 1964, and personal communication).Obsidian reached
the Early Formative villages of the Guatemalan coast in very tiny
amounts despite the presence of extensive natural deposits in the adjacent
highlands (Coe and Flannery, 1964b).
  Reciprocal exchanges between villages soon cease to be the most ef-
Flannery/Coe   Social and Economic Systems in                    Mesoamerica   273


                            DON         rT       mi        es?        ,
                        *     preety   Sy! S   SERS   O¢   ‘     oO       c
                              Sa | Ha      whe             NES




                                  PHPPFONP
                                        THD AY
                                  CONGLOMERATE © §& §




                      Figure 2. Settlement patterns.
274                                  Variability among Occupational Units
ficient method of exchange under the conditions described for the Mexi-
can highlands. Under a reciprocal system, the villages farthest from the
obsidian fields would have to wait until handfuls of obsidian had slowly
been traded from village to village along the route; perishable products
like zapotes would not last out such a trip. One solution to this was the
famous market system of the Mexican highlands. Still another, with an
even greater potential for the support of an aristoi and full-time religious
functionaries, is what Polanyi (1957) calls a “redistributive” system.
Through such a system, all resource areas channel their products direct to
a single local accumulative center from which goods can then be redis-
tributed to the scattered network of surrounding villages. The surpluses
accumulated in this local center support civic activities not seen in the
satellite villages; compare the pattern MacNeish (1964, Fig. 6) gives for
“temple towns” and their surrounding villages during the Santa Maria
Phase in the Tehuacan Valley.


                              Social Systems
Now, one might legitimately ask, so what? What difference could these
alternative settlement and economic systems make in the social organiza-
tion of Formative Mesoamerica? It is here that we feel Sahlins’ Polynesian
data can usefully be called into play.
  In his study of social stratification in Polynesia, Sahlins (1958) distin-
guished two basic types of sociopolitical organization, and these seem to
be associated with differences in resource exploitation very like those we
have just finished describing. The first type of social organization was the
“descent line,” or simple “unilateral exogamous clan” of Kirchhoff (1959).
These we might describe as corporate groups united by actual (or fiction-
alized) common descent through the male or female line; all members of
a given lineage being regarded as equals. The second type of social organ-
ization was the ramified system, “ramage,” or “conical clan” of Kirchhoff
(1959), which is not really a clan at all. The basic difference between this
and the preceding type of organization is that it is based not on unilateral
descent but on primogeniture; individuals are ranked in status according
to their distance from the direct line of descent from an ancestor at the
apex of the ramified system. (For a more detailed description of these
systems, see Kirchhoff, 1959; Sahlins, 1958).
  The distribution of these two social types in Polynesia was such that
Sahlins concluded that “the two systems, the ramified and the descent-
line, may represent differing adaptations related to variations in ecologi-
cal conditions. In particular, the distribution of natural resources, i.e., of
the zones of exploitation, may have been a factor prejudicing the devel-
opment of ramified or descent-line systems” (Sahlins, 1958, p- 201).
  Inspection of Sahlins’ data shows that unilateral exogamous clans were
almost inevitably associated with a settlement pattern of our “contagious”
Flannery/Coe Social and Economic Systems in Mesoamerica          275
type and an exploitive economy aimed at a relatively small number of
resource zones; that is, in situations analogous to our Guatemalan coastal
example. Ramified systems, on the other hand, occurred in areas where
the settlement pattern more closely resembled the Mexican highland type,
with balanced distribution through a number of strategic resource areas
and an economy involving redistribution. According to Sahlins, these dif-
ferences were related to the segmentation process, the “budding off” of
new villages, which (in Polynesia as in Mesoamerica) differed greatly
depending on the exploitive pattern. Stated in simplest terms:
  connection between segmented households would tend to be maintained if, in
  the process of segmentation, the new household was apt to move into a new
  resource area and thus specialize in a particular type of strategic production.
  Maintenance of ties would result in the growth of interconnected ramages
  and a hierarchy for purposes of effecting equitable distribution of goods, by
  both reciprocal and redistributive methods.    If, on the other hand, a new
  household moved into an area identical in exploitable opportunities to that
  in which the parent household was situated, connection between the two
  would weaken and dissolve and descent-line systems result (Sahlins, 1958,
  p- 215).

   Let us compare for a moment the highland Mexican settlement pattern
and that of the analogous “high island” peoples examined by Sahlins. If
exploitive and segmentary factors do indeed prejudice the development of
sociopolitical systems, the most effective type of organization for the re-
distributive economy of the highland “symbiotic” areas would have been
a ramified system. Our Formative highland peoples should have had an
organization based not on participation in an equalitarian descent group,
but on a great branching network of individuals of varying rank. Such a
system would perhaps involve a paramount chief responsible for the main
centers of accumulation and redistribution, and a carefully-kept system of
genealogies designed to establish at all times the complex levels of rank
within the society. Based on the functioning of such a system elsewhere,
we might tentatively construct a hypothetical model for its function in
highland Formative Mesoamerica (see Fig. 3).
   Here the branches of the ramified system serve as channels or “con-
veyor belts” along which goods flow to and from the redistributive cen-
ter: the head of each ramage is responsible for all the goods produced by
all households whose status derives from their relationship with him; he in
turn deals with the persons from whom he derives his inherited status.
Groups producing products of the oak woodland channel them to their
subchief, who relays them to the redistributive center; the same is done
with the products of the lagoon-side villages and the maguey-producing
areas. The paramount chief insures redistribution of all products in an
equitable manner down the same chain of command. The system can be
expanded indefinitely into any number of environmental zones, even ones
which would not support individual communities on a basis of self-suf-
276                                                   Variability among Occupational Units
ficiency. Near-total exploitation of a diverse environmental area results,
maintaining the system as well as producing surpluses which can be used
in ways which ritually reinforce the status of the chiefs and sub-chiefs.
Elaborate genealogies controlled the ranking system in Polynesia and
reified the paramount chief by tracing his direct ancestors back to mythi-
cal culture heroes or dieties.


                                        Ethnographic Data
The model given in Figure 3 is admittedly no more than hypothetical
with regard to the Formative symbiotic areas of highland Mesoamerica. It
worked in regions far removed in time and space; but, as Clark has
stressed, we must demonstrate its presence in Mesoamerica itself before it
attains the status of an acceptable hypothesis. Actually, although the de-
tails are not identical, one can find in the ethnographic literature of the
southern Mexican highlands, evidence of social systems analogous to
those of Sahlins’ ramified, status-conscious Polynesians. And interestingly




                                                        i
                                          MYTHICAL          ANCESTOR
       <—-- = Accumulation                              1
       <—— =Redistribution                            ty
                                                PAST CHIEF




       Deceased
      itt)                      Cee     eee     eee         CeCe   eee   eeeeererereee   Serre rr   errr   ery
       Living
                                  -——      —~                      —~——---   ~~




                siecscronecsee”
                    ey   fs J     :              L
                                                 TWLiv anne uur!

                    Figure 3. Hypothetical model for symbiotic areas.
Flannery/Coe Social and Economic Systems in Mesoamerica            277
enough, these peoples occur in the very areas where we assume a “sym-
biotic” economy, with redistribution and regional market systems.
   One reference which comes immediately to mind is the study by Dahl-
gren de Jordan (1954) on the Mixtecs of Oaxaca, based on colonial
documents and on Alfonso Caso’s studies of the Pre-Columbian codices of
the Mixteca. After a few abortive attempts to fit the Mixtecs into one or
another category of unilateral clan, Dahlgren (1954, p. 150) concluded
that the codices, at least, “excluded the existence of exogamous unilateral
clans, patrilineal as well as matrilineal.” None of the ancient sources
suggest unilateral descent or inheritance of property. The term Dahlgren
eventually settled on was “ambilateral clans with endogamous tendencies”
(1954, p. 151). In point of fact, her description is one of a ramified
system with status based on primogeniture.
   The Mixtecs could have been lifted, with slight modification, directly
out of Sahlins’ study. They kept elaborate genealogies of their royal
lineages—like those of Tilantongo and Teozacualco—many of which have
come down to us in the form of codices. The same term was used for
paternal and maternal uncles, and for paternal and maternal aunts. There
were marriages between cross-cousins, parallel-cousins, and even (among
the aristoi) between brother and sister. Marriage was not rigorously
exogamic, but rather rigorously “cacique con cacica y principal con prin-
cipala”, according to rank within the system. The caciques of Tilantongo,
Tlaxiaco, Achiutla, and Teposcolula are described as having been “her-
manos,” and among the direct descendants of the Mixtec ruler “Eight
Deer” alone there were four cases of brother-sister marriage. In the em-
pire of the Mixteca the distinctions of rank were inherited and extreme:
those of high birth were civil and spiritual leaders and below them spread
a complex hierarchy of caciques, principales, macehuales, and even slaves
—slaves who did not form a separate caste, but were ultimately related to
the rest of Mixtec society (Dahlgren, 1954, pp. 145-62).
   That the Mixtecs were hardly unique is suggested by codices from
other parts of the Mexican highlands which show genealogies distinguish-
ing direct-line descent versus collateral relatives. We in no way claim that
these social systems were identical to those of the highly stratified Poly-
nesians. We conclude, however, that there is in highland Mexico        (south
of the Aztec area) a suggestion of ramified systems rather than unilateral
exogamous clans—and, moreover, that such organization occurs in areas
which had (so far as we can infer from archeological data) a balanced,
“symbiotic” settlement pattern dispersed through a number of different
strategic resource areas. It therefore seems to us reasonable to postulate
that the Formative villagers of highland regions like the Tehuacan Valley
(Fig. 2b) had a ramified type of organization, albeit in a somewhat less
elaborately developed form.
   What about the lowland Formative villagers, with their “contagious”
settlement pattern,   their reciprocal economy,   and their essentially “one-
278                                   Variability among Occupational Units
resource-zone” economy? Theoretically, they should have had a unilateral
exogamous clan system in the Formative, with equalitarian lineages and
little status differentiation. This seems to us a not unreasonable picture to
paint for the Guatemalan Pacific coast, and perhaps much of the Maya
lowlands, at 1500 B.c. However, by Late Formative times the Guatemalan
coast was the scene of the highly complex Izapa-style ceremonial centers
 (Stirling, 1943; Coe, 1963, p. 34), and the Maya region had emerged as a
nuclear area. This poses certain theoretical problems which we will now
discuss.
   According to Kirchhoff, the distinction between the exogamous unilat-
eral clan and the ramified system of organization is not merely typologi-
cal: the ramified system is a virtual prerequisite for all higher forms of
social organization. “The form of kinship organization which the unilateral-
exogamous principal of clanship creates appears definitely as a blind
alley, and more than that; at a certain stage of economic and general
cultural evolution as an obstacle to further development” (Kirchhoff,
1959, p. 265). This is because the corporate, equalitarian nature of the
unilateral lineage, while it creates solidarity, does not provide the distinc-
tions of inequality which are a necessary precursor of stratified society.
The ramified system, whose very principle is rooted in differences of
rank, provides the basis out of which social classes can emerge. And the
individual ramages which are its building blocks can proliferate indefi-
nitely, while the gulf between slave and paramount chief continues to
widen. According to the Kirchhoff hypothesis, it is no surprise that high-
land Mesoamerica, with its ramified system, reached a level of civiliza-
tion. But the Maya empire comes as a great surprise, and it is here that
we would like to suggest a slight modification in theory. We propose that
the lowland civilizations of Mesoamerica could, and did, arise out of an
Early Formative unilateral-exogamous clan system.
   One of us (Coe, 1961) has already argued that the Petén Maya did in
fact exploit one relatively homogeneous environmental zone, with no re-
gional differences in crop cycles or exploitive techniques, and a segmenta-
tion pattern which presumably resembled that of our “contagious” For-
mative villages: new   communities   remained    in the same   resource   area.
And in fact, the Maya did have unilateral exogamous clans—patrilineal
ones—or “double unilineal descent,” with the patrilineage being the most
important in terms of land inheritance, governmental position, and exo-
gamic marriage (Coe, 1965, p. 104; Roys, 1940, p. 38). But far from being
in a “blind alley,” the Maya reached a level of civilization, with carefully
kept royal genealogies and enormous status differences, accumulation and
redistribution of surpluses, and a truly pyramidal society. This suggests
some rethinking of the potential of the unilateral exogamous clan system.
   For one possible explanation of what happened in lowland Mesoamer-
ica, two quotations from Fried may be relevant. “In all egalitarian eco-
nomies . . . there is also a germ of redistribution. It receives its simplest
Flannery/Coe    Social and Economic Systems in Mesoamerica               279
expression in the family but can grow no more complex than the pooling
and redisbursing of stored food for an extended family . . .” (1960, p.
716). This is the situation we picture along the lagoon and estuary sys-
tems of the coastal lowlands in the Early Formative.
   The move from egalitarian to rank society is essentially the shift from an
   economy dominated by reciprocity to one having redistribution as a major
   device. That being the case, one must look for the causes of ranking... in
   the conditions which enable the redistributive economy to emerge from
   its position of latency ...to dominate a network of kin groups which ex-
   tend beyond the boundaries of anything known on the reciprocal level
   (Fried, 1960, p. 719).
Our settlement pattern surveys indicate that this had indeed happened by
Late Formative times on the Guatemalan coast: major agricultural ac-
tivity had shifted inland to the piedmont in the vicinity of the Izapan
ceremonial centers, leaving specialized salt-making communities behind
to exploit the lagoon-estuary area (Coe and Flannery, 1967). Moreover,
there is clear evidence that our coastal farmer-fishers were now linked into
the diversified economic network of the adjacent highland area, with its
specialized exploitive communities    (like obsidian knapperies: see Shook
and Proskouriakoff, 1956, p. 96).
  However, we would like to suggest that the lowland Maya provide one
example of the way in which a redistributive economy and a stratified
society can grow out of patrilineal exogamous clans, even in a region
where only one “resource area” is exploited, if services are substituted for
products. Our model for this situation is indicated in Figure 4. The maize
produced by the patrilineages engaged in farming is channeled into the
regional center not for redistribution to food-producing lineages in other
resource areas, but to lineages dealing in services: stone-masons, archi-
tects, lapidaries, priests, bureaucrats,   and all the craft specialists who
went into the making of the Maya empire. These lineages reciprocated by
channeling into the redistributive center not products, but services. A
kind of stratified society can be built up by ranking the patrilineages
involved in these various activities (Fig. 5). The patrilineage directing all
this, from whom the caciques were recruited, as pointed out by Roys
(1957, p. 4), became reified to the point where it justified its lofty posi-
tion by claiming descent from the gods. So stratified was the society that
although individual patrilineages practiced exogamy, they married only
with members of equally highly-ranked patrilineages. Four classes—
nobles, commoners, serfs, and slaves—could be recognized at the time of
European contact (Roys, 1940). Proskouriakoff (1961) has indicated that
many inscriptions of the Classic Maya were the genealogies of ruling
patrilineages; Kelley (1962) believes he has detected such a royal patri-
lineage in the monuments of Quirigua and Copan. It seems not unreason-
able to suppose that this stratified society grew out of a Formative pat-
tern of patrilineal exogamous clans, a supposition which is lent support by
280                                  Variability among Occupational Units
the fact that the historic Maya did continue to practice strict patrilineal
exogamy—in contrast to the ramified Mixtecs, with their brother-sister
marriages.




       Deceased




                RULING      CRAFTSMEN          CORN   FARMERS
             PATRILINEAGE       :
                     Figure 4. Lowland Mayan model.




                       Figure 5. Patrilineage ranking.
Flannery/Coe Social and Economic Systems in Mesoamerica                  281
                               Conclusions
Since we cannot step into a time-machine,     there is much we can never
know about the social organization of Formative Mesoamerica. We be-
lieve that on the basis of settlement patterns we can detect two basic
types of exploitive systems: the “contagious” of the coastal lowlands and
the “symbiotic” of the highlands. There is ethnographic evidence that the
lowland area had exogamous patrilineal clans at time of European con-
tact, while the southern highlands had a ramified type of organization.
This would tend to support Sahlins’ theories of a functional correlation
between, on the one hand, the “contagious” segmentation process and
unilateral-exogamous organization and, on the other hand, between rami-
fied organization and a symbiotic economic pattern with redistribution.
We would therefore like to suggest a tentative methodology for Meso-
american archeologists who are interested in reconstructions of Pre-
Columbian social organization.
   1. Settlement pattern surveys aimed at showing whether the distribu-
tion of sites is “contagious” or a “balanced dispersal” with regard to re-
source areas.
   2. The recovery of plant and animal foods in an effort to define specif-
ically the products relied on, and the resource areas from which they
come,   with such a study’s implications for the nature    of the economy:
whether balanced reciprocity or redistribution dominates.
  3. The investigation of house and even room patterns within villages
where possible, searching for clues such as Longacre (1964) and Hill
(1965) have found, regarding the residence of corporate groups within
the community itself.
   4, Excavation of cemeteries such as reported by Longacre (1964) in an
effort to determine degree of ranking, whether inherited or acquired, and
the degree of status between members of adjacent dwellings and adjacent
communities.
  5. Utilization of ethnographic data from areas closely associated in time
and space, where possible, with the prehistoric community.
   6. Last, a search for correlations such as Sahlins attempted between
residence patterns, economy, and social systems. This is the most difficult
step, and the one which leaves us most open to error. But it is only
through taking this step that we may enable ourselves, some day, to
reconstruct in detail the processes that shaped        early Mesoamerican
civilization.
                          Postscript, 1968
This article was written in 1965. In the intervening years, further research
by Flannery, Coe, and Sahlins (independently), plus cogent criticisms by
Roy A. Rappaport and Ben Finney, render untenable part of the scheme
presented here. Redistribution is indeed an efficient means of exploiting a
varied environment, but it now seems unlikely that it is functionally related
to stratification or “ranking” of the kind seen in rampages. Our new data
282                                         Variability among Occupational Units
suggest that stratification is more closely linked to preferential access to the
most highly productive of the local resource areas. In the case of the
Valley of Oaxaca       (where     Flannery is now    working),     the critical area is a
narrow belt of river land which can produce two to three crops a year if
irrigated. On the Gulf Coast (where Coe is now working), the key zone
is the natural levee of the Coatzacoalcos River. Hereditary control of these
zones    by caciques    (today)     or high-status   lineages    (prehistorically)   seems
more important in the origins of stratification than redistribution. It is hoped
that future research in Mesoamerica will clarify the extent to which redistri-
bution is a tangentially related or a completely independent variable.


                                       References

ALLEE, W. C., ALFRED E. EMERSON,           ORLANDO     Park, THOMAS      Park and KARL
  P. Scumipt. 1949. Principles of animal ecology. Philadelphia: W. B. Saun-
   ders.
Cor, MicuareL D. 1961. Social typology and the tropical forest civilizations.
   Comparative Studies in Society and History, vol. 4, No. 1.
     . 1963. Cultural development in Southeastern Mesoamerica In Betty J.
  Meggers and Clifford Evans (Eds.), Aboriginal cultural development in
  Latin America: an interpretative review. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collec-
  tions, 146(1): 27—44.
     . 1965. A model of ancient community structure in the Maya lowlands.
  Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 21(2): 27-114.
Cor,     MicuareL   D., and Kenr     V. FLANNERY.     1964a.     Microenvironments     and
  Mesoamerican prehistory. Science, 143 (3607): 650—54.
     . 1964b. The Pre-Columbian obsidian             industry    of El Chayal,       Guate-
  mala. American Antiquity, 30(1): 43—49.
        . Early cultures and human ecology in South Coastal Guatemala. Smith-
  sonian Contributions to Anthropology, Vol. 3. Washington, D.C.: Smith-
  sonian Press.                ‘
Ciark, J. G. D. 1952. Prehistoric Europe: the economic basis. New York:
  Philosophical Library.
DAHLGREN DE JORDAN, Barsro. 1954. La Mixteca: Su cultura e historia prehis-
   panicas. Coleccién cultura Mexicana, No. 11. Mexico, D.F.: Imprenta Uni-
   versitaria.
Friep, Morton H. 1960. On the evolution of social stratification and the
   state. In Stanley Diamond (Ed.), Culture in history: essays in honor of Paul
   Radin. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hit, James N. 1965. The Broken K Site. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
   University of Chicago.
Keiitey, Davi H. 1963. Glyphic evidence for a dynastic sequence at Qui-
   riqua, Guatemala. American Antiquity, 27 (3): 323—35.
KrrcHHorF, Paut. 1959. The principle of clanship in human society. Reprinted
  in Morton H. Fried (Ed.), Readings in anthropology, Vol. 2. New York:
  Thomas Y. Crowell. (Originally published in Davidson Journal of Anthro-
  pology, Vol. 1, 1955.)
Loncacre, WiLL1AM A. 1964. Archaelogy as anthropology: a case study. Sci-
   ence, 144(3625): 1454-55.
MacNeErsH, Ricuarp S. 1964. Ancient Mesoamerican civilization. Science, 143
   (3606) :531—37.
Flannery/Coe Social and Economic Systems in Mesoamerica                     283
Pina CuAn, Roman. 1955. Las culturas precldsicas de la cuenca de Mexico.
   Mexico, D. F.: Fondo de Cultura Economica.
PoLany1, Karu,   1957. The economy      as instituted process. In Karl Polanyi,
  Conrad M. Arensberg, and Harry W. Pearson        (Eds.), Trade and market in
  the early empires: economies in history and theory. Glencoe, Ill.: The Free
  Press.
ProskourRIAkoFF, TATIANA. 1961. The lords of the Maya realm. Expedition, 4:
  14-21,
Roys, Ratpn L. 1940. Personal names of the Maya of Yucatan.        Contributions
  to American Anthropology and History, No. 31. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie
  Institution of Washington.
——-.   1957. The political geography of the Yucatan Maya. Publications, No.
  613. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Institution of Washington.
SAHLINS, MarsHALi D. 1958. Social stratification in Polynesia. Seattle: Univer-
   sity of Washington Press.
SANDERS, WiLL1AM T. 1956. The central Mexican symbiotic region: a study in
  prehistoric settlement patterns. In Gordon R. Willey (Ed.), Prehistoric set-
  tlement patterns in the New World. New York: Wenner-Gren Foundation
  for Anthropological Research.
Sapir, Epwarp. 1916. Time perspective in aboriginal American culture, a
   study in method. Geological Survey, Memoir No. 90, Anthropological Series,
  No. 13. Ottawa: Canada Dept. Of Mines.
SHook, Epwin M., and TATIANA ProskourIAKOFF. 1956. Settlement patterns in
   Meso-America and the sequence in the Guatemalan highlands. In Gordon R.
  Willey (Ed.), Prehistoric settlement patterns in the New World. New York:
   Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research.
STIRLING, MATTHEW W. 1943. Stone monuments of southern Mexico. Bureau
  of American Ethnology, Bulletin, No. 138. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
  Institution.
Witter, Gorpon     R., Gorpon     F. ExHoim,   and René   F. Mitton.   1964. The
  patterns of farming life and civilization. In Robert C. West   (Ed.), Natural
  environment and early cultures. Handbook of Middle American Indians, Vol.
  1 (Robert Wauchope, Gen. Ed.). Austin: University of Texas Press.
Wo tr, Eric R. 1959. Sons of the shaking earth. Chicago: University of Chi-
  cago Press.
FIFTEEN                                                STUART    STRUEVER




                                                            Woodland
                            Subsistence-Settlement Systems
                                 in the Lower Illinois Valley




This paper analyzes material remains to arrive at an interpretation of the
structure of segmentation   of two prehistoric cultural systems; that is, it
investigates how the structure of material remains reflects the manner in
which a social unit segments to exploit its biophysical environment. It is
not a study of social organization in the sense that it analyzes material
remains to arrive at the behavioral attributes of a social system (that is,
the mechanisms for maintaining social integration, such as descent rules,
post-marital residence patterns, etc.), but rather it is an attempt to sketch
the morphology of two subsistence-settlement systems—to point up the
kinds, quantities, and spatial configurations of material items that repre-
sent the skeleton of an extinct system for exploiting, processing, and stor-
ing food and other resources. This paper also attempts to compare these
two sequentially related systems, to describe the important differences
between them, and at least to broach the problem of explaining the
observable changes between the earlier and later systems.

             Premises: Archeological Research Objectives
                       and the Nature of Culture
Archeology as conceived here attempts to describe and, more particularly,
to explain the total range of cultural similarities and cultural differences
                                   285
286                                    Variability among Occupational Units
observable in space and through time (L. R. Binford, 1962, p. 217). An
evolutionary perspective is appropriate to the explanation of these simi-
larities and differences. More efficient, therefore more differentiated, cul-
tural forms replace less efficient ones, and higher levels of integration
replace lower ones in the history of culture change. Structural diversity of
cultures is expected consistent with widely varying social and natural en-
vironments, and culture history bespeaks of increasing diversity through
time. The latter reflects higher levels of adaptive specificity as cultures
become more closely geared to differing environments. Rates of cultural
evolution are not uniform: they change with shifting selective pressures
and vary with the adaptive requirements of diverse environments.
   Culture is viewed as a system of functionally interdependent parts in
which change in one aspect is related in specifiable ways to changes in
others. Explanations for change in a cultural system require understand-
ing of these linkages. Cultural variations in space are seen in terms of the
differing adaptive requirements of specific environments; accordingly,
varying ecological potentialities are linked to different exploitative eco-
nomies and the latter, in turn, to differing integrative requirements and
therefore to different forms of social structure, etc.
  The job of archeology is to demonstrate correlations of structural ele-
ments within, and co-variation of elements between, cultural units
through time and space. Archeology seeks, first, to reconstruct historical
sequences of cultural systems with focus on the linkages between vari-
ables involved in the structural modification of these systems through
time. And secondly, through controlled comparative studies between
sequences it seeks to elucidate the functional relationships pertaining be-
tween these variables.
  L. R. Binford (1962) suggests that material culture and the material by-
products of living relate in a systematic way to the structure of the total
culture. Archeology—and social anthropology alike—are faced with the
task of correlating the structure of material elements of a cultural system
with the structure of behavioral attributes of that same system. The struc-
ture of material remains is observable in terms of the qualitative and
quantitative representation and spatial configurations of all classes of
debris.
  Recently, there have been several efforts to excavate and analyze pre-
historic sites with the express purpose of describing this structure of ma-
terial remains (for example, Binford and Binford, 1966). Winters (1966)
has given us a detailed description of the structure of a Late Archaic
subsistence-settlement system in the Wabash Valley. However, there still
does not exist a sequence of structurally defined cultural systems for any
region. Only when such information becomes available can hypotheses be
developed that elucidate the functional relationships between variables in
the history of systemic change.
   Many archeologists who accept these premises and the research aims
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                                 287
stemming from them, consider subsistence and settlement the most acces-
sible aspects of the extinct culture.’ The literature is replete with intuitive
assessments of archeological complexes with respect to the problem of
subsistence and settlement, but descriptions based on the qualitive-quan-
titative—spatial relationships pertaining within and between classes of
artifacts, features, food debris, and other material remains are scarce.
   Once the archeologist accepts the premise that the material culture of
the extinct system will reveal a structured set of relationships, just as
social anthropology has demonstrated these relationships in the behav-
ioral aspects of cultural systems, he then takes as his problem the analysis
of this structure within the universe of the site, the region, and so on.
Within the site this structure might manifest itself in the definition of
activity areas (for example, cooking locality) and areas of social distinc-
tion (for example, locus of a kin-defined residence unit). Each of these
will have a formal definition based on the correlations of material cultural
elements. A cooking locality might be defined in terms of one or more
tool kits or activity sets, themselves defined on the basis of the spatial
clustering of certain artifact types (for example, pestles and slab grinding
stones ), kinds of life-maintenance by-products (for example, fire residues
and plant remains), and structural feature types (for example, hearths
and earth ovens). In addition, each activity area can be expected to have
spatial extension,    since activities tend to be localized and to a degree
spatially segregated within the area of a community. The analysis of kind,
number, and distribution of material elements recovered from an arche-
ological site, therefore, enables the archeologist to define tool kits, activity
sets, and—it is hoped—activity areas. These, in turn, are the building
blocks upon which settlement types are defined. All sites in which a
particular configuration of exploitative and maintenance activities were
carried out will disclose a similar structure of material elements and thus
become examples of a single settlement type.
  If focus shifts to a regional universe, the structure of an extinct settle-
ment system should be reflected in the kind, number, and distribution of
settlement types, each defined as indicated above. Since the biophysical
environment is itself structured, and since culture is an adaptive system,
its articulation with the environment should be reflected in the different-
ial geographic distribution of settlement types.
   The applicability of the foregoing concepts (1) for developing hypoth-
eses to explain observed      cultural variations    in time and space,      (2) for
planning an archeological research design appropriate to testing these
hypotheses, and (3) for devising effective methods of excavation and
   ‘ Many of the ideas presented here are the outgrowth of continuous discussion over
the past five years involving James Brown, Lewis and Sally Binford, Joseph Caldwell,
Melvin Fowler, Robert Whallon, Howard Winters, myself, and others. To Lewis Bin-
ford’s work in sharpening the concepts of culture and culture change as these pertain
to archeological objectives,.I am particularly indebted. This paper was presented at
the 1965 American Anthropological Association Meetings, Denver.
288                                  Variability among Occupational Units
approaches to analysis that maximize the interpretive potential of the
recovered data is best illustrated by describing them in the context of a
specific archeological program.


      Middle Woodland Period Culture Change in the Great Lakes-
            Riverine Area: Problem and Explanatory Model
Archeological work in the major river valleys south of the western Great
Lakes highlights a period of extensive cultural change during the final
centuries before Christ. These events, indicating a shift to higher levels of
cultural complexity, mark the advent of what has been described as
Hopewell Culture. (See Caldwell and Hall [1964] for recent statements
on Hopewell).
  The nature of the recognized culture change is threefold: (1) a rapid
and marked increase in population; (2) development of complex cere-
monial-mortuary activity reflecting increased status differentiation; and
(3) an extension and intensification of “interaction” between cultural
groups scattered over much of eastern United States. This interaction
involved movement of exotic raw materials (for example, obsidian) and
selected artifact styles (for example, zoomorphic effigy pipes) often be-
tween widely separated localities. Importantly, this synchronous emerg-
ence of style-sharing and raw material exchange over a wide area, of
mortuary practices which reflect increasing status differentiation, and of
rapid population expansion was confined to certain localities within the
Illinois, Mississippi, and a few other major valleys within the Great Lakes
—Riverine area. Contemporary cultural groups located outside these val-
leys apparently participated little or not at all in this interaction, and—
more importantly—lack of evidence for both a population increase and
the distinctive Hopewellian mortuary forms suggests they remained on a
lower level of complexity (cf. Struever, 1965a).
   In short, the archeological record for the Hopewellian manifestation
during the Middle Woodland period suggests that the three developments
in the culture change were interrelated aspects of a single phenomenon
largely restricted to a few river valleys. The problem poses itself: are
these in fact interdependent phenomena? If so, what model of systemic
change best explains the available evidence for this episode of cultural
development?
  I began an attempt to answer these questions by assuming that eco-
nomic change was an initiating factor; this inference was based upon the
apparent correlation of known Hopewellian mound groups in the western
Great Lakes with several important ecological variables, including tem-
perature clines, major waterfowl migration routes, and variants of a par-
ticular river valley ecosystem (Struever, 1964, pp. 98-99). It was further
hypothesized that the degree to which Woodland groups in different
locales underwent a shift to a higher level of complexity was closley
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                   289
related to whether or not (and if so, to what degree) they experienced
these still unknown adaptive changes.


                 The Illinois Valley Archeological Program
In 1959 I began a continuing program of site survey and excavation in the
lower Illinois Valley, a region in which Hopewellian development was
particularly marked. The first phase of this program sought to learn what
changes, if any, had occurred in the exploitative economy              and the struc-
ture of settlement and social organization between the terminal, or Black
Sand, phase of the Early Woodland period (ca. 450 to 200 s.c.) and
Middle Woodland times (200 3.c. to a.p. 400).
   To date, three multi-component Woodland              habitation sites have been
excavated    and surface survey has yielded cultural debris from about
thirty additional sites with occupations falling into this time range. Effort
was made to maximize recovery of materials relating to the exploitative
economy of the resident Woodland groups.
   No matter how detailed the collection and analysis of Early and Middle
Woodland cultural remains, subsistence-settlement systems cannot be in-
ferred without knowing something of the environmental context within
which these systems evolved. If, for example, Middle Woodland commun-
ities in the lower Illinois Valley were situated partly in terms of the
distribution of certain natural food resources, correlation between sites
and these resources should provide valuable clues for understanding their
subsistence-settlement system.
   Vegetation is pivotal to understanding natural food resource distribu-
tion. Not only are the plants themselves             a potential food source,       but
adaptation of animal species is in part dependent on the kind and distri-
bution of plants. Accordingly, Allison (1966) has attempted a reconstruc-
tion of the floral make-up of the lower Illinois Valley based on the kind,
quantity and spatial relationships of potential vegetal foods. This recon-
struction is based on data from the original land surveyor’s logs and maps,
together with Turner’s (1931) ecological studies of the 1920’s. The results
can be regarded as a valid picture of the vegetation during the early
nineteenth century.’ To what degree this early nineteenth-century floral
makeup is similar to that of Woodland times remains to be learned; in this
discussion the reconstructed nineteenth-century vegetation is treated as
comparable to that of the centuries immediately before and after Christ.
Allison was able to define ten microvegetation zones. Each is based upon
a complex of natural food plants which, because of similar adaptive re-
quirements, have a localized distribution within the lower Illinois Valley

  2 The early nineteenth century was chosen “because it is the earliest period for
which there is good documentary evidence on the vegetation . . . and because this
period preceded major changes in the flora . . . due to the influx of settlers, bringing
modern technology and large scale agriculture into the area” (Allison, 1966, p. 3).
290                                           Variability among Occupational Units




                                                                 LAKE
                                                             MICHIGAN




                                                           aan    geographic     area      encompassed
               =      ;                                    Va     by lower     Illinois     Valley
       Scale   in    Miles                                ia      Archaeological          Project




                    Figure 1. Lower Illinois Valley Archeological Project.


region. These plant distributions play an important role later in this paper
in interpreting Woodland subsistence and settlement.
   The hydrology and physiography of the lower Illinois, and in particular
their relationship to the flora, are essential for understanding Woodland
adaptations here. In this region the Illinois Valley is a broad, north-
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                            291
south—oriented trench that has cut deeply into Mississippian limestones.
The lower Valley ranges from 3.5 to 5 miles in width and is bordered by
perpendicular bluffs along both its eastern and western margins.
  The Illinois River is a sluggish stream with a gradual gradient. Accord-
ingly, it has not cut a deep channel, and natural levees that have a flood-
controlling function are poorly developed along its banks. In this region
the river hugs the western bluff line. Between the river and the bluffs on
the opposite or eastern side of the valley stretches a broad alluvial bot-
tomland which, prior to recent drainage, supported a dense forest of
cottonwood, willow, and other water-tolerant trees, interspersed with
sloughs and shallow lakes. Except for a narrow terrace along the eastern
edge of the valley, this bottomland spans the entire breadth of the valley
floor (cf. Fig. 4). The lakes were shallow catchbasins refilled almost
annually by the spring floods. Through the summer months these lakes
gradually evaporated and shrank, creating extensive mud-flats that pro-
vided an ideal habitat for local seed-bearing plants such as Chenopodium,
Polygonum, Iva, and Amaranthus spp. The extensiveness of these back-
water lakes is attributable to the gradual gradient, shallow stream bed,
and minimal levee development characteristic of the lower reaches of the
Illinois River. These, together with waters backing up from the Missis-
sippi River into the Illinois Valley during periods of high water, resulted
in prolonged floods in the lower Illinois. The sustained and almost annual
flooding and subsequent gradual recession of the waters created a satu-
rated floodplain dotted with shallow lakes and puddles, each with its
taptive fish population and a bottom formed of newly deposited silt.
  Within the valley floor, adjacent to and paralleling the eastern bluff
line, was a wet prairie covering the narrow corridor of higher ground
previously mentioned.
   The talus slope at the base of the bluffs along the valley margins, as
well as the slopes of the tributary stream valleys cutting through the
bluffs and leading into the Illinois from both east and west (cf. Fig. 4),
were and are today covered by an oak-hickory forest. Above this “Hillside-
Talus   Slope Zone,” as defined by Allison        (1966),   and extending   from
several hundred yards to more than a mile away from the Illinois Valley is
a heavily dissected   terrain.   Like the Talus    Slope Zone, this landscape
supported a heavy and predominately oak-hickory forest. Beyond this
upland forest belt, and still farther from the valley, began the high grass
prairie which formed the predominant vegetation over an extensive area
immediately south of the western Great Lakes. The Illinois River Valley
and bordering uplands present a picture, then, of a narrow biome differ-
entiated internally into a number of small-scale plant associations and
cutting through a vast prairie landscape.

  To analyze what, if any, change occurred in subsistence and settlement
as part of a hypothesized general change in cultural system between the
292                            Variability among Occupational Units
Early and Middle Woodland periods in the lower Illinois Valley, it is
necessary to describe and compare the material remains associated with
Black Sand and the later Havana and Pike-Hopewellian phases.
  The interpretations presented here are based upon data recovered and
analyzed through December, 1965. These are preliminary impressions of
incomplete studies; many changes in the interpretations presented here
can be expected when the analyses of artifacts, faunal, and floral materi-
als are completed.


  Description of Black Sand Phase Sites in the Lower Illinois Valley

DISTRIBUTION

Black Sand living sites tend to be scattered along a series of low sand
ridges situated in the Illinois Valley bottomlands and roughly paralleling
the river (Fig. 2). In the main, these sand ridges, which in some cases run
continuously for miles, appear to be shorelines of extinct river chahnels.
They represent the highest ground in the floodplain.
   Black Sand sites are located on the crest of these sand ridges, as well as
on the upper few yards of slope leading into what was formerly the river;
they are not located back from the immediate edge of what was then or
formerly the river shore.

SIZE AND   GROSS FORM   OF SITES

Surface survey indicates Black Sand living sites on the old river beaches
take two different forms: (1) small scatters of debris with definable
limits; the area of scatter ranges from 0.5 to 2 acres; (2) continuous linear
scatter; a light density of debris spread along the crest of a sand ridge for
considerable distances. We might guess that the continuous linear scatter
reflects repeated reoccupation or continuing occupation over some time
of the same locality (that is, the sand ridge) but not reoccupation of a
specific site locus. Stated differently, the continuous linear scatter reflects
frequent shifting of the settlement without intention of confining occupa-
tion to a few spatially-bounded site locations. The debris left from many
reoccupations or a continually shifting occupation gives the illusion of a
single, long, shoreline community. It is our guess that the occasional small
Black Sand site found on these same beaches reflects the true size of the
local aggregate.
   The predominance of a continuous scatter of Black Sand debris along
the old river shorelines suggests: (1) intensive occupation of a single
microenvironment, but not confinement of settlement for long periods to
a specific site locus in that microenvironment; and (2) since the shoreline
settlement was temporary and shifting, permanent constructions such as
reuseable house frames and storage pits were not built there. It can be
guessed that if constructions made for long-term use characterized these
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                                293




                                                   @ —_shoreline settlement
                                                   © _shoreline settlement
                                                         with cemetery assoc.
                                                   A _valley edge settlement

                                                   1 area shown in Fig. 4.

                                                        al       a
                                                         scale   in miles




     Figure 2. Distribution of Black Sand Phase Settlements in the Lower Illi-
              nois Valley.     —
294                                  Variability among Occupational Units
shoreline communities, a higher frequency of sites with definable boun-
daries would occur.

INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF THE SITES
  Survey data. Surface survey indicates a very light scatter of debris
characterizes these Black Sand shoreline sites. Sherd densities are particu-
larly low, while chert debris occurs in relatively high densities. A recent
study of chert sources indicates exclusively local raw material on these
sites. Mussel shell and animal bone are almost nonexistent on the surface,
and burnt limestone—characteristic hearth stone in this region of natural
limestone deposits—is scarce. Hand-size cobbles of crystalline rock, most
often used in hammer and grinding activities, occur in high frequency.
The soil of these Black Sand sites shows no sign of organic staining.
  Excavation data. To date, Peisker represents the only excavated Black
Sand habitation site in the lower Illinois Valley. Luckily, this site was
protected against later disturbances by a Hopewellian burial mound built
over it. Peisker was completely excavated in 1962 and 1963 by Gregory
Perino of the Gilcrease Institute of Indian History and Art (Tulsa, Okla-
homa), with intermittent help by the writer. This site was no more than
an acre in area. Conforming to the surface survey evidence for Black
Sand sites, densities of most classes of artifacts were light. A hunting-
butchering tool kit was well-represented by the high frequency of pro-
jectile points and flake knives. Pebble manos and hammerstones also
occurred in high frequencies. Recognizable imported chert was absent. It
is notable that so-called “ceremonial     items” (or, better, artifacts whose
primary functional context was probably the social rather than techno-
logical) were also absent from the site.
   Food remains included a wide range of land mammals; except for
white-tail deer, high frequencies of bone from any one or two animal
species were lacking. Flotation sampling of feature contents enabled re-
trieval of moderate   densities of wood    charcoal, but charred nut shells
provided the sole evidence for plant foods.
  Small, basin-like pits were found whose frequent charcoal contents in-
dicate they were fire features of some sort. If cooking features, they were
more likely roasting pits than earth ovens. Earth ovens are usually deep
and steep-sided, and might be expected to contain fire-altered stone; none
of these characteristics describes the Peisker features. Storage pits and
houses are other feature types notably absent at this site.
   A small cemetery occurred within the settlement precincts. A few pri-
mary and secondary burials were found in simple unprepared pits in the
old beach; grave goods were absent except for red ochre associated with
some skeletons. There was no evidence of differentiation between burials
that might be associated with status.
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                          295

         Description of Middle Woodland Habitation Sites in the
                           Lower Illinois Valley
DISTRIBUTION

Middle    Woodland   habitation   sites are, with a few exceptions,   concen-
trated at the base of the steep bluffs that define the eastern and western
margins of the Illinois Valley (Fig. 3). These sites lie within Allison’s
Hillside—Talus Slope Zone with its dense and predominantly oak-hickory
forest. The terrain is high and well-drained—not even exceptional floods
in recent times have reached this elevation. The majority of these bluff-
base sites are located along the western side of the valley; perhaps the
bluffs here afforded protection against severe and prevailing westerly
winds during the winter months. Proximity to the river, if it occupied its
present channel, may also have been a factor favoring occupation of the
western bluff-base.
   Detailed analyses of prehistoric hydrology and physiography in the
lower Illinois remain to be undertaken,      but a few observations    on the
relationship of Middle Woodland bluff-base sites to water sources and
land forms today are pertinent. First, the majority of Middle Woodland
bluff-base settlements were situated at the junction of a secondary stream
valley with the Illinois Valley. Inspection of these localities indicates most
have three characteristics in common: (1) the tributary valley supports a
perennial stream—even during dry months the drainage system of the
small valley is extensive enough to maintain some minimum water level;
(2) the river today passes close by the mouth of these secondary valleys;
and (3) the floodplain in the lower reaches of the tributary valley is
broad; heavy, swift run-off from the hill-country drained by the stream
would have resulted in frequent floods and consequent silt deposition
over extensive areas of the floodplain at the mouth of the secondary
valley.
   The great majority of Middle Woodland habitation sites in the lower
Illinois occupy a bluff-base position, but there are a handful of sites on
the old river shorelines in the valley floodplain. Not a single site is known
from any of the tributary valleys leading into the Illinois, the upland
forest bordering the Illinois Valley, or the prairie zone beyond (cf. Figs. 3
and 4). In short, Middle Woodland sites are located entirely within the
trench of the Illinois Valley itself; they do not occur even several hundred
yards outside the limestone bluffs that define its margins.

NUMBER AND SIZE OF SITES
The number of habitation sites increases sharply from Early to Middle
Woodland periods in the lower Illinois. There are ten documented Early
Woodland habitation components in the region, 25 Middle Woodland
296                                  Variability among Occupational Units




                                                    © _base settlement
                                                    #& — summer agricultural           camp (?)
                                                    %* _ regional   exchange       center
                                                    @ _ Hopewell       burial   site   (mound     group)
                                                    @ _ Hopewell       burial   site
                                                            with    mortuary       camp     assoc.


                                                    {{area shown           in Fig. 4

                                                            Oe 2

                                                               scale    in miles




      Figure 3. Distribution of Middle   Woodland       Settlements                       in the Lower
                Illinois Valley.
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                           297
ones. This increase in frequency of living sites is believed to reflect both a
change in settlement system, with a greater number of settlement types
occupied by a single Middle Woodland local group within the span of a
complete settlement cycle, and an absolute increase in population size in
the region. The population increase cannot be measured until controlled
sampling of all recognized microenvironments has been completed and
both Early and Middle Woodland settlement systems are understood.
Then, comparison of the size and number of examples of the settlement
type believed to have been occupied by the Maximum Local Aggregate’
chaaracteristic of a single Maximum Subsistence-Settlement Unit‘ can be
used to estimate relative population densities here during the Early and
Middle Woodland periods.
  Certainly the increased frequency of living sites cannot be attributed to
the concealing or destruction of Early Woodland sites; quite the contrary,
Early Woodland sites are concentrated on natural levees most of which
have not been covered or destroyed in any way. Middle Woodland habi-
tation sites, on the other hand, because they are largely situated at the
bluff base, are in position to be covered by sheet wash carried down from
the bluff above. Test excavation indicates most bluff-base sites have been
partially covered by recent sheet wash, and by chance two sites have been
discovered that were completely covered by sterile overburden. It is clear
that extensive sheet erosion has concealed entirely some bluff-base Mid-
dle Woodland       settlements,    and therefore     the number     of these sites is
expected to be greater than the present survey evidence indicates.
   Bluff-base Middle Woodland sites tend to have an area of scatter rang-
ing from 2.5 to 8 acres. Even the smaller bluff-base sites are larger than
any known Black Sand habitation site with definable boundaries. Middle
Woodland bluff-base sites reveal a heavy scatter of debris; sharp increases
are noted over Early Woodland in the density of all stone artifact types
relating to exploitative and maintenance             tasks, and in the density of
sherds, faunal debris, and hearth stone. The soil within the site area is
usually dark-stained, reflecting its high organic content. The site limits, in
contrast to Black Sand, are sharply defined by the color differences be-
tween the organically stained habitation             area   and the unstained       soil
around it.

INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF SITES
To date, Apple Creek is the only extensively excavated Middle Woodland
bluff-base site in the lower Illinois Valley. Snyder's Site in the Mississippi

   3.4 Maximum Local Aggregate consists of the maximum number of people who
together occupy a single settlement at some time during a total settlement cycle.
   4A Maximum Subsistence-Settlement Unit includes all those people integrated at
one or more intervals in the functioning of a single example of a subsistence-settlement
system. It may or may not be synonomous with a Maximum Local Aggregate, depend-
ing on the system. It sometimes occurs that people who at no time in the subsistence-
298                                 Variability among Occupational Units
Valley a few miles to the west is similarly located and was excavated by
the writer in 1960.
   At Apple Creek there is a major early Late Woodland occupation be-
longing to the newly defined White Hall phase. White Hall dates from
about a.p. 400 to 700.° It immediately post-dates the Pike-Hopewellian
phase of the Middle Woodland period (dated ca. a.v. 100 to 400). The
succeeding is a composite description of the internal structure of the
Apple Creek settlement compiled from the materials associated with both
Middle and early Late Woodland occupations. Analysis of the Apple
Creek materials has not yet proceeded far enough to enable division of
excavated materials between these two successive occupations, nor is it
yet possible to demonstrate the association of specific artifact and feature
types in arriving at a definition of tool kits, activity areas, and areas of
social distinction. However, the kind and quantity of artifact and feature
types, together with food remains recovered are themselves illuminating.
   Tools belonging to a hunting-butchering tool kit occur in very high
frequency, as do pebble hammer-grinding stones. Manufacturing tools
also occur in large numbers. These include tools to make items of exploi-
tative technology and others to make products not directly associated
with food procurement and preparation (for example, clothing). Items of
recreational equipment (for example, deer phalanges drilled for use in
the cup-and-pin game) are also frequent.
   Noteworthy is the high frequency of artifacts fitting L. R. Binford’s
(1962, p. 219) definition of “sociotechnic” items. These artifacts are be-
lieved to have their primary functional context in the social subsystem
where, for example, they might serve to symbolize and communicate
status of the person identified with the object. At Apple Creek these
would include drilled bear cariine teeth, pottery earspools and figurines,
fragments of platform pipes (some converted into pendants), and per-
haps obsidian lamellar flakes. Mica flakes recovered in the excavations
suggest that sheets of this mineral—a characteristic Hopewellian grave
good in this region—were cut and shaped by the Middle Woodland occu-
pants. This perhaps reflects manufacture as well as use of these status
goods in the Apple Creek community.
   An exceedingly high density of structural features occurred at Apple
Creek. Most numerous were deep, cylindrical storage pits and earth
ovens. Earth ovens were characteristically filled in part with a mass of
burnt limestone chunks. Quantities of this burnt rock were                  dispersed


settlement cycle are members of a common residence unit (such as a nucleated
community ) belong to a single Maximum Subsistence-Settlement Unit. This would be
the case in some redistributive systems.
   * Apple Creek is the type site for White Hall. Characteristic White Hall pottery
styles are sufficiently distinctive to warrant the separate phase designation, yet they
are similar enough to Weaver in the central Illinois Valley, and other early Late
Woodland regional variants in the Midwest, to indicate contemporaneity with them.
Radiocarbon evidence confirms this estimate of White Hall dating.
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                          299
through the midden and littered the site surface. At Apple Creek more
than 600 of these and other features were located in some 18,500 square
feet of excavated site surface; this is equivalent to one storage-refuse pit
or earth oven per 5 x 6-ft. area of site surface. As a further indication of
the magnitude of storage and cooking facilities at Apple Creek, total
volume of these features exceeds an estimated 10,000 cubic feet.
  One complete Middle Woodland house, 40 feet in diameter, was exca-
vated at Apple Creek. Holes defining the perimeter of the building
ranged from 6 to 16 inches in diameter, suggesting that posts of the
exterior supporting wall were both large and permanent. In turn, this
suggests the building was constructed for use over some period of time.
Remains associated with this building indicate it served as a domicile.
   By-products of living, particularly food remains, excavated at Apple
Creek also reflect Middle and early Late Woodland subsistence practices.
Quantities of animal bone were recovered; Paul W. Parmalee (ethno-
zoologist at the Illinois State Museum) and Andreas A. Paloumpis (icthy-
ologist at Illinois State University) have almost completed identification
of these materials. A diverse local fauna is represented, but it is noted that
bone from the white-tail deer, wild turkey, and various migratory water-
fowl species occurs in high frequencies. In addition, Paloumpis (1966) has
analyzed almost 30,000 fish bones from the site. Lawrence Kaplan (Uni-
versity of Massachusetts )and Richard A. Yarnell (Emory University) are
working with quantities of carbonized plant remains from Apple Creek.
These were recovered almost entirely by means of water and chemical
flotation processes (Struever, 1965b). Over 36,000 fragments of hickory
nut shell from 189 earth ovens, surface hearths, and storage-refuse pits
have been identified, together with more than 4,200 fragments of acorn
shell from 140 features. Seeds of commensal plants are represented by
some   1,800 charred   Polygonum    seeds, 230 Chenopodium,      and 160 Iva
seeds (Lawrence Kaplan, personal communication).
   Food remains associated with Middle and early Late Woodland occu-
pations at Apple Creek, while reflecting exploitation of a broad range of
local fauna, show major reliance on deer, turkey, ducks and geese, and
fish. Aside from one Lagenaria seed and four seeds of Cucurbita pepo
 (Hugh C. Cutler, personal communications), no certain cultigens have
been identified from Apple Creek. The evidence indicates reliance on
hickory nuts and acorns in season, with the seeds of pigweed, lamb’s-
quarter, and other local] plants still of indeterminate importance.
  At the Newbridge site, three miles from Apple Creek, the writer re-
covered a mass of carbonized Chenopodium and Polygonum seeds from a
White Hall phase pit. The seed mass was entirely free of leaves, stems, or
other plant debris and had all the appearances of food that had been
burnt and discarded in the process of cooking. While nothing comparable
was recovered from any feature at Apple Creek, the Newbridge Cheno-
podium-Polygonum seed mass suggests these seed-bearing plants played a
role in the White Hall subsistence economy.
300                                  Variability among Occupational Units
  Discussion thus far has centered entirely on the number, distribution,
and internal structure of Middle Woodland sites located at the base of the
talus slope along the margins of the Illinois Valley. The majority of Mid-
dle Woodland habitation sites occupy this bluff-base position, but survey
to date also reveals five sites on the old river shorelines in the Illinois
Valley floodplain. Unfortunately none has been excavated.
   One of these five floodplain sites is different from all other known
Middle Woodland sites in the lower Illinois Valley. This site covers a
minimum of twenty acres and its surface is littered with an incredibly
high density and diversity of cultural materials. The size of the Mound
House site sets it apart from the other 24 Middle Woodland habitation
sites known in this region. None of these 24 covers an area more than one-
third that of Mound House. This site has not yet been excavated, and
little can be said of its internal structure. However, debris collected from
its surface suggests it may represent a unique example of one settlement
type in the Middle Woodland settlement system of this region.
  Large quantities of imported raw material and finished goods made
from this material have been collected from its surface. Copper celts and
earspools, drilled bear canine teeth, platform pipe fragments, and other
typical Hopewellian status items are found in numbers. Artifacts or unal-
tered bits of obsidian, mica, marine shells, and copper reflect participa-
tion of the inhabitants in an exchange system bringing raw materials from
distant sources into the Illinois Valley. The diversity and density of this
exotic material are additional characteristics that set Mound House apart
from the other Middle Woodland sites in the region. The site appears to
represent some sort of trade or exchange hub, and perhaps served as a
center of within- and between-region interaction, in which exchange ac-
tivities took place articulating local Middle Woodland groups with each
other and, in turn, with groups outside the region.
   The Peisker site, described earlier in this paper, is both the location of
the one excavated Black Sand component in the lower Illinois Valley, and
also the site of a group of three Hopewellian burial mounds. These
mounds were recently excavated by the Gilcrease Institute under Gregory
Perino. Altogether they yielded five log crypts in each of which occurred
from seven to twelve adult human skeletons with typical Hopewellian
artifacts in association.
  Alongside these mounds was a Middle Woodland habitation site which
the writer excavated. The artifacts recovered here suggest this living site
belonged to the same cultural group that was responsible for the mounds.
  This Middle Woodland occupation site situated adjacent to the Peisker
mounds is markedly different in size and internal structure from the
aforementioned bluff-base settlement as represented by Apple Creek.
Evidence recovered indicates the site was not occupied primarily to per-
form tasks relating to the subsistence economy. Rather, activities relating
to maintenance and reinforcement of social integration of the group, cen-
tering about mortuary ceremonialism, appear to characterize the occupa-
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                            301
tion. The excavated materials indicate exploitative and maintanence activ-
ities connected with subsistence were singularly unimportant at this site.
Evidence to support this interpretation is of several kinds:
  1. Low densities of faunal material occurred, even though bone was
moderately well preserved.
   2. Extensive flotation sampling produced quantities of charcoal flecks
from the midden, but little analogous to the nut shells and seeds re-
covered at Apple Creek. The widespread occurrence of wood charcoal
indicates this absence cannot be attributed to poor preservation.
   3. A marked lack of storage-refuse pits and earth ovens in contrast to
the great numbers of these features at Apple Creek.
   4, Projectile points, scrapers, knives, manos and metates and other food
preparation tools were scarce.
   5. Manufacturing tools of all kinds were almost totally absent.
   6. Woodworking tools (for example, celts) and stone or shell hoes were
rare,
   7. Sherds from what were likely culinary or storage vessels were nu-
merous.
   In brief, the combined evidence from Peisker indicates that little, if
any, food was collected, processed, or stored on this site. The occurrence
of hearths in numbers and pottery vessels caked with char suggest that
food was prepared and eaten on the site, but it may well have been
carried here from another settlement. House remains were absent.
   In contrast to the scarcity of artifacts and features associated with
subsistence activities, numbers of typical Hopewellian status items were
recovered. These comprise a high proportion of the total artifact assem-
blage, when compared against assemblages from known bluff-base sites.
   Taken together, this evidence suggests that Peisker represents a special-
ized Middle Woodland mortuary camp. Data in support of this conclusion
are: (1) the large number of status items, all common Hopewellian burial
associations; (2) two apparent ritual features—one a cache of status
items and the other remnants of a structure that was apparently built and
burned several times; (3) a small area within the habitation site in which
status artifacts were concentrated; (4) Hopewellian burial mounds in im-
mediate proximity; (5) paucity of evidence for exploitation, preparation,
and storage of food and manufacture of tools and other goods; and (6)
the absence of houses or other permanent constructions.
   The Gilcrease Institute excavations uncovered a total of five log crypts
in the three mounds. Each tomb apparently served as a mausoleum into
which bodies were placed; burial occurred soon enough after death that
decomposition had not progressed to the point where bone articulations
were disturbed. It would appear that each log crypt was reopened at
intervals to receive a new body. Only occasional burials occurred in the
mound fill or around the mounds.
   In sum, the materials from the living area and the mounds appear to be
the remnants   of multiple,   short-lived   occupations   associated   with the
302                                  Variability among Occupational Units
burial of select dead. Activities involved were earthwork and tomb con-
struction, mortuary ritual, and interment of the body.


            A Black Sand Subsistence-Settlement System in the
                          Lower Illinois Valley
The totality of evidence from which to interpret Black Sand subsistence
and settlement is relatively sparse compared to that available for the
succeeding Middle and early Late Woodland periods. However, certain
generalizations can be made.
   Settlement was concentrated in the alluvial floodplain of the Illinois
River, specifically on the shorelines of old river channels and perhaps on
the banks of floodplain lakes. Occasional Black Sand sites are found on
sand ridges located near the bluffs at the valley edge, but none are known
from the base of the bluff talus slope itself or outside the Illinois Valley
proper (that is, within the secondary stream valleys, in the dissected
uplands adjacent to the river, or on the prairie beyond).
   The preponderance of Black Sand habitation sites in the Illinois Valley
floodplain may reflect heavy dependence on riverbottom flora and fauna.
The faunal remains recovered at Peisker indicate Black Sand groups ex-
ploited a wide range of land animals. Location of habitation sites on the
river shoreline may relate to fishing, but the faunal materials do not
confirm this. Fish remains were rare. It is important to know, in this
connection, whether the sand ridges were, at the time of occupation, the
shoreline of an existing river or the shoreline of an abandoned stream
channel. Immediate proximity of sites to river channels does not necessar-
ily indicate Black Sand groups depended heavily on river foods; occupa-
tion of the natural levees may reflect effort to settle on the highest avail-
able ground in the floodplain.
   Perhaps most important of all, there is no evidence that Black Sand
groups depended heavily on one or a few animal species.
   No evidence for plant cultivation was found, whether of tropical or
local plant types. Admittedly, carbonized plant remains have been ac-
tively sought at one site only. Plant remains at Peisker indicate use of
nuts, but preliminary inspection reveals few, if any, seeds from such local
plants as    Chenopodium, Polygonum, and Iva.
   In sum, diversified collecting of river-bottom fauna, and perhaps plant
foods, characterizes Black Sand subsistence.
   Our sample of Black Sand sites is too small to determine if settlement
size has one or more than one mode. If further survey confirms the
present suggestion that bounded Black Sand habitation sites are uni-
formly small (about 0.5 to 2 acres in area), it may be possible to infer
that fusion and fission of the Maximum Local Aggregate did not occur in
the course of the settlement cycle.
   The sites tend to be linear in form and to hold to the crest of the
natural levees. Continuous scatters of debris, in at least one case extend-
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                      303
ing for a mile or more, are thought to reflect intensive occupation of the
shoreline zone with shifting, impermanent settlement characteristic. Ap-
parently no attempt was made to occupy for long periods or to contin-
ually reoccupy a specific site location, and it is inferred that constructions
made for long-term use were not part of these communities. Excavation at
Peisker confirms this interpretation, since no evidence of houses or other
permanent constructions was recovered here. The absence of storage pits
supports the view of a shifting residence pattern.
   It will be recalled that there was no evidence at Peisker for Black Sand
natural food harvests. It can be inferred that harvest of natural food
“crops” with concomitant surpluses would have resulted in storage; in
turn, the latter would make continued occupation or seasonal reoccupa-
tion of a single site adaptive. We have seen that the combined survey and
excavation data from Black Sand sites reveal the absence of all three—
that is, natural food harvests, food storage, and long-term residence at one
site.
  In sum, one, and perhaps two, Black Sand settlement types are recog-
nizable. One, the Shoreline Settlement, was temporary and shifting. Local
Black Sand groups used an existing or former river shoreline as a base of
operations from which to exploit resources in the riverbottoms surround-
ing it. These sand ridges and adjacent bottomlands fall within Allison’s
Floodplain Forest and Backwater       Lakes Zones, two microenvironments
with the highest productive potential of any in the lower Illinois Valley
region in terms of the density and diversity of natural.food resources.
  Seasonally, local groups may have moved nearer the bluffs at the valley
edge to exploit ripening nuts, and these sites, none of which have been
excavated, would represent a possible second settlement type (cf. Fig. 2).


           Middle Woodland Subsistence-Settlement System
Middle Woodland sites in the lower Illinois Valley, then, have three char-
acteristic locations: (1) at the base of the talus slope along the valley
margins; (2) on river shorelines in the Illinois Valley floodplain; and (3)
immediately proximal to a Hopewellian burial site. Figure 3 shows this
distribution clearly. Furthermore, it has been seen that in structural terms
the floodplain sites can be separated into two types, with Mound House a
unique example of one type.
   The totality of evidence supports the interpretation that the bluff-base
Middle Woodland site represents a community occupied continuously or
intermittently over a long time span. It reflects an adaptation character-
ized by a high level of residential stability.
   Differentiation in soil color alone suggests that the bluff-base site is the
remains of a discrete, bounded settlement. The internal structure of the
community, as seen at Apple Creek, supports the idea of long-term resi-
dence. High frequencies of storage pits and a house with heavy support-
ing framework are seen as evidence for permanent constructions. The
304                                     Variability among Occupational Units
artifactual evidence indicates that tool manufacturing was important at
this site, and that recreational activity was part of the daily life of the
local inhabitants. The occurrence of artifacts associated with manufac-
turing and recreational activities itself suggests sustained occupation of
the site. Ethnographically in the eastern Woodlands it was during the
long winter occupations that the bulk of tool manufacturing and repair, as
well as games and other entertainment took place.
   In sum, bluff-base sites like Apple Creek provide evidence of sustained
occupation of a specific site locus. The site may have been occupied year-
round, or for a span of several months each year.
  The analyses of the food remains from Apple Creek indicate heavy
dependence    on white-tail deer, wild turkey, migratory       waterfowl,   and
fish. Large quantities of hickory nut and acorn shell indicate these were
collected   in quantity,   while   smaller   numbers   of charred   smartweed,
lamb’s-quarter, and marsh-elder seeds suggest they may have been ex-
ploited at the time the site was occupied. Noteworthy here is the apparent
selectivity in natural foods exploited. From the various Apple Creek data
it is inferred that the bluff-base settlement was occupied during all or
part of the fall, winter, and spring. -
   Because none have been excavated, the Middle Woodland sites located
on the sand ridges in the flood-plain—sometimes          three or more miles
from the nearest bluff-base site—remain a mystery.
  It may be noteworthy that these sites are located in the microenviron-
ment where the backwater lakes occur with their shorelines of rich allu-
vial silt.
  The Mound House site, from the surface evidence alone, is distinguish-
able from all other known Middle Woodland sites in the lower Illinois. Its
size is several times that of the next largest Middle Woodland site. Its
surface yields an unequaled density and diversity of debris; and the mate-
rials collected there include a high proportion of imported raw materials
used exclusively in making Hopewellian sociotechnic items.
   The Peisker Middle Woodland component is different from Apple
Creek and any of the aforementioned sites. High densities of animal bone
are lacking. Occupations of the site may have been of short duration,
since storage pits and other features interpreted as permanent        construc-
tions are lacking. Tools of exploitative and maintenance technology re-
lating to subsistence are scarce, while manufacturing tools and recrea-
tional paraphernalia are absent. That food was prepared and cooked on
the site is indicated by bone fragments, apparent roasting pits, and char-
covered sherds from culinary vessels.
   Noteworthy in this Middle Woodland occupation site at Peisker was
direct evidence for ceremonial-mortuary activity. This was reflected in the
high proportion of sociotechnic artifacts, the occurrence of two ritual
features and a possible ceremonial precinct (inferred from the localiza-
tion of sociotechnic artifacts on the site), and the immediate proximity of
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                305
the occupation area to five log mausoleums covered by earth mounds.
Each tomb contained a few adult burials with associated Hopewellian
goods.


     Middle Woodland Culture Change: An Explanatory Model
What model most economically explains the observed structural changes
between the Early and Middle Woodland archeological complexes de-
scribed here?
  The following hypothesis suggests that a shift in subsistence-settlement
system occurred between Early and Middle Woodland times. Changes
also occurred in social organization, reflecting different integrative re-
quirements created by higher population densities, larger local aggre-
gates, and changes in the manner of segmenting and partitioning the
population required for performing the new subsistence tasks.
  It is inferred that a marked change in ecological adaptation occurred in
the lower Illinois Valley about the time of Christ. Caldwell (1958, p. 31)
has noted that following the establishment of primary forest efficiency in
the eastern Woodlands by Late Archaic times (ca. 2500 to 1000 B.c.), the
hunting-gathering pattern continued, and in favored areas it was charac-
terized by more “specific adjustments to regional resources.” The lower
Illinois Valley is seen as one such “favored area” and here collecting of
natural foods reached a new high level of efficiency by at least the
Hopewell phase of the Pike tradition (Middle Woodland period, ca. a.p.
100 to 400).
   This new subsistence base can be termed Intensive Harvest Collecting.
Intensive Harvest Collecting denotes an adaptation centering on exploita-
tion of selected, high-yielding natural food resources characteristic of cer-
tain biomes that have a sharply restricted geographic distribution within
the woodlands of northeastern United States.
   Two factors are seen as essential to the biomes in which Intensive
Harvest Collecting is feasible: (1) natural food products must occur in
large, concentrated populations and lend themselves to harvesting (that
is, they can be collected in quantity with relatively small labor output);
and (2) the plant and animal populations from which these food pro-
ducts are derived must be regularly renewed.
   At least five resources available to Woodland groups in the lower II-
linois Valley meet these criteria: (1) nuts and acorns; (2) the seeds of
commensal plants such as Iva (marsh-elder), Polygonum (smartweed),
and Chenopodium (lamb’s-quarter); (3) white-tail deer; (4) migratory
waterfowl; and (5) certain species of fish. All five resources can be effi-
ciently exploited by means of a simple harvest technology. Annual fall nut
crops, with hickory nuts and acorns especially important, have their high-
est productive potential in the Hillside-Talus Slope and Upland Forest
zones occupying the steep slopes and dissected uplands along the margins
306                                   Variability among Occupational Units




                                              UPLAND       FOREST
                                               (oak - hickory - elm)




                                               UPLAND       FOREST
                                                 ( oak - hickory- elm)




                                                                       O   -Middie    Woodland      Settlement

                                1ayen json                            3
                                y    = Sees                        Prey — bluffs

                                                                       °                 2

                                                                                   scale in miles


      Figure 4. Middle Woodland Settlements and the distribution of harvest-
                able natural foods.


of the Illinois and secondary stream valleys (Allison, 1966). Cheno-
podium and the other seed-bearing plants mentioned above colonize na-
tural scars in the mantle of vegetation. In the valley bottomlands, spring
floods are constantly opening new areas of soil, the most extensive of
which are the mud-flats bordering permanent floodplain lakes and the silt
deposits remaining after temporary catch-basins of floodwater have en-
tirely evaporated. It may be that here, naturally or through man’s inter-
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                        307
vention, grew stands of lamb’s-quarter and other plants whose carbonized
seeds at Apple Creek, Newbridge, and other sites attest to their economic
importance. Indeed, Allison’s (1966) botanical study highlights the locali-
zation of these species on the floodplain lake shorelines.
   During the winter deer tend to move out of the Illinois Valley flood-
plain and into the valleys of feeder streams and into the forested areas of
the talus slope and adjacent uplands where browse is more plentiful.
Here, by various ambush and drive techniques, large numbers might be
killed. The Ilinois Valley is an important waterfowl migration route, part
of the Mississippi flyway. Ducks and geese move along this narrow cor-
ridor twice annually. The migrating birds stay largely within the confines
of the river valley, feeding and resting on the floodplain lakes. On these
lakes, by means of cast nets or other trapping devices, it was feasible for
Middle Woodland hunters to harvest these birds. In the early twentieth
century, market hunters using different techniques have demonstrated
this all too successfully. Paloumpis (1966) demonstrates that on the basis
of both species composition and size range within species determined on
fish remains from the Apple Creek site, entire fish populations character-
istic of riverbottom lakes were apparently collected by the Middle and/or
early Late Woodland residents. Possible techniques for harvesting fish in
this situation would include use of natural poisons, draining the lake, and
stunning the fish by stirring up the muddy bottom and thus reducing the
oxygen level of the water.
   In short, the food remains from Apple Creek suggest selective exploita-
tion of those natural plants and animals that could be harvested effi-
ciently and with resulting high yields. This change in subsistence prac-
tices appears to have begun in Middle Woodland and continued into
White Hall times (at least to a.p. 700).
   With these changes in subsistence there occurred a concomitant shift in
settlement. From the survey and excavation data, four settlement types
can be tentatively recognized constituting a Middle Woodland settlement
system. The Base Settlement is represented by Apple Creek and all those
sites located at the talus slope along the sides of the Illinois Valley. The
valley-edge lies midway between all the microenvironments in which oc-
cur one or more of the aforementioned harvestable natural foods. Inhab-
itants of the Base Settlement had immediate access to all five resources. It
is guessed that these resources were exploited in season from this site, and
also that processing and storage of these foods constituted major tasks
performed in these communities. These foods are available at various
times from fall through early spring, and it is hypothesized that valley-
edge settlements were occupied continuously during this period.
  The few Middle Woodland sites on the sand ridges in the floodplain may
represent Summer Agricultural Camps. These sites are located proximal
to former lake shorelines which provided the only extensive soil areas on
which plant cultivation could be practiced, given a simple hoe techn-
ology. Until one of these floodplain sites is excavated, little more can be
308                                    Variability among Occupational Units
said to support the thesis that these sites were occupied primarily during
the summer to perform agricultural tasks. There is some suggestion from
the pollen evidence that Apple Creek was abandoned during the summer
(Schoenwetter, 1964). During this period the occupants may have moved
into the floodplain, setting up temporary camps on the sand-ridge shore-
lines of the river and lakes to carry on agricultural activities nearby.
Summer and early fall were seasons in which inhabitants of the bottom-
lands were relatively safe from the floods that regularly inundated the
valley floor.
   The Mound House site is a unique example of the third tentative Mid-
dle Woodland settlement type: the Regional Exchange Center. Here,
finished goods and raw materials characteristic of the Hopewell Interac-
tion Sphere (Caldwell, 1964; Struever, 1964) may have entered the lower
Illinois Valley and been exchanged for local products (pearls?). At
Mound House, members of the local Middle Woodland groups through-
out the lower Illinois Valley area may have congregated periodically to
trade and carry on ritual activities by means of which these foreign
imports—copper,   mica,   marine    shells,   obsidian,   etc.—were   distributed
over the region, eventually to become burial goods in status graves cov-
ered by earth mounds that occur in small groups scattered along the
valley margins.
  The fourth Middle Woodland settlement type here is the Mortuary
Camp. These small habitation sites proximal to Hopewell mound ceme-
teries appear to represent short-lived, specialized occupations undertaken
to perform mortuary tasks. The archeological evidence from Peisker, the
only excavated example of this settlement type, reflects activities relating
both to mortuary tasks themselves and to maintenance of the participants
engaged in this work.         :


                                  Conclusions
This paper attempts to demonstrate a major change in subsistence-settle-
ment systems from Early to Middle Woodland periods in the lower Illinois
Valley. The new subsistence pattern involves the intensive “harvest” ex-
ploitation of select natural food resources,      with possible cultivation of
local seed-bearing plants along the shorelines of riverbottom lakes. The
resulting higher levels of economic productivity were accompanied by
population expansion (documented by the marked increase in total num-
ber and size of habitation sites). Population expansion, combined with
new patterns of segmenting and partitioning the population necessitated
by the harvest-collecting technology, created new integrative require-
ments. Now perhaps larger numbers of people were organized into a
single sociopolitical system. Differential access to goods and services, so
apparent in Hopewell burial sites in the lower Illinois Valley, reflects
increased status differentiation. Imported raw materials and craft items
fashioned from them occur with relatively few burials interred in tombs
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                        309
or mausoleums. These constructions involved major outlays of labor; one
Hopewellian mound       in the lower Illinois is built from more than an
estimated one million cubic feet of soil. Associated with these inferred
changes in social structure is the extension and intensification of long-
distance trade which, for the first time on any scale, brought exotic raw
materials and finished goods into the region. Again, for the most part
these imported goods appear archeologically as burial associations with
selected individuals.
   How can this episode of culture change—at this time and place—be
explained? David Aberle (personal communication) reminds us that cul-
tures do not necessarily maximize the exploitative potential of their en-
vironment. It is only in certain, still-to-be-defined coping situations in-
volving particular relationships of culture to other cultures and culture to
biophysical environment that “maximizing adaptations” occur. It remains
to be determined what changing selective pressures provided the impetus
for maximization of productivity based on collecting, as documented here
for Middle and early Late Woodland in the lower Illinois Valley. It is
important only to reaffirm that it is in the nature of the shifting coping
situations during Early Woodland and initial phases of Middle Woodland
that we must seek an explanation for the culture changes described here.
   Whatever the shifting selective pressures from Early to Middle Wood-
land times in the lower Illinois Valley, they were not present equally—or
at least did not produce the same results—throughout the entire western
Great Lakes—Riverine area. Judging from the distribution of Hopewel-
lian goods and mortuary sites, the shift in adaptation described here—-
involving changes in the structure of subsistence and settlement, an in-
crease in population density, increased social complexity, and participa-
tion in long-distance trade—appears to have been a localized phenome-
non confined largely to the central and lower Illinois Valley, sections of
the central Mississippi Valley, and a few other localities.
   Increased economic productivity is regarded as prerequisite to the
other manifestations of change noted here. To the extent that increased
productivity was dependent on an intensification of collecting like that
inferred here for the lower Illinois Valley, it is not surprising that major
 culture change during Middle and early Late Woodland was geograph-
 ically restricted in the western Great Lakes area. The complex of poten-
tially harvestable natural resources described here for the lower Illinois
have a very limited distribution. Paloumpis (1966) demonstrates that fish
in riverbottom lakes of the central Mississippi drainage have an exceed-
ingly high biomass; furthermore, he points out how restricted within the
Great Lakes area are broad floodplain situations with extensive back-
water lakes. Waterfowl migration routes within the Mississippi flyway are
narrow corridors along which great flights of ducks and geese move sea-
sonally. Outside these routes, which follow certain major river valleys,
waterfowl numbers diminish sharply. Cleland (1965) points out that deer
prefer deciduous forest “edges,” that is, places where forest borders on
310                                   Variability among Occupational Units
scrub and grassland, and Taylor (1956, p. 137) notes that white-tail deer
have always produced their largest populations where edges are most
extensive. One such edge situation is the forest-grassland ecotone, an
example of which is the strip of forested uplands bordering the Illinois
and other river valleys that dissect the long-grass prairie south of the
western Great Lakes. It can be expected that this forest-grassland zone
supported a dense deer population in prehistoric times.
   The northern boundary of the temperate deciduous forest lies in south-
ern Illinois and Indiana. North of it, and extending into southern Wis-
consin and Michigan, lies the prairie peninsula. Within the prairie penin-
sula nut crops were restricted to the narrow strips of forest bordering
stream courses. The dissected terrain adjacent to the Illinois Valley and
feeder streams leading into it supported a heavy oak-hickory forest with
excellent potential for nut production. And, finally, large stands of Che-
nopodium and similar seed-bearing plants occur only where stable plant
associations are prohibited from forming over extensive areas. The most
extensive areas of this kind in the eastern Woodlands occur in the broad
river floodplains.
  Intensive   Harvest   Collecting, then, is a subsistence   type that, given
certain selective pressures, may develop in an ecological context support-
ing a number of particularly high-yielding natural food resources. In the
western   Great Lakes area these conditions are found in certain broad
river valleys only. These valleys have extensive floodplains with a shallow
river channel, low gradient, and poorly developed natural levees.
Flooding is an annual occurrence. These valleys have a high productive
potential in fish, a fact traced to the great expanse of backwater      lakes
with their high biomass and fish populations that are renewed through
regular flooding (Paloumpis; 1966). These same conditions create exten-
sive areas of raw soil on which seed-bearing chenopods, marsh elder, and
other plants flourish. During the spring and fall, waterfowl migrate along
certain of these valleys. Heavy forests along the valley margins produce
nut crops and provide maximal conditions for support of a dense white-
tailed deer population (Cleland, 1965).
   It is interesting that culture change during the Middle Woodland pe-
riod in the western Great Lakes area appears most marked in localities
where this convergence of high-yielding populations of several plant and
animal species seems to have existed. Hopewell burial sites have their
greatest density in areas characterized by such an environment. It can be
hypothesized that, were the evidence available, these same areas would
also disclose significant population expansion and extensive participation
in the Hopewell “interaction sphere,” or trade system, during the Middle
Woodland period.
  This is not to imply that all culture change during Middle Woodland in
eastern United States was based on this particular shift in subsistence
practices. Rather, it might be expected that marked regional variability in
Struever Woodland Subsistence-Settlement Systems                                              311
both ecological conditions and selective pressures gave rise to a complex
mosaic of regional developments. Each was characterized by greater or
lesser rates and varying types of change and influenced in varying ways
by occurrences in contiguous and non-contiguous regions. David Aberle
(personal communication) cautions that developments in any one region
must be understood in terms of changes in the total environmental con-
text of a culture, and this context includes the whole sphere of between-
culture interaction in which the group under investigation resides. There-
fore, the eventual explanation of the accelerated culture change in Middle
Woodland groups of the lower Illinois Valley may lie more in a response
to significant culture change occurring in southern Ohio, the Gulf Coastal
Plain, or elsewhere, than in the changing availability of fish, chenopods,
hickory nuts, deer, and ducks in the lower Illinois Valley, or in a new
realization that these resources could be collected on a large-scale by
means of new techniques.
   In short, it may well be to changes in the social environment of these
Illinois Valley Middle Woodland groups that we will eventually ascribe
the changes      in subsistence,      settlement,       population      density, and        social
structure that are only now beginning to emerge from the archeological
record.


                                       References

ALLIson, Aprit L. 1966. Reconstruction of pre-modern vegetation in the lower
  Illinois Valley: a study of floral communities and their distribution with
  reference to prehistoric cultural-ecological adaptations. (Unpublished).
Brnrorp, Lewis R. 1962 Archaelogy as anthropology. American Antiquity,
  28 (2): 217—25.
Bryrorp, Lewis R., and Satty R. Brvrorp. 1966. A preliminary analysis of
  functional variability in the Mousterian of Levallois facies. American Anthro-
  pologist, 68 (2), Part 2: 238—95.
CALDWELL,     JosEPH    R.   1958.   Trend   and    tradition     in the prehistory     of the
  eastern United States. American Anthropological Association, Memoir No.
  88.
     . 1964, Interaction spheres in prehistory. In Joseph R. Caldwell and
  Robert    L. Hall    (Eds.),   Hopewellian       studies.     Scientific   Papers,   12    (6):
  133—43. Springfield: Illinois State Museum.
CALDWELL, JosePH R., and Rosert Hau                 (Eds.). 1964. Hopewellian studies.
  Scientific Papers, Vol. 12. Springfield: Illinois State Museum.
CLELAND, CuarLEes E. 1965. The evolution of subsistence patterns in the
  eastern United States. (Unpublished. )
PaLoumpis, ANDREAS A. 1966. Prehistoric utilization of fish populations in the
  lower Illinois Valley. (Unpublished. )
SCHOFNWETTER,     JAMES. 1964. Pollen studies in southern Illinois. Unpublished
  report to M.    L. Fowler,     Southern    Illinois    University,    as part of research
  undertaken under the auspices of the National Science Foundation                     (G188)
  and the Illinois Archaeological Survey.
STRUEVER, STUART.      1964. The Hopewell interaction sphere in Riverine-western
312                                   Variability among Occupational Units
  Great Lakes culture history. In Joseph Caldwell and Robert L. Hall (Eds.),
  Hopewellian studies. Scientific Papers, 12(3): 85—106. Springfield: Illinois
  State Museum.
     . 1965a. Middle woodland culture history in the Great Lakes-Riverine
  area. American Antiquity, 31(2): 211—23.
     . 1965b. The flotation process for recovery of plant remains. Southeast-
  ern Archaeological Conference, Bulletin 3: 32—35.
TayLor, WALTER P. 1956. The deer of North America. Harrisburg, Pa.: Stack-
  pole Press.
TuRNER, Lewis MacDona.p. 1931. Ecological studies in the lower Illinois
  River Valley. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.
Winters, Howarp D. 1966. The Riverton Culture. Unpublished Ph.D. disser-
  tation, University of Chicago.
SIXTEEN                                                LEWIS    R. BINFORD


