PART V

Chapter 13/ The Cerebral Savage: On the Work of Claude Lévi-Strauss

[]

            Today I sometimes wonder if I was not attracted to
anthropology, however unwittingly, by a structural affinity between the
civilisations which are its subject matter and my own thought processes.
My intelligence is neolithic.

Claude Lévi-Strauss, Tristes Tropiques

I

What, after all, is one to make of savages? Even now, after three
centuries of debate on the matter—whether they are noble, bestial, or
even as you and I; whether they reason as we do, are sunk in a demented
mysticism, or possessors of higher forms of truth we have in our avarice
lost; whether their customs, from cannibalism to matriliny, are mere
alternatives, no better and no worse, to our own, or crude precursors of
our own now outmoded, or simply passing strange, impenetrable exotica
amusing to collect; whether they are bound and we are free, or we are
bound and they are free—after all this we still don’t know. For the
anthropologist, whose profession it is to study other cultures, the
puzzle is always with him. His personal relationship to his object of
study is, perhaps more than for any other scientist, inevitably
problematic. Know what he thinks a savage is and you have the key to his
work. You know what he thinks he himself is and, knowing what he thinks
he himself is, you know in general what sort of thing he is going to say
about whatever tribe he happens to be studying. All ethnography is part
philosophy, and a good deal of the rest is confession.

In the case of Claude Lévi-Strauss, Professor of Social Anthropology in
the Collège de France and the center right now of a degree of general
attention which men who spend their lives studying far-off peoples do
not usually get, sorting out the spiritual elements from the descriptive
is particularly difficult. On the other hand, no anthropologist has been
more insistent on the fact that the practice of his profession has
consisted of a personal quest, driven by a personal vision, and directed
toward a personal salvation:

I owe myself to mankind just as much as to knowledge. History, politics,
the social and economic universe, the physical world, even the sky, all
surround me in concentric circles and I can only escape from those
circles in thought if I concede to each of them some part of my being.
Like the pebble which marks the surface of the wave with circles as it
passes through it, I must throw myself into the water if I am to plumb
the depths.

On the other hand, no anthropologist has made greater claims for
ethnology as a positive science:

The ultimate goal of the human sciences is not to constitute man but to
dissolve him. The critical importance of ethnology is that it represents
the first step in a process which includes others. Ethnographic analysis
tries to arrive at invariants beyond the empirical diversity of
societies. . . . This initial enterprise opens the way for others . . .
which are incumbent on the natural sciences: the reintegration of
culture into nature and generally of life into the whole of its
physico-chemical conditions. . . . One can understand, therefore, why I
find in ethnology the principle of all research.

In Lévi-Strauss’ work the two faces of anthropology—as a way of going at
the world and as a method for uncovering lawful relations among
empirical facts—are turned in toward one another so as to force a direct
confrontation between them rather than (as is more common among
ethnologists) out away from one another so as to avoid such a
confrontation and the inward stresses which go with it. This accounts
both for the power of his work and for its general appeal. It rings with
boldness and a kind of reckless candor. But it also accounts for the
more intraprofessional suspicion that what is presented as High Science
may really be an ingenious and somewhat roundabout attempt to defend a
metaphysical position, advance an ideological argument, and serve a
moral cause.

There is, perhaps, nothing so terribly wrong about this, but, as with
Marx, it is well to keep it in mind, lest an attitude toward life be
taken for a simple description of it. Every man has a right to create
his own savage for his own purposes. Perhaps every man does. But to
demonstrate that such a constructed savage corresponds to Australian
Aborigines, African Tribesmen, or Brazilian Indians is another matter
altogether.

The spiritual dimensions of Lévi-Strauss’ encounter with his object of
study, what trafficking with savages has meant to him personally, are
particularly easy to discover, for he has recorded them with figured
eloquence in a work which, though it is very far from being a great
anthropology book, or even an especially good one, is surely one of the
finest books ever written by an anthropologist: Tristes Tropiques.¹¹ Its
design is in the form of the standard legend of the Heroic Quest—the
precipitate departure from ancestral shores grown familiar, stultifying,
and in some uncertain way menacing (a philosophy post at a provincial
lycée in Le Brun’s France); the journey into another, darker world, a
magical realm full of surprises, tests, and revelations (the Brazilian
jungles of the Cuduveo, Bororo, Nambikwara, and Tupi-Kawahib); and the
return, resigned and exhausted, to ordinary existence (“farewell to
savages, then, farewell to journeying”) with a deepened knowledge of
reality and the obligation to communicate what one has learned to those
who, less adventurous, have stayed behind. The book is a combination
autobiography, traveler’s tale, philosophical treatise, ethnographic
report, colonial history, and prophetic myth.

 

 

For what, after all, have I learnt from the masters I have listened to,
the philosophers I have read, the societies I have investigated and that
very Science in which the West takes a pride? Simply a fragmentary
lesson or two which, if laid end to end would reconstitute the
meditations of [Buddha] at the foot of his tree.

The sea journey was uneventful, a prelude. Reflecting upon it twenty
years later he compares his position to that of the classical
navigators. They were sailing toward an unknown world, one hardly
touched by mankind, a Garden of Eden “spared the agitations of ‘history’
for some ten or twenty millennia.” He was sailing toward a spoiled
world, one which these navigators (and the colonists who followed them)
had destroyed in their greed, their cultural arrogance, and their rage
for progress. Nothing was left of the terrestrial Garden but remnants.
Its very nature had been transformed and had become “historical where it
once was eternal, and social where it once was metaphysical.” Once the
traveler found civilizations radically different from his own awaiting
him at the end of his journey. Now he finds impoverished imitations of
his own, set off here and there by the relics of a discarded past. It is
not surprising that he finds Rio disappointing. The proportions are all
wrong. Sugar Loaf Mountain is too small, the bay is placed the wrong way
round, the tropical moon seems overblown with only shanties and
bungalows to set it off. He arrived as a delayed Columbus to make a
flattening discovery: “The tropics are not so much exotic as out of
date.”

Ashore, the descent into the depths begins. The plot thickens, grows
phantasmagorial, and arrives at a dénouement wholly unforeseen. There
are no Indians in the outskirts of São Paulo as he had been promised in
Paris by, of all people, the head of the Ecole Normale. Where in 1918
two-thirds of the state was marked on the map as “unexplored territory,
inhabited only by Indians,” not a single native Indian was left by 1935,
when, in search of “a human society reduced to its basic expression,” he
took up his post as Professor of Sociology in the new university there.
The nearest were several hundred miles away on a reservation; but they
were not very satisfying. Neither true Indians nor true savages, “they
were a perfect example of that social predicament which is becoming ever
more widespread in the second half of the 20th century: they were
‘former savages,’ that is to say [ones] on whom civilisation had been
abruptly forced; and, as soon as they were no longer ‘a danger to
society,’ civilisation took no further interest in them.” Nonetheless,
the encounter was instructive, as all initiations are, for they
disabused him of “the ingenuous and poetical notion of what is in store
for us that is common to all novices in anthropology,” and so prepared
him to confront with more objectivity the less “contaminated” Indians
with whom he was to have to do later.

There were four groups of these, each a little farther into the jungle,
a little more untouched, a little more promising of final illumination.
The Caduveo in the middle Paraguay intrigued him for their body tattoos
in whose elaborate designs he thought he could see a formal
representation of their aboriginal social organization, by then largely
decayed. The Bororo, deeper into the forest, were rather more intact.
Their numbers had been radically reduced by disease and exploitation,
but they still lived in the old village pattern and struggled to
maintain both their clan system and their religion. Deeper yet, the
childlike Nambikwara were so simple that he could find in their
political organization—a matter of small, constantly re-forming nomadic
bands led by temporary chiefs—support for Rousseau’s theory of the
social contract. And finally, near the Bolivian border, in “Crusoe
country,” gnosis appeared at last at hand in the form of the
Tupi-Kawahib, who were not only uncontaminated, but, the savant’s dream,
unstudied:

Nothing is more exciting for an anthropologist than the prospect of
being the first white man to penetrate a native community. . . . In my
journey I was to relive the experience of the travellers of old; at the
same time I should be faced with that moment, so crucial to modern
thought, at which a community, which had thought itself complete,
perfected, and self-sufficient, is made to realise that it is nothing of
the kind. . . . The counter-revelation in short: the fact that it is not
alone in the world, that it is but part of a vast human ensemble, and
that to know itself it must first look at the unrecognisable image of
itself in that mirror of which one long-forgotten splinter was about to
give out, for myself alone, its first and last reflection.

With such great expectations it came then as a distinct disappointment
that rather than providing a purified vision of primitivity these
ultimate savages proved intellectually inaccessible, beyond his grasp.
He, quite literally, could not communicate with them.

I had wanted to pursue “the Primitive” to its furthest point. Surely my
wish has been gratified by these delightful people whom no white man had
seen before me, and none would ever see again? My journey had been
enthralling and, at the end of it, I had come upon “my” savages. But
alas—they were all too savage. . . . There they were, all ready to teach
me their customs and beliefs and I knew nothing of their language. They
were as close to me as an image seen in a looking-glass. I could touch,
but not understand them. I had at one and the same time my reward and my
punishment, for did not my mistake, and that of my profession, lie in
the belief that men are not always men? That some are more deserving of
our interest and our attention because there is something astonishing to
us in their manners. . . . No sooner are such people known, or guessed
at, than their strangeness drops away, and one might as well have stayed
in one’s own village. Or if, as in the present case, their strangeness
remained intact, then it was no good to me, for I could not even begin
to analyse it. Between these two extremes, what are the equivocal cases
which afford us [anthropologists] the excuses by which we live? Who is,
in the end, the one most defrauded by the disquiet we arouse in the
reader? Our remarks must be pushed a certain distance if we are to make
them intelligible, and yet they must be cut off halfway, since the
people whom they astonish are very like those for whom the customs in
question are a matter of course. Is it the reader who is deceived by his
belief in us? Or ourselves, who have not the right to be satisfied
before we have completely dissolved that residuum which gave our vanity
its pretext?

At the end of the Quest there waited thus not a revelation but a riddle.
The anthropologist seems condemned either to journey among men whom he
can understand precisely because his own culture has already
contaminated them, covered them with “the filth, our filth, that we have
thrown in the face of humanity,” or among those who, not so
contaminated, are for that reason largely unintelligible to him. Either
he is a wanderer among true savages (of whom there are precious few left
in any case) whose very otherness isolates his life from theirs or he is
a nostalgic tourist “hastening in search of a vanished reality . . . an
archaeologist of space, trying in vain to repiece together the idea of
the exotic with the help of a particle here and a fragment of debris
there.” Confronted with looking-glass men he can touch but not grasp,
and with half-ruined men “pulverised by the development of Western
civilisation,” Lévi-Strauss compares himself to the Indian in the legend
who had been to the world’s end and there asked questions of peoples and
things and was disappointed in what he heard. “I am the victim of a
double infirmity: what I see is an affliction to me; what I do not see a
reproach.”

Must the anthropologist therefore despair? Are we never to know savages
at all? No, because there is another avenue of approach to their world
than personal involvement in it—namely, the construction out of the
particles and fragments of debris it is still possible to collect (or
which have already been collected) of a theoretical model of society
which, though it corresponds to none which can be observed in reality
will nonetheless help us towards an understanding of the basic
foundations of human existence. And this is possible because despite the
surface strangeness of primitive men and their societies they are, at a
deeper level, a psychological level, not alien at all. The mind of man
is, at bottom, everywhere the same: so that what could not be
accomplished by a drawing near, by an attempt to enter bodily into the
world of particular savage tribes, can be accomplished instead by a
standing back, by the development of a general, closed, abstract,
formalistic science of thought, a universal grammar of the intellect. It
is not by storming the citadels of savage life directly, seeking to
penetrate their mental life phenomenologically (a sheer impossibility)
that a valid anthropology can be written. It is by intellectually
reconstituting the shape of that life out of its filth-covered
“archaeological” remains, reconstructing the conceptual systems that,
from deep beneath its surface, animated it and gave it form.

What a journey to the heart of darkness could not produce, an immersion
in structural linguistics, communication theory, cybernetics, and
mathematical logic can. Out of the disappointed romanticism of Tristes
Tropiques arose the exultant sciencism of Lévi-Strauss’ other major
work, La Pensée Sauvage (1962).²²

II

La Pensée Sauvage actually departs from an idea first set forth in
Tristes Tropiques with respect to the Caduveo and their sociological
tattoos: namely, that the totality of a people’s customs always forms an
ordered whole, a system. The number of these systems is limited. Human
societies, like individual human beings, never create out of whole cloth
but merely choose certain combinations from a repertory of ideas
anteriorly available to them. Stock themes are endlessly arranged and
rearranged into different patterns: variant expressions of an underlying
ideational structure which it should be possible, given enough
ingenuity, to reconstitute. The job of the ethnologist is to describe
the surface patterns as best he can, to reconstitute the deeper
structures out of which they are built, and to classify those
structures, once reconstituted, into an analytical scheme—rather like
Mendeleev’s periodic table of the elements. After that “all that would
remain for us to do would be to recognise those [structures] which
[particular] societies had in fact adopted.” Anthropology is only
apparently the study of customs, beliefs, or institutions. Fundamentally
it is the study of thought.

In La Pensée Sauvage this governing notion—that the universe of
conceptual tools available to the savage is closed and he must make do
with it to build whatever cultural forms he builds—reappears in the
guise of what Lévi-Strauss calls “the science of the concrete.” Savages
build models of reality—of the natural world, of the self, of society.
But they do so not as modern scientists do by integrating abstract
propositions into a framework of formal theory, sacrificing the
vividness of perceived particulars for the explanatory power of
generalized conceptual systems, but by ordering perceived particulars
into immediately intelligible wholes. The science of the concrete
arranges directly sensed realities—the unmistakable differences between
kangaroos and ostriches, the seasonal advance and retreat of flood
waters, the progress of the sun or the phases of the moon. These become
structural models representing the underlying order of reality as it
were analogically. “Savage thought extends its grasp by means of
imagines mundi. It fashions mental constructions which render the world
intelligible to the degree that they contrive to resemble it.”

This uncanonical science (“which we prefer to call ‘primary’ rather than
‘primitive’”) puts a philosophy of finitude into practice. The elements
of the conceptual world are given, prefabricated as it were, and
thinking consists in fiddling with the elements. Savage logic works like
a kaleidoscope whose chips can fall into a variety of patterns while
remaining unchanged in quantity, form, or color. The number of patterns
producible in this way may be large if the chips are numerous and varied
enough, but it is not infinite. The patterns consist in the disposition
of the chips vis-à-vis one another (that is, they are a function of the
relationships among the chips rather than their individual properties
considered separately). And their range of possible transformations is
strictly determined by the construction of the kaleidoscope, the inner
law which governs its operation. And so it is too with savage thought.
Both anecdotal and geometric, it builds coherent structures out of “the
odds and ends left over from psychological or historical process.”

These odds and ends, the chips of the kaleidoscope, are images drawn
from myth, ritual, magic, and empirical lore. (How, precisely, they have
come into being in the first place is one of the points on which
Lévi-Strauss is not too explicit, referring to them vaguely as the
“residue of events . . . fossil remains of the history of an individual
or a society.”) Such images are inevitably embodied in larger
structures—in myths, ceremonies, folk taxonomies, and so on—for, as in a
kaleidoscope, one always sees the chips distributed in some pattern,
however ill-formed or irregular. But, as in a kaleidoscope, they are
detachable from these structures and arrangeable into different ones of
a similar sort. Quoting Franz Boas that “it would seem that mythological
worlds have been built up, only to be shattered again, and that new
worlds were built from the fragments,” Lévi-Strauss generalizes this
permutational view of thinking to savage thought in general. It is all a
matter of shuffling discrete (and concrete) images—totem animals, sacred
colors, wind directions, sun deities, or whatever—so as to produce
symbolic structures capable of formulating and communicating objective
(which is not to say accurate) analyses of the social and physical
worlds.

Consider totemism. Long regarded as an autonomous, unitary institution,
a kind of primitive nature worship to be explained in terms of
mechanical theories of one sort or another—evolutionist, functionalist,
psychoanalytic, utilitarian—it is for Lévi-Strauss only a special case
of this overall tendency to build conceptual schemes out of particular
images.

In totemism, a logical parallel is (quite subconsciously) postulated
between two series, one natural and one cultural. The order of
differences between the terms on one side of the parallel is isomorphic
with the order of differences between the terms on the other side. In
the simplest case, the apparent physical differences between animal
species—bear, eagle, turtle, and so forth—are put into correspondence
with the sociological differences between social groups—clans A, B, C,
and so on. It is not the specific characteristics of bear, eagle, and
turtle as such which are critical—fox, rabbit, and crow would have
served as well—but the sensible contrast between any pair of them. It is
upon this that the savage seizes to represent intellectually to himself
and to others the structure of his clan system. When he says that the
members of his clan are descended from bear but those of his neighbor’s
from eagle, he is not giving forth with a bit of illiterate biology. He
is saying, in a concrete metaphorical way, that the relationship between
his clan and his neighbors is analogous to the perceived relationship
between species. Considered term by term, totemic beliefs are simply
arbitrary. “History” has cast them up and “history” may ultimately
destroy them, alter their role, or replace them with others. But seen as
an ordered set they become coherent, for they are able then to represent
symbolically another sort of set similarly ordered: allied, exogamous,
patrilineal clans. And the point is general. The relationship between a
symbolic structure and its referent, the basis of its meaning, is
fundamentally “logical,” a coincidence of form—not affective, not
historical, not functional. Savage thought is frozen reason and
anthropology is, like music and mathematics, “one of the few true
vocations.”

Or like linguistics. For in language too the constituent units—phonemes,
morphemes, words—are, from a semantic point of view, arbitrary. Why the
French call a certain kind of animal “chien” and the English call it
“dog,” or why English forms its plurals by adding “s” and Malay forms
its by doubling roots are not the sorts of questions
linguists—structural linguists, at any rate—any longer consider it
profitable to ask except in historical terms. It is only when language
is ordered, by the rules of grammar and syntax, into utterances—strings
of speech embodying propositions—that significance emerges and
communication is possible. And in language too this guiding order, this
ur-system of forms in terms of which discrete units are shuffled in such
a way as to turn sound into speech, is subconscious. It is a deep
structure which a linguist reconstitutes from its surface
manifestations. One can become conscious of one’s grammatical categories
by reading linguistic treatises just as one can become conscious of
one’s cultural categories by reading ethnological ones. But, as acts,
both speaking and behaving are spontaneous performances fed from
underground springs. Finally, and most important, linguistic study (and,
along with it, information theory and class logic) also defines its
basic units, its constituent elements, not in terms of their common
properties but their differences, that is, by contrasting them in pairs.
Binary opposition—that dialectical chasm between plus and minus which
computer technology has rendered the lingua franca of modern
science—forms the basis of savage thought as it does of language. And
indeed it is this which makes them essentially variant forms of the same
thing: communications systems.

With this door open all things are possible. Not just the logic of
totemic classifications but of any classificatory scheme at all—plant
taxonomies, personal names, sacred geographies, cosmologies, hair styles
among the Omaha Indians, or design motifs on Australian
bull-roarers—can, en principe, be exposed. For they always trace down to
an underlying opposition of paired terms—high and low, right and left,
peace and war, and so on—expressed in concrete images, palpable
concepts, “beyond which it is, for intrinsic reasons, both useless and
impossible to go.” Further, once certain of these schemas, or
structures, are determined, they can then be related to one another—that
is, reduced to a more general, and “deeper,” structure embracing them
both. They are shown to be mutually derivable from each other by logical
operations—inversion, transposition, substitution: all sorts of
systematic permutations—just as one transforms an English sentence into
the dots and dashes of Morse code or turns a mathematical expression
into its complement by changing all the signs. One can even move between
different levels of social reality—the exchange of women in marriage,
the exchange of gifts in trade, the exchange of symbols in ritual—by
demonstrating that the logical structures of these various institutions
are, when considered as communication schemes, isomorphic.

Some of these essays in “socio-logic” are, like the analysis of
totemism, persuasive and enlightening as far as they go. (Inasmuch as
any metaphysical content or affective aura these beliefs may have is
vigorously excluded from attention, this is not really so very far.)
Others, like the attempt to show that totemism and caste are capable
(“by means of a very simple transformation”) of being reduced to variant
expressions of the same general underlying structure are at least
intriguing if not precisely convincing. And others, like the attempts to
show that the different ways in which horses, dogs, birds, and cattle
are named form a coherent three-dimensional system of complementary
images cross-cut by relations of inverted symmetry, are triumphs of
self-parody. They are exercises in “depth interpretation” farfetched
enough to make even a psychoanalyst blush. It is all terribly ingenious.
If a model of society which is “eternal and universal” can be built up
out of the debris of dead and dying societies—a model which reflects
neither time, nor place, nor circumstance but (this from Totemism) “a
direct expression of the structure of the mind (and behind the mind,
probably of the brain)”—then this may well be the way to build it.

III

For what Lévi-Strauss has made for himself is an infernal culture
machine. It annuls history, reduces sentiment to a shadow of the
intellect, and replaces the particular minds of particular savages in
particular jungles with the Savage Mind immanent in us all. It has made
it possible for him to circumvent the impasse to which his Brazilian
expedition led—physical closeness and intellectual distance—by what
perhaps he always really wanted—intellectual closeness and physical
distance. “I stood out against the new tendencies in metaphysical
thinking which were then [i.e., in 1934] beginning to take shape,” he
wrote in Tristes Tropiques, explaining his dissatisfaction with academic
philosophy and his turn towards anthropology.

Phenomenology I found unacceptable, in so far as it postulated a
continuity between experience and reality. That one enveloped and
explained the other I was quite willing to agree, but I had learnt . . .
that there is no continuity in the passage between the two and that to
reach reality we must first repudiate experience, even though we may
later reintegrate it into an objective synthesis in which sentimentality
plays no part.

As for the trend of thought which was to find fulfilment in
existentialism, it seemed to me to be the exact opposite of true
thought, by reason of its indulgent attitude toward the illusions of
subjectivity. To promote private preoccupations to the rank of
philosophical problems is dangerous . . . excusable as an element in
teaching procedure, but perilous in the extreme if it leads the
philosopher to turn his back on his mission. That mission (he holds it
only until science is strong enough to take over from philosophy) is to
understand Being in relation to itself, and not in relation to oneself.

The High Science of La Pensée Sauvage and the Heroic Quest of Tristes
Tropiques are, at base, but “very simple transformations” of one
another. They are variant expressions of the same deep underlying
structure: the universal rationalism of the French Enlightenment. For
all the apostrophes to structural linguistics, information theory, class
logic, cybernetics, game theory, and other advanced doctrines, it is not
de Saussure, or Shannon, or Boole, or Weiner, or von Neumann who is
Lévi-Strauss’ real guru (nor, despite the ritual invocation of them for
dramatic effect, Marx or Buddha)—but Rousseau.

Rousseau is our master and our brother. . . . For there is only one way
in which we can escape the contradiction inherent in the notion of the
position of the anthropologist, and that is by reformulating, on our own
account, the intellectual procedures which allowed Rousseau to move
forward from the ruins left by the Discours sur l’Origine de l’Inégalité
to the ample design of the Social Contract, of which Emile reveals the
secret. He it is who showed us how, after we have destroyed every
existing order, we can still discover the principles which allow us to
erect a new order in their stead.

Like Rousseau, Lévi-Strauss’ search is not after all for men, whom he
doesn’t much care for, but for Man, with whom he is enthralled. It is,
as much in La Pensée Sauvage as in Tristes Tropiques, the jewel in the
lotus he is after. The “unshakable basis of human society” is not really
social at all but psychological—a rational, universal, eternal, and thus
(in the great tradition of French moralism) virtuous mind.

Rousseau (“of all the philosophes the nearest to being an
anthropologist”) demonstrates the method by which the paradox of the
anthropological traveler—who comes either too late to find savagery or
too early to appreciate it—can at last be solved. We must, as he did,
develop the ability to penetrate the savage mind by employing (to
provide Lévi-Strauss with what he perhaps least needs, another
expression) what might be called epistemological empathy. The bridge
between our world and that of our subjects (extinct, opaque, or merely
tattered) lies not in personal confrontation—which, so far as it occurs,
corrupts both them and us. It lies in a kind of experimental mind
reading. And Rousseau, “trying on [himself] modes of thought taken from
elsewhere or merely imagined” (in order to demonstrate “that every human
mind is a locus of virtual experience where what goes on in the minds of
men, however remote they may be, can be investigated”), was the first to
undertake it. One understands the thought of savages neither by mere
introspection nor by mere observation, but by attempting to think as
they think and with their materials. What one needs, aside from
obsessively detailed ethnography, is a neolithic intelligence.

The philosophical conclusions which for Lévi-Strauss follow from this
postulate—that savages can only be understood by reenacting their
thought processes with the debris of their cultures—add up, in turn, to
a technically reconditioned version of Rousseauian moralism.

Savage (“wild,” “undomesticated”) modes of thought are primary in human
mentality. They are what we all have in common. The civilized (“tamed,”
“domesticated”) thought patterns of modern science and scholarship are
specialized productions of our own society. They are secondary, derived,
and, though not unuseful, artificial. Although these primary modes of
thought (and thus the foundations of human social life) are
“undomesticated” like the “wild pansy”—that spectacularly untranslatable
pun which gives La Pensée Sauvage its title—they are essentially
intellectual, rational, logical, not emotional, instinctive, or
mystical. The best—but in no sense perfect—time for man was the
neolithic (i.e., postagricultural, preurban) age: what Rousseau (who,
contrary to the usual stereotype of him, was not a primitivist) called
société naissante. For it was then that this mentality flourished,
producing, out of its “science of the concrete,” those arts of
civilization—agriculture, animal husbandry, pottery, weaving, food
conservation and preparation, and so on—which still provide the
foundations of our existence.

It would have been better for man had he kept to this “middle ground
between the indolence of the primitive state and the questing activity
to which we are prompted by our armour propre”—instead of abandoning it,
by some unhappy chance, for the restless ambitiousness, the pride and
egoism, of mechanical civilization. But he has left it. The task of
social reform consists in turning us again toward that middle state, not
by drawing us back into the neolithic but by presenting us with
compelling reminders of its human achievements, its sociological grace,
so as to draw us forward into a rational future where its ideals—the
balancing of self-regard with general sympathy—will be even more fully
realized. And it is a scientifically enriched anthropology
(“legitimizing the principles of savage thought and restoring them to
their rightful place”) which is the appropriate agency of such reform.
Progress toward humanness—that gradual unfolding of the higher
intellectual faculties Rousseau called perfectibilité—was destroyed by
cultural parochialism, armed with a half-grown science. Cultural
universalism, armed with a mature science, will once more set it in
motion.

If [the human] race has so far concentrated on one task, and one
alone—that of building a society in which Man can live—then the sources
of strength on which our remote ancestors drew are present also in
ourselves. All the stakes are still on the board, and we can take them
up at any time we please. Whatever was done, and done badly, can be
begun all over again: “The golden age [wrote Rousseau] which blind
superstition situated behind or ahead of us is in us.” Human brotherhood
acquires a palpable significance when we find our image of it confirmed
in the poorest of tribes, and when that tribe offers us an experience
which, when joined with many hundreds of others, has a lesson to teach
us.

IV

But perhaps more interesting than this modernized profession of a
classical faith in (to use Hooker’s phrase) “the perpetual and general
voice of men” is what the fate of such an attempt to set King Reason
back upon his throne in the guise of the Cerebral Savage will be in
today’s world. However much it is set round with symbolic logic, matrix
algebra, or structural linguistics, can we—after all that has happened
since 1762—still believe in the sovereignty of the intellect?

After a century-and-a-half of investigations into the depths of human
consciousness which have uncovered vested interests, infantile emotions,
or a chaos of animal appetites, we now have one which finds there the
pure light of natural wisdom that shines in all alike. It will doubtless
be greeted, in some quarters, with a degree of welcome, not to say
relief. Yet that such an investigation should have been launched from an
anthropological base seems distinctly surprising. For anthropologists
are forever being tempted—as Lévi-Strauss himself once was—out of
libraries and lecture halls, where it is hard to remember that the mind
of man is no dry light, into “the field,” where it is impossible to
forget it. Even if there are not many “true savages” out there any more,
there are enough vividly peculiar human individuals around to make any
doctrine of man which sees him as the bearer of changeless truths of
reason—an “original logic” proceeding from “the structure of the
mind”—seem merely quaint, an academic curiosity.

That Lévi-Strauss should have been able to transmute the romantic
passion of Tristes Tropiques into the hypermodern intellectualism of La
Pensée Sauvage is surely a startling achievement. But there remain the
questions one cannot help but ask. Is this transmutation science or
alchemy? Is the “very simple transformation” which produced a general
theory out of a personal disappointment real or a sleight of hand? Is it
a genuine demolition of the walls which seem to separate mind from mind
by showing that the walls are surface structures only, or is it an
elaborately disguised evasion necessitated by a failure to breach them
when they were directly encountered? Is Lévi-Strauss writing, as he
seems to be claiming in the confident pages of La Pensée Sauvage, a
prolegomenon to all future anthropology? Or is he, like some uprooted
neolithic intelligence cast away on a reservation, shuffling the debris
of old traditions in a vain attempt to revivify a primitive faith whose
moral beauty is still apparent but from which both relevance and
credibility have long since departed?

[]

1 Tristes Tropiques (Paris, 1955), translated minus several chapters
into English by John Russell (New York, 1964).

2 An English translation (also not integral) has appeared as The Savage
Mind (London, 1966). However, the translation (mercifully unattributed)
is, unlike Russell’s sensitive rendering of Tristes Tropiques,
execrable, and I have for the most part made my own English versions
rather than quote from it. Lévi-Strauss’ collection of essays,
Anthropologic Structurale, in which many of the themes of his more
recent work first appeared, has been translated as Structural
Anthropology (New York, 1963); his Le Totémisme Aujourd’hui (Paris,
1962), a sort of dry run for La Pensée Sauvage, as Totemism (Boston,
1963).

Chapter 14/ Person, Time, and Conduct in Bali

[]

The Social Nature of Thought

Human thought is consummately social: social in its origins, social in
its functions, social in its forms, social in its applications. At base,
thinking is a public activity—its natural habitat is the houseyard, the
marketplace, and the town square. The implications of this fact for the
anthropological analysis of culture, my concern here, are enormous,
subtle, and insufficiently appreciated.

I want to draw out some of these implications by means of what might
seem at first glance an excessively special, even a somewhat esoteric
inquiry: an examination of the cultural apparatus in terms of which the
people of Bali define, perceive, and react to—that is, think
about—individual persons. Such an investigation is, however, special and
esoteric only in the descriptive sense. The facts, as facts, are of
little immediate interest beyond the confines of ethnography, and I
shall summarize them as briefly as I can. But when seen against the
background of a general theoretical aim—to determine what follows for
the analysis of culture from the proposition that human thinking is
essentially a social activity—the Balinese data take on a peculiar
importance.

Not only are Balinese ideas in this area unusually well developed, but
they are, from a Western perspective, odd enough to bring to light some
general relationships between different orders of cultural
conceptualization that are hidden from us when we look only at our own
all-too-familiar framework for the identification, classification, and
handling of human and quasi-human individuals. In particular, they point
up some unobvious connections between the way in which a people perceive
themselves and others, the way in which they experience time, and the
affective tone of their collective life—connections that have an import
not just for the understanding of Balinese society but human society
generally.

The Study of Culture

A great deal of recent social scientific theorizing has turned upon an
attempt to distinguish and specify two major analytical concepts:
culture and social structure.¹¹ The impetus for this effort has sprung
from a desire to take account of ideational factors in social processes
without succumbing to either the Hegelian or the Marxist forms of
reductionism. In order to avoid having to regard ideas, concepts,
values, and expressive forms either as shadows cast by the organization
of society upon the hard surfaces of history or as the soul of history
whose progress is but a working out of their internal dialectic, it has
proved necessary to regard them as independent but not self-sufficient
forces—as acting and having their impact only within specific social
contexts to which they adapt, by which they are stimulated, but upon
which they have, to a greater or lesser degree, a determining influence.
“Do you really expect,” Marc Bloch wrote in his little book on The
Historian’s Craft, “to know the great merchants of Renaissance Europe,
vendors of cloth or spices, monopolists in copper, mercury or alum,
bankers of Kings and the Emperor, by knowing their merchandise alone?
Bear in mind that they were painted by Holbein, that they read Erasmus
and Luther. To understand the attitude of the medieval vassal to his
seigneur you must inform yourself about his attitude to his God as
well.” Both the organization of social activity, its institutional
forms, and the systems of ideas which animate it must be understood, as
must the nature of the relations obtaining between them. It is to this
end that the attempt to clarify the concepts of social structure and of
culture has been directed.

There is little doubt, however, that within this two-sided development
it has been the cultural side which has proved the more refractory and
remains the more retarded. In the very nature of the case, ideas are
more difficult to handle scientifically than the economic, political,
and social relations among individuals and groups which those ideas
inform. And this is all the more true when the ideas involved are not
the explicit doctrines of a Luther or an Erasmus, or the articulate
images of a Holbein, but the half-formed, taken-for-granted,
indifferently systematized notions that guide the normal activities of
ordinary men in everyday life. If the scientific study of culture has
lagged, bogged down most often in mere descriptivism, it has been in
large part because its very subject matter is elusive. The initial
problem of any science—defining its object of study in such a manner as
to render it susceptible of analysis—has here turned out to be unusually
hard to solve.

It is at this point that the conception of thinking as basically a
social act, taking place in the same public world in which other social
acts occur, can play its most constructive role. The view that thought
does not consist of mysterious processes located in what Gilbert Ryle
has called a secret grotto in the head but of a traffic in significant
symbols—objects in experience (rituals and tools; graven idols and water
holes; gestures, markings, images, and sounds) upon which men have
impressed meaning—makes of the study of culture a positive science like
any other.²² The meanings, that symbols, the material vehicles of
thought, embody are often elusive, vague, fluctuating, and convoluted,
but they are, in principle, as capable of being discovered through
systematic empirical investigation—especially if the people who perceive
them will cooperate a little—as the atomic weight of hydrogen or the
function of the adrenal glands. It is through culture patterns, ordered
clusters of significant symbols, that man makes sense of the events
through which he lives. The study of culture, the accumulated totality
of such patterns, is thus the study of the machinery individuals and
groups of individuals employ to orient themselves in a world otherwise
opaque.

In any particular society, the number of generally accepted and
frequently used culture patterns is extremely large, so that sorting out
even the most important ones and tracing whatever relationships they
might have to one another is a staggering analytical task. The task is
somewhat lightened, however, by the fact that certain sorts of patterns
and certain sorts of relationships among patterns recur from society to
society, for the simple reason that the orientational requirements they
serve are generically human. The problems, being existential, are
universal; their solutions, being human, are diverse. It is, however,
through the circumstantial understanding of these unique solutions, and
in my opinion only in that way, that the nature of the underlying
problems to which they are a comparable response can be truly
comprehended. Here, as in so many branches of knowledge, the road to the
grand abstractions of science winds through a thicket of singular facts.

One of these pervasive orientational necessities is surely the
characterization of individual human beings. Peoples everywhere have
developed symbolic structures in terms of which persons are perceived
not baldly as such, as mere unadorned members of the human race, but as
representatives of certain distinct categories of persons, specific
sorts of individuals. In any given case, there are inevitably a
plurality of such structures. Some, for example kinship terminologies,
are ego-centered: that is, they define the status of an individual in
terms of his relationship to a specific social actor. Others are
centered on one or another subsystem or aspect of society and are
invariant with respect to the perspectives of individual actors: noble
ranks, age-group statuses, occupational categories. Some—personal names
and sobriquets—are informal and particularizing; others—bureaucratic
titles and caste designations—are formal and standardizing. The everyday
world in which the members of any community move, their
taken-for-granted field of social action, is populated not by anybodies,
faceless men without qualities, but by somebodies, concrete classes of
determinate persons positively characterized and appropriately labeled.
And the symbol systems which define these classes are not given in the
nature of things—they are historically constructed, socially maintained,
and individually applied.

Even a reduction of the task of cultural analysis to a concern only with
those patterns having something to do with the characterization of
individual persons renders it only slightly less formidable, however.
This is because there does not yet exist a perfected theoretical
framework within which to carry it out. What is called structural
analysis in sociology and social anthropology can ferret out the
functional implications for a society of a particular system of
person-categories, and at times even predict how such a system might
change under the impact of certain social processes; but only if the
system—the categories, their meanings, and their logical
relationships—can be taken as already known. Personality theory in
social-psychology can uncover the motivational dynamics underlying the
formation and the use of such systems and can assess their effect upon
the character structures of individuals actually employing them; but
also only if, in a sense, they are already given, if how the individuals
in question see themselves and others has been somehow determined. What
is needed is some systematic, rather than merely literary or
impressionistic, way to discover what is given, what the conceptual
structure embodied in the symbolic forms through which persons are
perceived actually is. What we want and do not yet have is a developed
method of describing and analyzing the meaningful structure of
experience (here, the experience of persons) as it is apprehended by
representative members of a particular society at a particular point in
time—in a word, a scientific phenomenology of culture.

Predecessors, Contemporaries, Consociates, and Successors

There have been, however, a few scattered and rather abstract ventures
in cultural analysis thus conceived, from the results of which it is
possible to draw some useful leads into our more focused inquiry. Among
the more interesting of such forays are those which were carried out by
the late philosopher-cum-sociologist Alfred Schutz, whose work
represents a somewhat heroic, yet not unsuccessful, attempt to fuse
influences stemming from Scheler, Weber, and Husserl on the one side
with ones stemming from James, Mead, and Dewey on the other.³³ Schutz
covered a multitude of topics—almost none of them in terms of any
extended or systematic consideration of specific social
processes—seeking always to uncover the meaningful structure of what he
regarded as “the paramount reality” in human experience: the world of
daily life as men confront it, act in it, and live through it. For our
own purposes, one of his exercises in speculative social
phenomenology—the disaggregation of the blanket notion of “fellowmen”
into “predecessors,” “contemporaries,” “consociates,” and
“successors”—provides an especially valuable starting point. Viewing the
cluster of culture patterns Balinese use to characterize individuals in
terms of this breakdown brings out, in a most suggestive way, the
relationships between conceptions of personal identity, conceptions of
temporal order, and conceptions of behavioral style which, as we shall
see, are implicit in them.

The distinctions themselves are not abstruse, but the fact that the
classes they define overlap and interpenetrate makes it difficult to
formulate them with the decisive sharpness analytical categories demand.
“Consociates” are individuals who actually meet, persons who encounter
one another somewhere in the course of daily life. They thus share,
however briefly or superficially, not only a community of time but also
of space. They are “involved in one another’s biography” at least
minimally; they “grow older together” at least momentarily, interacting
directly and personally as egos, subjects, selves. Lovers, so long as
love lasts, are consociates, as are spouses until they separate or
friends until they fall out. So also are members of orchestras, players
at games, strangers chatting on a train, hagglers in a market, or
inhabitants of a village: any set of persons who have an immediate,
face-to-face relationship. It is, however, persons having such relations
more or less continuously and to some enduring purpose, rather than
merely sporadically or incidentally, who form the heart of the category.
The others shade over into being the second sort of fellowmen:
“contemporaries.”

Contemporaries are persons who share a community of time but not of
space: they live at (more or less) the same period of history and have,
often very attenuated, social relationships with one another, but they
do not—at least in the normal course of things—meet. They are linked not
by direct social interaction but through a generalized set of
symbolically formulated (that is, cultural) assumptions about each
other’s typical modes of behavior. Further, the level of generalization
involved is a matter of degree, so that the graduation of personal
involvement in consociate relations from lovers through chance
acquaintances—relations also culturally governed, of course—here
continues until social ties slip off into a thoroughgoing anonymity,
standardization, and interchangeability:

Thinking of my absent friend A., I form an ideal type of his personality
and behavior based on my past experience of A. as my consociate. Putting
a letter in a mailbox, I expect that unknown people, called postmen,
will act in a typical way, not quite intelligible to me, with the result
that my letter will reach the addressee within typically reasonable
time. Without ever having met a Frenchman or a German, I understand “Why
France fears the rearmament of Germany.” Complying with a rule of
English grammar, I follow [in my writings] a socially-approved behavior
pattern of contemporary English-speaking fellow-men to which I have to
adjust to make myself understandable. And, finally, any artifact or
utensil refers to the anonymous fellow-man who produced it to be used by
other anonymous fellow-men for attaining typical goals by typical means.
These are just a few of the examples but they are arranged according to
the degree of increasing anonymity involved and therewith of the
construct needed to grasp the Other and his behavior.⁴⁴

Finally, “predecessors” and “successors” are individuals who do not
share even a community of time and so, by definition, cannot interact;
and, as such, they form something of a single class over against both
consociates and contemporaries, who can and do. But from the point of
view of any particular actor they do not have quite the same
significance. Predecessors, having already lived, can be known or, more
accurately, known about, and their accomplished acts can have an
influence upon the lives of those for whom they are predecessors (that
is, their successors), though the reverse is, in the nature of the case,
not possible. Successors, on the other hand, cannot be known, or even
known about, for they are the unborn occupants of an unarrived future;
and though their lives can be influenced by the accomplished acts of
those whose successors they are (that is, their predecessors), the
reverse is again not possible.⁵⁵

For empirical purposes, however, it is more useful to formulate these
distinctions less strictly also, and to emphasize that, like those
setting off consociates from contemporaries, they are relative and far
from clear-cut in everyday experience. With some exceptions, our older
consociates and contemporaries do not drop suddenly into the past, but
fade more or less gradually into being our predecessors as they age and
die, during which period of apprentice ancestorhood we may have some
effect upon them, as children so often shape the closing phases of their
parents’ lives. And our younger consociates and contemporaries grow
gradually into becoming our successors, so that those of us who live
long enough often have the dubious privilege of knowing who is to
replace us and even occasionally having some glancing influence upon the
direction of his growth. “Consociates,” “contemporaries,”
“predecessors,” and “successors” are best seen not as pigeonholes into
which individuals distribute one another for classificatory purposes,
but as indicating certain general and not altogether distinct,
matter-of-fact relationships which individuals conceive to obtain
between themselves and others.

But again, these relationships are not perceived purely as such; they
are grasped only through the agency of cultural formulations of them.
And, being culturally formulated, their precise character differs from
society to society as the inventory of available culture patterns
differs; from situation to situation within a single society as
different patterns among the plurality of those which are available are
deemed appropriate for application; and from actor to actor within
similar situations as idiosyncratic habits, preferences, and
interpretations come into play. There are, at least beyond infancy, no
neat social experiences of any importance in human life. Everything is
tinged with imposed significance, and fellowmen, like social groups,
moral obligations, political institutions, or ecological conditions are
apprehended only through a screen of significant symbols which are the
vehicles of their objectification, a screen that is therefore very far
from being neutral with respect to their “real” nature. Consociates,
contemporaries, predecessors, and successors are as much made as born.⁶⁶

Balinese Orders of Person-Definition

In Bali,⁷⁷ there are six sorts of labels which one person can apply to
another in order to identify him as a unique individual and which I want
to consider against this general conceptual background: (1) personal
names; (2) birth order names; (3) kinship terms; (4) teknonyms; (5)
status titles (usually called “caste names” in the literature on Bali);
and (6) public titles, by which I mean quasi-occupational titles borne
by chiefs, rulers, priests, and gods. These various labels are not, in
most cases, employed simultaneously, but alternatively, depending upon
the situation and sometimes the individual. They are not, also, all the
sorts of such labels ever used; but they are the only ones which are
generally recognized and regularly applied. And as each sort consists
not of a mere collection of useful tags but of a distinct and bounded
terminological system, I shall refer to them as “symbolic orders of
person-definition” and consider them first serially, only later as a
more or less coherent cluster.

PERSONAL NAMES

The symbolic order defined by personal names is the simplest to describe
because it is in formal terms the least complex and in social ones the
least important. All Balinese have personal names, but they rarely use
them, either to refer to themselves or others or in addressing anyone.
(With respect to one’s forebears, including one’s parents, it is in fact
sacrilegious to use them.) Children are more often referred to and on
occasion even addressed by their personal names. Such names are
therefore sometimes called “child” or “little” names, though once they
are ritually bestowed 105 days after birth, they are maintained
unchanged through the whole course of a man’s life. In general, personal
names are seldom heard and play very little public role.

Yet, despite this social marginality, the personal-naming system has
some characteristics which, in a rather left-handed way, are extremely
significant for an understanding of Balinese ideas of personhood. First,
personal names are, at least among the commoners (some 90 percent of the
population), arbitrarily coined nonsense syllables. They are not drawn
from any established pool of names which might lend to them any
secondary significance as being “common” or “unusual,” as reflecting
someone’s being named “after” someone—an ancestor, a friend of the
parents, a famous personage—or as being propitious, suitable,
characteristic of a group or region, indicating a kinship relation, and
so forth.⁸⁸ Second, the duplication of personal names within a single
community—that is, a politically unified, nucleated settlement—is
studiously avoided. Such a settlement (called a bandjar, or “hamlet”) is
the primary face-to-face group outside the purely domestic realm of the
family, and in some respects is even more intimate. Usually highly
endogamous and always highly corporate, the hamlet is the Balinese world
of consociates par excellence; and, within it, every person possesses,
however unstressed on the social level, at least the rudiments of a
completely unique cultural identity. Third, personal names are
monomials, and so do not indicate familial connections, or in fact
membership in any sort of group whatsoever. And, finally, there are (a
few rare, and in any case only partial, exceptions aside) no nicknames,
no epithets of the “Richard-the-Lion-Hearted” or “Ivan-the-Terrible”
sort among the nobility, not even any diminutives for children or pet
names for lovers, spouses, and so on.

Thus, whatever role the symbolic order of person-definition marked out
by the personal-naming system plays in setting Balinese off from one
another or in ordering Balinese social relations is essentially residual
in nature. One’s name is what remains to one when all the other socially
much more salient cultural labels attached to one’s person are removed.
As the virtually religious avoidance of its direct use indicates, a
personal name is an intensely private matter. Indeed, toward the end of
a man’s life, when he is but a step away from being the deity he will
become after his death and cremation, only he (or he and a few equally
aged friends) may any longer know what in fact it is; when he disappears
it disappears with him. In the well-lit world of everyday life, the
purely personal part of an individual’s cultural definition, that which
in the context of the immediate consociate community is most fully and
completely his, and his alone, is highly muted. And with it are muted
the more idiosyncratic, merely biographical, and, consequently,
transient aspects of his existence as a human being (what, in our more
egoistic framework, we call his “personality”) in favor of some rather
more typical, highly conventionalized, and, consequently, enduring ones.

BIRTH ORDER NAMES

The most elementary of such more standardized labels are those
automatically bestowed upon a child, even a stillborn one, at the
instant of its birth, according to whether it is the first, second,
third, fourth, etc., member of a sibling set. There is some local and
status-group variation in usage here, but the most common system is to
use Wayan for the first child, Njoman for the second, Made (or Nengah)
for the third, and Ktut for the fourth, beginning the cycle over again
with Wayan for the fifth, Njoman for the sixth, and so on.

These birth order names are the most frequently used terms of both
address and reference within the hamlet for children and for young men
and women who have not yet produced offspring. Vocatively, they are
almost always used simply, that is, without the addition of the personal
name: “Wayan, give me the hoe,” and so forth. Referentially, they may be
supplemented by the personal name, especially when no other way is
convenient to get across which of the dozens of Wayans or Njomans in the
hamlet is meant: “No, not Wayan Rugrug, Wayan Kepig,” and so on. Parents
address their own children and childless siblings address one another
almost exclusively by these names, rather than by either personal names
or kin terms. For persons who have had children, however, they are never
used either inside the family or out, teknonyms being employed, as we
shall see, instead, so that, in cultural terms, Balinese who grow to
maturity without producing children (a small minority) remain themselves
children—that is, are symbolically pictured as such—a fact commonly of
great shame to them and embarrassment to their consociates, who often
attempt to avoid having to use vocatives to them altogether.⁹⁹

The birth order system of person-definition represents, therefore, a
kind of plus ça change approach to the denomination of individuals. It
distinguishes them according to four completely contentless
appellations, which neither define genuine classes (for there is no
conceptual or social reality whatsoever to the class of all Wayans or
all Ktuts in a community), nor express any concrete characteristics of
the individuals to whom they are applied (for there is no notion that
Wayans have any special psychological or spiritual traits in common
against Njomans or Ktuts). These names, which have no literal meaning in
themselves (they are not numerals or derivatives of numerals) do not, in
fact, even indicate sibling position or rank in any realistic or
reliable way.¹⁰¹⁰ A Wayan may be a fifth (or ninth!) child as well as a
first; and, given a traditional peasant demographic structure—great
fertility plus a high rate of stillbirths and deaths in infancy and
childhood—a Made or a Ktut may actually be the oldest of a long string
of siblings and a Wayan the youngest. What they do suggest is that, for
all procreating couples, births form a circular succession of Wayans,
Njomans, Mades, Ktuts, and once again Wayans, an endless four-stage
replication of an imperishable form. Physically men come and go as the
ephemerae they are, but socially the dramatis personal’ remain eternally
the same as new Wayans and Ktuts emerge from the timeless world of the
gods (for infants, too, are but a step away from divinity) to replace
those who dissolve once more into it.

KINSHIP TERMS

Formally, Balinese kinship terminology is quite simple in type, being of
the variety known technically as “Hawaiian” or “Generational.” In this
sort of system, an individual classifies his relatives primarily
according to the generation they occupy with respect to his own. That is
to say, siblings, half-siblings, and cousins (and their spouses’
siblings, and so forth) are grouped together under the same term; all
uncles and aunts on either side are terminologically classed with mother
and father; all children of brothers, sisters, cousins, and so on (that
is, nephews of one sort or another) are identified with own children;
and so on, downward through the grandchild, great-grandchild, etc.,
generations, and upward through the grandparent, great-grandparent,
etc., ones. For any given actor, the general picture is a layer-cake
arrangement of relatives, each layer consisting of a different
generation of kin—that of actor’s parents or his children, of his
grandparents or his grandchildren, and so on, with his own layer, the
one from which the calculations are made, located exactly halfway up the
cake.¹¹¹¹

Given the existence of this sort of system, the most significant (and
rather unusual) fact about the way it operates in Bali is that the terms
it contains are almost never used vocatively, but only referentially,
and then not very frequently. With rare exceptions, one does not
actually call one’s father (or uncle) “father,” one’s child (or
nephew/niece) “child,” one’s brother (or cousin) “brother,” and so on.
For relatives genealogically junior to oneself vocative forms do not
even exist; for relatives senior they exist but, as with personal names,
it is felt to demonstrate a lack of respect for one’s elders to use
them. In fact, even the referential forms are used only when
specifically needed to convey some kinship information as such, almost
never as general means of identifying people.

Kinship terms appear in public discourse only in response to some
question, or in describing some event which has taken place or is
expected to take place, with respect to which the existence of the kin
tie is felt to be a relevant piece of information. (“Are you going to
Father-of-Regreg’s tooth-filing?” “Yes, he is my ‘brother.’”) Thus, too,
modes of address and reference within the family are no more (or not
much more) intimate or expressive of kin ties in quality than those
within the hamlet generally. As soon as a child is old enough to be
capable of doing so (say, six years, though this naturally varies) he
calls his mother and father by the same term—a teknonym, status group
title, or public title—that everyone else who is acquainted with them
uses toward them, and is called in turn Wayan, Ktut, or whatever, by
them. And, with even more certainty, he will refer to them, whether in
their hearing or outside of it, by this popular, extradomestic term as
well.

In short, the Balinese system of kinship terminology defines individuals
in a primarily taxonomic, not a face-to-face idiom, as occupants of
regions in a social field, not partners in social interaction. It
functions almost entirely as a cultural map upon which certain persons
can be located and certain others, not features of the landscape mapped,
cannot. Of course, some notions of appropriate interpersonal behavior
follow once such determinations are made, once a person’s place in the
structure is ascertained. But the critical point is that, in concrete
practice, kin terminology is employed virtually exclusively in service
of ascertainment, not behavior, with respect to whose patterning other
symbolic appliances are dominant.¹²¹² The social norms associated with
kinship, though real enough, are habitually overridden, even within
kinship-type groups themselves (families, households, lineages) by
culturally better armed norms associated with religion, politics, and,
most fundamentally of all, social stratification.

Yet in spite of the rather secondary role it plays in shaping the
moment-to-moment flow of social intercourse, the system of kinship
terminology, like the personal-naming system, contributes importantly,
if indirectly, to the Balinese notion of personhood. For, as a system of
significant symbols, it too embodies a conceptual structure under whose
agency individuals, one’s self as well as others, are apprehended; a
conceptual structure which is, moreover, in striking congruence with
those embodied in the other, differently constructed and variantly
oriented, orders of person-definition. Here, also, the leading motif is
the immobilization of time through the iteration of form.

This iteration is accomplished by a feature of Balinese kin terminology
I have yet to mention: in the third generation above and below the
actor’s own, terms become completely reciprocal. That is to say, the
term for “great-grandparent” and “great-grandchild” is the same: kumpi.
The two generations, and the individuals who comprise them, are
culturally identified. Symbolically, a man is equated upwardly with the
most distant ascendant, downwardly with the most distant descendant, he
is ever likely to interact with as a living person.

Actually, this sort of reciprocal terminology proceeds on through the
fourth generation, and even beyond. But as it is only extremely rarely
that the lives of a man and his great-great-grandparent (or
great-great-grandchild) overlap, this continuation is of only
theoretical interest, and most people don’t even know the terms
involved. It is the four-generation span (i.e., the actor’s own, plus
three ascending or descending) which is considered the attainable ideal,
the image, like our three-score-and-ten, of a fully completed life, and
around which the kumpi-kumpi terminology puts, as it were, an emphatic
cultural parenthesis.

This parenthesis is accentuated further by the rituals surrounding
death. At a person’s funeral, all his relatives who are generationally
junior to him must make homage to his lingering spirit in the Hindu
palms-to-forehead fashion, both before his bier and, later, at the
graveside. But this virtually absolute obligation, the sacramental heart
of the funeral ceremony, stops short with the third descending
generation, that of his “grandchildren.” His “great-grandchildren” are
his kumpi, as he is theirs, and so, the Balinese say, they are not
really junior to him at all but rather “the same age.” As such, they are
not only not required to show homage to his spirit, but they are
expressly forbidden to do so. A man prays only to the gods and, what is
the same thing, his seniors, not to his equals or juniors.¹³¹³

Balinese kinship terminology thus not only divides human beings into
generational layers with respect to a given actor, it bends these layers
into a continuous surface which joins the “lowest” with the “highest” so
that, rather than a layer-cake image, a cylinder marked off into six
parallel bands called “own,” “parent,” “grandparent,” “kumpi,”
“grandchild,” and “child” is perhaps more exact.¹⁴¹⁴ What at first
glance seems a very diachronic formulation, stressing the ceaseless
progression of generations is, in fact, an assertion of the essential
unreality—or anyway the unimportance—of such a progression. The sense of
sequence, of sets of collaterals following one another through time, is
an illusion generated by looking at the terminological system as though
it were used to formulate the changing quality of face-to-face
interactions between a man and his kinsmen as he ages and dies—as indeed
many, if not most such systems are used. When one looks at it, as the
Balinese primarily do, as a common-sense taxonomy of the possible types
of familial relationships human beings may have, a classification of
kinsmen into natural groups, it is clear that what the bands on the
cylinder are used to represent is the genealogical order of seniority
among living people and nothing more. They depict the spiritual (and
what is the same thing, structural) relations among coexisting
generations, not the location of successive generations in an
unrepeating historical process.

TEKNONYMS

If personal names are treated as though they were military secrets,
birth order names applied mainly to children and young adolescents, and
kinship terms invoked at best sporadically, and then only for purposes
of secondary specification, how, then, do most Balinese address and
refer to one another? For the great mass of the peasantry, the answer
is: by teknonyms.¹⁵¹⁵

As soon as a couple’s first child is named, people begin to address and
refer to them as “Father-of” and “Mother-of” Regreg, Pula, or whatever
the child’s name happens to be. They will continue to be so called (and
to call themselves) until their first grandchild is born, at which time
they will begin to be addressed and referred to as “Grandfather-of” and
“Grandmother-of” Suda, Lilir, or whomever; and a similar transition
occurs if they live to see their first great-grandchild.¹⁶¹⁶ Thus, over
the “natural” four-generation kumpi-to-kumpi life span, the term by
which an individual is known will change three times, as first he, then
at least one of his children, and finally at least one of his
grandchildren produce offspring.

Of course, many if not most people neither live so long nor prove so
fortunate in the fertility of their descendants. Also, a wide variety of
other factors enter in to complicate this simplified picture. But,
subtleties aside, the point is that we have here a culturally
exceptionally well developed and socially exceptionally influential
system of teknonymy. What impact does it have upon the individual
Balinese’s perceptions of himself and his acquaintances?

Its first effect is to identify the husband and wife pair, rather as the
bride’s taking on of her husband’s surname does in our society; except
that here it is not the act of marriage which brings about the
identification but of procreation. Symbolically, the link between
husband and wife is expressed in terms of their common relation to their
children, grandchildren, or great-grandchildren, not in terms of the
wife’s incorporation into her husband’s “family” (which, as marriage is
highly endogamous, she usually belongs to anyway).

This husband-wife—or, more accurately, father-mother—pair has very great
economic, political, and spiritual importance. It is, in fact, the
fundamental social building block. Single men cannot participate in the
hamlet council, where seats are awarded by married couple; and, with
rare exceptions, only men with children carry any weight there. (In
fact, in some hamlets men are not even awarded seats until they have a
child.) The same is true for descent groups, voluntary organizations,
irrigation societies, temple congregations, and so on. In virtually all
local activities, from the religious to the agricultural, the parental
couple participates as a unit, the male performing certain tasks, the
female certain complementary ones. By linking a man and a wife through
an incorporation of the name of one of their direct descendants into
their own, teknonymy underscores both the importance of the marital pair
in local society and the enormous value which is placed upon
procreation.¹⁷¹⁷

This value also appears, in a more explicit way, in the second cultural
consequence of the pervasive use of teknonyms: the classification of
individuals into what, for want of a better term, may be called
procreational strata. From the point of view of any actor, his
hamletmates are divided into childless people, called Wayan, Made, and
so on; people with children, called “Father (Mother)-of”; people with
grandchildren, called “Grandfather (Grandmother)-of”; and people with
great-grandchildren, called “Great-grandparent-of.” And to this ranking
is attached a general image of the nature of social hierarchy: childless
people are dependent minors; fathers-of are active citizens directing
community life; grandfathers-of are respected elders giving sage advice
from behind the scenes; and great-grandfathers-of are senior dependents,
already half-returned to the world of the gods. In any given case,
various mechanisms have to be employed to adjust this rather
too-schematic formula to practical realities in such a way as to allow
it to mark out a workable social ladder. But, with these adjustments, it
does, indeed, mark one out, and as a result a man’s “procreative status”
is a major element in his social identity, both in his own eyes and
those of everyone else. In Bali, the stages of human life are not
conceived in terms of the processes of biological aging, to which little
cultural attention is given, but of those of social regenesis.

Thus, it is not sheer reproductive power as such, how many children one
can oneself produce, that is critical. A couple with ten children is no
more honored than a couple with five; and a couple with but a single
child who has in turn but a single child outranks them both. What counts
is reproductive continuity, the preservation of the community’s ability
to perpetuate itself just as it is, a fact which the third result of
teknonymy, the designation of procreative chains, brings out most
clearly.

The way in which Balinese teknonymy outlines such chains can be seen
from the model diagram (Figure 1). For simplicity, I have shown only the
male teknonyms and have used English names for the referent generation.
I have also arranged the model so as to stress the fact that teknonymous
usage reflects the absolute age not the genealogical order (or the sex)
of the eponymous descendants.

As Figure 1 indicates, teknonymy outlines not only procreative statuses
but specific sequences of such statuses, two, three, or four (very, very
occasionally, five) generations deep. Which particular sequences are
marked out is largely accidental: had Mary been born before Joe, or Don
before Mary, the whole alignment would have been altered. But though the
particular individuals who are taken as referents, and hence the
particular sequences of filiation which receive symbolic recognition, is
an arbitrary and not very consequential matter, the fact that such
sequences are marked out stresses an important fact about personal
identity among the Balinese: an individual is not perceived in the
context of who his ancestors were (that, given the cultural veil which
slips over the dead, is not even known), but rather in the context of
whom he is ancestral to. One is not defined, as in so many societies of
the world, in terms of who produced one, some more or less distant, more
or less grand founder of one’s line, but in terms of whom one has
produced, a specific, in most cases still living, half-formed individual
who is one’s child, grandchild, or great-grandchild, and to whom one
traces one’s connection through a particular set of procreative
links.¹⁸¹⁸ What links “Great-grandfather-of-Joe,” “Grandfather-of-Joe,”
and “Father-of-Joe” is the fact that, in a sense, they have cooperated
to produce Joe—that is, to sustain the social metabolism of the Balinese
people in general and their hamlet in particular. Again, what looks like
a celebration of a temporal process is in fact a celebration of the
maintenance of what, borrowing a term from physics, Gregory Bateson has
aptly called a “steady state.”¹⁹¹⁹ In this sort of teknonymous regime,
the entire population is classified in terms of its relation to and
representation in that subclass of the population in whose hands social
regenesis now most instantly lies—the oncoming cohort of prospective
parents. Under its aspect even that most time-saturated of human
conditions, great-grandparenthood, appears as but an ingredient in an
unperishing present.

[Balinese Teknonymy]

FIGURE 1

Balinese Teknonymy

NOTE: Mary is older than Don; Joe is older than Mary, Jane, and Don. The
relative ages of all other people, save of course as they are ascendants
and descendants, are irrelevant so far as teknonymy is concerned.

STATUS TITLES

In theory, everyone (or nearly everyone) in Bali bears one or another
title—Ida Bagus, Gusti, Pasek, Dauh, and so forth—which places him on a
particular rung in an all-Bali status ladder; each title represents a
specific degree of cultural superiority or inferiority with respect to
each and every other one, so that the whole population is sorted out
into a set of uniformly graded castes. In fact, as those who have tried
to analyze the system in such terms have discovered, the situation is
much more complex.

It is not simply that a few low-ranking villagers claim that they (or
their parents) have somehow “forgotten” what their titles are; nor that
there are marked inconsistencies in the ranking of titles from place to
place, at times even from informant to informant; nor that, in spite of
their hereditary basis, there are nevertheless ways to change titles.
These are but (not uninteresting) details concerning the day-to-day
working of the system. What is critical is that status titles are not
attached to groups at all, but only to individuals.²⁰²⁰

Status in Bali, or at least that sort determined by titles, is a
personal characteristic; it is independent of any social structural
factors whatsoever. It has, of course, important practical consequences,
and those consequences are shaped by and expressed through a wide
variety of social arrangements, from kinship groups to governmental
institutions. But to be a Dewa, a Pulosari, a Pring, or a Maspadan is at
base only to have inherited the right to bear that title and to demand
the public tokens of deference associated with it. It is not to play any
particular role, to belong to any particular group, or to occupy any
particular economic, political, or sacerdotal position.

The status title system is a pure prestige system. From a man’s title
you know, given your own title, exactly what demeanor you ought to
display toward him and he toward you in practically every context of
public life, irrespective of whatever other social ties obtain between
you and whatever you may happen to think of him as a man. Balinese
politesse is very highly developed and it rigorously controls the outer
surface of social behavior over virtually the entire range of daily
life. Speech style, posture, dress, eating, marriage, even
house-construction, place of burial, and mode of cremation are patterned
in terms of a precise code of manners which grows less out of a passion
for social grace as such as out of some rather far-reaching metaphysical
considerations.

The sort of human inequality embodied in the status title system and the
system of etiquette which expresses it is neither moral, nor economic,
nor political—it is religious. It is the reflection in everyday
interaction of the divine order upon which such interaction, from this
point of view a form of ritual, is supposed to be modeled. A man’s title
does not signal his wealth, his power, or even his moral reputation, it
signals his spiritual composition; and the incongruity between this and
his secular position may be enormous. Some of the greatest movers and
shakers in Bali are the most rudely approached, some of the most
delicately handled the least respected. It would be difficult to
conceive of anything further from the Balinese spirit than Machiavelli’s
comment that titles do not reflect honor upon men, but rather men upon
their titles.

In theory, Balinese theory, all titles come from the gods. Each has been
passed along, not always without alteration, from father to child, like
some sacred heirloom, the difference in prestige value of the different
titles being an outcome of the varying degree to which the men who have
had care of them have observed the spiritual stipulations embodied in
them. To bear a title is to agree, implicitly at least, to meet divine
standards of action, or at least approach them, and not all men have
been able to do this to the same extent. The result is the existing
discrepancy in the rank of titles and of those who bear them. Cultural
status, as opposed to social position, is here once again a reflection
of distance from divinity.

Associated with virtually every title there are one or a series of
legendary events, very concrete in nature, involving some spiritually
significant misstep by one or another holder of the title. These
offenses—one can hardly call them sins—-are regarded as specifying the
degree to which the title has declined in value, the distance which it
has fallen from a fully transcendent status, and thus as fixing, in a
general way at least, its position in the overall scale of prestige.
Particular (if mythic) geographical migrations, cross-title marriages,
military failures, breaches of mourning etiquette, ritual lapses, and
the like are regarded as having debased the title to a greater or lesser
extent: greater for the lower titles, lesser for the higher.

Yet, despite appearances, this uneven deterioration is, in its essence,
neither a moral nor an historical phenomenon. It is not moral because
the incidents conceived to have occasioned it are not, for the most
part, those against which negative ethical judgments would, in Bali any
more than elsewhere, ordinarily be brought, while genuine moral faults
(cruelty, treachery, dishonesty, profligacy) damage only reputations,
which pass from the scene with their owners, not titles which remain. It
is not historical because these incidents, disjunct occurrences in a
once-upon-a-time, are not invoked as the causes of present realities but
as statements of their nature. The important fact about title-debasing
events is not that they happened in the past, or even that they happened
at all, but that they are debasing. They are formulations not of the
processes which have brought the existing state of affairs into being,
nor yet of moral judgments upon it (in neither of which intellectual
exercises the Balinese show much interest): they are images of the
underlying relationship between the form of human society and the divine
pattern of which it is, in the nature of things, an imperfect
expression—more imperfect at some points than at others.

But if, after all that has been said about the autonomy of the title
system, such a relationship between cosmic patterns and social forms is
conceived to exist, exactly how is it understood? How is the title
system, based solely on religious conceptions, on theories of inherent
differences in spiritual worth among individual men, connected up with
what, looking at the society from the outside, we would call the
“realities” of power, influence, wealth, reputation, and so on, implicit
in the social division of labor? How, in short, is the actual order of
social command fitted into a system of prestige ranking wholly
independent of it so as to account for and, indeed, sustain the loose
and general correlation between them which in fact obtains? The answer
is: through performing, quite ingeniously, a kind of hat trick, a
certain sleight of hand, with a famous cultural institution imported
from India and adapted to local tastes—the Varna System. By means of the
Varna System the Balinese inform a very disorderly collection of status
pigeonholes with a simple shape which is represented as growing
naturally out of it but which in fact is arbitrarily imposed upon it.

As in India, the Varna System consists of four gross
categories—Brahmana, Satria, Wesia, and Sudra—ranked in descending order
of prestige, and with the first three (called in Bali, Triwangsa—“the
three peoples”) defining a spiritual patriciate over against the
plebeian fourth. But in Bali the Varna System is not in itself a
cultural device for making status discriminations but for correlating
those already made by the title system. It summarizes the literally
countless fine comparisons implicit in that system in a neat (from some
points of view all-too-neat) separation of sheep from goats, and
first-quality sheep from second, second from third.²¹²¹ Men do not
perceive one another as Satrias or Sudras but as, say, Dewas or Kebun
Tubuhs, merely using the Satria-Sudra distinction to express generally,
and for social organizational purposes, the order of contrast which is
involved by identifying Dewa as a Satria title and Kebun Tubuh as a
Sudra one. Varna categories are labels applied not to men, but to the
titles they bear—they formulate the structure of the prestige system;
titles, on the other hand, are labels applied to individual men—they
place persons within that structure. To the degree that the Varna
classification of titles is congruent with the actual distribution of
power, wealth, and esteem in the society—that is, with the system of
social stratification—the society is considered to be well ordered. The
right sort of men are in the right sort of places: spiritual worth and
social standing coincide.

This difference in function between title and Varna is clear from the
way in which the symbolic forms associated with them are actually used.
Among the Triwangsa gentry, where, some exceptions aside, teknonymy is
not employed, an individual’s title is used as his or her main term of
address and reference. One calls a man Ida Bagus, Njakan, or Gusi (not
Brahmana, Satria, or Wesia) and refers to him by the same terms,
sometimes adding a birth order name for more exact specification (Ida
Bagus Made, Njakan Njoman, and so forth). Among the Sudras, titles are
used only referentially, never in address, and then mainly with respect
to members of other hamlets than one’s own, where the person’s teknonym
may not be known, or, if known, considered to be too familiar in tone to
be used for someone not a hamletmate. Within the hamlet, the referential
use of Sudra titles occurs only when prestige status information is
considered relevant (“Father-of-Joe is a Kedisan, and thus ‘lower’ than
we Pande,” and so on), while address is, of course, in terms of
teknonyms. Across hamlet lines, where, except between close friends,
teknonyms fall aside, the most common term of address is Djero.
Literally, this means “inside” or “insider,” thus a member of the
Triwangsa, who are considered to be “inside,” as against the Sudras, who
are “outside” (Djaba); but in this context it has the effect of saying,
“In order to be polite, I am addressing you as though you were a
Triwangsa, which you are not (if you were, I would call you by your
proper title), and I expect the same pretense from you in return.” As
for Varna terms, they are used, by Triwangsa and Sudra alike, only in
conceptualizing the overall prestige hierarchy in general terms, a need
which usually appears in connection with transhamlet political,
sacerdotal, or stratificatory matters: “The kings of Klungkung are
Satrias, but those of Tabanan only Wesias,” or “There are lots of rich
Brahmanas in Sanur, which is why the Sudras there have so little to say
about hamlet affairs,” and so on.

The Varna System thus does two things. It connects up a series of what
appear to be ad hoc and arbitrary prestige distinctions, the titles,
with Hinduism, or the Balinese version of Hinduism, thus rooting them in
a general world view. And it interprets the implications of that world
view, and therefore the titles, for social organization: the prestige
gradients implicit in the title system ought to be reflected in the
actual distribution of wealth, power, and esteem in society, and, in
fact, be completely coincident with it. The degree to which this
coincidence actually obtains is, of course, moderate at best. But,
however many exceptions there may be to the rule—Sudras with enormous
power, Satrias working as tenant farmers, Brahmanas neither esteemed nor
estimable—it is the rule and not the exceptions that the Balinese regard
as truly illuminating the human condition. The Varna System orders the
title system in such a way as to make it possible to view social life
under the aspect of a general set of cosmological notions: notions in
which the diversity of human talent and the workings of historical
process are regarded as superficial phenomena when compared with the
location of persons in a system of standardized status categories, as
blind to individual character as they are immortal.

PUBLIC TITLES

This final symbolic order of person-definition is, on the surface, the
most reminiscent of one of the more prominent of our own ways of
identifying and characterizing individuals.²²²² We, too, often (all too
often, perhaps) see people through a screen of occupational
categories—as not just practicing this vocation or that, but as almost
physically infused with the quality of being a postman, teamster,
politician, or salesman. Social function serves as the symbolic vehicle
through which personal identity is perceived; men are what they do.

The resemblance is only apparent, however. Set amid a different cluster
of ideas about what selfhood consists in, placed against a different
religio-philosophical conception of what the world consists in, and
expressed in terms of a different set of cultural devices—public
titles—for portraying it, the Balinese view of the relation between
social role and personal identity gives a quite different slant to the
ideographic significance of what we call occupation but the Balinese
call linggih—“seat,” “place,” “berth.”

This notion of “seat” rests on the existence in Balinese thought and
practice of an extremely sharp distinction between the civic and
domestic sectors of society. The boundary between the public and private
domains of life is very clearly drawn both conceptually and
institutionally. At every level, from the hamlet to the royal palace,
matters of general concern are sharply distinguished and carefully
insulated from matters of individual or familial concern, rather than
being allowed to interpenetrate as they do in so many other societies.
The Balinese sense of the public as a corporate body, having interests
and purposes of its own, is very highly developed. To be charged, at any
level, with special responsibilities with respect to those interests and
purposes is to be set aside from the run of one’s fellowmen who are not
so charged, and it is this special status that public titles express.

At the same time, though the Balinese conceive the public sector of
society as bounded and autonomous, they do not look upon it as forming a
seamless whole, or even a whole at all. Rather they see it as consisting
of a number of separate, discontinuous, and at times even competitive
realms, each self-sufficient, self-contained, jealous of its rights, and
based on its own principles of organization. The most salient of such
realms include: the hamlet as a corporate political community; the local
temple as a corporate religious body, a congregation; the irrigation
society as a corporate agricultural body; and, above these, the
structures of regional—that is, suprahamlet—government and worship,
centering on the nobility and the high priesthood.

A description of these various public realms or sectors would involve an
extensive analysis of Balinese social structure inappropriate in the
present context.²³²³ The point to be made here is that, associated with
each of them, there are responsible officers—stewards is perhaps a
better term—who as a result bear particular titles: Klian, Perbekel,
Pekaseh, Pemangku, Anak Agung, Tjakorda, Dewa Agung, Pedanda, and so on
up to perhaps a half a hundred or more. And these men (a very small
proportion of the total population) are addressed and referred to by
these official titles—sometimes in combination with birth order names,
status titles, or, in the case of Sudras, teknonyms for purposes of
secondary specification.²⁴²⁴ The various “village chiefs” and “folk
priests” on the Sudra level, and, on the Triwangsa, the host of “kings,”
“princes,” “lords,” and “high priests” do not merely occupy a role. They
become, in the eyes of themselves and those around them, absorbed into
it. They are truly public men, men for whom other aspects of
personhood—individual character, birth order, kinship relations,
procreative status, and prestige rank take, symbolically at least, a
secondary position. We, focusing upon psychological traits as the heart
of personal identity, would say they have sacrificed their true selves
to their role; they, focusing on social position, say that their role is
of the essence of their true selves.

Access to these public-title-bearing roles is closely connected with the
system of status titles and its organization into Varna categories, a
connection effected by what may be called “the doctrine of spiritual
eligibility.” This doctrine asserts that political and religious “seats”
of translocal—regional or Bali-wide—significance are to be manned only
by Triwangsas, while those of local significance ought properly to be in
the hands of Sudras. At the upper levels the doctrine is strict: only
Satrias—that is, men bearing titles deemed of Satria rank—may be kings
or paramount princes, only Wesias or Satrias lords or lesser princes,
only Brahmanas high priests, and so on. At the lower levels, it is less
strict; but the sense that hamlet chiefs, irrigation society heads, and
folk priests should be Sudras, that Triwangsas should keep their place,
is quite strong. In either case, however, the overwhelming majority of
persons bearing status titles of the Varna category or categories
theoretically eligible for the stewardship roles to which the public
titles are attached do not have such roles and are not likely to get
them. On the Triwangsa level, access is largely hereditary,
primogenitural even, and a sharp distinction is made between that
handful of individuals who “own power” and the vast remainder of the
gentry who do not. On the Sudra level, access to public office is more
often elective, but the number of men who have the opportunity to serve
is still fairly limited. Prestige status decides what sort of public
role one can presume to occupy; whether or not one occupies such a role
is another question altogether.

Yet, because of the general correlation between prestige status and
public office the doctrine of spiritual eligibility brings about, the
order of political and ecclesiastical authority in the society is hooked
in with the general notion that social order reflects dimly, and ought
to reflect clearly, metaphysical order; and, beyond that, that personal
identity is to be defined not in terms of such superficial, because
merely human, matters as age, sex, talent, temperament, or
achievement—that is, biographically, but in terms of location in a
general spiritual hierarchy—that is, typologically. Like all the other
symbolic orders of person-definition, that stemming from public titles
consists of a formulation, with respect to different social contexts, of
an underlying assumption: it is not what a man is as a man (as we would
phrase it) that matters, but where he fits in a set of cultural
categories which not only do not change but, being transhuman, cannot.

And, here too, these categories ascend toward divinity (or with equal
accuracy, descend from it), their power to submerge character and
nullify time increasing as they go. Not only do the higher level public
titles borne by human beings blend gradually into those borne by the
gods, becoming at the apex identical with them, but at the level of the
gods there is literally nothing left of identity but the title itself.
All gods and goddesses are addressed and referred to either as Dewa (f.
Dewi) or, for the higher ranking ones, Betara (f. Betari). In a few
cases, these general appellations are followed by particularizing ones:
Betara Guru, Dewi Sri, and so forth. But even such specifically named
divinities are not conceived as possessing distinctive personalities:
they are merely thought to be administratively responsible, so to speak,
for regulating certain matters of cosmic significance: fertility, power,
knowledge, death, and so on. In most cases, Balinese do not know, and do
not want to know, which gods and goddesses are those worshipped in their
various temples (there is always a pair, one male, one female), but
merely call them “Dewa (Dewi) Pura Such-and-Such”—god (goddess) of
temple such-and-such. Unlike the ancient Greeks and Romans, the average
Balinese shows little interest in the detailed doings of particular
gods, nor in their motivations, their personalities, or their individual
histories. The same circumspection and propriety is maintained with
respect to such matters as is maintained with respect to similar matters
concerning elders and superiors generally.²⁵²⁵

The world of the gods is, in short, but another public realm,
transcending all the others and imbued with an ethos which those others
seek, so far as they are able, to embody in themselves. The concerns of
this realm lie on the cosmic level rather than the political, the
economic, or the ceremonial (that is, the human) and its stewards are
men without features, individuals with respect to whom the usual indices
of perishing humanity have no significance. The nearly faceless,
thoroughly conventionalized, never-changing icons by which nameless gods
known only by their public titles are, year after year, represented in
the thousands of temple festivals across the island comprise the purest
expression of the Balinese concept of personhood. Genuflecting to them
(or, more precisely, to the gods for the moment resident in them) the
Balinese are not just acknowledging divine power. They are also
confronting the image of what they consider themselves at bottom to be;
an image which the biological, psychological, and sociological
concomitants of being alive, the mere materialities of historical time,
tend only to obscure from sight.

A Cultural Triangle of Forces

There are many ways in which men are made aware, or rather make
themselves aware, of the passage of time—by marking the changing of the
seasons, the alterations of the moon, or the progress of plant life; by
the measured cycling of rites, or agricultural work, or household
activities; by the preparation and scheduling of projected acts and the
memory and assessment of accomplished ones; by the preservation of
genealogies, the recital of legends, or the framing of prophecies. But
surely among the most important is by the recognition in oneself and in
one’s fellowmen of the process of biological aging, the appearance,
maturation, decay, and disappearance of concrete individuals. How one
views this process affects, therefore, and affects profoundly, how one
experiences time. Between a people’s conception of what it is to be a
person and their conception of the structure of history there is an
unbreakable internal link.

Now, as I have been stressing, the most striking thing about the culture
patterns in which Balinese notions of personal identity are embodied is
the degree to which they depict virtually everyone—friends, relatives,
neighbors, and strangers; elders and youths; superiors and inferiors;
men and women; chiefs, kings, priests, and gods; even the dead and the
unborn—as stereotyped contemporaries, abstract and anonymous fellowmen.
Each of the symbolic orders of person-definition, from concealed names
to flaunted titles, acts to stress and strengthen the standardization,
idealization, and generalization implicit in the relation between
individuals whose main connection consists in the accident of their
being alive at the same time and to mute or gloss over those implicit in
the relation between consociates, men intimately involved in one
another’s biographies, or between predecessors and successors, men who
stand to one another as blind testator and unwitting heir. Of course,
people in Bali are directly, and sometimes deeply, involved in one
another’s lives; they do feel their world to have been shaped by the
actions of those who came before them and orient their actions toward
shaping the world of those who will come after them. But it is not these
aspects of their existence as persons—their immediacy and individuality,
or their special, never-to-be-repeated, impact upon the stream of
historical events—which are culturally played up, symbolically
emphasized: it is their social placement, their particular location
within a persisting, indeed an eternal, metaphysical order.²⁶²⁶ The
illuminating paradox of Balinese formulations of personhood is that they
are—in our terms anyway—depersonalizing.

In this way, the Balinese blunt, though of course they cannot efface,
three of the most important sources of a sense of temporality: the
apprehension of one’s comrades (and thus oneself with them) as
perpetually perishing; the awareness of the heaviness with which the
completed lives of the dead weigh upon the uncompleted lives of the
living; and the appreciation of the potential impact upon the unborn of
actions just now being undertaken.

Consociates, as they meet, confront and grasp one another in an
immediate present, a synoptic “now”; and in so doing they experience the
elusiveness and ephemerality of such a now as it slips by in the ongoing
stream of face-to-face interaction. “For each partner [in a consociate
relationship] the other’s body, his gestures, his gait and facial
expressions, are immediately observable, not merely as things or events
of the outer world but in their physiognomical significance, that is as
[expressions] of the other’s thoughts. . . . Each partner participates
in the on-rolling life of the other, can grasp in a vivid present the
other’s thoughts as they are built up step by step. They may thus share
one another’s anticipations of the future as plans, or hopes, or
anxieties. . . . [They] are mutually involved in one another’s
biography; they are growing older together. . . .”²⁷²⁷ As for
predecessors and successors, separated by a material gulf, they perceive
one another in terms of origins and outcomes, and in so doing experience
the inherent chronologicality of events, the linear progress of
standard, transpersonal time—the sort whose passage can be measured with
clocks and calendars.²⁸²⁸

In minimizing, culturally, all three of these experiences—that of the
evanescing present consociate intimacy evokes; that of the determining
past contemplation of predecessors evokes; and that of the moldable
future anticipation of successors evokes—in favor of the sense of pure
simultaneity generated by the anonymized encounter of sheer
contemporaries, the Balinese produce yet a second paradox. Linked to
their depersonalizing conception of personhood is a detemporalizing
(again from our point of view) conception of time.

TAXONOMIC CALENDARS AND PUNCTUAL TIME

Balinese calendrical notions—their cultural machinery for demarcating
temporal units—reflect this clearly; for they are largely used not to
measure the elapse of time, nor yet to accent the uniqueness and
irrecoverability of the passing moment, but to mark and classify the
qualitative modalities in terms of which time manifests itself in human
experience. The Balinese calendar (or, rather, calendars; as we shall
see there are two of them) cuts time up into bounded units not in order
to count and total them but to describe and characterize them, to
formulate their differential social, intellectual, and religious
significance.²⁹²⁹

The two calendars which the Balinese employ are a lunar-solar one and
one built around the interaction of independent cycles of day-names,
which I shall call “permutational.” The permutational calendar is by far
the most important. It consists of ten different cycles of day-names.
These cycles are of varying lengths. The longest contains ten day-names,
following one another in a fixed order, after which the first day-name
reappears and the cycle starts over. Similarly, there are nine, eight,
seven, six, five, four, three, two, and even—the ultimate of a
“contemporized” view of time—one day-name cycles. The names in each
cycle are also different, and the cycles run concurrently. That is to
say, any given day has, at least in theory, ten different names
simultaneously applied to it, one from each of the ten cycles. Of the
ten cycles only those containing five, six, and seven day-names are of
major cultural significance, however, although the three-name cycle is
used to define the market week and plays a role in fixing certain minor
rituals, such as the personal-naming ceremony referred to earlier.

Now, the interaction of these three main cycles—the five, the six, and
the seven—means that a given trinomially designated day (that is, one
with a particular combination of names from all three cycles) will
appear once in every two hundred and ten days, the simple product of
five, six, and seven. Similar interactions between the five- and
seven-name cycles produce binomially designated days which turn up every
thirty-five days, between the six- and seven-name cycles binomially
designated days which occur every forty-two days, and between the
five-and six-name cycles binomially designated days appearing at
thirty-day intervals. The conjunctions that each of these four
periodicities, super-cycles as it were, define (but not the
periodicities themselves) are considered not only to be socially
significant but to reflect, in one fashion or another, the very
structure of reality.

The outcome of all this wheels-within-wheels computation is a view of
time as consisting of ordered sets of thirty, thirty-five, forty-two, or
two hundred and ten quantum units (“days”), each of which units has a
particular qualitative significance of some sort indexed by its
trinomial or binomial name: rather like our notion of the unluckiness of
Friday-the-Thirteenth. To identify a day in the forty-two-day set—and
thus assess its practical and/or religious significance—one needs to
determine its place, that is, its name, in the six-name cycle (say,
Ariang) and in the seven- (say, Boda): the day is Boda-Ariang, and one
shapes one’s actions accordingly. To identify a day in the
thirty-five-day set, one needs its place and name in the five-name cycle
(for example, Klion) and in the seven-: for example, Boda-Klion—this is
rainan, the day on which one must set out small offerings at various
points to “feed” the gods. For the two hundred and ten-day set, unique
determination demands names from all three weeks: for example,
Boda-Ariang-Klion, which, it so happens, is the day on which the most
important Balinese holiday, Galungan, is celebrated.³⁰³⁰

Details aside, the nature of time-reckoning this sort of calendar
facilitates is clearly not durational but punctual. That is, it is not
used (and could only with much awkwardness and the addition of some
ancillary devices be used) to measure the rate at which time passes, the
amount which has passed since the occurrence of some event, or the
amount which remains within which to complete some project: it is
adapted to and used for distinguishing and classifying discrete,
self-subsistent particles of time—“days.” The cycles and supercycles are
endless, un-anchored, uncountable, and, as their internal order has no
significance, without climax. They do not accumulate, they do not build,
and they are not consumed. They don’t tell you what time it is; they
tell you what kind of time it is.³¹³¹

The uses of the permutational calendar extend to virtually all aspects
of Balinese life. In the first instance, it determines (with one
exception) all the holidays—that is, general community celebrations—of
which Goris lists some thirty-two in all, or on the average about one
day out of every seven.³²³² These do not appear, however, in any
discernible overall rhythm. If we begin, arbitrarily, with
Radité-Tungleh-Paing as “one,” holidays appear on days numbering: 1, 2,
3, 4, 14, 15, 24, 49, 51, 68, 69, 71, 72, 73, 74, 77, 78, 79, 81, 83,
84, 85, 109, 119, 125, 154, 183, 189, 193, 196, 205, 210.³³³³ The result
of this sort of spasmodic occurrence of festivals, large and small, is a
perception of time—that is, of days—as falling broadly into two very
general varieties, “full” and “empty”: days on which something of
importance goes on and others on which nothing, or at least nothing
much, goes on, the former often being called “times” or “junctures” and
the latter “holes.” All of the other applications of the calendar merely
reinforce and refine this general perception.

Of these other applications, the most important is the determination of
temple celebrations. No one knows how many temples there are on Bali,
though Swellengrebel has estimated that there are more than 20,000.³⁴³⁴
Each of these temples—family temples, descent-group temples,
agricultural temples, death temples, settlement temples, associational
temples, “caste” temples, state temples, and so on—has its own day of
celebration, called odalan, a term which though commonly, and
misleadingly, translated as “birthday” or, worse yet, “anniversary,”
literally means “coming out,” “emergence,” “appearance”—that is, not the
day on which the temple was built but the day on which it is (and since
it has been in existence always has been) “activated,” on which the gods
come down from the heavens to inhabit it. In between odalans it is
quiescent, uninhabited, empty; and, aside from a few offerings prepared
by its priest on certain days, nothing happens there.

For the great majority of the temples, the odalan is determined
according to the permutational calendar (for the remainder, odalans are
determined by the lunar-solar calendar, which as we shall see, comes to
about the same thing so far as modes of time-perception are concerned),
again in terms of the interaction of the five-, six-, and seven-name
cycles. What this means is that temple ceremonies—which range from the
incredibly elaborate to the almost invisibly simple—are of, to put it
mildly, frequent occurrence in Bali, though here too there are certain
days on which many such celebrations fall and others on which, for
essentially metaphysical reasons, none do.³⁵³⁵

Balinese life is thus not only irregularly punctuated by frequent
holidays, which everyone celebrates, but by even more frequent temple
celebrations which involve only those who are, usually by birth, members
of the temple. As most Balinese belong to a half-dozen temples or more,
this makes for a fairly busy, not to say frenetic, ritual life, though
again one which alternates, unrhythmically, between hyperactivity and
quiescence.

In addition to these more religious matters of holidays and temple
festivals, the permutational calendar invades and encompasses the more
secular ones of everyday life as well.³⁶³⁶ There are good and bad days
on which to build a house, launch a business enterprise, change
residence, go on a trip, harvest crops, sharpen cock spurs, hold a
puppet show, or (in the old days) start a war, or conclude a peace. The
day on which one was born, which again is not a birthday in our sense
(when you ask a Balinese when he was born his reply comes to the
equivalent of “Thursday, the ninth,” which is not of much help in
determining his age) but his odalan, is conceived to control or, more
accurately, to indicate much of his destiny.³⁷³⁷ Men born on this day
are liable to suicide, on that to become thieves, on this to be rich, on
that to be poor; on this to be well, or long-lived, or happy, on that to
be sickly, or short-lived, or unhappy. Temperament is similarly
assessed, and so is talent. The diagnosis and treatment of disease is
complexly integrated with calendrical determinations, which may involve
the odalans of both the patient and the curer, the day on which he fell
ill, as well as days metaphysically associated with the symptoms and
with the medicine. Before marriages are contracted, the odalans of the
individuals are compared to see if their conjunction is auspicious, and
if not there will be—at least if the parties, as is almost always the
case, are prudent—no marriage. There is a time to bury and a time to
cremate, a time to marry and a time to divorce, a time—to shift from the
Hebraic to the Balinese idiom—for the mountain top and a time for the
market, for social withdrawal and social participation. Meetings of
village council, irrigation societies, voluntary associations are all
fixed in terms of the permutational (or, more rarely, the lunar-solar)
calendar; and so are periods for sitting quietly at home and trying to
keep out of trouble.

The lunar-solar calendar, though constructed on a different basis,
actually embodies the same punctual conception of time as the
permutational. Its main distinction and, for certain purposes, advantage
is that it is more or less anchored; it does not drift with respect to
the seasons.

This calendar consists of twelve numbered months which run from new moon
to new moon.³⁸³⁸ These months are then divided into two sorts of (also
numbered) days: lunar (tithi) and solar (diwasa). There are always
thirty lunar days in a month, but, given the discrepancy between the
lunar and solar years, there are sometimes thirty solar days in a month
and sometimes twenty-nine. In the latter case, two lunar days are
considered to fall on one solar day—that is, one lunar day is skipped.
This occurs every sixty-three days; but, although this calculation is
astronomically quite accurate, the actual determination is not made on
the basis of astronomical observation and theory, for which the Balinese
do not have the necessary cultural equipment (to say nothing of the
interest); it is determined by the use of the permutational calendar.
The calculation was of course originally arrived at astronomically; but
it was arrived at by the Hindus from whom the Balinese, in the most
distant past, imported the calendar. For the Balinese, the double lunar
day—the day on which it is two days at once—is just one more special
kind of day thrown up by the workings of the cycles and supercycles of
the permutational calendar—a priori, not a posteriori, knowledge.

In any case, this correction still leaves a nine-eleven-day deviation
from the true solar year, and this is compensated for by the
interpolation of a leap-month every thirty months, an operation which
though again originally a result of Hindu astronomical observation and
calculation is here simply mechanical. Despite the fact that the
lunar-solar calendar looks astronomical, and thus seems to be based on
some perceptions of natural temporal processes, celestial clocks, this
is an illusion arising from attending to its origins rather than its
uses. Its uses are as divorced from observation of the heavens—or from
any other experience of passing time—as are those of the permutational
calendar by which it is so rigorously paced. As with the permutational
calendar, it is the system, automatic, particulate, fundamentally not
metrical but classificatory, which tells you what day (or what kind of
day) it is, not the appearance of the moon, which, as one looks casually
up at it, is experienced not as a determinant of the calendar but as a
reflex of it. What is “really real” is the name—or, in this case, the
(two-place) number—of the day, its place in the transempirical taxonomy
of days, not its epiphenomenal reflection in the sky.³⁹³⁹

In practice, the lunar-solar calendar is used in the same way for the
same sorts of things as the permutational. The fact that it is (loosely)
anchored makes it rather more handy in agricultural contexts, so that
planting, weeding, harvesting, and the like are usually regulated in
terms of it, and some temples having a symbolic connection with
agriculture or fertility celebrate their reception of the gods according
to it. This means that such receptions appear only about every 355 (in
leap years, about 385) rather than 210 days. But otherwise the pattern
is unchanged.

In addition, there is one major holiday, Njepi (“to make quiet”), which
is celebrated according to the lunar-solar calendar. Often called, by
Western scholars, “the Balinese New Year,” even though it falls at the
beginning (that is, the new moon) of not the first but the tenth month
and is concerned not with renewal or rededication but with an
accentuated fear of demons and an attempt to render one’s emotions
tranquil. Njepi is observed by an eerie day of silence: no one goes out
on the streets, no work is conducted, no light or fire is lit, while
conversation even within houseyards is muted. The lunar-solar system is
not much used for “fortune telling” purposes, though the new moon and
full moon days are considered to have certain qualitative
characteristics, sinister in the first case, auspicious in the second.
In general, the lunar-solar calendar is more a supplement to the
permutational than an alternative to it. It makes possible the
employment of a classificatory, full-and-empty, “detemporalized”
conception of time in contexts where the fact that natural conditions
vary periodically has to be at least minimally acknowledged.

CEREMONY, STAGE FRIGHT, AND ABSENCE OF CLIMAX

The anonymization of persons and the immobilization of time are thus but
two sides of the same cultural process: the symbolic de-emphasis, in the
everyday life of the Balinese, of the perception of fellowmen as
consociates, successors, or predecessors in favor of the perception of
them as contemporaries. As the various symbolic orders of
person-definition conceal the biological, psychological, and historical
foundation of that changing pattern of gifts and inclinations we call
personality behind a dense screen of ready-made identities, iconic
selves, so the calendar, or rather the application of the calendar,
blunts the sense of dissolving days and evaporating years that those
foundations and that pattern inevitably suggest by pulverizing the flow
of time into disconnected, dimensionless, motionless particles. A sheer
contemporary needs an absolute present in which to live; an absolute
present can be inhabited only by a contemporized man. Yet, there is a
third side to this same process which transforms it from a pair of
complementary prepossessions into a triangle of mutually reinforcing
cultural forces: the ceremonialization of social intercourse.

To maintain the (relative) anonymization of individuals with whom one is
in daily contact, to dampen the intimacy implicit in face-to-face
relationships—in a word, to render consociates contemporaries—it is
necessary to formalize relations with them to a fairly high degree, to
confront them in a sociological middle distance where they are close
enough to be identified but not so close as to be grasped: quasi
strangers, quasi friends. The ceremoniousness of so much of Balinese
daily life, the extent (and the intensity) to which interpersonal
relations are controlled by a developed system of conventions and
proprieties, is thus a logical correlate of a thoroughgoing attempt to
block the more creatural aspects of the human condition—individuality,
spontaneity, perishability, emotionality, vulnerability—from sight. This
attempt is, like its counterparts, only very partially successful, and
the ceremonialization of Balinese social interaction is no closer to
being complete than is the anonymization of persons or the
immobilization of time. But the degree to which its success is wished
for, the degree to which it is an obsessing ideal, accounts for the
degree to which the ceremonialization obtains, for the fact that in Bali
manners are not a mere matter of practical convenience or incidental
decoration but are of deep spiritual concern. Calculated politesse,
outward form pure and simple, has there a normative value that we, who
regard it as pretentious or comic when we don’t regard it as
hypocritical, can scarcely, now that Jane Austen is about as far from us
as Bali, any longer appreciate.

Such an appreciation is rendered even more difficult by the presence
within this industrious polishing of the surfaces of social life of a
peculiar note, a stylistic nuance, we would not, I think, expect to be
there. Being stylistic and being a nuance (though an altogether
pervasive one), it is very difficult to communicate to someone who has
not himself experienced it. “Playful theatricality” perhaps hits near
it, if it is understood that the playfulness is not lighthearted but
almost grave and the theatricality not spontaneous but almost forced.
Balinese social relations are at once a solemn game and a studied drama.

This is most clearly seen in their ritual and (what is the same thing)
artistic life, much of which is in fact but a portrait of and a mold for
their social life. Daily interaction is so ritualistic and religious
activity so civic that it is difficult to tell where the one leaves off
and the other begins; and both are but expressions of what is justly
Bali’s most famous cultural attribute: her artistic genius. The
elaborate temple pageants; the grandiloquent opcras, equilibristic
ballets, and stilted shadow plays; the circuitous speech and apologetic
gestures—all these are of a piece. Etiquette is a kind of dance, dance a
kind of ritual, and worship a form of etiquette. Art, religion, and
politesse all exalt the outward, the contrived, the well-wrought
appearance of things. They celebrate the forms; and it is the tireless
manipulation of these forms—what they call “playing”—that gives to
Balinese life its settled haze of ceremony.

The mannered cast of Balinese interpersonal relations, the fusion of
rite, craft, and courtesy, thus leads into a recognition of the most
fundamental and most distinctive quality of their particular brand of
sociality: its radical aestheticism. Social acts, all social acts, are
first and foremost designed to please—to please the gods, to please the
audience, to please the other, to please the self; but to please as
beauty pleases, not as virtue pleases. Like temple offerings or gamelan
concerts, acts of courtesy are works of art, and as such they
demonstrate, and are meant to demonstrate, not rectitude (or what we
would call rectitude) but sensibility.

Now, from all this—that daily life is markedly ceremonious; that this
ceremoniousness takes the form of an earnest, even sedulous, kind of
“playing” with public forms; that religion, art, and etiquette are then
but differently directed manifestations of an overall cultural
fascination with the worked-up semblance of things; and that morality
here is consequently aesthetic at base—it is possible to attain a more
exact understanding of two of the most marked (and most remarked)
features of the affective tone of Balinese life: the importance of the
emotion of what has been (wrongly) called “shame” in interpersonal
relations, and the failure of collective activity—religious, artistic,
political, economic—to build toward the definable consummations, what
has been (acutely) called its “absence of climax.”⁴⁰⁴⁰ One of these
themes, the first, leads directly back toward conceptions of personhood,
the other, no less directly, toward conceptions of time, so securing the
vertices of our metaphorical triangle connecting the Balinese behavioral
style with the ideational environment in which it moves.

The concept of “shame,” together with its moral and emotional cousin
“guilt,” has been much discussed in the literature, entire cultures
sometimes being designated as “shame cultures” because of the presumed
prominence in them of an intense concern with “honor,” “reputation,” and
the like, at the expense of a concern, conceived to be dominant in
“guilt cultures,” with “sin,” “inner worth,” and so forth.⁴¹⁴¹ The
usefulness of such an overall categorization and the complex problems of
comparative psychological dynamics involved aside, it has proven
difficult in such studies to divest the term “shame” of what is after
all its most common meaning in English—“consciousness of guilt”—and so
to disconnect it very completely from guilt as such—“the fact or feeling
of having done something reprehensible.” Usually, the contrast has been
turned upon the fact that “shame” tends to be applied (although,
actually, far from exclusively) to situations in which wrongdoing is
publicly exposed, and “guilt” (though equally far from exclusively) to
situations in which it is not. Shame is the feeling of disgrace and
humiliation which follows upon a transgression found out; guilt is the
feeling of secret badness attendant upon one not, or not yet, found out.
Thus, though shame and guilt are not precisely the same thing in our
ethical and psychological vocabulary, they are of the same family; the
one is a surfacing of the other, the other a concealment of the one.

But Balinese “shame,” or what has been translated as such (lek), has
nothing to do with transgressions, exposed or unexposed, acknowledged or
hidden, merely imagined or actually performed. This is not to say that
Balinese feel neither guilt nor shame, are without either conscience or
pride, anymore than they are unaware that time passes or that men are
unique individuals. It is to say that neither guilt nor shame is of
cardinal importance as affective regulators of their interpersonal
conduct, and that lek, which is far and away the most important of such
regulators, culturally the most intensely emphasized, ought therefore
not to be translated as “shame,” but rather, to follow out our
theatrical image, as “stage fright.” It is neither the sense that one
has transgressed nor the sense of humiliation that follows upon some
uncovered transgression, both rather lightly felt and quickly effaced in
Bali, that is the controlling emotion in Balinese face-to-face
encounters. It is, on the contrary, a diffuse, usually mild, though in
certain situations virtually paralyzing, nervousness before the prospect
(and the fact) of social interaction, a chronic, mostly low-grade worry
that one will not be able to bring it off with the required finesse.⁴²⁴²

Whatever its deeper causes, stage fright consists in a fear that, for
want of skill or self-control, or perhaps by mere accident, an aesthetic
illusion will not be maintained, that the actor will show through his
part and the part thus dissolve into the actor. Aesthetic distance
collapses, the audience (and the actor) loses sight of Hamlet and gains
it, uncomfortably for all concerned, of bumbling John Smith painfully
miscast as the Prince of Denmark. In Bali, the case is the same, if the
drama more humble. What is feared—mildly in most cases, intensely in a
few—is that the public performance that is etiquette will be botched,
that the social distance etiquette maintains will consequently collapse,
and that the personality of the individual will then break through to
dissolve his standardized public identity. When this occurs, as it
sometimes does, our triangle falls apart: ceremony evaporates, the
immediacy of the moment is felt with an excruciating intensity, and men
become unwilling consociates locked in mutual embarrassment, as though
they had inadvertently intruded upon one another’s privacy. Lek is at
once the awareness of the ever-present possibility of such an
interpersonal disaster and, like stage fright, a motivating force toward
avoiding it. It is the fear of faux pas—rendered only that much more
probable by an elaborated politesse—that keeps social intercourse on its
deliberately narrowed rails. It is lek, more than anything else, that
protects Balinese concepts of personhood from the individualizing force
of face-to-face encounters.

“Absence of climax,” the other outstanding quality of Balinese social
behavior, is so peculiarly distinctive and so distinctively odd that
only extended description of concrete events could properly evoke it. It
amounts to the fact that social activities do not build, or are not
permitted to build, toward definitive consummations. Quarrels appear and
disappear, on occasion they even persist, but they hardly ever come to a
head. Issues are not sharpened for decision, they are blunted and
softened in the hope that the mere evolution of circumstances will
resolve them, or better yet, that they will simply evaporate. Daily life
consists of self-contained, monadic encounters in which something either
happens or does not—an intention is realized or it is not, a task
accomplished or not. When the thing doesn’t happen—the intention is
frustrated, the task unaccomplished—the effort may be made again from
the beginning at some other time; or it may simply be abandoned.
Artistic performances start, go on (often for very extended periods when
one does not attend continually but drifts away and back, chatters for a
while, sleeps for a while, watches rapt for a while), and stop; they are
as uncentered as a parade, as directionless as a pageant. Ritual often
seems, as in the temple celebrations, to consist largely of getting
ready and cleaning up. The heart of the ceremony, the obeisance to the
gods come down onto their altars, is deliberately muted to the point
where it sometimes seems almost an afterthought, a glancing, hesitant
confrontation of anonymous persons brought physically very close and
kept socially very distant. It is all welcoming and bidding farewell,
foretaste and aftertaste, with but the most ceremonially buffered,
ritually insulated sort of actual encounter with the sacred presences
themselves. Even in such a dramatically more heightened ceremony as the
Rangda-Barong, fearful witch and foolish dragon combat ends in a state
of complete irresolution, a mystical, metaphysical, and moral standoff
leaving everything precisely as it was, and the observer—or anyway the
foreign observer—with the feeling that something decisive was on the
verge of happening but never quite did.⁴³⁴³

In short, events happen like holidays. They appear, vanish, and
reappear—each discrete, sufficient unto itself, a particular
manifestation of the fixed order of things. Social activities are
separate performances; they do not march toward some destination, gather
toward some denouement. As time is punctual, so life is. Not orderless,
but qualitatively ordered, like the days themselves, into a limited
number of established kinds. Balinese social life lacks climax because
it takes place in a motionless present, a vectorless now. Or, equally
true, Balinese time lacks motion because Balinese social life lacks
climax. The two imply one another, and both together imply and are
implied by the Balinese contemporization of persons. The perception of
fellowmen, the experience of history, and the temper of collective
life—what has sometimes been called ethos—are hooked together by a
definable logic. But the logic is not syllogistic; it is social.

Cultural Integration, Cultural Conflict, Cultural Change

Referring as it does both to formal principles of reasoning and to
rational connections among facts and events, “logic” is a treacherous
word; and nowhere more so than in the analysis of culture. When one
deals with meaningful forms, the temptation to see the relationship
among them as immanent, as consisting of some sort of intrinsic affinity
(or disaffinity) they bear for one another, is virtually overwhelming.
And so we hear cultural integration spoken of as a harmony of meaning,
cultural change as an instability of meaning, and cultural conflict as
an incongruity of meaning, with the implication that the harmony, the
instability, or the incongruity are properties of meaning itself, as,
say, sweetness is a property of sugar or brittleness of glass.

Yet, when we try to treat these properties as we would sweetness or
brittleness, they fail to behave, “logically,” in the expected way. When
we look for the constituents of the harmony, the instability, or the
incongruity, we are unable to find them resident in that of which they
are presumably properties. One cannot run symbolic forms through some
sort of cultural assay to discover their harmony content, their
stability ratio, or their index of incongruity; one can only look and
see if the forms in question are in fact coexisting, changing, or
interfering with one another in some way or other, which is like tasting
sugar to see if it is sweet or dropping a glass to see if it is brittle,
not like investigating the chemical composition of sugar or the physical
structure of glass. The reason for this is, of course, that meaning is
not intrinsic in the objects, acts, processes, and so on, which bear it,
but—as Durkheim, Weber, and so many others have emphasized—imposed upon
them; and the explanation of its properties must therefore be sought in
that which does the imposing—men living in society. The study of thought
is, to borrow a phrase from Joseph Levenson, the study of men
thinking;⁴⁴⁴⁴ and as they think not in some special place of their own,
but in the same place—the social world—that they do everything else, the
nature of cultural integration, cultural change, or cultural conflict is
to be probed for there: in the experiences of individuals and groups of
individuals as, under the guidance of symbols, they perceive, feel,
reason, judge, and act.

To say this is, however, not to yield to psychologism, which along with
logicism is the other great saboteur of cultural analysis; for human
experience—the actual living through of events—is not mere sentience,
but, from the most immediate perception to the most mediated judgment,
significant sentience—sentience interpreted, sentience grasped. For
human beings, with the possible exception of neonates, who except for
their physical structure are human only in posse anyway, all experience
is construed experience, and the symbolic forms in terms of which it is
construed thus determine—in conjunction with a wide variety of other
factors ranging from the cellular geometry of the retina to the
endogenous stages of psychological maturation—its intrinsic texture. To
abandon the hope of finding the “logic” of cultural organization in some
Pythagorean “realm of meaning” is not to abandon the hope of finding it
at all. It is to turn our attention toward that which gives symbols
their life: their use.⁴⁵⁴⁵

What binds Balinese symbolic structures for defining persons (names, kin
terms, teknonyms, titles, and so on) to their symbolic structures for
characterizing time (permutational calendars, and so forth), and both of
these to their symbolic structures for ordering interpersonal behavior
(art, ritual, politesse, and so on), is the interaction of the effects
each of these structures has upon the perceptions of those who use them,
the way in which their experiential impacts play into and reinforce one
another. A penchant for “contemporizing” fellowmen blunts the sense of
biological aging; a blunted sense of biological aging removes one of the
main sources of a sense of temporal flow; a reduced sense of temporal
flow gives to interpersonal events an episodic quality. Ceremonialized
interaction supports standardized perceptions of others; standardized
perceptions of others support a “steady-state” conception of society; a
steady-state conception of society supports a taxonomic perception of
time. And so on: one could begin with conceptions of time and go around,
in either direction, the same circle. The circle, though continuous, is
not in a strict sense closed, because none of these modes of experience
is more than a dominant tendency, a cultural emphasis, and their subdued
opposites, equally well-rooted in the general conditions of human
existence and not without some cultural expression of their own, coexist
with them, and indeed act against them. Yet, they are dominant; they do
reinforce one another; and they are persisting. And it is to this state
of affairs, neither permanent nor perfect, that the concept “cultural
integration”—what Weber called “Sinnzusammenhang”—can be legitimately
applied.

In this view, cultural integration is no longer taken to be a sui
generis phenomenon locked away from the common life of man in a logical
world of its own. Perhaps even more important, however, it is also not
taken to be an all-embracing, completely pervasive, unbounded one. In
the first place, as just noted, patterns counteractive to the primary
ones exist as subdominant but nonetheless important themes in, so far as
we can tell, any culture. In an ordinary, quite un-Hegelian way, the
elements of a culture’s own negation are, with greater or lesser force,
included within it. With respect to the Balinese, for example, an
investigation of their witch beliefs (or, to speak phenomenologically,
witch experiences) as inverses of what might be called their person
beliefs, or of their trance behavior as an inverse of their etiquette,
would be most enlightening in this respect and would add both depth and
complexity to the present analysis. Some of the more famous attacks upon
received cultural characterizations—revelations of suspicion and
factionalism among the “harmony-loving” Pueblans, or of an “amiable
side” to the rivalrous Kwakiutl—consist essentially in a pointing out of
the existence, and the importance, of such themes.⁴⁶⁴⁶

But beyond this sort of natural counterpoint there are also simple,
unbridged discontinuities between certain major themes themselves. Not
everything is connected to everything else with equal directness; not
everything plays immediately into or against everything else. At the
very least such universal primary interconnection has to be empirically
demonstrated, not just, as so often has been the case, axiomatically
assumed.

Cultural discontinuity, and the social disorganization which, even in
highly stable societies, can result from it, is as real as cultural
integration. The notion, still quite widespread in anthropology, that
culture is a seamless web is no less a petitio principii than the older
view that culture is a thing of shreds and patches which, with a certain
excess of enthusiasm, it replaced after the Malinowskian revolution of
the early thirties. Systems need not be exhaustively interconnected to
be systems. They may be densely interconnected or poorly, but which they
are—how rightly integrated they are—is an empirical matter. To assert
connections among modes of experiencing, as among any variables, it is
necessary to find them (and find ways of finding them), not simply
assume them. And as there are some rather compelling theoretical reasons
for believing that a system which is both complex, as any culture is,
and fully joined cannot function, the problem of cultural analysis is as
much a matter of determining independencies as interconnections, gulfs
as well as bridges.⁴⁷⁴⁷ The appropriate image, if one must have images,
of cultural organization, is neither the spider web nor the pile of
sand. It is rather more the octopus, whose tentacles are in large part
separately integrated, neurally quite poorly connected with one another
and with what in the octopus passes for a brain, and yet who nonetheless
manages both to get around and to preserve himself, for a while anyway,
as a viable if somewhat ungainly entity.

The close and immediate interdependency between conceptions of person,
time, and conduct which has been proposed in this essay is, so I would
argue, a general phenomenon, even if the particular Balinese form of it
is peculiar to a degree, because such an interdependency is inherent in
the way in which human experience is organized, a necessary effect of
the conditions under which human life is led. But it is only one of a
vast and unknown number of such general interdependencies, to some of
which it is more or less directly connected, to others only very
indirectly, to others for all practical purposes virtually not at all.

The analysis of culture comes down therefore not to an heroic “holistic”
assault upon “the basic configurations of the culture,” an overarching
“order of orders” from which more limited configurations can be seen as
mere deductions, but to a searching out of significant symbols, clusters
of significant symbols, and clusters of clusters of significant
symbols—the material vehicles of perception, emotion, and
understanding—and the statement of the underlying regularities of human
experience implicit in their formation. A workable theory of culture is
to be achieved, if it is to be achieved, by building up from directly
observable modes of thought, first to determinate families of them and
then to more variable, less tightly coherent, but nonetheless ordered
“octopoid” systems of them, confluences of partial integrations, partial
incongruencies, and partial independencies.

Culture moves rather like an octopus too—not all at once in a smoothly
coordinated synergy of parts, a massive coaction of the whole, but by
disjointed movements of this part, then that, and now the other which
somehow cumulate to directional change. Where, leaving cephalopods
behind, in any given culture the first impulses toward progression will
appear, and how and to what degree they will spread through the system,
is, at this stage of our understanding, if not wholly unpredictable,
very largely so. Yet that if such impulses appear within some rather
closely interconnected and socially consequential part of the system,
their driving force will most likely be high, does not appear to be too
unreasonable a supposition.

Any development which would effectively attack Balinese
personperceptions, Balinese experiences of time, or Balinese notions of
propriety would seem to be laden with potentialities for transforming
the greater part of Balinese culture. These are not the only points at
which such revolutionary developments might appear (anything which
attacked Balinese notions of prestige and its bases would seem at least
equally portentous), but surely they are among the most important. If
the Balinese develop a less anonymized view of one another, or a more
dynamic sense of time, or a more informal style of social interaction, a
very great deal indeed—not everything, but a very great deal—would have
to change in Balinese life, if only because any one of these changes
would imply, immediately and directly, the others and all three of them
play, in different ways and in different contexts, a crucial role in
shaping that life.

Such cultural changes could, in theory, come from within Balinese
society or from without; but considering the fact that Bali is now part
of a developing national state whose center of gravity is elsewhere—in
the great cities of Java and Sumatra—it would seem most likely to come
from without.

The emergence for almost the first time in Indonesian history of a
political leader who is human, all-too-human, not merely in fact but in
appearance would seem to imply something of a challenge to traditional
Balinese personhood conceptions. Not only is Sukarno a unique, vivid,
and intensely intimate personality in the eyes of the Balinese, he is
also, so to speak, aging in public. Despite the fact that they do not
engage in face-to-face interaction with him, he is phenomenologically
much more their consociate than their contemporary, and his unparalleled
success in achieving this kind of relationship—not only in Bali, but in
Indonesia quite generally—is the secret of a good deal of his hold on,
his fascination for, the population. As with all truly charismatic
figures his power comes in great part from the fact that he does not fit
traditional cultural categories but bursts them open by celebrating his
own distinctiveness. The same is true, in reduced intensity, for the
lesser leaders of the New Indonesia, down to those small-frog Sukarnos
(with whom the population does have face-to-face relations) now
beginning to appear in Bali itself.⁴⁸⁴⁸ The sort of individualism which
Burckhardt saw the Renaissance princes bringing, through sheer force of
character, to Italy, and bringing with it the modern Western
consciousness, may be in the process of being brought, in rather
different form, to Bali by the new populist princes of Indonesia.

Similarly, the politics of continuing crisis on which the national state
has embarked, a passion for pushing events toward their climaxes rather
than away from them, would seem to pose the same sort of challenge to
Balinese conceptions of time. And when such politics are placed, as they
are increasingly being placed, in the historical framework so
characteristic of New Nation nationalism almost everywhere—original
greatness, foreign oppression, extended struggle, sacrifice and
self-liberation, impending modernization—the whole conception of the
relation of what is now happening to what has happened and what is going
to happen is altered.

And finally, the new informality of urban life and of the pan-Indonesian
culture which dominates it—the growth in importance of youth and youth
culture with the consequent narrowing, sometimes even the reversal, of
the social distance between generations; the sentimental comradeship of
fellow revolutionaries; the populist equalitarianism of political
ideology, Marxist and non-Marxist alike—appears to contain a similar
threat to the third, the ethos or behavioral style, side of the Balinese
triangle.

All this is admittedly mere speculation (though, given the events of the
fifteen years of Independence, not wholly groundless speculation) and
when, how, how fast, and in what order Balinese perceptions of person,
time, and conduct will change is, if not wholly unpredictable in
general, largely so in detail. But as they do change—which seems to me
certain, and in fact already to have well begun⁴⁹⁴⁹—the sort of analysis
here developed of cultural concepts as active forces, of thought as a
public phenomenon with effects like other public phenomena, should aid
us in discovering its outlines, its dynamics, and, even more important,
its social implications. Nor, in other forms and with other results,
should it be less useful elsewhere.

[]

1 The most systematic and extensive discussions are to be found in T.
Parsons and E. Shils, eds., Toward a General Theory of Action
(Cambridge, Mass., 1959); and T. Parsons, The Social System (Glencoe,
III., 1951). Within anthropology, some of the more notable treatments,
not all of them in agreement, include: S. F. Nadel, Theory of Social
Structure (Glencoe, III., 1957); E. Leach, Political Systems of Highland
Burma (Cambridge, Mass., 1954); E. E. Evans-Pritchard, Social
Anthropology (Glencoe, III., 1951); R. Redfield, The Primitive World and
Its Transformations (Ithaca, 1953); C. Lévi-Strauss, “Social Structure,”
in his Structural Anthropology (New York, 1963), pp. 277–323; R. Firth,
Elements of Social Organization (New York, 1951); and M. Singer,
“Culture,” in International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, vol. 3
(New York, 1968), p. 527.

2 G. Ryle, The Concept of Mind (New York, 1949). I have dealt with some
of the philosophical issues, here passed over in silence, raised by the
“extrinsic theory of thought,” above, Chapter 3, pp. 55–61, and need now
only re-emphasize that this theory does not involve a commitment to
behaviorism, in either its methodological or epistemological forms; nor
yet again to any disputation of the brute fact that it is individuals,
not collectivities, who think.

3 For an introduction to Schutz’s work in this field, see his The
Problem of Social Reality, Collected Papers, 1, ed. M. Natanson (The
Hague, 1962).

4 Ibid., pp. 17–18. Brackets added, paragraphing altered.

5 Where “ancestor worship” on the one side or “ghost beliefs” on the
other are present, successors may be regarded as (ritually) capable of
interacting with their predecessors, or predecessors of (mystically)
interacting with their successors. But in such cases the “persons”
involved are, while the interaction is conceived to be occurring,
phenomenologically not predecessors and successors, but contemporaries,
or even consociates. It should be kept clearly in mind that, both here
and in the discussion to follow, distinctions are formulated from the
actor’s point of view, not from that of an outside, third-person
observer. For the place of actor-oriented (sometimes miscalled
“subjective”) constructs in the social sciences, see, T. Parsons, The
Structure of Social Action (Glencoe, III., 1937), especially the
chapters on Max Weber’s methodological writings.

6 It is in this regard that the
consociate-contemporary-predecessor-successor formulation differs
critically from at least some versions of the
umwelt-mitwelt-vorwelt-vogelwelt formulation from which it derives, for
there is no question here of apodictic deliverances of “transcendental
subjectivity” a la Husserl but rather of socio-psychologically developed
and historically transmitted “forms of understanding” a la Weber. For an
extended, if somewhat indecisive, discussion of this contrast, see M.
Merleau-Ponty, “Phenomenology and the Sciences of Man,” in his The
Primacy of Perception (Evanston, 1964), pp. 43–55.

7 In the following discussion, I shall be forced to schematize Balinese
practices severely and to represent them as being much more homogeneous
and rather more consistent than they really are. In particular,
categorical statements, of either a positive or negative variety (“All
Balinese . . .”; “No Balinese . . .”), must be read as having attached
to them the implicit qualification “. . . so far as my knowledge goes,”
and even sometimes as riding roughshod over exceptions deemed to be
“abnormal.” Ethnographically fuller presentations of some of the data
here summarized can be found in H. and C. Geertz, “Teknonymy in Bali:
Parenthood, Age-Grading, and Genealogical Amnesia,” Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute 94 (part 2) (1964):94–108; C. Geertz,
“Tihingan: A Balinese Village,” Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en
volkenkunde, 120 (1964):1–33; and C. Geertz, “Form and Variation in
Balinese Village Structure,” American Anthropologist 61 (1959):991–1012.

8 While personal names of commoners are mere inventions, meaningless in
themselves, those of the gentry are often drawn from Sanskrit sources
and “mean” something, usually something rather high-flown, like
“virtuous warrior” or “courageous scholar.” But this meaning is
ornamental rather than denotative, and in most cases what the meaning of
the name is (as opposed to the simple fact that it has one) is not
actually known. This contrast between mere babble among the peasantry
and empty grandiloquence among the gentry is not without cultural
significance, but its significance lies mainly in the area of the
expression and perception of social inequality, not of personal
identity.

9 This is, of course, not to say that such people are reduced in
sociological (much less psychological) terms to playing the role of a
child, for they are accepted as adults, if incomplete ones, by their
consociates. The failure to have children is, however, a distinct
handicap for anyone desiring much local power or prestige, and I have
for my part never known a childless man who carried much weight in
hamlet councils, or for that matter who was not socially marginal in
general.

10 From a merely etymological point of view, they do have a certain aura
of meaning, for they derive from obsolete roots indicating “leading,”
“medial,” and “following”; but these gossamery meanings have no genuine
everyday currency and are, if at all, but very peripherally perceived.

11 In point of fact, the Balinese system (or, in all probability, any
other system) is not purely generational; but the intent here is merely
to convey the general form of the system, not its precise structure. For
the full terminological system, see H. and C. Geertz, “Teknonymy in
Bali.”

12 For a distinction, similar to the one drawn here, between the
“ordering” and the “role-designating” aspects of kin terminologies, see
D. Schneider and G. Homans, “Kinship Terminology and the American
Kinship System,” American Anthropologist 57 (1955): 1195–1208.

13 Old men of the same generation as the deceased do not pray to him
either, of course, for the same reason.

14 It might seem that the continuation of terms beyond the kumpi level
would argue against this view. But in fact it supports it. For, in the
rare case where a man has a (“real” or “classificatory”)
great-great-grandchild (kelab) old enough to worship him at his death,
the child is, again, forbidden to do so. But here not because he is “the
same age” as the deceased but because he is “(a generation) older”—i.e.,
equivalent to the dead man’s “father.” Similarly, an old man who lives
long enough to have a great-great-grandchild kelab who has passed
infancy and then died will worship—alone—at the child’s grave, for the
child is (one generation) senior to him. In principle, the same pattern
holds in more distant generations, when, as the Balinese do not use kin
terms to refer to the dead or the unborn, the problem becomes entirely
theoretical: “That’s what we’d call them and how we would treat them if
we had any, which we never do.”

15 Personal pronouns are another possibility and might indeed be
considered as a separate symbolic order of person-definition. But, in
fact, their use also tends to be avoided whenever possible, often at the
expense of some awkwardness of expression.

16 This use of a descendant’s personal name as part of a teknonym in no
way contradicts my earlier statements about the lack of public currency
of such names. The “name” here is part of the appellation of the person
bearing the teknonym, not, even derivatively, of the eponymous child,
whose name is taken purely as a reference point and is without—so far as
I can tell—any independent symbolic value at all. If the child dies,
even in infancy, the teknonym is usually maintained unchanged; the
eponymous child addresses and refers to his father and mother by the
teknonym which includes his own name quite unself-consciously; there is
no notion that the child whose name is embraced in his parents’,
grandparents’, or great-grandparents’ teknonyms is, on that account, any
way different from or privileged over his siblings whose names are not;
there is no shifting of teknonyms to include the names of favored or
more able offspring, and so on.

17 It also underscores another theme which runs through all the orders
of person-definition discussed here: the minimization of the difference
between the sexes which are represented as being virtually
interchangeable so far as most social roles are concerned. For an
intriguing discussion of this theme, see J. Belo, Rangda and Barong
(Locust Valley, N.Y., 1949).

18 In this sense, birth order terms could, in a more elegant analysis,
be defined as “zero teknonyms” and included in this symbolic order: a
person called Wayan, Njoman, etc., is a person who has produced no one,
who has, as yet anyway, no descendants.

19 G. Bateson, “Bali: The Value System of a Steady State,” in M. Fortes,
ed., Social Structure; Studies Presented to Radcliffe-Brown (New York,
1963), pp. 35–53. Bateson was the first to point out, if somewhat
obliquely, the peculiar achronic nature of Balinese thought, and my more
narrowly focused analysis has been much stimulated by his general views.
See also his “An Old Temple and a New Myth,” Djawa (Jogjakarta) 17
(1937):219–307. [These have now been reprinted in J. Belo, ed.,
Traditional Balinese Culture (New York, 1970), pp. 384–402; 111–136.]

20 Neither how many different titles are found in Bali (though there
must be well over a hundred) nor how many individuals bear each title is
known, for there has never been a census taken in these terms. In four
hamlets I studied intensively in southeastern Bali a total of thirty-two
different titles were represented, the largest of which was carried by
nearly two hundred and fifty individuals, the smallest by one, with the
modal figure running around fifty or sixty. See C. Geertz, “Tihingan: A
Balinese Village.”

21 Varna categories are often subdivided, especially by high-status
persons, into three ranked classes—superior (utama), medium (madia), and
inferior (nista)—the various titles in the overall category being
appropriately subgrouped. A full analysis of the Balinese system of
social stratification—as much Polynesian as Indian in type—cannot be
given here.

22 The existence of one other order, that having to do with sex markers
(Ni for women, I for men) ought at least to be mentioned. In ordinary
life, these titles are affixed only to personal names (most of which are
themselves sexually neutral) or to personal names plus birth order name,
and then only infrequently. As a result, they are, from the point of
view of person-definition, of but incidental importance, and I have felt
justified in omitting explicit consideration of them.

23 For an essay in this direction, see C. Geertz, “Form and Variation in
Balinese Village Structure.”

24 Place names associated with the function the title expresses are
perhaps even more common as secondary specification: “Klian Pau,” “Pau”
being the name of the hamlet of which the person is klian (chief,
elder); “Anak Agung Kaleran,” “Kaleran”—literally “north” or
“northern”—being the name (and the location) of the lord’s palace.

25 Traditional texts, some of them fairly extensive, relating certain
activities of the gods, do exist and fragments of the stories are known.
But not only do these myths also reflect the typological view of
personhood, the static view of time, and the ceremonialized style of
interaction I am seeking to characterize, but the general reticence to
discuss or think about the divine means that the stories they relate
enter but slightly into Balinese attempts to understand and adapt to
“the world.” The difference between the Greeks and the Balinese lies not
so much in the sort of lives their gods lead, scandalous in both cases,
as in their attitude toward those lives. For the Greeks, the private
doings of Zeus and his associates were conceived to illuminate the
all-too-similar doings of men, and so gossip about them had
philosophical import. For the Balinese, the private lives of Betara Guru
and his associates are just that, private, and gossip about them is
unmannerly—even, given their place in the prestige hierarchy,
impertinent.

26 It is the overall order which is conceived to be fixed, not the
individual’s location within it, which is movable, though more along
certain axes than others. (Along some, e.g., birth order, it is not
movable at all.) But the point is that this movement is not, or anyway
not primarily, conceived in what we would regard to be temporal terms:
when a “father-of” becomes a “grandfather-of,” the alteration is
perceived as being less one of aging than a change in social (and what
is here the same thing, cosmic) coordinates, a directed movement through
a particular sort of unchanging attribute, space. Also, within some
symbolic orders of person-definition, location is not conceived as an
absolute quality because coordinates are origin-dependent: in Bali, as
elsewhere, one man’s brother is another man’s uncle.

27 Schutz, The Problem of Social Reality, pp. 16–17, Brackets added.

28 Ibid., pp. 221–222.

29 As a preface to the following, and an appendix to the preceding,
discussion, it should be remarked that, just as the Balinese do have
consociate relations with one another and do have some sense of the
material connection between ancestors and descendants, so too they do
have some, as we would put it, “true” calendrical concepts—absolute
dates in the so-called Caka system, Hinduistic notions of successive
epochs, as well as, indeed, access to the Gregorian calendar. But these
are (ca. 1958) unstressed and of distinctly secondary importance in the
ordinary course of everyday life; variant patterns applied in restricted
contexts for specific purposes by certain sorts of persons on sporadic
occasions. A complete analysis of Balinese culture—so far as such a
thing is possible—would indeed have to take account of them; and from
certain points of view they are not without theoretical significance.
The point, here and elsewhere, in this quite incomplete analysis,
however, is not that the Balinese are, as the Hungarians are reputed to
be, immigrants from another planet entirely unlike ourselves, but merely
that the major thrust of their thought concerning certain matters of
critical social importance lies, at least for the moment, in a markedly
different direction from ours.

30 Because the thirty-seven-name cycles (uku) which make up the two
hundred and ten-day supercycle are also named, they can be, and commonly
are, used in conjunction with five- and seven-day names, so eliminating
the need to invoke names from the six-name cycle. But this is merely a
notational matter: the result is exactly the same, though the days of
the thirty- and forty-two-day supercycles are thus obscured. Balinese
devices—charts, lists, numerical calculation, mnemonics—for making
calendrical determinations and assessing their meaning are both complex
and various, and there are differences in technique and interpretation
between individuals, villages, and regions of the island. Printed
calendars in Bali (a still not very widespread innovation) contrive to
show at once the uku; the day in each of the ten permutating cycles
(including the one that never changes!); the day and month in the
lunar-solar system; the day, the month, and year in the Gregorian and
Islamic calendars; and the day, month, year, and year-name in the
Chinese calendar—complete with notations of all the important holidays
from Christmas to Galungan these various systems define. For fuller
discussions of Balinese calendrical ideas and their socioreligious
meaning, see R. Goris, “Holidays and Holy Days,” in J. L. Swellengrebel,
ed., Bali (The Hague, 1960), pp. 115–129, together with the references
cited there.

31 More accurately: the days they define tell you what kind of time it
is. Though the cycles and supercycles, being cycles, are recurrent, it
is not this fact about them which is attended to or to which
significance is attached. The thirty-, thirty-five-, forty-two-, and two
hundred and ten-day periodicities, and thus the intervals they
demarcate, are not, or are only very peripherally, perceived as such;
nor are the intervals implicit in the elementary periodicities, the
cycles proper, which generate them—a fact which has sometimes been
obscured by calling the former “months” and “years” and the latter
“weeks.” It is—one cannot stress it too strongly—only the “days” which
really matter, and the Balinese sense of time is not much more cyclical
than it is durative: it is particulate. Within individual days there is
a certain amount of short-range, not very carefully calibrated, durative
measurement, by the public beating of slit-gongs at various points
(morning, midday, sundown, and so on) of the diurnal cycle, and for
certain collective labor tasks where individual contributions have to be
roughly balanced, by water-clocks. But even this is of little
importance: in contrast to their calendrical apparatus, Balinese
horological concepts and devices are very undeveloped.

32 Goris, “Holidays and Holy Days,” p. 121. Not all of these holidays
are major, of course. Many of them are celebrated simply within the
family and quite routinely. What makes them holidays is that they are
identical for all Balinese, something not the case for other sorts of
celebrations.

33 Ibid. There are, of course. subrhythms resulting from the workings of
the cycles: thus every thirty-fifth day is a holiday because it is
determined by the interaction of the five- and seven-name cycles, but in
terms of the sheer succession of days there is none, though there is
some clustering here and there. Goris regards Radité-Tungleh-Paing as
the “first day of the . . . Balinese (permutational] year” (and thus
those days as the first days of their respective cycles); but though
there may (or may not: Goris doesn’t say) be some textual basis for
this, I could find no evidence that the Balinese in fact so perceive it.
In fact, if any day is regarded as something of what we would regard as
a temporal milestone it would be Galungan (number seventy-four in the
above reckoning). But even this idea is very weakly developed at best;
like other holidays, Galungan merely happens. To present the Balinese
calendar, even partially, in terms of Western flow-of-time ideas is, in
my opinion, inevitably to misrender it phenomenologically.

34 Swellengrebel, Bali, p. 12. These temples are of all sizes and
degrees of significance, and Swellengrebel notes that the Bureau of
Religious Affairs on Bali gave a (suspiciously precise) figure, ca.
1953, of 4,661 “large and important” temples for the island, which, it
should be remembered, is, at 2,170 square miles, about the size of
Delaware.

35 For a description of a full-blown odalan (most of which last three
days rather than just one), see J. Belo, Balinese Temple Festival
(Locust Valley, N.Y., 1953). Again, odalans are most commonly computed
by the use of the uku rather than the six-name cycle, together with the
five and seven-name cycles. See note 30.

36 There are also various metaphysical conceptions associated with days
bearing different names—constellations of gods, demons, natural objects
(trees, birds, beasts), virtues and vices (love, hate . . .), and so
on—which explain “why” it has the character it has—but these need not be
pursued here. In this area, as well as in the associated “fortune
telling” operations described in the text, theories and interpretations
are less standardized and computation is not confined to the five-,
six-, and seven-name cycles, but extended to various permutations of the
others, a fact which makes the possibilities virtually limitless.

37 With respect to individuals the term applied is more often otonan
than odalan, but the root meaning is just the same: “emerging,”
“appearance,” “coming out.”

38 The names of the last two months—borrowed from Sanskrit—are not
strictly speaking numbers as are those of the other ten; but in terms of
Balinese perceptions they “mean” eleventh and twelfth.

39 In fact, as another Indic borrowing, the years are numbered too,
but—outside of priestly circles where familiarity with it is more a
matter of scholarly prestige, a cultural ornament, than anything
else—year enumeration plays virtually no role in the actual use of the
calendar, and lunar-solar dates are almost always given without the
year, which is, with the rarest of exceptions, neither known nor cared
about. Ancient texts and inscriptions sometimes indicate the year, but
in the ordinary course of life the Balinese never “date” anything, in
our sense of the term, except perhaps to say that some event—a volcanic
eruption, a war, and so forth—happened “when I was small,” “when the
Dutch were here,” or, the Balinese illo tempore, “in Madjapahit times,”
and so on.

40 On the “shame” theme in Balinese culture, see M. Covarrubias, The
Island of Bali (New York, 1956); on “absence of climax,” G. Bateson and
M. Mead, Balinese Character (New York, 1942).

41 For a comprehensive critical review, see G. Piers and M. Singer,
Shame and Guilt (Springfield, III., 1953).

42 Again, I am concerned here with cultural phenomenology, not
psychological dynamics. It is, of course, quite possible, though I do
not think the evidence is available either to prove or disprove it, that
Balinese “stage fright” is connected with unconscious guilt feelings of
some sort or another. My only point is that to translate lek as either
“guilt” or “shame” is, given the usual sense of these terms in English,
to misrender it, and that our word “stage fright”—“nervousness felt at
appearing before an audience,” to resort to Webster’s again—gives a much
better, if still imperfect, idea of what the Balinese are in fact
talking about when they speak, as they do almost constantly, of lek.

43 For a description of the Rangda–Barong combat, see J. Belo, Rangda
and Barong; for a brilliant evocation of its mood, G. Bateson and M.
Mead, Balinese Character. See also above, pp. 114–118.

44 J. Levenson, Modern China and Its Confucian Past (Garden City, 1964),
p. 212. Here, as elsewhere, I use “thinking” to refer not just to
deliberate reflection but intelligent activity of any sort, and
“meaning” to refer not just to abstract “concepts” but significance of
any sort. This is perhaps somewhat arbitrary, and a little loose, but
one must have general terms to talk about general subjects, even if what
falls under such subjects is very far from being homogeneous.

45 “Every sign by itself seems dead. What gives it life?—in use it is
alive. Is life breathed into it there?—Or is its use its life?” L.
Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations (New York, 1953), p. 128e.
Italics in original.

46 Li An-che, “Zuni: Some Observations and Queries,” American
Anthropologist 39 (1937):62–76; H. Codere, “The Amiable Side of Kwakiutl
Life,” American Anthropologist 58 (1956):334–351. Which of two
antithetical patterns or clusters of patterns, if either, is in fact
primary, is of course an empirical problem, but not, particularly if
some thought is given to what “primacy” means in this connection, an
insoluble one.

47 “It has thus been shown that, for adaptations to accumulate, there
must not be channels . . . from some variables . . . to others. . . .
The idea so often implicit in physiological writings that all will be
well if only sufficient cross-connections are available is . . . quite
wrong.” W. R. Ashby, Design for a Brain, 2nd ed. rev. (New York, 1960),
p. 155. Italics in original. Of course, the reference here is to direct
connections—what Ashby calls “primary joins.” Any variable with no
relations whatsoever to other variables in the system would simply not
be part of it. For a discussion of the nest of theoretical problems
involved here, see Ashby, pp. 171–183, 205–218. For an argument that
cultural discontinuity may not only be compatible with the effective
functioning of the social systems they govern but even supportive of
such functioning, see J. W. Fernandez, “Symbolic Consensus in a Fang
Reformative Cult,” American Anthropologist 67 (1965):902–929.

48 It is perhaps suggestive that the only Balinese of much importance in
the central Indonesian government during the early years of the
Republic—he was foreign minister for a while—was the Satria paramount
prince of Gianjar, one of the traditional Balinese kingdoms, who bore
the marvellously Balinese “name” of Anak Agung Gde Agung. “Anak Agung”
is the public title borne by the members of the ruling house of Gianjar,
Gde is a birth order title (the Triwangsa equivalent of Wayan), and
Agung though a personal name is in fact just an echo of the public
title. As “gde” and “agung” both mean “big,” and “anak” means man, the
whole name comes to something like “Big, Big, Big Man”—as indeed he was,
until he fell from Sukarno’s favor. More recent political leaders in
Bali have taken to the use of their more individualized personal names
in the Sukarno fashion and to the dropping of titles, birth order names,
teknonyms, and so on, as “feudal” or “old-fashioned.”

49 This was written in early 1965; for the dramatic changes that, in
fact, occurred later that year, see pp. 282–283 and Chapter 11.

Chapter 15/ Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight

[]

The Raid

Early in April of 1958, my wife and I arrived, malarial and diffident,
in a Balinese village we intended, as anthropologists, to study. A small
place, about five hundred people, and relatively remote, it was its own
world. We were intruders, professional ones, and the villagers dealt
with us as Balinese seem always to deal with people not part of their
life who yet press themselves upon them: as though we were not there.
For them, and to a degree for ourselves, we were nonpersons, specters,
invisible men.

We moved into an extended family compound (that had been arranged before
through the provincial government) belonging to one of the four major
factions in village life. But except for our landlord and the village
chief, whose cousin and brother-in-law he was, everyone ignored us in a
way only a Balinese can do. As we wandered around, uncertain, wistful,
eager to please, people seemed to look right through us with a gaze
focused several yards behind us on some more actual stone or tree.
Almost nobody greeted us; but nobody scowled or said anything unpleasant
to us either, which would have been almost as satisfactory. If we
ventured to approach someone (something one is powerfully inhibited from
doing in such an atmosphere), he moved, negligently but definitely,
away. If, seated or leaning against a wall, we had him trapped, he said
nothing at all, or mumbled what for the Balinese is the ultimate
nonword—“yes.” The indifference, of course, was studied; the villagers
were watching every move we made, and they had an enormous amount of
quite accurate information about who we were and what we were going to
be doing. But they acted as if we simply did not exist, which, in fact,
as this behavior was designed to inform us, we did not, or anyway not
yet.

This is, as I say, general in Bali. Everywhere else I have been in
Indonesia, and more latterly in Morocco, when I have gone into a new
village, people have poured out from all sides to take a very close look
at me, and, often an all-too-probing feel as well. In Balinese villages,
at least those away from the tourist circuit, nothing happens at all.
People go on pounding, chatting, making offerings, staring into space,
carrying baskets about while one drifts around feeling vaguely
disembodied. And the same thing is true on the individual level. When
you first meet a Balinese, he seems virtually not to relate to you at
all; he is, in the term Gregory Bateson and Margaret Mead made famous,
“away.”¹¹ Then—in a day, a week, a month (with some people the magic
moment never comes)—he decides, for reasons I have never quite been able
to fathom, that you are real, and then he becomes a warm, gay,
sensitive, sympathetic, though, being Balinese, always precisely
controlled, person. You have crossed, somehow, some moral or
metaphysical shadow line. Though you are not exactly taken as a Balinese
(one has to be born to that), you are at least regarded as a human being
rather than a cloud or a gust of wind. The whole complexion of your
relationship dramatically changes to, in the majority of cases, a
gentle, almost affectionate one—a low-keyed, rather playful, rather
mannered, rather bemused geniality.

My wife and I were still very much in the gust-of-wind stage, a most
frustrating, and even, as you soon begin to doubt whether you are really
real after all, unnerving one, when, ten days or so after our arrival, a
large cockfight was held in the public square to raise money for a new
school.

Now, a few special occasions aside, cockfights are illegal in Bali under
the Republic (as, for not altogether unrelated reasons, they were under
the Dutch), largely as a result of the pretensions to puritanism radical
nationalism tends to bring with it. The elite, which is not itself so
very puritan, worries about the poor, ignorant peasant gambling all his
money away, about what foreigners will think, about the waste of time
better devoted to building up the country. It sees cockfighting as
“primitive,” “backward,” “unprogressive,” and generally unbecoming an
ambitious nation. And, as with those other embarrassments—-opium
smoking, begging, or uncovered breasts—it seeks, rather
unsystematically, to put a stop to it.

Of course, like drinking during Prohibition or, today, smoking
marihuana, cockfights, being a part of “The Balinese Way of Life,”
nonetheless go on happening, and with extraordinary frequency. And, as
with Prohibition or marihuana, from time to time the police (who, in
1958 at least, were almost all not Balinese but Javanese) feel called
upon to make a raid, confiscate the cocks and spurs, fine a few people,
and even now and then expose some of them in the tropical sun for a day
as object lessons which never, somehow, get learned, even though
occasionally, quite occasionally, the object dies.

As a result, the fights are usually held in a secluded corner of a
village in semisecrecy, a fact which tends to slow the action a
little—not very much, but the Balinese do not care to have it slowed at
all. In this case, however, perhaps because they were raising money for
a school that the government was unable to give them, perhaps because
raids had been few recently, perhaps, as I gathered from subsequent
discussion, there was a notion that the necessary bribes had been paid,
they thought they could take a chance on the central square and draw a
larger and more enthusiastic crowd without attracting the attention of
the law.

They were wrong. In the midst of the third match, with hundreds of
people, including, still transparent, myself and my wife, fused into a
single body around the ring, a superorganism in the literal sense, a
truck full of policemen armed with machine guns roared up. Amid great
screeching cries of “pulisi! pulisi!” from the crowd, the policemen
jumped out, and, springing into the center of the ring, began to swing
their guns around like gangsters in a motion picture, though not going
so far as actually to fire them. The superorganism came instantly apart
as its components scattered in all directions. People raced down the
road, disappeared headfirst over walls, scrambled under platforms,
folded themselves behind wicker screens, scuttled up coconut trees.
Cocks armed with steel spurs sharp enough to cut off a finger or run a
hole through a foot were running wildly around. Everything was dust and
panic.

On the established anthropological principle, “When in Rome,” my wife
and I decided, only slightly less instantaneously than everyone else,
that the thing to do was run too. We ran down the main village street,
northward, away from where we were living, for we were on that side of
the ring. About halfway down another fugitive ducked suddenly into a
compound—his own, it turned out—and we, seeing nothing ahead of us but
rice fields, open country, and a very high volcano, followed him. As the
three of us came tumbling into the courtyard, his wife, who had
apparently been through this sort of thing before, whipped out a table,
a tablecloth, three chairs, and three cups of tea, and we all, without
any explicit communication whatsoever, sat down, commenced to sip tea,
and sought to compose ourselves.

A few moments later, one of the policemen marched importantly into the
yard, looking for the village chief. (The chief had not only been at the
fight, he had arranged it. When the truck drove up he ran to the river,
stripped off his sarong, and plunged in so he could say, when at length
they found him sitting there pouring water over his head, that he had
been away bathing when the whole affair had occurred and was ignorant of
it. They did not believe him and fined him three hundred rupiah, which
the village raised collectively.) Seeing me and my wife, “White Men,”
there in the yard, the policeman performed a classic double take. When
he found his voice again he asked, approximately, what in the devil did
we think we were doing there. Our host of five minutes leaped instantly
to our defense, producing an impassioned description of who and what we
were, so detailed and so accurate that it was my turn, having barely
communicated with a living human being save my landlord and the village
chief for more than a week, to be astonished. We had a perfect right to
be there, he said, looking the Javanese upstart in the eye. We were
American professors; the government had cleared us; we were there to
study culture; we were going to write a book to tell Americans about
Bali. And we had all been there drinking tea and talking about cultural
matters all afternoon and did not know anything about any cockfight.
Moreover, we had not seen the village chief all day; he must have gone
to town. The policeman retreated in rather total disarray. And, after a
decent interval, bewildered but relieved to have survived and stayed out
of jail, so did we.

The next morning the village was a completely different world for us.
Not only were we no longer invisible, we were suddenly the center of all
attention, the object of a great outpouring of warmth, interest, and
most especially, amusement. Everyone in the village knew we had fled
like everyone else. They asked us about it again and again (I must have
told the story, small detail by small detail, fifty times by the end of
the day), gently, affectionately, but quite insistently teasing us: “Why
didn’t you just stand there and tell the police who you were?” “Why
didn’t you just say you were only watching and not betting?” “Were you
really afraid of those little guns?” As always, kinesthetically minded
and, even when fleeing for their lives (or, as happened eight years
later, surrendering them), the world’s most poised people, they
gleefully mimicked, also over and over again, our graceless style of
running and what they claimed were our panic-stricken facial
expressions. But above all, everyone was extremely pleased and even more
surprised that we had not simply “pulled out our papers” (they knew
about those too) and asserted our Distinguished Visitor status, but had
instead demonstrated our solidarity with what were now our covillagers.
(What we had actually demonstrated was our cowardice, but there is
fellowship in that too.) Even the Brahmana priest, an old, grave,
halfway-to-heaven type who because of its associations with the
underworld would never be involved, even distantly, in a cockfight, and
was difficult to approach even to other Balinese, had us called into his
courtyard to ask us about what had happened, chuckling happily at the
sheer extraordinariness of it all.

In Bali, to be teased is to be accepted. It was the turning point so far
as our relationship to the community was concerned, and we were quite
literally “in.” The whole village opened up to us, probably more than it
ever would have otherwise (I might actually never have gotten to that
priest, and our accidental host became one of my best informants), and
certainly very much faster. Getting caught, or almost caught, in a vice
raid is perhaps not a very generalizable recipe for achieving that
mysterious necessity of anthropological field work, rapport, but for me
it worked very well. It led to a sudden and unusually complete
acceptance into a society extremely difficult for outsiders to
penetrate. It gave me the kind of immediate, inside-view grasp of an
aspect of “peasant mentality” that anthropologists not fortunate enough
to flee headlong with their subjects from armed authorities normally do
not get. And, perhaps most important of all, for the other things might
have come in other ways, it put me very quickly on to a combination
emotional explosion, status war, and philosophical drama of central
significance to the society whose inner nature I desired to understand.
By the time I left I had spent about as much time looking into
cockfights as into witchcraft, irrigation, caste, or marriage.

Of Cocks and Men

Bali, mainly because it is Bali, is a well-studied place. Its mythology,
art, ritual, social organization, patterns of child rearing, forms of
law, even styles of trance, have all been microscopically examined for
traces of that elusive substance Jane Belo called “The Balinese
Temper.”²² But, aside from a few passing remarks, the cockfight has
barely been noticed, although as a popular obsession of consuming power
it is at least as important a revelation of what being a Balinese “is
really like” as these more celebrated phenomena.³³ As much of America
surfaces in a ball park, on a golf links, at a race track, or around a
poker table, much of Bali surfaces in a cock ring. For it is only
apparently cocks that are fighting there. Actually, it is men.

To anyone who has been in Bali any length of time, the deep
psychological identification of Balinese men with their cocks is
unmistakable. The double entendre here is deliberate. It works in
exactly the same way in Balinese as it does in English, even to
producing the same tired jokes, strained puns, and uninventive
obscenities. Bateson and Mead have even suggested that, in line with the
Balinese conception of the body as a set of separately animated parts,
cocks are viewed as detachable, self-operating penises, ambulant
genitals with a life of their own.⁴⁴ And while I do not have the kind of
unconscious material either to confirm or disconfirm this intriguing
notion, the fact that they are masculine symbols par excellence is about
as indubitable, and to the Balinese about as evident, as the fact that
water runs downhill.

The language of everyday moralism is shot through, on the male side of
it, with roosterish imagery. Sabung, the word for cock (and one which
appears in inscriptions as early as A.D. 922), is used metaphorically to
mean “hero,” “warrior,” “champion,” “man of parts,” “political
candidate,” “bachelor,” “dandy,” “lady-killer,” or “tough guy.” A
pompous man whose behavior presumes above his station is compared to a
tailless cock who struts about as though he had a large, spectacular
one. A desperate man who makes a last, irrational effort to extricate
himself from an impossible situation is likened to a dying cock who
makes one final lunge at his tormentor to drag him along to a common
destruction. A stingy man, who promises much, gives little, and
begrudges that, is compared to a cock which, held by the tail, leaps at
another without in fact engaging him. A marriageable young man still shy
with the opposite sex or someone in a new job anxious to make a good
impression is called “a fighting cock caged for the first time.”⁵⁵ Court
trials, wars, political contests, inheritance disputes, and street
arguments are all compared to cockfights.⁶⁶ Even the very island itself
is perceived from its shape as a small, proud cock, poised, neck
extended, back taut, tail raised, in eternal challenge to large,
feckless, shapeless Java.⁷⁷

But the intimacy of men with their cocks is more than metaphorical.
Balinese men, or anyway a large majority of Balinese men, spend an
enormous amount of time with their favorites, grooming them, feeding
them, discussing them, trying them out against one another, or just
gazing at them with a mixture of rapt admiration and dreamy
self-absorption. Whenever you see a group of Balinese men squatting idly
in the council shed or along the road in their hips down, shoulders
forward, knees up fashion, half or more of them will have a rooster in
his hands, holding it between his thighs, bouncing it gently up and down
to strengthen its legs, ruffling its feathers with abstract sensuality,
pushing it out against a neighbor’s rooster to rouse its spirit,
withdrawing it toward his loins to calm it again. Now and then, to get a
feel for another bird, a man will fiddle this way with someone else’s
cock for a while, but usually by moving around to squat in place behind
it, rather than just having it passed across to him as though it were
merely an animal.

In the houseyard, the high-walled enclosures where the people live,
fighting cocks are kept in wicker cages, moved frequently about so as to
maintain the optimum balance of sun and shade. They are fed a special
diet, which varies somewhat according to individual theories but which
is mostly maize, sifted for impurities with far more care than it is
when mere humans are going to eat it, and offered to the animal kernel
by kernel. Red pepper is stuffed down their beaks and up their anuses to
give them spirit. They are bathed in the same ceremonial preparation of
tepid water, medicinal herbs, flowers, and onions in which infants are
bathed, and for a prize cock just about as often. Their combs are
cropped, their plumage dressed, their spurs trimmed, and their legs
massaged, and they are inspected for flaws with the squinted
concentration of a diamond merchant. A man who has a passion for cocks,
an enthusiast in the literal sense of the term, can spend most of his
life with them, and even those, the overwhelming majority, whose passion
though intense has not entirely run away with them, can and do spend
what seems not only to an outsider, but also to themselves, an
inordinate amount of time with them. “I am cock crazy,” my landlord, a
quite ordinary afficionado by Balinese standards, used to moan as he
went to move another cage, give another bath, or conduct another
feeding. “We’re all cock crazy.”

The madness has some less visible dimensions, however, because although
it is true that cocks are symbolic expressions or magnifications of
their owner’s self, the narcissistic male ego writ out in Aesopian
terms, they are also expressions—and rather more immediate ones—of what
the Balinese regard as the direct inversion, aesthetically, morally, and
metaphysically, of human status: animality.

The Balinese revulsion against any behavior regarded as animal-like can
hardly be overstressed. Babies are not allowed to crawl for that reason.
Incest, though hardly approved, is a much less horrifying crime than
bestiality. (The appropriate punishment for the second is death by
drowning, for the first being forced to live like an animal.)⁸⁸ Most
demons are represented—in sculpture, dance, ritual, myth—in some real or
fantastic animal form. The main puberty rite consists in filing the
child’s teeth so they will not look like animal fangs. Not only
defecation but eating is regarded as a disgusting, almost obscene
activity, to be conducted hurriedly and privately, because of its
association with animality. Even falling down or any form of clumsiness
is considered to be bad for these reasons. Aside from cocks and a few
domestic animals—oxen, ducks—of no emotional significance, the Balinese
are aversive to animals and treat their large number of dogs not merely
callously but with a phobic cruelty. In identifying with his cock, the
Balinese man is identifying not just with his ideal self, or even his
penis, but also, and at the same time, with what he most fears, hates,
and ambivalence being what it is, is fascinated by—“The Powers of
Darkness.”

The connection of cocks and cockfighting with such Powers, with the
animalistic demons that threaten constantly to invade the small,
cleared-off space in which the Balinese have so carefully built their
lives and devour its inhabitants, is quite explicit. A cockfight, any
cockfight, is in the first instance a blood sacrifice offered, with the
appropriate chants and oblations, to the demons in order to pacify their
ravenous, cannibal hunger. No temple festival should be conducted until
one is made. (If it is omitted, someone will inevitably fall into a
trance and command with the voice of an angered spirit that the
oversight be immediately corrected.) Collective responses to natural
evils—illness, crop failure, volcanic eruptions—almost always involve
them. And that famous holiday in Bali, “The Day of Silence” (Njepi),
when everyone sits silent and immobile all day long in order to avoid
contact with a sudden influx of demons chased momentarily out of hell,
is preceded the previous day by large-scale cockfights (in this case
legal) in almost every village on the island.

In the cockfight, man and beast, good and evil, ego and id, the creative
power of aroused masculinity and the destructive power of loosened
animality fuse in a bloody drama of hatred, cruelty, violence, and
death. It is little wonder that when, as is the invariable rule, the
owner of the winning cock takes the carcass of the loser—often torn limb
from limb by its enraged owner—home to eat, he does so with a mixture of
social embarrassment, moral satisfaction, aesthetic disgust, and
cannibal joy. Or that a man who has lost an important fight is sometimes
driven to wreck his family shrines and curse the gods, an act of
metaphysical (and social) suicide. Or that in seeking earthly analogues
for heaven and hell the Balinese compare the former to the mood of a man
whose cock has just won, the latter to that of a man whose cock has just
lost.

The Fight

Cockfights (tetadjen; sabungan) are held in a ring about fifty feet
square. Usually they begin toward late afternoon and run three or four
hours until sunset. About nine or ten separate matches (sehet) comprise
a program. Each match is precisely like the others in general pattern:
there is no main match, no connection between individual matches, no
variation in their format, and each is arranged on a completely ad hoc
basis. After a fight has ended and the emotional debris is cleaned
away—the bets have been paid, the curses cursed, the carcasses
possessed—seven, eight, perhaps even a dozen men slip negligently into
the ring with a cock and seek to find there a logical opponent for it.
This process, which rarely takes less than ten minutes, and often a good
deal longer, is conducted in a very subdued, oblique, even dissembling
manner. Those not immediately involved give it at best but disguised,
sidelong attention; those who, embarrassedly, are, attempt to pretend
somehow that the whole thing is not really happening.

A match made, the other hopefuls retire with the same deliberate
indifference, and the selected cocks have their spurs (tadji)
affixed—razor-sharp, pointed steel swords, four or five inches long.
This is a delicate job which only a small proportion of men, a
half-dozen or so in most villages, know how to do properly. The man who
attaches the spurs also provides them, and if the rooster he assists
wins, its owner awards him the spur-leg of the victim. The spurs are
affixed by winding a long length of string around the foot of the spur
and the leg of the cock. For reasons I shall come to presently, it is
done somewhat differently from case to case, and is an obsessively
deliberate affair. The lore about spurs is extensive—they are sharpened
only at eclipses and the dark of the moon, should be kept out of the
sight of women, and so forth. And they are handled, both in use and out,
with the same curious combination of fussiness and sensuality the
Balinese direct toward ritual objects generally.

The spurs affixed, the two cocks are placed by their handlers (who may
or may not be their owners) facing one another in the center of the
ring.⁹⁹ A coconut pierced with a small hole is placed in a pail of
water, in which it takes about twenty-one seconds to sink, a period
known as a tjeng and marked at beginning and end by the beating of a
slit gong. During these twenty-one seconds the handlers (pengangkcb) are
not permitted to touch their roosters. If, as sometimes happens, the
animals have not fought during this time, they are picked up, fluffed,
pulled, prodded, and otherwise insulted, and put back in the center of
the ring and the process begins again. Sometimes they refuse to fight at
all, or one keeps running away, in which case they are imprisoned
together under a wicker cage, which usually gets them engaged.

Most of the time, in any case, the cocks fly almost immediately at one
another in a wing-beating, head-thrusting, leg-kicking explosion of
animal fury so pure, so absolute, and in its own way so beautiful, as to
be almost abstract, a Platonic concept of hate. Within moments one or
the other drives home a solid blow with his spur. The handler whose cock
has delivered the blow immediately picks it up so that it will not get a
return blow, for if he does not the match is likely to end in a mutually
mortal tie as the two birds wildly hack each other to pieces. This is
particularly true if, as often happens, the spur sticks in its victim’s
body, for then the aggressor is at the mercy of his wounded foe.

With the birds again in the hands of their handlers, the coconut is now
sunk three times after which the cock which has landed the blow must be
set down to show that he is firm, a fact he demonstrates by wandering
idly around the ring for a coconut sink. The coconut is then sunk twice
more and the fight must recommence.

During this interval, slightly over two minutes, the handler of the
wounded cock has been working frantically over it, like a trainer
patching a mauled boxer between rounds, to get it in shape for a last,
desperate try for victory. He blows in its mouth, putting the whole
chicken head in his own mouth and sucking and blowing, fluffs it, stuffs
its wounds with various sorts of medicines, and generally tries anything
he can think of to arouse the last ounce of spirit which may be hidden
somewhere within it. By the time he is forced to put it back down he is
usually drenched in chicken blood, but, as in prize fighting, a good
handler is worth his weight in gold. Some of them can virtually make the
dead walk, at least long enough for the second and final round.

In the climactic battle (if there is one; sometimes the wounded cock
simply expires in the handler’s hands or immediately as it is placed
down again), the cock who landed the first blow usually proceeds to
finish off his weakened opponent. But this is far from an inevitable
outcome, for if a cock can walk, he can fight, and if he can fight, he
can kill, and what counts is which cock expires first. If the wounded
one can get a stab in and stagger on until the other drops, he is the
official winner, even if he himself topples over an instant later.

Surrounding all this melodrama—which the crowd packed tight around the
ring follows in near silence, moving their bodies in kinesthetic
sympathy with the movement of the animals, cheering their champions on
with wordless hand motions, shiftings of the shoulders, turnings of the
head, falling back en masse as the cock with the murderous spurs careens
toward one side of the ring (it is said that spectators sometimes lose
eyes and fingers from being too attentive), surging forward again as
they glance off toward another—is a vast body of extraordinarily
elaborate and precisely detailed rules.

These rules, together with the developed lore of cocks and cockfighting
which accompanies them, are written down in palm-leaf manuscripts
(lontar; rontal) passed on from generation to generation as part of the
general legal and cultural tradition of the villages. At a fight, the
umpire (saja komong; djuru kembar)—the man who manages the coconut—is in
charge of their application and his authority is absolute. I have never
seen an umpire’s judgment questioned on any subject, even by the more
despondent losers, nor have I ever heard, even in private, a charge of
unfairness directed against one, or, for that matter, complaints about
umpires in general. Only exceptionally well trusted, solid, and, given
the complexity of the code, knowledgeable citizens perform this job, and
in fact men will bring their cocks only to fights presided over by such
men. It is also the umpire to whom accusations of cheating, which,
though rare in the extreme, occasionally arise, are referred; and it is
he who in the not infrequent cases where the cocks expire virtually
together decides which (if either, for, though the Balinese do not care
for such an outcome, there can be ties) went first. Likened to a judge,
a king, a priest, and a policeman, he is all of these, and under his
assured direction the animal passion of the fight proceeds within the
civic certainty of the law. In the dozens of cockfights I saw in Bali, I
never once saw an altercation about rules. Indeed, I never saw an open
altercation, other than those between cocks, at all.

This crosswise doubleness of an event which, taken as a fact of nature,
is rage untrammeled and, taken as a fact of culture, is form perfected,
defines the cockfight as a sociological entity. A cockfight is what,
searching for a name for something not vertebrate enough to be called a
group and not structureless enough to be called a crowd, Erving Goffman
has called a “focused gathering”—a set of persons engrossed in a common
flow of activity and relating to one another in terms of that flow.¹⁰¹⁰
Such gatherings meet and disperse; the participants in them fluctuate;
the activity that focuses them is discrete—a particulate process that
reoccurs rather than a continuous one that endures. They take their form
from the situation that evokes them, the floor on which they are placed,
as Goffman puts it; but it is a form, and an articulate one,
nonetheless. For the situation, the floor is itself created, in jury
deliberations, surgical operations, block meetings, sit-ins, cockfights,
by the cultural preoccupations—here, as we shall see, the celebration of
status rivalry—which not only specify the focus but, assembling actors
and arranging scenery, bring it actually into being.

In classical times (that is to say, prior to the Dutch invasion of
1908), when there were no bureaucrats around to improve popular
morality, the staging of a cockfight was an explicitly societal matter.
Bringing a cock to an important fight was, for an adult male, a
compulsory duty of citizenship; taxation of fights, which were usually
held on market day, was a major source of public revenue; patronage of
the art was a stated responsibility of princes; and the cock ring, or
wantilan, stood in the center of the village near those other monuments
of Balinese civility—the council house, the origin temple, the
marketplace, the signal tower, and the banyan tree. Today, a few special
occasions aside, the newer rectitude makes so open a statement of the
connection between the excitements of collective life and those of blood
sport impossible, but, less directly expressed, the connection itself
remains intimate and intact. To expose it, however, it is necessary to
turn to the aspect of cockfighting around which all the others pivot,
and through which they exercise their force, an aspect I have thus far
studiously ignored. I mean, of course, the gambling.

Odds and Even Money

The Balinese never do anything in a simple way that they can contrive to
do in a complicated one, and to this generalization cockfight wagering
is no exception.

In the first place, there are two sorts of bets, or toh.¹¹¹¹ There is
the single axial bet in the center between the principals (toh
ketengah), and there is the cloud of peripheral ones around the ring
between members of the audience (toh kesasi). The first is typically
large; the second typically small. The first is collective, involving
coalitions of bettors clustering around the owner; the second is
individual, man to man. The first is a matter of deliberate, very quiet,
almost furtive arrangement by the coalition members and the umpire
huddled like conspirators in the center of the ring; the second is a
matter of impulsive shouting, public offers, and public acceptances by
the excited throng around its edges. And most curiously, and as we shall
see most revealingly, where the first is always, without exception, even
money, the second, equally without exception, is never such. What is a
fair coin in the center is a biased one on the side.

The center bet is the official one, hedged in again with a webwork of
rules, and is made between the two cock owners, with the umpire as
overseer and public witness.¹²¹² This bet, which, as I say, is always
relatively and sometimes very large, is never raised simply by the owner
in whose name it is made, but by him together with four or five,
sometimes seven or eight, allies—kin, village mates, neighbors, close
friends. He may, if he is not especially well-to-do, not even be the
major contributor; though, if only to show that he is not involved in
any chicanery, he must be a significant one.

Of the fifty-seven matches for which I have exact and reliable data on
the center bet, the range is from fifteen ringgits to five hundred, with
a mean at eighty-five and with the distribution being rather noticeably
trimodal: small fights (15 ringgits either side of 35) accounting for
about 45 percent of the total number; medium ones (20 ringgits either
side of 70) for about 25 percent; and large (75 ringgits either side of
175) for about 20 percent, with a few very small and very large ones out
at the extremes. In a society where the normal daily wage of a manual
laborer—a brickmaker, an ordinary farmworker, a market porter—was about
three ringgits a day, and considering the fact that fights were held on
the average about every two-and-a-half days in the immediate area I
studied, this is clearly serious gambling, even if the bets are pooled
rather than individual efforts.

The side bets are, however, something else altogether. Rather than the
solemn, legalistic pactmaking of the center, wagering takes place rather
in the fashion in which the stock exchange used to work when it was out
on the curb. There is a fixed and known odds paradigm which runs in a
continuous series from ten-to-nine at the short end to two-to-one at the
long: 10–9, 9–8, 8–7, 7–6, 6–5, 5–4, 4–3, 3–2, 2–1. The man who wishes
to back the underdog cock (leaving aside how favorites, kebut, and
underdogs, ngai, are established for the moment) shouts the short-side
number indicating the odds he wants to be given. That is, if he shouts
gasal, “five,” he wants the underdog at five-to-four (or, for him,
four-to-five); if he shouts “four,” he wants it at four-to-three (again,
he putting up the “three”); if “nine,” at nine-to-eight, and so on. A
man backing the favorite, and thus considering giving odds if he can get
them short enough, indicates the fact by crying out the color-type of
that cock—“brown,” “speckled,” or whatever.¹³¹³

As odds-takers (backers of the underdog) and odds-givers (backers of the
favorite) sweep the crowd with their shouts, they begin to focus in on
one another as potential betting pairs, often from far across the ring.
The taker tries to shout the giver into longer odds, the giver to shout
the taker into shorter ones.¹⁴¹⁴ The taker, who is the wooer in this
situation, will signal how large a bet he wishes to make at the odds he
is shouting by holding a number of fingers up in front of his face and
vigorously waving them. If the giver, the wooed, replies in kind, the
bet is made; if he does not, they unlock gazes and the search goes on.

The side betting, which takes place after the center bet has been made
and its size announced, consists then in a rising crescendo of shouts as
backers of the underdog offer their propositions to anyone who will
accept them, while those who are backing the favorite but do not like
the price being offered, shout equally frenetically the color of the
cock to show they too are desperate to bet but want shorter odds.

Almost always odds-calling, which tends to be very consensual in that at
any one time almost all callers are calling the same thing, starts off
toward the long end of the range—five-to-four or four-to-three—and then
moves, also consensually, toward the short end with greater or lesser
speed and to a greater or lesser degree. Men crying “five” and finding
themselves answered only with cries of “brown” start crying “six,”
either drawing the other callers fairly quickly with them or retiring
from the scene as their too-generous offers are snapped up. If the
change is made and partners are still scarce, the procedure is repeated
in a move to “seven,” and so on, only rarely, and in the very largest
fights, reaching the ultimate “nine” or “ten” levels. Occasionally, if
the cocks are clearly mismatched, there may be no upward movement at
all, or even a movement down the scale to four-to-three, three-to-two,
very, very rarely two-to-one, a shift which is accompanied by a
declining number of bets as a shift upward is accompanied by an
increasing number. But the general pattern is for the betting to move a
shorter or longer distance up the scale toward the, for sidebets,
nonexistent pole of even money, with the overwhelming majority of bets
falling in the four-to-three to eight-to-seven range.¹⁵¹⁵

As the moment for the release of the cocks by the handlers approaches,
the screaming, at least in a match where the center bet is large,
reaches almost frenzied proportions as the remaining unfulfilled bettors
try desperately to find a last-minute partner at a price they can live
with. (Where the center bet is small, the opposite tends to occur:
betting dies off, trailing into silence, as odds lengthen and people
lose interest.) In a large-bet, well-made match—the kind of match the
Balinese regard as “real cockfighting”—the mob scene quality, the sense
that sheer chaos is about to break loose, with all those waving,
shouting, pushing, clambering men is quite strong, an effect which is
only heightened by the intense stillness that falls with instant
suddenness, rather as if someone had turned off the current, when the
slit gong sounds, the cocks are put down, and the battle begins.

When it ends, anywhere from fifteen seconds to five minutes later, all
bets are immediately paid. There are absolutely no IOUs, at least to a
betting opponent. One may, of course, borrow from a friend before
offering or accepting a wager, but to offer or accept it you must have
the money already in hand and, if you lose, you must pay it on the spot,
before the next match begins. This is an iron rule, and as I have never
heard of a disputed umpire’s decision (though doubtless there must
sometimes be some), I have also never heard of a welshed bet, perhaps
because in a worked-up cockfight crowd the consequences might be, as
they are reported to be sometimes for cheaters, drastic and immediate.

It is, in any case, this formal asymmetry between balanced center bets
and unbalanced side ones that poses the critical analytical problem for
a theory which sees cockfight wagering as the link connecting the fight
to the wider world of Balinese culture. It also suggests the way to go
about solving it and demonstrating the link.

The first point that needs to be made in this connection is that the
higher the center bet, the more likely the match will in actual fact be
an even one. Simple considerations of rationality suggest that. If you
are betting fifteen ringgits on a cock, you might be willing to go along
with even money even if you feel your animal somewhat the less
promising. But if you are betting five hundred you are very, very likely
to be loathe to do so. Thus, in large-bet fights, which of course
involve the better animals, tremendous care is taken to see that the
cocks are about as evenly matched as to size, general condition,
pugnacity, and so on as is humanly possible. The different ways of
adjusting the spurs of the animals are often employed to secure this. If
one cock seems stronger, an agreement will be made to position his spur
at a slightly less advantageous angle—a kind of handicapping, at which
spur affixers are, so it is said, extremely skilled. More care will be
taken, too, to employ skillful handlers and to match them exactly as to
abilities.

In short, in a large-bet fight the pressure to make the match a
genuinely fifty-fifty proposition is enormous, and is consciously felt
as such. For medium fights the pressure is somewhat less, and for small
ones less yet, though there is always an effort to make things at least
approximately equal, for even at fifteen ringgits (five days’ work) no
one wants to make an even money bet in a clearly unfavorable situation.
And, again, what statistics I have tend to bear this out. In my
fifty-seven matches, the favorite won thirty-three times overall, the
underdog twenty-four, a 1.4 : 1 ratio. But if one splits the figures at
sixty ringgits center bets, the ratios turn out to be 1.1 : 1 (twelve
favorites, eleven underdogs) for those above this line, and 1.6 : 1
(twenty-one and thirteen) for those below it. Or, if you take the
extremes, for very large fights, those with center bets over a hundred
ringgits the ratio is 1 : 1 (seven and seven); for very small fights,
those under forty ringgits, it is 1.9 : 1 (nineteen and ten).¹⁶¹⁶

Now, from this proposition—that the higher the center bet the more
exactly a fifty-fifty proposition the cockfight is—two things more or
less immediately follow: (1) the higher the center bet is, the greater
the pull on the side betting toward the short-odds end of the wagering
spectrum, and vice versa; (2) the higher the center bet is, the greater
the volume of side betting, and vice versa.

The logic is similar in both cases. The closer the fight is in fact to
even money, the less attractive the long end of the odds will appear
and, therefore, the shorter it must be if there are to be takers. That
this is the case is apparent from mere inspection, from the Balinese’s
own analysis of the matter, and from what more systematic observations I
was able to collect. Given the difficulty of making precise and complete
recordings of side betting, this argument is hard to cast in numerical
form, but in all my cases the odds-giver, odds-taker consensual point, a
quite pronounced mini-max saddle where the bulk (at a guess, two-thirds
to three-quarters in most cases) of the bets are actually made, was
three or four points further along the scale toward the shorter end for
the large-center-bet fights than for the small ones, with medium ones
generally in between. In detail, the fit is not, of course, exact, but
the general pattern is quite consistent: the power of the center bet to
pull the side bets toward its own even-money pattern is directly
proportional to its size, because its size is directly proportional to
the degree to which the cocks are in fact evenly matched. As for the
volume question, total wagering is greater in large-center-bet fights
because such fights are considered more “interesting,” not only in the
sense that they are less predictable, but, more crucially, that more is
at stake in them—in terms of money, in terms of the quality of the
cocks, and consequently, as we shall see, in terms of social
prestige.¹⁷¹⁷

The paradox of fair coin in the middle, biased coin on the outside is
thus a merely apparent one. The two betting systems, though formally
incongruent, are not really contradictory to one another, but are part
of a single larger system in which the center bet is, so to speak, the
“center of gravity,” drawing, the larger it is the more so, the outside
bets toward the short-odds end of the scale. The center bet thus “makes
the game,” or perhaps better, defines it, signals what, following a
notion of Jeremy Bentham’s, I am going to call its “depth.”

The Balinese attempt to create an interesting, if you will, “deep,”
match by making the center bet as large as possible so that the cocks
matched will be as equal and as fine as possible, and the outcome, thus,
as unpredictable as possible. They do not always succeed. Nearly half
the matches are relatively trivial, relatively uninteresting—in my
borrowed terminology, “shallow”—affairs. But that fact no more argues
against my interpretation than the fact that most painters, poets, and
playwrights are mediocre argues against the view that artistic effort is
directed toward profundity and, with a certain frequency, approximates
it. The image of artistic technique is indeed exact: the center bet is a
means, a device, for creating “interesting,” “deep” matches, not the
reason, or at least not the main reason, why they are interesting, the
source of their fascination, the substance of their depth. The question
of why such matches are interesting—indeed, for the Balinese,
exquisitely absorbing—takes us out of the realm of formal concerns into
more broadly sociological and social-psychological ones, and to a less
purely economic idea of what “depth” in gaming amounts to.¹⁸¹⁸

Playing with Fire

Bentham’s concept of “deep play” is found in his The Theory of
Legislation.¹⁹¹⁹ By it he means play in which the stakes are so high
that it is, from his utilitarian standpoint, irrational for men to
engage in it at all. If a man whose fortune is a thousand pounds (or
ringgits) wages five hundred of it on an even bet, the marginal utility
of the pound he stands to win is clearly less than the marginal
disutility of the one he stands to lose. In genuine deep play, this is
the case for both parties. They are both in over their heads. Having
come together in search of pleasure they have entered into a
relationship which will bring the participants, considered collectively,
net pain rather than net pleasure. Bentham’s conclusion was, therefore,
that deep play was immoral from first principles and, a typical step for
him, should be prevented legally.

But more interesting than the ethical problem, at least for our concerns
here, is that despite the logical force of Bentham’s analysis men do
engage in such play, both passionately and often, and even in the face
of law’s revenge. For Bentham and those who think as he does (nowadays
mainly lawyers, economists, and a few psychiatrists), the explanation
is, as I have said, that such men are irrational—addicts, fetishists,
children, fools, savages, who need only to be protected against
themselves. But for the Balinese, though naturally they do not formulate
it in so many words, the explanation lies in the fact that in such play,
money is less a measure of utility, had or expected, than it is a symbol
of moral import, perceived or imposed.

It is, in fact, in shallow games, ones in which smaller amounts of money
are involved, that increments and decrements of cash are more nearly
synonyms for utility and disutility, in the ordinary, unexpanded
sense—for pleasure and pain, happiness and unhappiness. In deep ones,
where the amounts of money are great, much more is at stake than
material gain: namely, esteem, honor, dignity, respect—in a word, though
in Bali a profoundly freighted word, status.²⁰²⁰ It is at stake
symbolically, for (a few cases of ruined addict gamblers aside) no one’s
status is actually altered by the outcome of a cockfight; it is only,
and that momentarily, affirmed or insulted. But for the Balinese, for
whom nothing is more pleasurable than an affront obliquely delivered or
more painful than one obliquely received—particularly when mutual
acquaintances, undeceived by surfaces, are watching—such appraisive
drama is deep indeed.

This, I must stress immediately, is not to say that the money does not
matter, or that the Balinese is no more concerned about losing five
hundred ringgits than fifteen. Such a conclusion would be absurd. It is
because money does, in this hardly unmaterialistic society, matter and
matter very much that the more of it one risks, the more of a lot of
other things, such as one’s pride, one’s poise, one’s dispassion, one’s
masculinity, one also risks, again only momentarily but again very
publicly as well. In deep cockfights an owner and his collaborators,
and, as we shall see, to a lesser but still quite real extent also their
backers on the outside, put their money where their status is.

It is in large part because the marginal disutility of loss is so great
at the higher levels of betting that to engage in such betting is to lay
one’s public self, allusively and metaphorically, through the medium of
one’s cock, on the line. And though to a Benthamite this might seem
merely to increase the irrationality of the enterprise that much
further, to the Balinese what it mainly increases is the meaningfulness
of it all. And as (to follow Weber rather than Bentham) the imposition
of meaning on life is the major end and primary condition of human
existence, that access of significance more than compensates for the
economic costs involved.²¹²¹ Actually, given the even-money quality of
the larger matches, important changes in material fortune among those
who regularly participate in them seem virtually nonexistent, because
matters more or less even out over the long run. It is, actually, in the
smaller, shallow fights, where one finds the handful of more pure,
addict-type gamblers involved—those who are in it mainly for the
money—that “real” changes in social position, largely downward, are
affected. Men of this sort, plungers, are highly dispraised by “true
cockfighters” as fools who do not understand what the sport is all
about, vulgarians who simply miss the point of it all. They are, these
addicts, regarded as fair game for the genuine enthusiasts, those who do
understand, to take a little money away from—something that is easy
enough to do by luring them, through the force of their greed, into
irrational bets on mismatched cocks. Most of them do indeed manage to
ruin themselves in a remarkably short time, but there always seems to be
one or two of them around, pawning their land and selling their clothes
in order to bet, at any particular time.²²²²

This graduated correlation of “status gambling” with deeper fights and,
inversely, “money gambling” with shallower ones is in fact quite
general. Bettors themselves form a sociomoral hierarchy in these terms.
As noted earlier, at most cockfights there are, around the very edges of
the cockfight area, a large number of mindless, sheer-chance-type
gambling games (roulette, dice throw, coin-spin, pea-under-the-shell)
operated by concessionaires. Only women, children, adolescents, and
various other sorts of people who do not (or not yet) fight cocks—the
extremely poor, the socially despised, the personally idiosyncratic—play
at these games, at, of course, penny ante levels. Cockfighting men would
be ashamed to go anywhere near them. Slightly above these people in
standing are those who though they do not themselves fight cocks, bet on
the smaller matches around the edges. Next, there are those who fight
cocks in small, or occasionally medium matches, but have not the status
to join in the large ones, though they may bet from time to time on the
side in those. And finally, there are those, the really substantial
members of the community, the solid citizenry around whom local life
revolves, who fight in the larger fights and bet on them around the
side. The focusing element in these focused gatherings, these men
generally dominate and define the sport as they dominate and define the
society. When a Balinese male talks, in that almost venerative way,
about “the true cockfighter,” the bebatoh (“bettor”) or djuru kurung
(“cage keeper”), it is this sort of person, not those who bring the
mentality of the pea-and-shell game into the quite different,
inappropriate context of the cockfight, the driven gambler (potét, a
word which has the secondary meaning of thief or reprobate), and the
wistful hanger-on, that they mean. For such a man, what is really going
on in a match is something rather closer to an affaire d’honneur
(though, with the Balinese talent for practical fantasy, the blood that
is spilled is only figuratively human) than to the stupid, mechanical
crank of a slot machine.

What makes Balinese cockfighting deep is thus not money in itself, but
what, the more of it that is involved the more so, money causes to
happen: the migration of the Balinese status hierarchy into the body of
the cockfight. Psychologically an Aesopian representation of the ideal /
demonic, rather narcissistic, male self, sociologically it is an equally
Aesopian representation of the complex fields of tension set up by the
controlled, muted, ceremonial, but for all that deeply felt, interaction
of those selves in the context of everyday life. The cocks may be
surrogates for their owners’ personalities, animal mirrors of psychic
form, but the cockfight is—or more exactly, deliberately is made to be—a
simulation of the social matrix, the involved system of cross-cutting,
overlapping, highly corporate groups—villages, kingroups, irrigation
societies, temple congregations, “castes”—in which its devotees
live.²³²³ And as prestige, the necessity to affirm it, defend it,
celebrate it, justify it, and just plain bask in it (but not, given the
strongly ascriptive character of Balinese stratification, to seek it),
is perhaps the central driving force in the society, so also—ambulant
penises, blood sacrifices, and monetary exchanges aside—is it of the
cockfight. This apparent amusement and seeming sport is, to take another
phrase from Erving Goffman, “a status bloodbath.”²⁴²⁴

The easiest way to make this clear, and at least to some degree to
demonstrate it, is to invoke the village whose cockfighting activities I
observed the closest—the one in which the raid occurred and from which
my statistical data are taken.

Like all Balinese villages, this one—Tihingan, in the Klungkung region
of southeast Bali—is intricately organized, a labyrinth of alliances and
oppositions. But, unlike many, two sorts of corporate groups, which are
also status groups, particularly stand out, and we may concentrate on
them, in a part-for-whole way, without undue distortion.

First, the village is dominated by four large, patrilineal, partly
endogamous descent groups which are constantly vying with one another
and form the major factions in the village. Sometimes they group two and
two, or rather the two larger ones versus the two smaller ones plus all
the unaffiliated people; sometimes they operate independently. There are
also subfactions within them, subfactions within the subfactions, and so
on to rather fine levels of distinction. And second, there is the
village itself, almost entirely endogamous, which is opposed to all the
other villages round about in its cockfight circuit (which, as
explained, is the market region), but which also forms alliances with
certain of these neighbors against certain others in various
supravillage political and social contexts. The exact situation is thus,
as everywhere in Bali, quite distinctive; but the general pattern of a
tiered hierarchy of status rivalries between highly corporate but
various based groupings (and, thus, between the members of them) is
entirely general.

Consider, then, as support of the general thesis that the cockfight, and
especially the deep cockfight, is fundamentally a dramatization of
status concerns, the following facts, which to avoid extended
ethnographic description I shall simply pronounce to be facts—though the
concrete evidence, examples, statements, and numbers that could be
brought to bear in support of them, is both extensive and unmistakable:

1. A man virtually never bets against a cock owned by a member of his
own kingroup. Usually he will feel obliged to bet for it, the more so
the closer the kin tie and the deeper the fight. If he is certain in his
mind that it will not win, he may just not bet at all, particularly if
it is only a second cousin’s bird or if the fight is a shallow one. But
as a rule he will feel he must support it and, in deep games, nearly
always does. Thus the great majority of the people calling “five” or
“speckled” so demonstratively are expressing their allegiance to their
kinsman, not their evaluation of his bird, their understanding of
probability theory, or even their hopes of unearned income.

2. This principle is extended logically. If your kingroup is not
involved you will support an allied kingroup against an unallied one in
the same way, and so on through the very involved networks of alliances
which, as I say, make up this, as any other, Balinese village.

3. So, too, for the village as a whole. If an outsider cock is fighting
any cock from your village, you will tend to support the local one. If,
what is a rarer circumstance but occurs every now and then, a cock from
outside your cockfight circuit is fighting one inside it, you will also
tend to support the “home bird.”

4. Cocks which come from any distance are almost always favorites, for
the theory is the man would not have dared to bring it if it was not a
good cock, the more so the further he has come. His followers are, of
course, obliged to support him, and when the more grand-scale legal
cockfights are held (on holidays, and so on) the people of the village
take what they regard to be the best cocks in the village, regardless of
ownership, and go off to support them, although they will almost
certainly have to give odds on them and to make large bets to show that
they are not a cheapskate village. Actually, such “away games,” though
infrequent, tend to mend the ruptures between village members that the
constantly occurring “home games,” where village factions are opposed
rather than united, exacerbate.

5. Almost all matches are sociologically relevant. You seldom get two
outsider cocks fighting, or two cocks with no particular group backing,
or with group backing which is mutually unrelated in any clear way. When
you do get them, the game is very shallow, betting very slow, and the
whole thing very dull, with no one save the immediate principals and an
addict gambler or two at all interested.

6. By the same token, you rarely get two cocks from the same group, even
more rarely from the same subfaction, and virtually never from the same
sub-subfaction (which would be in most cases one extended family)
fighting. Similarly, in outside village fights two members of the
village will rarely fight against one another, even though, as bitter
rivals, they would do so with enthusiasm on their home grounds.

7. On the individual level, people involved in an institutionalized
hostility relationship, called puik, in which they do not speak or
otherwise have anything to do with each other (the causes of this formal
breaking of relations are many: wife-capture, inheritance arguments,
political differences) will bet very heavily, sometimes almost
maniacally, against one another in what is a frank and direct attack on
the very masculinity, the ultimate ground of his status, of the
opponent.

8. The center bet coalition is, in all but the shallowest games, always
made up by structural allies—no “outside money” is involved. What is
“outside” depends upon the context, of course, but given it, no outside
money is mixed in with the main bet; if the principals cannot raise it,
it is not made. The center bet, again especially in deeper games, is
thus the most direct and open expression of social opposition, which is
one of the reasons why both it and matchmaking are surrounded by such an
air of unease, furtiveness, embarrassment, and so on.

9. The rule about borrowing money—that you may borrow for a bet but not
in one—stems (and the Balinese are quite conscious of this) from similar
considerations: you are never at the economic mercy of your enemy that
way. Gambling debts, which can get quite large on a rather short-term
basis, are always to friends, never to enemies, structurally speaking.

10. When two cocks are structurally irrelevant or neutral so far as you
are concerned (though, as mentioned, they almost never are to each
other) you do not even ask a relative or a friend whom he is betting on,
because if you know how he is betting and he knows you know, and you go
the other way, it will lead to strain. This rule is explicit and rigid;
fairly elaborate, even rather artificial precautions are taken to avoid
breaking it. At the very least you must pretend not to notice what he is
doing, and he what you are doing.

11. There is a special word for betting against the grain, which is also
the word for “pardon me” (mpura). It is considered a bad thing to do,
though if the center bet is small it is sometimes all right as long as
you do not do it too often. But the larger the bet and the more
frequently you do it, the more the “pardon me” tack will lead to social
disruption.

12. In fact, the institutionalized hostility relation, puik, is often
formally initiated (though its causes always lie elsewhere) by such a
“pardon me” bet in a deep fight, putting the symbolic fat in the fire.
Similarly, the end of such a relationship and resumption of normal
social intercourse is often signalized (but, again, not actually brought
about) by one or the other of the enemies supporting the other’s bird.

13. In sticky, cross-loyalty situations, of which in this
extraordinarily complex social system there are of course many, where a
man is caught between two more or less equally balanced loyalties, he
tends to wander off for a cup of coffee or something to avoid having to
bet, a form of behavior reminiscent of that of American voters in
similar situations.²⁵²⁵

14. The people involved in the center bet are, especially in deep
fights, virtually always leading members of their group—kinship,
village, or whatever. Further, those who bet on the side (including
these people) are, as I have already remarked, the more established
members of the village—the solid citizens. Cockfighting is for those who
are involved in the everyday politics of prestige as well, not for
youth, women, subordinates, and so forth.

15. So far as money is concerned, the explicitly expressed attitude
toward it is that it is a secondary matter. It is not, as I have said,
of no importance; Balinese are no happier to lose several weeks’ income
than anyone else. But they mainly look on the monetary aspects of the
cockfight as self-balancing, a matter of just moving money around,
circulating it among a fairly well-defined group of serious
cockfighters. The really important wins and losses are seen mostly in
other terms, and the general attitude toward wagering is not any hope of
cleaning up, of making a killing (addict gamblers again excepted), but
that of the horseplayer’s prayer: “Oh, God, please let me break even.”
In prestige terms, however, you do not want to break even, but, in a
momentary, punctuate sort of way, win utterly. The talk (which goes on
all the time) is about fights against such-and-such a cock of So-and-So
which your cock demolished, not on how much you won, a fact people, even
for large bets, rarely remember for any length of time, though they will
remember the day they did in Pan Loh’s finest cock for years.

16. You must bet on cocks of your own group aside from mere loyalty
considerations, for if you do not people generally will say, “What! Is
he too proud for the likes of us? Does he have to go to Java or Den
Pasar [the capital town] to bet, he is such an important man?” Thus
there is a general pressure to bet not only to show that you are
important locally, but that you are not so important that you look down
on everyone else as unfit even to be rivals. Similarly, home team people
must bet against outside cocks or the outsiders will accuse them—a
serious charge—of just collecting entry fees and not really being
interested in cockfighting, as well as again being arrogant and
insulting.

17. Finally, the Balinese peasants themselves are quite aware of all
this and can and, at least to an ethnographer, do state most of it in
approximately the same terms as I have. Fighting cocks, almost every
Balinese I have ever discussed the subject with has said, is like
playing with fire only not getting burned. You activate village and
kingroup rivalries and hostilities, but in “play” form, coming
dangerously and entrancingly close to the expression of open and direct
interpersonal and intergroup aggression (something which, again, almost
never happens in the normal course of ordinary life), but not quite,
because, after all, it is “only a cockfight.”

More observations of this sort could be advanced, but perhaps the
general point is, if not made, at least well-delineated, and the whole
argument thus far can be usefully summarized in a formal paradigm:

THE MORE A MATCH IS . . .

            1.  Between near status equals (and / or personal enemies)

            2.  Between high status individuals

THE DEEPER THE MATCH.

THE DEEPER THE MATCH . . .

            1.  The closer the identification of cock and man (or, more
properly, the deeper the match the more the man will advance his best,
most closely-identified-with cock).

            2.  The finer the cocks involved and the more exactly they
will be matched.

            3.  The greater the emotion that will be involved and the
more the general absorption in the match.

            4.  The higher the individual bets center and outside, the
shorter the outside bet odds will tend to be, and the more betting there
will be overall.

            5.  The less an “economic” and the more a “status” view of
gaming will be involved, and the “solider” the citizens who will be
gaming.²⁶²⁶

Inverse arguments hold for the shallower the fight, culminating, in a
reversed-signs sense, in the coin-spinning and dice-throwing amusements.
For deep fights there are no absolute upper limits, though there are of
course practical ones, and there are a great many legendlike tales of
great Duel-in-the-Sun combats between lords and princes in classical
times (for cockfighting has always been as much an elite concern as a
popular one), far deeper than anything anyone, even aristocrats, could
produce today anywhere in Bali.

Indeed, one of the great culture heroes of Bali is a prince, called
after his passion for the sport, “The Cockfighter,” who happened to be
away at a very deep cockfight with a neighboring prince when the whole
of his family—father, brothers, wives, sisters—were assassinated by
commoner usurpers. Thus spared, he returned to dispatch the upstart,
regain the throne, reconstitute the Balinese high tradition, and build
its most powerful, glorious, and prosperous state. Along with everything
else that the Balinese see in fighting cocks—themselves, their social
order, abstract hatred, masculinity, demonic power—they also see the
archetype of status virtue, the arrogant, resolute, honor-mad player
with real fire, the ksatria prince.²⁷²⁷

Feathers, Blood, Crowds, and Money

“Poetry makes nothing happen,” Auden says in his elegy of Yeats, “it
survives in the valley of its saying . . . a way of happening, a mouth.”
The cockfight too, in this colloquial sense, makes nothing happen. Men
go on allegorically humiliating one another and being allegorically
humiliated by one another, day after day, glorying quietly in the
experience if they have triumphed, crushed only slightly more openly by
it if they have not. But no one’s status really changes. You cannot
ascend the status ladder by winning cockfights; you cannot, as an
individual, really ascend it at all. Nor can you descend it that
way.²⁸²⁸ All you can do is enjoy and savor, or suffer and withstand, the
concocted sensation of drastic and momentary movement along an aesthetic
semblance of that ladder, a kind of behind-the-mirror status jump which
has the look of mobility without its actuality.

Like any art form—for that, finally, is what we are dealing with—the
cockfight renders ordinary, everyday experience comprehensible by
presenting it in terms of acts and objects which have had their
practical consequences removed and been reduced (or, if you prefer,
raised) to the level of sheer appearances, where their meaning can be
more powerfully articulated and more exactly perceived. The cockfight is
“really real” only to the cocks—it does not kill anyone, castrate
anyone, reduce anyone to animal status, alter the hierarchical relations
among people, or refashion the hierarchy; it does not even redistribute
income in any significant way. What it does is what, for other peoples
with other temperaments and other conventions, Lear and Crime and
Punishment do; it catches up these themes—death, masculinity, rage,
pride, loss, beneficence, chance—and, ordering them into an encompassing
structure, presents them in such a way as to throw into relief a
particular view of their essential nature. It puts a construction on
them, makes them, to those historically positioned to appreciate the
construction, meaningful—visible, tangible, graspable—“real,” in an
ideational sense. An image, fiction, a model, a metaphor, the cockfight
is a means of expression; its function is neither to assuage social
passions nor to heighten them (though, in its playing-with-fire way it
does a bit of both), but, in a medium of feathers, blood, crowds, and
money, to display them.

The question of how it is that we perceive qualities in
things—paintings, books, melodies, plays—that we do not feel we can
assert literally to be there has come, in recent years, into the very
center of aesthetic theory.²⁹²⁹ Neither the sentiments of the artist,
which remain his, nor those of the audience, which remain theirs, can
account for the agitation of one painting or the serenity of another. We
attribute grandeur, wit, despair, exuberance to strings of sounds;
lightness, energy, violence, fluidity to blocks of stone. Novels are
said to have strength, buildings eloquence, plays momentum, ballets
repose. In this realm of eccentric predicates, to say that the
cockfight, in its perfected cases at least, is “disquietful” does not
seem at all unnatural, merely, as I have just denied it practical
consequence, somewhat puzzling.

The disquietfulness arises, “somehow,” out of a conjunction of three
attributes of the fight; its immediate dramatic shape; its metaphoric
content; and its social context. A cultural figure against a social
ground, the fight is at once a convulsive surge of animal hatred, a mock
war of symbolical selves, and a formal simulation of status tensions,
and its aesthetic power derives from its capacity to force together
these diverse realities. The reason it is disquietful is not that it has
material effects (it has some, but they are minor); the reason that it
is disquietful is that, joining pride to selfhood, selfhood to cocks,
and cocks to destruction, it brings to imaginative realization a
dimension of Balinese experience normally well-obscured from view. The
transfer of a sense of gravity into what is in itself a rather blank and
unvarious spectacle, a commotion of beating wings and throbbing legs, is
effected by interpreting it as expressive of something unsettling in the
way its authors and audience live, or, even more ominously, what they
are.

As a dramatic shape, the fight displays a characteristic that does not
seem so remarkable until one realizes that it does not have to be there:
a radically atomistical structure.³⁰³⁰ Each match is a world unto
itself, a particulate burst of form. There is the matchmaking, there is
the betting, there is the fight, there is the result—utter triumph and
utter defeat—and there is the hurried, embarrassed passing of money. The
loser is not consoled. People drift away from him, look around him,
leave him to assimilate his momentary descent into nonbeing, reset his
face, and return, scarless and intact, to the fray. Nor are winners
congratulated, or events rehashed; once a match is ended the crowd’s
attention turns totally to the next, with no looking back. A shadow of
the experience no doubt remains with the principals, perhaps even with
some of the witnesses of a deep fight, as it remains with us when we
leave the theater after seeing a powerful play well-performed; but it
quite soon fades to become at most a schematic memory—a diffuse glow or
an abstract shudder—and usually not even that. Any expressive form lives
only in its own present—the one it itself creates. But, here, that
present is severed into a string of flashes, some more bright than
others, but all of them disconnected, aesthetic quanta. Whatever the
cockfight says, it says in spurts.

But, as I have argued lengthily elsewhere, the Balinese live in
spurts.³¹³¹ Their life, as they arrange it and perceive it, is less a
flow, a directional movement out of the past, through the present,
toward the future than an on-off pulsation of meaning and vacuity, an
arhythmic alternation of short periods when “something” (that is,
something significant) is happening, and equally short ones where
“nothing” (that is, nothing much) is—between what they themselves call
“full” and “empty” times, or, in another idiom, “junctures” and “holes.”
In focusing activity down to a burning-glass dot, the cockfight is
merely being Balinese in the same way in which everything from the
monadic encounters of everyday life, through the clanging pointillism of
gamelan music, to the visiting-day-of-the-gods temple celebrations are.
It is not an imitation of the punctuateness of Balinese social life, nor
a depiction of it, nor even an expression of it; it is an example of it,
carefully prepared.³²³²

If one dimension of the cockfight’s structure, its lack of temporal
directionality, makes it seem a typical segment of the general social
life, however, the other, its flat-out, head-to-head (or spur-to-spur)
aggressiveness, makes it seem a contradiction, a reversal, even a
subversion of it. In the normal course of things, the Balinese are shy
to the point of obsessiveness of open conflict. Oblique, cautious,
subdued, controlled, masters of indirection and dissimulation—what they
call alus, “polished,” “smooth”—they rarely face what they can turn away
from, rarely resist what they can evade. But here they portray
themselves as wild and murderous, with manic explosions of instinctual
cruelty. A powerful rendering of life as the Balinese most deeply do not
want it (to adapt a phrase Frye has used of Gloucester’s blinding) is
set in the context of a sample of it as they do in fact have it.³³³³
And, because the context suggests that the rendering, if less than a
straightforward description, is nonetheless more than an idle fancy; it
is here that the disquietfulness—the disquietfulness of the fight, not
(or, anyway, not necessarily) its patrons, who seem in fact rather
thoroughly to enjoy it—emerges. The slaughter in the cock ring is not a
depiction of how things literally are among men, but, what is almost
worse, of how, from a particular angle, they imaginatively are.³⁴³⁴

The angle, of course, is stratificatory. What, as we have already seen,
the cockfight talks most forcibly about is status relationships, and
what it says about them is that they are matters of life and death. That
prestige is a profoundly serious business is apparent everywhere one
looks in Bali—in the village, the family, the economy, the state. A
peculiar fusion of Polynesian title ranks and Hindu castes, the
hierarchy of pride is the moral backbone of the society. But only in the
cockfight are the sentiments upon which that hierarchy rests revealed in
their natural colors. Enveloped elsewhere in a haze of etiquette, a
thick cloud of euphemism and ceremony, gesture and allusion, they are
here expressed in only the thinnest disguise of an animal mask, a mask
which in fact demonstrates them far more effectively than it conceals
them. Jealousy is as much a part of Bali as poise, envy as grace,
brutality as charm; but without the cockfight the Balinese would have a
much less certain understanding of them, which is, presumably, why they
value it so highly.

Any expressive form works (when it works) by disarranging semantic
contexts in such a way that properties conventionally ascribed to
certain things are unconventionally ascribed to others, which are then
seen actually to possess them. To call the wind a cripple, as Stevens
does, to fix tone and manipulate timbre, as Schoenberg does, or, closer
to our case, to picture an art critic as a dissolute bear, as Hogarth
does, is to cross conceptual wires; the established conjunctions between
objects and their qualities are altered, and phenomena—fall weather,
melodic shape, or cultural journalism—are clothed in signifiers which
normally point to other referents.³⁵³⁵ Similarly, to connect—and
connect, and connect—the collision of roosters with the divisiveness of
status is to invite a transfer of perceptions from the former to the
latter, a transfer which is at once a description and a judgment.
(Logically, the transfer could, of course, as well go the other way;
but, like most of the rest of us, the Balinese are a great deal more
interested in understanding men than they are in understanding cocks.)

What sets the cockfight apart from the ordinary course of life, lifts it
from the realm of everyday practical affairs, and surrounds it with an
aura of enlarged importance is not, as functionalist sociology would
have it, that it reinforces status discriminations (such reinforcement
is hardly necessary in a society where every act proclaims them), but
that it provides a metasocial commentary upon the whole matter of
assorting human beings into fixed hierarchical ranks and then organizing
the major part of collective existence around that assortment. Its
function, if you want to call it that, is interpretive: it is a Balinese
reading of Balinese experience, a story they tell themselves about
themselves.

Saying Something of Something

To put the matter this way is to engage in a bit of metaphorical
refocusing of one’s own, for it shifts the analysis of cultural forms
from an endeavor in general parallel to dissecting an organism,
diagnosing a symptom, deciphering a code, or ordering a system—the
dominant analogies in contemporary anthropology—to one in general
parallel with penetrating a literary text. If one takes the cockfight,
or any other collectively sustained symbolic structure, as a means of
“saying something of something” (to invoke a famous Aristotelian tag),
then one is faced with a problem not in social mechanics but social
semantics.³⁶³⁶ For the anthropologist, whose concern is with formulating
sociological principles, not with promoting or appreciating cockfights,
the question is, what does one learn about such principles from
examining culture as an assemblage of texts?

Such an extension of the notion of a text beyond written material, and
even beyond verbal, is, though metaphorical, not, of course, all that
novel. The interpretatio naturae tradition of the middle ages, which,
culminating in Spinoza, attempted to read nature as Scripture, the
Nietszchean effort to treat value systems as glosses on the will to
power (or the Marxian one to treat them as glosses on property
relations), and the Freudian replacement of the enigmatic text of the
manifest dream with the plain one of the latent, all offer precedents,
if not equally recommendable ones.³⁷³⁷ But the idea remains
theoretically undeveloped; and the more profound corollary, so far as
anthropology is concerned, that cultural forms can be treated as texts,
as imaginative works built out of social materials, has yet to be
systematically exploited.³⁸³⁸

In the case at hand, to treat the cockfight as a text is to bring out a
feature of it (in my opinion, the central feature of it) that treating
it as a rite or a pastime, the two most obvious alternatives, would tend
to obscure: its use of emotion for cognitive ends. What the cockfight
says it says in a vocabulary of sentiment—the thrill of risk, the
despair of loss, the pleasure of triumph. Yet what it says is not merely
that risk is exciting, loss depressing, or triumph gratifying, banal
tautologies of affect, but that it is of these emotions, thus exampled,
that society is built and individuals are put together. Attending
cockfights and participating in them is, for the Balinese, a kind of
sentimental education. What he learns there is what his culture’s ethos
and his private sensibility (or, anyway, certain aspects of them) look
like when spelled out externally in a collective text; that the two are
near enough alike to be articulated in the symbolics of a single such
text; and—the disquieting part—that the text in which this revelation is
accomplished consists of a chicken hacking another mindlessly to bits.

Every people, the proverb has it, loves its own form of violence. The
cockfight is the Balinese reflection on theirs: on its look, its uses,
its force, its fascination. Drawing on almost every level of Balinese
experience, it brings together themes—animal savagery, male narcissism,
opponent gambling, status rivalry, mass excitement, blood
sacrifice—whose main connection is their involvement with rage and the
fear of rage, and, binding them into a set of rules which at once
contains them and allows them play, builds a symbolic structure in
which, over and over again, the reality of their inner affiliation can
be intelligibly felt. If, to quote Northrop Frye again, we go to see
Macbeth to learn what a man feels like after he has gained a kingdom and
lost his soul, Balinese go to cockfights to find out what a man, usually
composed, aloof, almost obsessively self-absorbed, a kind of moral
autocosm, feels like when, attacked, tormented, challenged, insulted,
and driven in result to the extremes of fury, he has totally triumphed
or been brought totally low. The whole passage, as it takes us back to
Aristotle (though to the Poetics rather than the Hermeneutics), is worth
quotation:

But the poet [as opposed to the historian]. Aristotle says, never makes
any real statements at all, certainly no particular or specific ones.
The poet’s job is not to tell you what happened, but what happens: not
what did take place, but the kind of thing that always does take place.
He gives you the typical, recurring, or what Aristotle calls universal
event. You wouldn’t go to Macbeth to learn about the history of
Scotland—you go to it to learn what a man feels like after he’s gained a
kingdom and lost his soul. When you meet such a character as Micawber in
Dickens, you don’t feel that there must have been a man Dickens knew who
was exactly like this: you feel that there’s a bit of Micawber in almost
everybody you know, including yourself. Our impressions of human life
are picked up one by one, and remain for most of us loose and
disorganized. But we constantly find things in literature that suddenly
coordinate and bring into focus a great many such impressions, and this
is part of what Aristotle means by the typical or universal human
event.³⁹³⁹

It is this kind of bringing of assorted experiences of everyday life to
focus that the cockfight, set aside from that life as “only a game” and
reconnected to it as “more than a game,” accomplishes, and so creates
what, better than typical or universal, could be called a paradigmatic
human event—that is, one that tells us less what happens than the kind
of thing that would happen if, as is not the case, life were art and
could be as freely shaped by styles of feeling as Macbeth and David
Copperfield are.

Enacted and re-enacted, so far without end, the cockfight enables the
Balinese, as, read and reread, Macbeth enables us, to see a dimension of
his own subjectivity. As he watches fight after fight, with the active
watching of an owner and a bettor (for cockfighting has no more interest
as a pure spectator sport than does croquet or dog racing), he grows
familiar with it and what it has to say to him, much as the attentive
listener to string quartets or the absorbed viewer of still life grows
slowly more familiar with them in a way which opens his subjectivity to
himself.⁴⁰⁴⁰

Yet, because—in another of those paradoxes, along with painted feelings
and unconsequenced acts, which haunt aesthetics—that subjectivity does
not properly exist until it is thus organized, art forms generate and
regenerate the very subjectivity they pretend only to display. Quartets,
still lifes, and cockfights are not merely reflections of a pre-existing
sensibility analogically represented; they are positive agents in the
creation and maintenance of such a sensibility. If we see ourselves as a
pack of Micawbers, it is from reading too much Dickens (if we see
ourselves as unillusioned realists, it is from reading too little); and
similarly for Balinese, cocks, and cockfights. It is in such a way,
coloring experience with the light they cast it in, rather than through
whatever material effects they may have, that the arts play their role,
as arts, in social life.⁴¹⁴¹

In the cockfight, then, the Balinese forms and discovers his temperament
and his society’s temper at the same time. Or, more exactly, he forms
and discovers a particular facet of them. Not only are there a great
many other cultural texts providing commentaries on status hierarchy and
self-regard in Bali, but there are a great many other critical sectors
of Balinese life besides the stratificatory and the agonistic that
receive such commentary. The ceremony consecrating a Brahmana priest, a
matter of breath control, postural immobility, and vacant concentration
upon the depths of being, displays a radically different, but to the
Balinese equally real, property of social hierarchy—its reach toward the
numinous transcendent. Set not in the matrix of the kinetic emotionality
of animals, but in that of the static passionlessness of divine
mentality, it expresses tranquillity not disquiet. The mass festivals at
the village temples, which mobilize the whole local population in
elaborate hostings of visiting gods—songs, dances, compliments,
gifts—assert the spiritual unity of village mates against their status
inequality and project a mood of amity and trust.⁴²⁴² The cockfight is
not the master key to Balinese life, any more than bullfighting is to
Spanish. What it says about that life is not unqualified nor even
unchallenged by what other equally eloquent cultural statements say
about it. But there is nothing more surprising in this than in the fact
that Racine and Molière were contemporaries, or that the same people who
arrange chrysanthemums cast swords.⁴³⁴³

The culture of a people is an ensemble of texts, themselves ensembles,
which the anthropologist strains to read over the shoulders of those to
whom they properly belong. There are enormous difficulties in such an
enterprise, methodological pitfalls to make a Freudian quake, and some
moral perplexities as well. Nor is it the only way that symbolic forms
can be sociologically handled. Functionalism lives, and so does
psychologism. But to regard such forms as “saying something of
something,” and saying it to somebody, is at least to open up the
possibility of an analysis which attends to their substance rather than
to reductive formulas professing to account for them.

As in more familiar exercises in close reading, one can start anywhere
in a culture’s repertoire of forms and end up anywhere else. One can
stay, as I have here, within a single, more or less bounded form, and
circle steadily within it. One can move between forms in search of
broader unities or informing contrasts. One can even compare forms from
different cultures to define their character in reciprocal relief. But
whatever the level at which one operates, and however intricately, the
guiding principle is the same: societies, like lives, contain their own
interpretations. One has only to learn how to gain access to them.

[]

1 G. Bateson and M. Mead, Balinese Character: A Photographic Analysis
(New York, 1942), p. 68.

2 J. Belo, “The Balinese Temper,” in Traditional Balinese Culture, ed.
J. Belo (New York, 1970) (originally published in 1935), pp. 85–110.

3 The best discussion of cockfighting is again Bateson and Mead’s
Balinese Character, pp. 24–25, 140; but it, too, is general and
abbreviated.

4 Ibid., pp. 25–26. The cockfight is unusual within Balinese culture in
being a single-sex public activity from which the other sex is totally
and expressly excluded. Sexual differentiation is culturally extremely
played down in Bali and most activities, formal and informal, involve
the participation of men and women on equal ground, commonly as linked
couples. From religion, to politics, to economics, to kinship, to dress,
Bali is a rather “unisex” society, a fact both its customs and its
symbolism clearly express. Even in contexts where women do not in fact
play much of a role—music, painting, certain agricultural
activities—their absence, which is only relative in any case, is more a
mere matter of fact than socially enforced. To this general pattern, the
cockfight, entirely of, by, and for men (women—at least Balinese
women—do not even watch), is the most striking exception.

5 C. Hooykaas, The Lay of the Jaya Prana (London, 1958), p. 39. The lay
has a stanza (no. 17) with the reluctant bridgegroom use. Jaya Prana,
the subject of a Balinese Uriah myth, responds to the lord who has
offered him the loveliest of six hundred servant girls: “Godly King, my
Lord and Master / I beg you, give me leave to go / such things are not
yet in my mind; / like a fighting cock encaged / indeed I am on my
mettle / I am alone I as yet the flame has not been fanned.”

6 For these, see V. E. Korn, Het Adatrecht van Bali, 2d ed. (The Hague,
1932), index under toh.

7 There is indeed a legend to the effect that the separation of Java and
Bali is due to the action of a powerful Javanese religious figure who
wished to protect himself against a Balinese culture hero (the ancestor
of two Ksatria castes) who was a passionate cockfighting gambler. See C.
Hooykaas, Agama Tirtha (Amsterdam, 1964), p. 184.

8 An incestuous couple is forced to wear pig yokes over their necks and
crawl to a pig trough and eat with their mouths there. On this, see J.
Belo, “Customs Pertaining to Twins in Bali,” in Traditional Balinese
Culture, ed. J. Belo, p. 49; on the abhorrence of animality generally,
Bateson and Mead, Balinese Character, p. 22.

9 Except for unimportant, small-bet fights (on the question of fight
“importance,” see below) spur affixing is usually done by someone other
than the owner. Whether the owner handles his own cock or not more or
less depends on how skilled he is at it, a consideration whose
importance is again relative to the importance of the fight. When spur
affixers and cock handlers are someone other than the owner, they are
almost always a quite close relative—a brother or cousin—or a very
intimate friend of his. They are thus almost extensions of his
personality, as the fact that all three will refer to the cock as
“mine,” say “I” fought So-and-So, and so on, demonstrates. Also,
owner-handler-affixer triads tend to be fairly fixed, though individuals
may participate in several and often exchange roles within a given one.

10 E. Goffman, Encounters: Two Studies in the Sociology of Interaction
(Indianapolis, 1961), pp. 9–10.

11 This word, which literally means an indelible stain or mark, as in a
birthmark or a vein in a stone, is used as well for a deposit in a court
case, for a pawn, for security offered in a loan, for a stand-in for
someone else in a legal or ceremonial context, for an earnest advanced
in a business deal, for a sign placed in a field to indicate its
ownership is in dispute, and for the status of an unfaithful wife from
whose lover her husband must gain satisfaction or surrender her to him.
See Korn, Het Adatrecht van Bali; Th. Pigeaud, Javaans-Nederlands
Handwoordenboek (Groningen, 1938); H. H. Juynboll,
Oudjavaansche-Nederlandsche Woordenlijst (Leiden, 1923).

12 The center bet must be advanced in cash by both parties prior to the
actual fight. The umpire holds the stakes until the decision is rendered
and then awards them to the winner, avoiding, among other things, the
intense embarrassment both winner and loser would feel if the latter had
to pay off personally following his defeat. About 10 percent of the
winner’s receipts are subtracted for the umpire’s share and that of the
fight sponsors.

13 Actually, the typing of cocks, which is extremely elaborate (I have
collected more than twenty classes, certainly not a complete list), is
not based on color alone, but on a series of independent, interacting,
dimensions, which include—besides color—size, bone thickness, plumage,
and temperament. (But not pedigree. The Balinese do not breed cocks to
any significant extent, nor, so far as I have been able to discover,
have they ever done so. The asil, or jungle cock, which is the basic
fighting strain everywhere the sport is found, is native to southern
Asia, and one can buy a good example in the chicken section of almost
any Balinese market for anywhere from four or five ringgits up to fifty
or more.) The color element is merely the one normally used as the type
name, except when the two cocks of different types—as on principle they
must be—have the same color, in which case a secondary indication from
one of the other dimensions (“large speckled” v. “small speckled,” etc.)
is added. The types are coordinated with various cosmological ideas
which help shape the making of matches, so that, for example, you fight
a small, headstrong, speckled brown-on-white cock with flat-lying
feathers and thin legs from the east side of the ring on a certain day
of the complex Balinese calendar, and a large, cautious, all-black cock
with tufted feathers and stubby legs from the north side on another day,
and so on. All this is again recorded in palm-leaf manuscripts and
endlessly discussed by the Balinese (who do not all have identical
systems), and a full-scale componentialcum-symbolic analysis of cock
classifications would be extremely valuable both as an adjunct to the
description of the cockfight and in itself. But my data on the subject,
though extensive and varied, do not seem to be complete and systematic
enough to attempt such an analysis here. For Balinese cosmological ideas
more generally see Belo, ed., Traditional Balinese Culture, and J. L.
Swellengrebel, ed., Bali: Studies in Life, Thought, and Ritual (The
Hague, 1960).

14 For purposes of ethnographic completeness, it should be noted that it
is possible for the man backing the favorite—the odds-giver—to make a
bet in which he wins if his cock wins or there is a tie, a slight
shortening of the odds (I do not have enough cases to be exact, but ties
seem to occur about once every fifteen or twenty matches). He indicates
his wish to do this by shouting sapih (“tie”) rather than the cock-type,
but such bets are in fact infrequent.

15 The precise dynamics of the movement of the betting is one of the
most intriguing, most complicated, and, given the hectic conditions
under which it occurs, most difficult to study, aspects of the fight.
Motion picture recording plus multiple observers would probably be
necessary to deal with it effectively. Even impressionistically—the only
approach open to a lone ethnographer caught in the middle of all this—it
is clear that certain men lead both in determining the favorite (that
is, making the opening cock-type calls which always initiate the
process) and in directing the movement of the odds, these “opinion
leaders” being the more accomplished cockfighters-cum-solid-citizens to
be discussed below. If these men begin to change their calls, others
follow; if they begin to make bets, so do others and—though there are
always a large number of frustrated bettors crying for shorter or longer
odds to the end—the movement more or less ceases. But a detailed
understanding of the whole process awaits what, alas, it is not very
likely ever to get: a decision theorist armed with precise observations
of individual behavior.

16 Assuming only binomial variability, the departure from a fifty-fifty
expectation in the sixty-ringgits-and-below case is 1.38 standard
deviations, or (in a one direction test) an eight in one hundred
possibility by chance alone; for the below-forty-ringgits case it is
1.65 standard deviations, or about five in one hundred. The fact that
these departures though real are not extreme merely indicates, again,
that even in the smaller fights the tendency to match cocks at least
reasonably evenly persists. It is a matter of relative relaxation of the
pressures toward equalization, not their elimination. The tendency for
high-bet contests to be coin-flip propositions is, of course, even more
striking, and suggests the Balinese know quite well what they are about.

17 The reduction in wagering in smaller fights (which, of course, feeds
on itself; one of the reasons people find small fights uninteresting is
that there is less wagering in them, and contrariwise for large ones)
takes place in three mutually reinforcing ways. First, there is a simple
withdrawal of interest as people wander off to have a cup of coffee or
chat with a friend. Second, the Balinese do not mathematically reduce
odds, but bet directly in terms of stated odds as such. Thus, for a
nine-to-eight bet, one man wagers nine ringgits, the other eight; for
five-to-four, one wagers five, the other four. For any given currency
unit, like the ringgit, therefore, 6.3 times as much money is involved
in a ten-to-nine bet as in a two-to-one bet, for example, and, as noted,
in small fights betting settles toward the longer end. Finally, the bets
which are made tend to be one- rather than two-, three-, or in some of
the very largest fights, four- or five-finger ones. (The fingers
indicate the multiples of the stated bet odds at issue, not absolute
figures. Two fingers in a six-to-five situation means a man wants to
wager ten ringgits on the underdog against twelve, three in an
eight-to-seven situation, twenty-one against twenty-four, and so on.)

18 Besides wagering there are other economic aspects of the cockfight,
especially its very close connection with the local market system which,
though secondary both to its motivation and to its function, are not
without importance. Cockfights are open events to which anyone who
wishes may come, sometimes from quite distant areas, but well over 90
percent, probably over 95, are very local affairs, and the locality
concerned is defined not by the village, nor even by the administrative
district, but by the rural market system. Bali has a three-day market
week with the familiar “solar-system”-type rotation. Though the markets
themselves have never been very highly developed, small morning affairs
in a village square, it is the microregion such rotation rather
generally marks out—ten or twenty square miles, seven or eight
neighboring villages (which in contemporary Bali is usually going to
mean anywhere from five to ten or eleven thousand people) from which the
core of any cockfight audience, indeed virtually all of it, will come.
Most of the fights are in fact organized and sponsored by small combines
of petty rural merchants under the general premise, very strongly held
by them and indeed by all Balinese, that cockfights are good for trade
because “they get money out of the house, they make it circulate.”
Stalls selling various sorts of things as well as assorted sheer-chance
gambling games (see below) are set up around the edge of the area so
that this even takes on the quality of a small fair. This connection of
cockfighting with markets and market sellers is very old, as, among
other things, their conjunction in inscriptions [R. Goris, Prasasti
Bali, 2 vols. (Bandung, 1954)] indicates. Trade has followed the cock
for centuries in rural Bali, and the sport has been one of the main
agencies of the island’s monetization.

19 The phrase is found in the Hildreth translation, International
Library of Psychology (1931), note to p. 106; see L. L. Fuller, The
Morality of Law (New Haven, 1964), p. 6 ff.

20 Of course, even in Bentham, utility is not normally confined as a
concept to monetary losses and gains, and my argument here might be more
carefully put in terms of a denial that for the Balinese, as for any
people, utility (pleasure, happiness . . . ) is merely identifiable with
wealth. But such terminological problems are in any case secondary to
the essential point: the cockfight is not roulette.

21 M. Weber, The Sociology of Religion (Boston, 1963). There is nothing
specifically Balinese, of course, about deepening significance with
money, as Whyte’s description of corner boys in a working-class district
of Boston demonstrates: “Gambling plays an important role in the lives
of Cornerville people. Whatever game the corner boys play, they nearly
always bet on the outcome. When there is nothing at stake, the game is
not considered a real contest. This does not mean that the financial
element is all-important. I have frequently heard men say that the honor
of winning was much more important than the money at stake. The corner
boys consider playing for money the real test of skill and, unless a man
performs well when money is at stake, he is not considered a good
competitor.” W. F. Whyte, Street Corner Society, 2d ed. (Chicago, 1955),
p. 140.

22 The extremes to which this madness is conceived on occasion to go—and
the fact that it is considered madness—is demonstrated by the Balinese
folk tale I Tuhung Kuning. A gambler becomes so deranged by his passion
that, leaving on a trip, he orders his pregnant wife to take care of the
prospective newborn if it is a boy but to feed it as meat to his
fighting cocks if it is a girl. The mother gives birth to a girl, but
rather than giving the child to the cocks she gives them a large rat and
conceals the girl with her own mother. When the husband returns, the
cocks, crowing a jingle, inform him of the deception and, furious, he
sets out to kill the child. A goddess descends from heaven and takes the
girl up to the skies with her. The cocks die from the food given them,
the owner’s sanity is restored, the goddess brings the girl back to the
father, who reunites him with his wife. The story is given as “Geel
Komkommertje” in J. Hooykaas-van Leeuwen Boomkamp, Sprookjes en Verhalen
van Bali (The Hague, 1956), pp. 19–25.

23 For a fuller description of Balinese rural social structure, see C.
Geertz, “Form and Variation in Balinese Village Structure,” American
Anthropologist 61 (1959): pp. 94–108; “Tihingan, A Balinese Village,” in
R. M. Koentjaraningrat, Villages in Indonesia (Ithaca, 1967), pp.
210–243; and, though it is a bit off the norm as Balinese villages go.
V. E. Korn, De Dorpsrepubliek tnganan Pagringsingan (Santpoort,
Netherlands, 1933).

24 Goffman, Encounters, p. 78.

25 B. R. Berelson, P. F. Lazersfeld, and W. N. McPhee, Voting; A Study
of Opinion Formation in a Presidential Campaign (Chicago, 1954).

26 As this is a formal paradigm, it is intended to display the logical,
not the causal, structure of cockfighting. Just which of these
considerations leads to which, in what order, and by what mechanisms, is
another matter—one I have attempted to shed some light on in the general
discussion.

27 In another of Hooykaas-van Leeuwen Boomkamp’s folk tales (“De Gast,”
Sprookjes en Verhalen van Bali, pp. 172–180), a low caste Sudra, a
generous, pious, and carefree man who is also an accomplished
cockfighter, loses, despite his accomplishment, fight after fight until
he is not only out of money but down to his last cock. He does not
despair, however—“I bet,” he says, “upon the Unseen World.”

His wife, a good and hard-working woman, knowing how much he enjoys
cockfighting, gives him her last “rainy day” money to go and bet. But,
filled with misgivings due to his run of ill luck, he leaves his own
cock at home and bets merely on the side. He soon loses all but a coin
or two and repairs to a food stand for a snack, where he meets a
decrepit, odorous, and generally unappetizing old beggar leaning on a
staff. The old man asks for food, and the hero spends his last coins to
buy him some. The old man then asks to pass the night with the hero,
which the hero gladly invites him to do. As there is no food in the
house, however, the hero tells his wife to kill the last cock for
dinner. When the old man discovers this fact, he tells the hero he has
three cocks in his own mountain hut and says the hero may have one of
them for fighting. He also asks for the hero’s son to accompany him as a
servant, and, after the son agrees, this is done.

The old man turns out to be Siva and, thus, to live in a great palace in
the sky, though the hero does not know this. In time, the hero decides
to visit his son and collect the promised cock. Lifted up into Siva’s
presence, he is given the choice of three cocks. The first crows: “I
have beaten fifteen opponents.” The second crows, “I have beaten
twenty-five opponents.” The third crows, “I have beaten the king.” “That
one, the third, is my choice,” says the hero, and returns with it to
earth.

When he arrives at the cockfight, he is asked for an entry fee and
replies, “I have no money; I will pay after my cock has won.” As he is
known never to win, he is let in because the king, who is there
fighting, dislikes him and hopes to enslave him when he loses and cannot
pay off. In order to insure that this happens, the king matches his
finest cock against the hero’s. When the cocks are placed down, the
hero’s flees, and the crowd, led by the arrogant king, hoots in
laughter. The hero’s cock then flies at the king himself, killing him
with a spur stab in the throat. The hero flees. His house is encircled
by the king’s men. The cock changes into a Garuda, the great mythic bird
of Indic legend, and carries the hero and his wife to safety in the
heavens.

When the people see this, they make the hero king and his wife queen and
they return as such to earth. Later their son, released by Siva, also
returns and the hero-king announces his intention to enter a hermitage.
(“I will fight no more cockfights. I have bet on the Unseen and won.”)
He enters the hermitage and his son becomes king.

28 Addict gamblers are really less declassed (for their status is, as
everyone else’s, inherited) than merely impoverished and personally
disgraced. The most prominent addict gambler in my cockfight circuit was
actually a very high caste satria who sold off most of his considerable
lands to support his habit. Though everyone privately regarded him as a
fool and worse (some, more charitable, regarded him as sick), he was
publicly treated with the elaborate deference and politeness due his
rank. On the independence of personal reputation and public status in
Bali, see above, Chapter 14.

29 For four, somewhat variant, treatments, see S. Langer, Feeling and
Form (New York, 1953); R. Wollheim, Art and Its Objects (New York,
1968); N. Goodman, Languages of Art (Indianapolis, 1968); M.
Merleau-Ponty, “The Eye and the Mind,” in his The Primacy of Perception
(Evanston, III., 1964), pp. 159–190.

30 British cockfights (the sport was banned there in 1840) indeed seem
to have lacked it, and to have generated, therefore, a quite different
family of shapes. Most British fights were “mains,” in which a preagreed
number of cocks were aligned into two teams and fought serially. Score
was kept and wagering took place both on the individual matches and on
the main as a whole. There were also “battle Royales,” both in England
and on the Continent, in which a large number of cocks were let loose at
once with the one left standing at the end the victor. And in Wales, the
so-called Welsh main followed an elimination pattern, along the lines of
a present-day tennis tournament, winners proceeding to the next round.
As a genre, the cock fight has perhaps less compositional flexibility
than, say, Latin comedy, but it is not entirely without any. On
cockfighting more generally, see A. Ruport, The Art of Cockfighting (New
York, 1949); G. R. Scott, History of Cockfighting (London, 1957); and L.
Fitz-Barnard, Fighting Sports (London, 1921).

31 Above, pp. 391–398.

32 For the necessity of distinguishing among “description,”
“representation,” “exemplification,” and “expression” (and the
irrelevance of “imitation” to all of them) as modes of symbolic
reference, see Goodman, Languages of Art, pp. 61–110, 45–91, 225–241.

33 N. Frye, The Educated Imagination (Bloomington, Ind., 1964), p. 99.

34 There are two other Balinese values and disvalues which, connected
with punctuate temporality on the one hand and unbridled aggressiveness
on the other, reinforce the sense that the cockfight is at once
continuous with ordinary social life and a direct negation of it: what
the Balinese call ramé, and what they call paling. Ramé means crowded,
noisy, and active, and is a highly sought-after social state: crowded
markets, mass festivals, busy streets are all ramé, as, of course, is,
in the extreme, a cockfight. Ramé is what happens in the “full” times
(its opposite, sepi, “quiet,” is what happens in the “empty” ones).
Paling is social vertigo, the dizzy, disoriented, lost, turned-around
feeling one gets when one’s place in the coordinates of social space is
not clear, and it is a tremendously disfavored, immensely
anxiety-producing state. Balinese regard the exact maintenance of
spatial orientation (“not to know where north is” is to be crazy),
balance, decorum, status relationships, and so forth, as fundamental to
ordered life (krama) and paling, the sort of whirling confusion of
position the scrambling cocks exemplify as its profoundest enemy and
contradiction. On ramé, see Bateson and Mead, Balinese Character, pp. 3,
64; on paling, ibid., p. 11, and Belo, ed., Traditional Balinese
Culture, p. 90 ff.

35 The Stevens reference is to his “The Motive for Metaphor” (“You like
it under the trees in autumn,/Because everything is half dead./The wind
moves like a cripple among the leaves / And repeats words without
meaning”) [Copyright 1947 by Wallace Stevens, reprinted from The
Collected Poems of Wallace Stevens by permission of Alfred A. Knopf,
Inc., and Faber and Faber Ltd.); the Schoenberg reference is to the
third of his Five Orchestral Pieces (Opus 16), and is borrowed from H.
H. Drager, “The Concept of ‘Tonal Body,’” in Reflections on Art, ed. S.
Langer (New York, 1961), p. 174. On Hogarth, and on this whole
problem—there called “multiple matrix matching”—see E. H. Gombrich, “The
Use of Art for the Study of Symbols,” in Psychology and the Visual Arts,
ed. J. Hogg (Baltimore, 1969), pp. 149–170. The more usual term for this
sort of semantic alchemy is “metaphorical transfer,” and good technical
discussions of it can be found in M. Black, Models and Metaphors
(Ithaca, N.Y., 1962), p. 25 ff; Goodman, Language as Art, p. 44 ff; and
W. Percy, “Metaphor as Mistake,” Sewanee Review 66 (1958): 78–99.

36 The tag is from the second book of the Organon, On Interpretation.
For a discussion of it, and for the whole argument for freeing “the
notion of text . . . from the notion of scripture or writing” and
constructing, thus, a general hermeneutics, see P. Ricoeur, Freud and
Philosophy (New Haven, 1970), p. 20 ff.

37 Ibid.

38 Lévi-Strauss’ “structuralism” might seem an exception. But it is only
an apparent one, for, rather than taking myths, totem rites, marriage
rules, or whatever as texts to interpret, Lévi-Strauss takes them as
ciphers to solve, which is very much not the same thing. He does not
seek to understand symbolic forms in terms of how they function in
concrete situations to organize perceptions (meanings, emotions,
concepts, attitudes); he seeks to understand them entirely in terms of
their internal structure, independent de tout sujet, de tout objet, et
de toute contexte. See above, Chapter 13.

39 Frye, The Educated Imagination, pp. 63–64.

40 The use of the, to Europeans, “natural” visual idiom for
perception—“see,” “watches,” and so forth—is more than usually
misleading here, for the fact that, as mentioned earlier, Balinese
follow the progress of the fight as much (perhaps, as fighting cocks are
actually rather hard to see except as blurs of motion, more) with their
bodies as with their eyes, moving their limbs, heads, and trunks in
gestural mimicry of the cocks’ maneuvers, means that much of the
individual’s experience of the fight is kinesthetic rather than visual.
If ever there was an example of Kenneth Burke’s definition of a symbolic
act as “the dancing of an attitude” [The Philosophy of Literary Form,
rev. ed. (New York, 1957), p. 9] the cockfight is it. On the enormous
role of kinesthetic perception in Balinese life. Bateson and Mead,
Balinese Character, pp. 84–88; on the active nature of aesthetic
perception in general, Goodman. Language of Art, pp. 241–244.

41 All this coupling of the occidental great with the oriental lowly
will doubtless disturb certain sorts of aestheticians as the earlier
efforts of anthropologists to speak of Christianity and totemism in the
same breath disturbed certain sorts of theologians. But as ontological
questions are (or should be) bracketed in the sociology of religion,
judgmental ones are (or should be) bracketed in the sociology of art. In
any case, the attempt to deprovincialize the concept of art is but part
of the general anthropological conspiracy to deprovincialize all
important social concepts—marriage, religion, law, rationality—and
though this is a threat to aesthetic theories which regard certain works
of art as beyond the reach of sociological analysis, it is no threat to
the conviction, for which Robert Graves claims to have been reprimanded
at his Cambridge tripos, that some poems are better than others.

42 For the consecration ceremony, see V. E. Korn, “The Consecration of
the Priest,” in Swellengrebel, ed., Bali: Studies, pp. 131–154; for
(somewhat exaggerated) village communion, R. Goris, “The Religious
Character of the Balinese Village,” ibid., pp. 79–100.

43 That what the cockfight has to say about Bali is not altogether
without perception and the disquiet it expresses about the general
pattern of Balinese life is not wholly without reason is attested by the
fact that in two weeks of December 1965, during the upheavals following
the unsuccessful coup in Djakarta, between forty and eighty thousand
Balinese (in a population of about two million) were killed, largely by
one another—the worst outburst in the country. [J. Hughes, Indonesian
Upheaval (New York, 1967), pp. 173–183. Hughes figures are, of course,
rather casual estimates, but they are not the most extreme.] This is not
to say, of course, that the killings were caused by the cockfight, could
have been predicted on the basis of it, or were some sort of enlarged
version of it with real people in the place of the cocks—all of which is
nonsense. It is merely to say that if one looks at Bali not just through
the medium of its dances, its shadowplays, its sculpture, and its girls,
but—as the Balinese themselves do—also through the medium of its
cockfight, the fact that the massacre occurred seems, if no less
appalling, less like a contradiction to the laws of nature. As more than
one real Gloucester has discovered, sometimes people actually get life
precisely as they most deeply do not want it.

