Chapter 9/ After the Revolution: The Fate of Nationalism in the New
States

[]

Between 1945 and 1968 sixty-six “countries”—the actualities demand the
quotation marks—attained political independence from colonial rule.
Unless one counts the American engagement in Vietnam, an ambiguous case,
the last great struggle for national liberation was that which triumphed
in Algeria in the summer of 1962. Though a few other collisions are
apparently still to come—in the Portuguese territories of Africa, for
example—the great revolution against Western governance of Third World
peoples is essentially over. Politically, morally, and sociologically,
the results are mixed. But from the Congo to Guyana the wards of
imperialism are, formally anyway, free.¹¹

Considering all that independence seemed to promise—popular rule, rapid
economic growth, social equality, cultural regeneration, national
greatness and, above all, an end to the ascendancy of the West—it is not
surprising that its actual advent has been anticlimactic. It is not that
nothing has happened, that a new era has not been entered. Rather, that
era having been entered, it is necessary now to live in it rather than
merely imagine it, and that is inevitably a deflating experience.

The signs of this darkened mood are everywhere: in nostalgia for the
emphatic personalities and well-made dramas of the revolutionary
struggle; in disenchantment with party politics, parliamentarianism,
bureaucracy, and the new class of soldiers, clerks, and local powers; in
uncertainty of direction, ideological weariness, and the steady spread
of random violence; and, not the least, in a dawning realization that
things are more complicated than they look, that social, economic, and
political problems, once thought to be mere reflexes of colonial rule,
to disappear when it disappeared, have less superficial roots.
Philosophically, the lines between realism and cynicism, between
prudence and apathy, and between maturity and despair may be very broad;
but sociologically, they are always very narrow. And in most of the new
states right now they have thinned almost to the vanishing point.

Behind the mood, which is of course not unmixed, lie the realities of
postcolonial social life. The sacred leaders of the national struggle
are either gone (Gandhi, Nehru, Sukarno, Nkrumah, Muhammed V, U Nu,
Jinnah, Ben Bella, Keita, Azikiwe, Nasser, Bandaranaike), replaced by
less confident heirs or less theatrical generals, or have been
diminished to mere heads of state (Kenyatta, Nyerere, Bourguiba, Lee,
Sekou Touré, Castro). The near-millennial hopes of political deliverance
once invested in a handful of extraordinary men are not only now
diffused among a larger number of distinctly less extraordinary ones but
are themselves attenuated. The enormous concentration of social energies
that charismatic leadership can, whatever its other defects, clearly
accomplish, dissolves when such leadership disappears. The passing of
the generation of prophet-liberators in the last decade has been nearly
as momentous, if not quite as dramatic, an event in the history of the
new states as was their appearance in the thirties, forties, and
fifties. Here and there, new ones will doubtless from time to time
emerge, and some may make a considerable impact upon the world. But,
unless a wave of Communist uprisings, of which there is now little
indication, sweeps through the Third World throwing up a cloud of Che
Guevaras, there will not soon again be such a galaxy of successful
revolutionary heroes as there were in the Olympian days of the Bandung
Conference. Most new states are in for a period of commonplace rulers.

In addition to the reduction in the grandeur of leadership, there has
been a solidification of the white collar patriciate—what American
sociologists like to call “the new middle class” and the French, less
euphemistic, call la classe dirigeante—which surrounds and in many
places engulfs that leadership. Just as colonial rule tended almost
everywhere to transform those who happened to be socially ascendant (and
submissive to its demands) at the time of its advent into a privileged
corps of officials and overseers, so independence tended almost
everywhere to create a similar, though larger, corps out of those who
happened to be ascendant (and responsive to its spirit) at its advent.
In some cases, the class continuity between the new elite and the old is
great, in some less great; determining its composition has been the
major internal political struggle of the revolutionary and immediate
postrevolutionary periods. But accommodative, parvenu, or something in
between, it is now rather definitely in place, and the avenues of
mobility that for a moment seemed so wide open seem now, to most people,
distinctly less so. As political leadership has slipped back toward the
“normal,” or anyway appearing such, so too has the stratification
system.

So too, indeed, has society as a whole. The consciousness of massive,
univocal, irresistible movement, the stirring to action of an entire
people, that the attack upon colonialism almost everywhere induced has
not wholly disappeared, but it has powerfully lessened. There is much
less talk, both inside the new states and in the scholarly literature
concerning them, about “social mobilization” than there was five, not to
say ten, years ago (and what there is seems increasingly hollow). And
this is because there is in fact much less social mobilization. Change
continues, and indeed may even be accelerating under a general illusion
that nothing much is happening, an illusion in good part generated by
the great expectations that accompanied liberation in the first place.²²
But the general forward motion of “the nation as a whole” has been
replaced by a complex, uneven, and many-directioned movement by its
various parts, which conduces to a sense less of progress than of
agitated stagnation.

Yet, despite the sense of diluted leadership, renascent privilege, and
arrested movement, the force of the great political emotion upon which
the independence movement was everywhere built remains but slightly
dimmed. Nationalism—amorphous, uncertainly focused, half-articulated,
but for all that highly inflammable—is still the major collective
passion in most new states, and in some it is virtually the only one.
That, like the Trojan War, the world revolution may not take place as
scheduled, that poverty, inequality, exploitation, superstition, and
great power politics are going to be around for a while, is an idea,
however galling, that most people at least can somehow contrive to live
with. But, once aroused, the desire to become a people rather than a
population, a recognized and respected somebody in the world who counts
and is attended to, is, short of its satisfaction, apparently
unappeasable. At least it has nowhere yet been appeased.

Actually, the novelties of the postrevolutionary period have, in many
ways, exacerbated it. The realization that the power imbalance between
the new states and the West has not only not been corrected by the
destruction of colonialism, but has in some respects increased, while at
the same time the buffer colonial rule provided against the direct
impact of that imbalance has been removed, leaving fledgling states to
fend for themselves against stronger, more practiced, established
states, renders nationalist sensitivity to “outside interference” just
that much more intense and that much more general. In the same way,
emerging into the world as an independent state has led to a similar
sensitivization to the acts and intentions of neighboring states—most of
them likewise just emerged—that was not present when such states were
not free agents but, as oneself, “belonged” to a distant power. And
internally, removing European rule has liberated the nationalisms within
nationalisms that virtually all the new states contain and produced as
provincialism or separatism, a direct and in some cases—Nigeria, India,
Malaysia, Indonesia, Pakistan—immediate threat to the new-wrought
national identity in whose name the revolution was made.

The effects of this persistent nationalistic sentiment amid national
disappointment have been naturally varied: a withdrawal into
don’t-touch-me isolationism, as in Burma; a surge of neotraditionalism,
as in Algeria; a turn toward regional imperialism, as in precoup
Indonesia; an obsession with a neighboring enemy, as in Pakistan; a
collapse into ethnic civil war, as in Nigeria; or, in the majority of
the cases where the conflict is for the moment less severe, an
underdeveloped version of muddling-through, which contains a little of
all these plus a certain amount of whistling in the dark. The
postrevolutionary period was envisioned to be one of organizing rapid,
large-scale, broadly coordinated social, economic, and political
advance. But it has turned out to be rather more a continuation, under
changed, and in some ways even less propitious, circumstances, of the
main theme of the revolutionary and immediate prerevolutionary periods:
the definition, creation, and solidification of a viable collective
identity.

In this process, the formal liberation from colonial rule turns out not
to have been the climax but a stage; a critical and necessary stage, but
a stage nonetheless, and quite possibly far from the most consequential
one. As in medicine the severity of surface symptoms and the severity of
underlying pathology are not always in close correlation, so in
sociology the drama of public events and the magnitude of structural
change are not always in precise accord. Some of the greatest
revolutions occur in the dark.

Four Phases of Nationalism

The tendency for the velocities of outward change and inward
transformation to be out of phase with one another is clearly enough
demonstrated in the general history of decolonization.

If, keeping all the limitations of periodization in mind, one divides
that history into four major phases—that in which the nationalist
movements formed and crystallized; that in which they triumphed; that in
which they organized themselves into states; and that (the present one)
in which, organized into states, they find themselves obliged to define
and stabilize their relationships both to other states and to the
irregular societies out of which they arose—this incongruence comes
plainly into view. The most obvious changes, those which caught and held
the attention of the entire world, occurred in the second and third of
these phases. But the bulk of the more far-reaching changes, those
altering the general shape and direction of social evolution, occurred
or are occurring in the less spectacular first and fourth.

The first, formative stage of nationalism consisted essentially of
confronting the dense assemblage of cultural, racial, local, and
linguistic categories of self-identification and social loyalty that
centuries of uninstructed history had produced with a simple, abstract,
deliberately constructed, and almost painfully self-conscious concept of
political ethnicity—a proper “nationality” in the modern manner. The
granular images into which individuals’ views of who they are and who
they aren’t are so intensely bound in traditional society, were
challenged by the more general, vaguer, but no less charged conceptions
of collective identity, based on a diffuse sense of common destiny, that
tend to characterize industrialized states. The men who raised this
challenge, the nationalist intellectuals, were thus launching a
revolution as much cultural, even epistemological, as it was political.
They were attempting to transform the symbolic framework through which
people experienced social reality, and thus, to the extent that life is
what we make of it all, that reality itself.

That this effort to revise the frames of self-perception was an uphill
battle, that in most places it was hardly more than just begun, and that
in all it remained confused and incomplete goes without saying—or would,
had not the contrary so often been asserted. Indeed, the very success of
the independence movements in rousing the enthusiasm of the masses and
directing it against foreign domination tended to obscure the frailty
and narrowness of the cultural foundations upon which those movements
rested, because it led to the notion that anticolonialism and collective
redefinition are the same thing. But for all the intimacy (and
complexity) of their interconnections, they are not. Most Tamils,
Karens, Brahmins, Malays, Sikhs, Ibos, Muslims, Chinese, Nilotes,
Bengalis, or Ashantis found it a good deal easier to grasp the idea that
they were not Englishmen than that they were Indians, Burmese, Malayans,
Ghanaians, Pakistanis, Nigerians, or Sudanese.

As the mass attack (more massive, and more violent, in some places than
others) upon colonialism developed, it seemed to create, in and of
itself, the basis of a new national identity that independence would
merely ratify. The popular rallying behind a common, extremely specific
political aim—an occurrence that surprised the nationalists nearly as
much as it did the colonialists—was taken for a sign of a deeper
solidarity, which produced by it would yet outlive it. Nationalism came
to mean, purely and simply, the desire—and the demand—for freedom.
Transforming a people’s view of themselves, their society, and their
culture—the sort of thing that absorbed Gandhi, Jinnah, Fanon, Sukarno,
Senghor, and indeed all the bitter theorists of national awakening—was
identified, to a large extent by some of these same men, with the access
of such peoples to self-government. “Seek ye first the political
kingdom”—the nationalists would make the state, and the state would make
the nation.

The task of making the state turned out to be exacting enough to permit
this illusion, indeed the whole moral atmosphere of the revolution, to
be sustained for some time beyond the transfer of sovereignty. The
degree to which this proved possible, necessary, or even advisable,
varied widely from Indonesia or Ghana at one extreme to Malaysia or
Tunisia at the other. But, with a few exceptions, by now all the new
states have organized governments that maintain general dominion within
their borders, and well or badly, function. And as government shakes
down into some reasonably recognizable institutional form—party
oligarchy, presidential autocracy, military dictatorship, reconditioned
monarchism, or, very partially in the best of cases, representative
democracy—it becomes less and less easy to avoid confronting the fact
that to make Italy is not to make Italians. Once the political
revolution is accomplished, and a state, if hardly consolidated, is at
least established, the question: Who are we, who have done all this?
re-emerges from the easy populism of the last years of decolonization
and the first of independence.

Now that there is a local state rather than a mere dream of one, the
task of nationalist ideologizing radically changes. It no longer
consists in stimulating popular alienation from a foreign-dominated
political order, nor with orchestrating a mass celebration of that
order’s demise. It consists in defining, or trying to define, a
collective subject to whom the actions of the state can be internally
connected, in creating, or trying to create, an experiential “we” from
whose will the activities of government seem spontaneously to flow. And
as such, it tends to revolve around the question of the content,
relative weight, and proper relationship of two rather towering
abstractions: “The Indigenous Way of Life” and “The Spirit of the Age.”

To stress the first of these is to look to local mores, established
institutions, and the unities of common experience—to “tradition,”
“culture,” “national character,” or even “race”—for the roots of a new
identity. To stress the second is to look to the general outlines of the
history of our time, and in particular to what one takes to be the
overall direction and significance of that history. There is no new
state in which both these themes (which, merely to have names for them,
I shall call “essentialism” and “epochalism”) are not present; few in
which they are not thoroughly entangled with one another; and only a
small, incompletely decolonized minority in which the tension between
them is not invading every aspect of national life from language choice
to foreign policy.

Language choice is, in fact, a good, even a paradigmatic, example. I
cannot think of a new state in which this question has not in some form
or other risen to the level of national policy.³³ The intensity of the
disturbance it has thereby generated, as well as the effectiveness with
which it has been handled, varies quite widely; but for all the
diversity of its expressions, the “language issue” turns precisely on
the essentialism-epochalism dilemma.

For any speaker of it, a given language is at once either more or less
his own or more or less someone else’s, and either more or less
cosmopolitan or more or less parochial—a borrowing or a heritage; a
passport or a citadel. The question of whether, when, and for what
purposes to use it is thus also the question of how far a people should
form itself by the bent of its genius and how far by the demands of its
times.

The tendency to approach the “language issue” from the linguistic
standpoint, homemade or scientific, has somewhat obscured this fact.
Most discussion, inside the new states and out, concerning the
“suitability” of a given language for national use has suffered from the
notion that this suitability turns on the inherent nature of the
language—on the adequacy of its grammatical, lexical, or “cultural”
resources to the expression of complex philosophical, scientific,
political, or moral ideas. But what it really turns on is the relative
importance of being able to give one’s thoughts, however crude or
subtle, the kind of force that speaking one’s mother tongue permits as
against being able to participate in movements of thought to which only
“foreign,” or in some cases “literary,” languages can give access.

It doesn’t matter therefore whether, in concrete form, the problem is
the status of classical as against colloquial Arabic in Middle Eastern
countries; the place of an “elite” Western language amid a collection of
“tribal” languages in sub-Saharan Africa; the complex stratification of
local, regional, national, and international languages in India or the
Philippines; or the replacement of a European language of limited world
significance by others of greater significance in Indonesia. The
underlying issue is the same. It is not whether this or that language is
“developed” or “capable of development”; it is whether this or that
language is psychologically immediate and whether it is an avenue to the
wider community of modern culture.

It is not because Swahili lacks a stable syntax or Arabic cannot build
combining forms—dubious propositions in any case⁴⁴—that language
problems are so prominent in the Third World: it is because, for the
overwhelming majority of speakers of the overwhelming majority of
languages in the new states, the two sides of this double question tend
to work out inversely. What, from the ordinary speaker’s view, is the
natural vehicle of thought and feeling (and particularly in cases like
Arabic, Hindi, Amharic, Khmer, or Javanese—the repository of an advanced
religious, literary, and artistic tradition to boot) is, from the view
of the main current of twentieth century civilization, virtually a
patois. And what for that current are the established vehicles of its
expression, are for that ordinary speaker at best but half-familiar
languages of even less familiar peoples.⁵⁵

Formulated this way, the “language problem” is only the “nationality
problem” writ small, though in some places the conflicts arising from it
are intense enough to make the relationship seem reversed. Generalized,
the “who are we” question asks what cultural forms—what systems of
meaningful symbols—to employ to give value and significance to the
activities of the state, and by extension to the civil life of its
citizens. Nationalist ideologies built out of symbolic forms drawn from
local traditions—which are, that is, essentialist—tend, like
vernaculars, to be psychologically immediate but socially isolating;
built out of forms implicated in the general movement of contemporary
history—that is, epochalist—they tend, like lingua francas, to be
socially deprovincializing but psychologically forced.

However, rarely is such an ideology anywhere purely essentialist or
purely epochalist. All are mixed and one can speak at best only of a
bias in one direction or another, and often not even of that. Nehru’s
image of “India” was doubtless heavily epochalist, Gandhi’s doubtless
heavily essentialist; but the fact that the first was the disciple of
the second and the second the patron of the first (and neither managed
to convince all Indians that he was not, in the one case, a brown
Englishman, or, in the other, a medieval reactionary) demonstrates that
the relation between these two routes to self-discovery is a subtle and
even paradoxical one. Indeed, the more ideologized new states—Indonesia,
Ghana, Algeria, Egypt, Ceylon, and the like—have tended to be both
intensely epochalist and intensely essentialist at the same time,
whereas countries more purely essentialist like Somalia or Cambodia, or
epochalist like Tunisia or the Philippines, have been rather the
exceptions.

The tension between these two impulses—to move with the tide of the
present and to hold to an inherited course—gives new state nationalism
its peculiar air of being at once hell-bent toward modernity and morally
outraged by its manifestations. There is a certain irrationality in
this. But it is more than a collective derangement; it is a social
cataclysm in the process of happening.

Essentialism and Epochalism

The interplay of essentialism and epochalism is not, therefore, a kind
of cultural dialectic, a logistic of abstract ideas, but a historical
process as concrete as industrialization and as tangible as war. The
issues are being fought out not simply at the doctrine and argument
level—though there is a great deal of both—but much more importantly in
the material transformations that the social structures of all the new
states are undergoing. Ideological change is not an independent stream
of thought running alongside social process and reflecting (or
determining) it, it is a dimension of that process itself.

The impact within any new state society of the desire for coherence and
continuity on the one hand and for dynamism and contemporaneity on the
other is both extremely uneven and highly nuanced. The pull of
indigenous tradition is felt most heavily by its appointed, and these
days rather besieged, guardians—monks, mandarins, pandits, chiefs,
ulema, and so on; that of what is usually referred to (not altogether
accurately) as “the West,” by the urban youth, the troubled schoolboys
of Cairo, Djakarta, or Kinshasa who have surrounded words like shabb,
pemuda, and jeunesse with an aura of energy, idealism, impatience, and
menace. But stretching out between these all-too-visible extremes is the
great bulk of the population, among whom essentialist and epochalist
sentiments are scrambled into a vast confusion of outlooks, which,
because the current of social change produced it, only the current of
social change can sort out.

As illustrative cases, compressed to the dimensions of historical
anecdotes, of the generation of this confusion and of the efforts now
being made to dissolve it, Indonesia and Morocco can serve as well as
any. My reason for choosing them is that they are the cases I happen to
know firsthand and, in dealing with the interplay between institutional
change and cultural reconstruction, the degree to which one can
substitute a synoptic vision for an intimate one is limited. Their
experiences are, as all social experiences, unique. But they are not so
different either from one another or from those of new states as a whole
as to be unable to reveal, in their very particularity, some generic
outlines of the problems faced by societies struggling to bring what
they like to call their “personality” into a workable alignment with
what they like to call their “destiny.”

In Indonesia, the essentialist element is, and long has been, extremely
unhomogeneous. To an extent, this is true for virtually all the new
states, which tend to be bundles of competing traditions gathered
accidentally into concocted political frameworks rather than organically
evolving civilizations. But in Indonesia, the outlands at once of India,
China, Oceania, Europe, and the Middle East, cultural diversity has been
for centuries both especially great and especially complex. The edge of
everything classical, it has been itself shamelessly eclectic.

Up until about the third decade of this century, the several ingredient
traditions—Indic, Sinitic, Islamic, Christian, Polynesian—were suspended
in a kind of half-solution in which contrasting, even opposed styles of
life and world outlooks managed to coexist, if not wholly without
tension, or even without violence, at least in some sort of usually
workable, to-each-his-own sort of arrangement. This modus vivendi began
to show signs of strain as early as the mid-nineteenth century, but its
dissolution got genuinely under way only with the rise, from 1912 on, of
nationalism; its collapse, which is still not complete, only in the
revolutionary and postrevolutionary periods. For then what had been
parallel traditionalisms, encapsulated in localities and classes, became
competing definitions of the essence of the New Indonesia. What was
once, to employ a term I have used elsewhere, a kind of “cultural
balance of power” became an ideological war of a peculiarly implacable
sort.

Thus, in apparent paradox (though, in fact, it has been a nearly
universal occurrence in the new states) the move toward national unity
intensified group tensions within the society by raising settled
cultural forms out of their particular contexts, expanding them into
general allegiances, and politicizing them. As the nationalist movement
developed, it separated into strands. In the Revolution these strands
became parties, each promoting a different aspect of the eclectic
tradition as the only true basis of Indonesian identity. Marxists looked
mainly to the folk melange of peasant life for the essence of the
national heritage; the technicians, clerks, and administrators of the
classe dirigeante to the Indic aestheticism of the Javanese aristocracy;
and the more substantial merchants and landholders to Islam. Village
populism, cultural elitism, religious puritanism: some differences of
ideological opinion can perhaps be adjusted, but not these.

Rather than adjusted they were accentuated, as each strand attempted to
graft a modernist appeal onto its traditionalist base. For the populist
element, this was Communism; and the Indonesian Communist party,
professing to discern an indigenous radical tradition in the
collectivism, social egalitarianism, and anticlericalism of rural life,
became the chief spokesman both for peasant essentialism, especially
Javanese peasant essentialism, and for a revolutionary epochalism of the
usual “rise of the masses” sort. For the salaried element, the modernist
appeal was industrial society as found (or imagined) in Europe and the
United States, and it proposed a marriage of convenience between
oriental spirituality and occidental drive, between “wisdom” and
“technique,” that would somehow preserve cherished values while
transforming the material basis of the society out of which those values
had arisen. And for the pious, it was naturally enough religious reform,
a celebration of the effort to renovate Islamic civilization in such a
way as to regain its lost, rightful leadership of the moral, material,
and intellectual progress of mankind. But, in the event, none of these
things—Peasant Revolution, The Meeting of East and West, or The Cultural
Resurgence of Islam—happened. What happened was the mass slaughter of
1965, in which somewhere between a quarter and three-quarters of a
million people lost their lives. The blood bath in which the Sukarno
regime with painful slowness drowned was the result of a vast complex of
causes, and it would be absurd to reduce it to an ideological explosion.
Yet, whatever the role of economic, political, psychological, or—for
that matter—accidental factors in bringing it on (and, what is even
harder to explain, sustaining it), it marked the end of a distinct phase
in the progress of Indonesian nationalism. Not only were the slogans of
unity (“one people, one language, one nation”; “from many, one”;
“collective harmony”; and so on), which had not been easy to credit in
the first place, now rendered implausible altogether, but the theory
that the native eclecticism of Indonesian culture would yield easily to
a generalized modernism clamped onto one or another element of it was
definitively disproved. Multiform in the past, it would seem also to
have to be multiform in the present.

In Morocco, the main obstacle to defining an integral national self has
not been cultural heterogeneity, which in comparative terms has not been
so very great, but social particularism, which in comparative terms has
been extreme. Traditional Morocco consisted of an enormous,
ill-organized field of rapidly forming and rapidly dissolving political
constellations on every level from the court to the camp, every basis
from the mystical to the occupational, and every scale from the grand to
the microscopic. The continuity of the social order lay less in any
durability of the arrangements composing it or the groups embodying it,
for the sturdiest of them were fugitive, than in the constancy of the
processes by which, incessantly reworking those arrangements and
redefining those groups, it formed, reformed, and re-reformed itself.

Insofar as this unsettled society had a center, it was the Alawite
monarchy. But even in the best times the monarchy was hardly more than
the largest bear in the garden. Embedded in a patrimonial bureaucracy of
the most classic sort, a haphazard assortment of courtiers, chieftains,
scribes, and judges, it struggled continuously to bring competing
centers of power—of which there were literally hundreds, each resting on
slightly different ground from the next—within its control. Although
between its founding in the seventeenth century and its submission in
1912 it never altogether failed in this, it also never more than very
partially succeeded. Not quite an anarchy and not quite a polity, the
Moroccan state had, with its endemic particularism, just enough reality
to persist.

Initially the effect of colonial domination, which only formally lasted
about forty years, was to eviscerate the monarchy and turn it into a
kind of Moorish tableau vivant; but intentions are one thing and events
are another, and the ultimate result of European rule was to establish
the king as the axis of the Moroccan political system rather more
emphatically than had originally been the case. Though the earliest
movements toward independence were undertaken by an uneasy, and as it
turned out unstable, coalition of Western-educated intellectuals and
neotraditional Muslim reformers, it was the arrest, exile, and
triumphant restoration of Muhammed V in 1953–1955 that finally secured
the independence movement, and, in securing it, turned the throne into
the focus of Morocco’s growing but still intermittent sense of
nationhood. The country got, revived, ideologized, and better organized,
its center back. But, it soon turned out, it also got, similarly
improved, its particularism back.

Much postrevolutionary political history has demonstrated this fact:
that however transformed, the crucial struggle still consists in an
attempt by the king and his staff to sustain the monarchy as a viable
institution in a society in which everything from landscape and kinship
structure to religion and national character conspires to partition
political life into disparate and disconnected exhibitions of parochial
power. The first such exhibitions came with a series of so-called tribal
uprisings—in part foreign-stimulated, in part the result of domestic
political maneuvering, in part a return of the culturally repressed—that
harried the new state during the first few years of independence. These
were eventually put down with a combination of royal force and royal
intrigue. But they were merely the first, rather elemental indications
of what life was going to be like for a classical monarchy that,
returning from the limbo of colonial subservience, had to establish
itself as at once the authentic expression of the nation’s soul and the
appropriate vehicle of its modernization.

As Samuel Huntington has pointed out, the peculiar fate of traditional
monarchies almost everywhere in the new states is to have also to be
modernizing monarchies, or at least to look like such.⁶⁶ A king content
merely to reign can remain a political icon, a piece of cultural
bric-a-brac. But if he wants also to rule, as Moroccan kings have always
very much wanted to do, he must make himself the expression of a
powerful force in contemporary social life. For Muhammed V, and, since
1961, his son Hassan II, this force has been the emergence for the first
time in the country’s history of a Western-educated class large enough
to permeate the entire society and discrete enough to represent a
distinctive interest. Though their styles have been somewhat
different—Hassan is remote where Muhammed was paternal—they have each
struggled at once to organize and to place themselves at the head of The
New Middle Class, The Intermediate Sectors, La Classe Dirigeante, The
National Elite, or whatever this forming crowd of officials, officers,
managers, educators, technicians, and publicists ought properly to be
called.

Suppressing the tribal rebellions was thus less the end of the old order
than the end of an ineffective strategy for dominating it. After 1958,
the essentials of what has become the palace’s established approach to
securing a firmer grip on the Moroccan half-polity emerged—the
construction of a constitutional monarchy, constitutional enough to
attract the support of the educated elite and monarchical enough to
maintain the substance of royal power. Desiring the fate of neither the
English monarchy nor the Iraqi, Muhammed V, and even more Hassan II,
have sought to create an institution which, invoking Islam, Arabism, and
three centuries of Alawite rule, could draw its legitimacy from the past
and, calling for rationalism, dirigisme, and technocracy, its authority
from the present.

The stages in the recent history of this effort to turn Morocco, by a
kind of political miscegenation, into what can only be called a royalist
republic—the separation of the secularist, religious, and traditionalist
wings of the nationalist movement and the consequent formation of a
multiparty system in 1958–1959; the failure of the king’s own coalition
party, the Front for the Defense of Constitutional Institutions, to gain
a parliamentary majority in the 1963 general elections; the royal
suspension, ostensibly temporary, of parliament in 1965; the dime-novel
murder (in France) of the major opponent of the whole project, Mehdi Ben
Barka, in 1968—need not be traced out here. The point is that the
tension between essentialism and epochalism is as observable in the
vicissitudes of the postrevolutionary Moroccan political system as in
those of the Indonesian; and if it has not as yet attained so flamboyant
a denouement, and one may hope never will, it has been moving in the
same direction of increasing unmanageability, as the relationship
between what Edward Shils has called the “will to be modern” and what
Mazzini called the “need to exist and have a name” grows steadily more
involved.⁷⁷ And though the form it takes and the speed at which it moves
naturally vary, the same process is occurring in, if perhaps not all, at
least the overwhelming majority of the new states as, the revolution
accomplished, the point of it is sought.

Concepts of Culture

Until Talcott Parsons, carrying forward Weber’s double rejection (and
double acceptance) of German idealism and Marxist materialism, provided
a viable alternative, the dominant concept of culture in American social
science identified culture with learned behavior. This concept can
hardly be called “wrong”—isolated concepts are neither “wrong” nor
“right”—and for many, rather routine purposes it was, and remains,
serviceable. But it is now clear to virtually everyone whose interests
extend any distance beyond the descriptive that it is very difficult to
generate analyses of much theoretical power from such a diffuse,
empiricist notion. The day when social phenomena were explained by
redescribing them as culture patterns and noting that such patterns are
handed down from generation to generation is very nearly past. And
Parsons, insisting in his grave and toneless voice that to interpret the
way a group of human beings behave as an expression of their culture
while defining their culture as the sum of the ways in which they have
learned to behave is not terribly informative, is as responsible for its
passing as any single figure in contemporary social science.

In place of this near-idea, Parsons, following not only Weber but a line
of thought stretching back at least to Vico, has elaborated a concept of
culture as a system of symbols by which man confers significance upon
his own experience. Symbol systems, man-created, shared, conventional,
ordered, and indeed learned, provide human beings with a meaningful
framework for orienting themselves to one another, to the world around
them, and to themselves. At once a product and a determinant of social
interaction, they are to the process of social life as a computer’s
program is to its operations, the genic helix to the development of the
organism, the blueprint to the construction of the bridge, the score to
the performance of the symphony, or, to choose a humbler analogy, the
recipe to the baking of the cake—so the symbol system is the information
source that, to some measurable extent, gives shape, direction,
particularity, and point to an ongoing flow of activity.

Yet these analogies, which suggest a pre-existing template stamping form
onto a process external to it, pass rather facilely over what has
emerged as the central theoretical problem for this more sophisticated
approach: namely, how to conceptualize the dialectic between the
crystallization of such directive “patterns of meaning” and the concrete
course of social life.

There is a sense in which a computer’s program is an outcome of prior
developments in the technology of computing, a particular helix of
phylogenetic history, a blueprint of earlier experiments in bridge
building, a score of the evolution of musical performance, and a recipe
of a long series of successful and unsucccessful cakes. But the simple
fact that the information elements in these cases are materially
separable from the processual—one can, in principle anyhow, write out
the program, isolate the helix, draw the blueprint, publish the score,
note down the recipe—makes them less useful as models for the
interaction of cultural patterns and social processes where, a few more
intellectualized realms like music and cake-baking in part aside, the
very question at issue is precisely how such a separation is, even in
thought, actually to be effected. The workability of the Parsonian
concept of culture rests almost entirely on the degree to which such a
model can be constructed—on the degree to which the relationship between
the development of symbol systems and the dynamics of social process can
be circumstantially exposed, thereby rendering the depiction of
technologies, rituals, myths, and kinship terminologies as man-made
information sources for the directive ordering of human conduct more
than a metaphor.

This problem has haunted Parsons’ writings on culture from the earliest
days when he regarded it as a set of Whiteheadian “external objects”
psychologically incorporated into personalities and thus, by extension,
institutionalized in social systems, to the most recent where he sees it
more in the control-mechanism terms of cybernetics. But nowhere has it
come home more to roost than in discussing ideology; for, of all the
realms of culture, ideology is the one in which the relationship between
symbolic structures and collective behavior is at once the most
conspicuous and the least clear.

For Parsons, an ideology is but a special sort of symbol system:

A system of beliefs held in common by members of a collectivity . . .
which is oriented to the evaluative integration of the collectivity, by
interpretation of the empirical nature of the collectivity and of the
situation in which it is placed, the processes by which it developed to
its given state, the goals to which its members are collectively
oriented, and their relation to the future course of events.⁸⁸

Yet, left at that, this formulation fuses together modes of
self-interpretation that do not entirely go together, and, glossing over
the moral tension inherent in ideological activity, obscures the
interior sources of its enormous sociological dynamism. In particular,
the two clauses I have underscored, the “interpretation of the empirical
nature of the collectivity,” and “[the interpretation] of the situation
in which [that collectivity] is placed,” are not, as I hope I have by
now demonstrated, as coordinate as practical enterprises in social
self-definition as the mere “and” conjoining them might suggest. So far
as new state nationalism is concerned, they are in fact very deeply, in
some places irreconcilably, at odds. To deduce what the nation is from a
conception of the world-historical situation in which it is thought to
be enclosed—“epochalism”—produces one sort of moral-political universe;
to diagnose the situation with which the nation is faced from a prior
conception of what it is intrinsically—“essentialism”—produces quite
another; and to combine the two (the most common approach) produces a
confused assortment of mixed cases. For this reason, among others,
nationalism is not a mere by-product but the very stuff of social change
in so many new states; not its reflection, its cause, its expression, or
its engine, but the thing itself.

To see one’s country as the product of “the processes by which it
developed to its given state,” or, alternatively, to see it as the
ground of “the future course of events,” is, in short, to see it rather
differently. But, more than that, it is to look in rather different
places to see it: to parents, to traditional authority figures, to
custom and legend; or, to secular intellectuals, to the oncoming
generation, to “current events,” and the mass media. Fundamentally, the
tension between essentialist and epochalist strains in new state
nationalism is not a tension between intellectual passions but between
social institutions charged with discordant cultural meanings. An
increase in newspaper circulation, an upsurge of religious activity, a
decline in family cohesion, an expansion of universities, a reassertion
of hereditary privilege, a proliferation of folklore societies are—like
their contraries—themselves elements in the process by which the
character and content of that nationalism as an “information source” for
collective behavior are determined. The organized “systems of belief”
propagated by professional ideologists represent attempts to raise
aspects of this process to the level of conscious thought and so
deliberately control it.

But, no more than consciousness exhausts mentality does nationalist
ideology exhaust nationalism; what it does, selectively and
incompletely, is articulate it. The images, metaphors, and rhetorical
turns from which nationalist ideologies are built are essentially
devices, cultural devices designed to render one or another aspect of
the broad process of collective self-redefinition explicit, to cast
essentialist pride or epochalist hope into specific symbolic forms,
where more than dimly felt, they can be described, developed,
celebrated, and used. To formulate an ideological doctrine is to make
(or try to make—there are more failures than successes) what was a
generalized mood into a practical force.

The scuffle of political sects in Indonesia and the shifting foundations
of monarchy in Morocco, the first so far an apparent failure, the second
so far an ambiguous success, represent such attempts to draw the
intangibilities of conceptual change into articulate cultural forms.
They represent, also, of course, and even more immediately, a struggle
for power, place, privilege, wealth, fame, and all the other so-called
“real” rewards of life. Indeed, it is because of the fact that they also
represent this that their ability to focus and transform men’s views of
who they are and how they should act is so great.

The “patterns of meaning” by which social change is formed grow from the
processes of that change itself and, crystallized into proper ideologies
or embedded in popular attitudes, serve in turn, to some inevitably
limited degree, to guide it. The progress from cultural diversity to
ideological combat to mass violence in Indonesia, or the attempt to
dominate a field of social particularisms by fusing the values of a
republic with the facts of an autocracy in Morocco, are without doubt
the hardest of hard political, economic, and stratificatory realities;
real blood has flowed, real dungeons have been built—and, to be fair,
real pain has been relieved. But they are also without doubt the record
of those would-be countries’ efforts to breathe intelligibility into an
idea of “nationhood,” in terms of which these realities, and worse to
come, can be confronted, shaped, and understood.

And this is true for the new states generally. As the heroic excitements
of the political revolution against colonial domination recede into an
inspirational past to be replaced by the shabbier, but no less
convulsive movements of the dispiriting present, the secular analogues
of Weber’s famous “problems of meaning” grow more and more desperate. It
is not only in religion that things are not “merely there and happen”
but “have a ‘meaning’ and are there because of this meaning,” but in
politics as well, and in new-state politics in particular. The questions
“What is it all for?” “What’s the use?” and “Why go on?” arise in the
context of mass poverty, official corruption, or tribal violence as much
as in those of wasting illness, defeated hope, or premature death. They
get no better answers, but insofar as they get any at all it is from
images of a heritage worth preserving or a promise worth pursuing, and
though these need not necessarily be nationalist images, almost all of
them—Marxist ones included—are.⁹⁹

Rather like religion, nationalism has a bad name in the modern world,
and, rather like religion, it more or less deserves it. Between them
(and sometimes in combination) religious bigotry and nationalist hatred
have probably brought more havoc upon humanity than any two forces in
history, and doubtless will bring a great deal more. Yet also rather
like religion, nationalism has been a driving force in some of the most
creative changes in history, and doubtless will be so again in many yet
to come. It would seem, then, well to spend less time decrying it—which
is a little like cursing the winds—and more in trying to figure out why
it takes the forms it does and how it might be prevented from tearing
apart even as it creates the societies in which it arises, and beyond
that the whole fabric of modern civilization. For in the new states the
age of ideology is not only not over, but, as the inchoate changes of
self-conception wrought by the dramatic events of the past forty years
emerge into the public light of explicit doctrine, only just beginning.
In preparing ourselves to understand and deal with it, or perhaps only
to survive it, the Parsonian theory of culture, suitably emended, is one
of our most powerful intellectual tools.

[]

1 The term “new states,” indeterminate to begin with, becomes even more
so as time passes and the states age. Though my main referent is the
countries that have gained independence since World War II, I do not
hesitate, where it suits my purposes and seems realistic, to extend the
term to cover states like those of the Middle East, whose formal
independence came earlier, or even those, like Ethiopia, Iran, or
Thailand, which in the strict sense were never colonies at all.

2 For an incisive, if anecdotal, discussion of the way in which
contemporary social conditions in the Third World hamper the recognition
of change on the part of “the natives” and foreign observers alike, see
A. Hirschman, “Underdevelopment, Obstacles to the Perception of Change,
and Leadership,” Daedalus 97 (1968): 925–937. For some comments of my
own relative to the tendency of Western scholars—and, inferentially,
Third World intellectuals—to underestimate the present rate (and to
misconceive the direction) of change in the new states, see “Myrdal’s
Mythology,” Encounter, June 1969, pp. 26–34.

3 For a general review, see J. A. Fishman et al., eds., Language
Problems of Developing Nations (New York, 1968).

4 For the first (not accepted, but attacked), see L. Harries, “Swahili
in Modern East Africa,” in Fishman et al., Language Problems, p. 426.
For the second (accepted during an incisive discussion along the general
lines here being developed), see C. Gallagher, “North African Problems
and Prospects: Language and Identity,” in Language Problems, p. 140. My
point, of course, is not that technical linguistic matters have no
relevance to language problems in the new states, but merely that the
roots of those problems are much deeper and that expanding lexicons,
standardizing usages, improving writing systems, and rationalizing
instruction, though valuable in themselves, do not touch the central
difficulty.

5 The main exception so far as the Third World generally is concerned is
Latin America, but there—proving the rule—language issues are very much
less prominent than in the new states proper and tend to reduce to
education and minority group problems. (For an example, see D. H. Burns,
“Bilingual Education in the Andes of Peru,” in Fishman et al., Language
Problems, pp. 403–413.) To what degree the fact that Spanish (or, more,
Portuguese) is just enough of a carrier of modern thought to be felt to
be an avenue to it and just marginal enough a carrier of it not actually
to be a very good one has played a part in the intellectual
provincialization of Latin America—so that it has in fact had a language
problem without quite realizing it—is an interesting and separate
question.

6 S P. Huntington, “The Political Modernization of Traditional
Monarchies,” Daedalus 95 (1966):763–768; see also his Political Order in
Changing Societies (New Haven, 1968). With Huntington’s general
analysis, too much influenced, in my opinion, by the analogy of the king
vs. aristocracy struggle in premodern Europe, I am, however, in some
disagreement. For Morocco, anyway, the image of a populist monarchy “out
of style in middle-class circles,” appealing over the heads of “local
privilege, corporate autonomy [and] feudal power” to the masses in the
interests of progressive reform, seems to me very nearly the reverse of
the truth. For more realistic views of postindependence Moroccan
politics, see J. Waterbury, The Commander of the Faithful (London,
1970).

7 E. Shils, “Political Development in the New States,” Comparative
Studies in Society and History 2 (1960): 265–292, 379–411.

8 T. Parsons, The Social System (Glencoe, III., 1951), p. 349. Italics
added.

9 The question of the relationship between Marxism and nationalism is a
vexed one which it would take another essay even to outline. Suffice it
here to say that, as far as the new states are concerned, Marxist
movements, Communist or non-Communist, have almost everywhere been
heavily nationalistic in both aim and idiom, and there is very little
sign that they are becoming any less so. Actually, the same point could
be made about religio-political movements—Muslim, Buddhist, Hindu, or
whatever; they too tend to be as localized in fact as they are placeless
in principle.

Chapter 10/ The Integrative Revolution: Primordial Sentiments and Civil
Politics in the New States

[]

I

In 1948, scarcely a year after Independence, Pandit Nehru found himself
in the always unsettling position for an opposition politician finally
come to power of being obliged to place in practice a policy he had long
espoused but never liked. With Patel and Sitaramayya, he was appointed
to the Linguistic Provinces Committee.

The Congress had supported the principle of linguistic determination of
state boundaries within India almost since its founding, arguing,
ironically enough, that British maintenance of “arbitrary”—that is,
nonlinguistic—administrative units was part of a divide-and-rule policy.
In 1920 it had actually reorganized its own regional chapters along
linguistic lines so as better to secure its popular appeal. But with the
echoes of partition perhaps still ringing in his ears, Nehru was deeply
shaken by his experience on the Linguistic Committee, and with the
candor that made him virtually unique among the leaders of the new
states, he admitted it:

[This inquiry] has been in some ways an eye-opener for us. The work of
60 years of the Indian National Congress was standing before us, face to
face with centuries-old India of narrow loyalties, petty jealousies and
ignorant prejudices engaged in mortal conflict and we were simply
horrified to see how thin was the ice upon which we were skating. Some
of the ablest men in the country came before us and confidently and
emphatically stated that language in this country stood for and
represented culture, race, history, individuality, and finally a
sub-nation.¹¹

But, horrified or not, Nehru, Patel, and Sitaramayya in the end were
forced to endorse the claims of Andhra as a Telugu-speaking state, and
the thin ice was broken. Within the decade India had been almost
entirely reorganized along linguistic lines, and a wide range of
observers, both domestic and foreign, were wondering aloud whether the
country’s political unity would survive this wholesale concession to
“narrow loyalties, petty jealousies, and ignorant prejudices.”²²

The problem that opened Nehru’s eyes in such wide astonishment is
phrased in linguistic terms, but the same problem phrased in a wide
variety of terms is, of course, literally pandemic to the new states, as
the countless references to “dual” or “plural” or “multiple” societies,
to “mosaic” or “composite” social structures, to “states” that are not
“nations” and “nations” that are not “states,” to “tribalism,”
“parochialism,” and “communalism,” as well as to pan-national movements
of various sorts demonstrate.

When we speak of communalism in India, we refer to religious contrasts;
when we speak of it in Malaya, we are mainly concerned with racial ones,
and in the Congo with tribal ones. But the grouping under a common
rubric is not simply adventitious; the phenomena referred to are in some
way similar. Regionalism has been the main theme in Indonesian
disaffection, differences in custom in Moroccan. The Tamil minority in
Ceylon is set off from the Sinhalese majority by religion, language,
race, region, and social custom; the Shiite minority in Iraq is set off
from the dominant Sunnis virtually by an intra-Islamic sectarian
difference alone. Pan-national movements in Africa are largely based on
race, in Kurdistan, on tribalism; in Laos, the Shan States, and
Thailand, on language. Yet all these phenomena, too, are in some sense
of a piece. They form a definable field of investigation.

That is, they would, could we but define it. The stultifying aura of
conceptual ambiguity that surrounds the terms “nation,” “nationality,”
and “nationalism” has been extensively discussed and thoroughly deplored
in almost every work that has been concerned to attack the relationship
between communal and political loyalties.³³ But as the preferred remedy
has been to adopt a theoretical eclecticism that, in its attempt to do
justice to the multifaceted nature of the problems involved, tends to
confuse political, psychological, cultural, and demographic factors,
actual reduction of that ambiguity has not proceeded very far. Thus a
recent symposium on the Middle East refers indiscriminately to the
efforts of the Arab League to destroy existing nation-state boundaries,
those of the Sudan Government to unify a somewhat arbitrary and
accidentally demarcated sovereign state, and those of the Azerin Turks
to separate from Iran and join the Soviet Republic of Azerbaijan as
“nationalism.”⁴⁴ Operating with a similarly omnibus concept, Coleman
sees Nigerians (or some of them) as displaying five different sorts of
nationalism at once—“African,” “Nigerian,” “Regional,” “Group,” and
“Cultural.”⁵⁵ And Emerson defines a nation as a “terminal community—the
largest community that, when the chips are down, effectively commands
men’s loyalty, overriding the claims both of the lesser communities
within it and those that cut across it or potentially enfold it within a
still greater society . . . ,” which simply shifts the ambiguity from
the term “nation” to the term “loyalty,” as well as seeming to leave
such questions as whether India, Indonesia, or Nigeria are nations to
the determination of some future, unspecified historical crisis.⁶⁶

Some of this conceptual haze is burned away, however, if it is realized
that the peoples of the new states are simultaneously animated by two
powerful, thoroughly interdependent, yet distinct and often actually
opposed motives—the desire to be recognized as responsible agents whose
wishes, acts, hopes, and opinions “matter,” and the desire to build an
efficient, dynamic modern state. The one aim is to be noticed: it is a
search for an identity, and a demand that the identity be publicly
acknowledged as having import, a social assertion of the self as “being
somebody in the world.”⁷⁷ The other aim is practical: it is a demand for
progress, for a rising standard of living, more effective political
order, greater social justice, and beyond that of “playing a part in the
larger arena of world politics,” of “exercising influence among the
nations.”⁸⁸ The two motives are, again, most intimately related, because
citizenship in a truly modern state has more and more become the most
broadly negotiable claim to personal significance, and because what
Mazzini called the demand to exist and have a name is to such a great
extent fired by a humiliating sense of exclusion from the important
centers of power in world society. But they are not the same thing. They
stem from different sources and respond to different pressures. It is,
in fact, the tension between them that is one of the central driving
forces in the national evolution of the new states; as it is, at the
same time, one of the greatest obstacles to such evolution.

This tension takes a peculiarly severe and chronic form in the new
states, both because of the great extent to which their peoples’ sense
of self remains bound up in the gross actualities of blood, race,
language, locality, religion, or tradition, and because of the steadily
accelerating importance in this century of the sovereign state as a
positive instrument for the realization of collective aims. Multiethnic,
usually multilinguistic, and sometimes multiracial, the populations of
the new states tend to regard the immediate, concrete, and to them
inherently meaningful sorting implicit in such “natural” diversity as
the substantial content of their individuality. To subordinate these
specific and familiar identifications in favor of a generalized
commitment to an overarching and somewhat alien civil order is to risk a
loss of definition as an autonomous person, either through absorption
into a culturally undifferentiated mass or, what is even worse, through
a domination by some other rival ethnic, racial, or linguistic community
that is able to imbue that order with the temper of its own personality.
But at the same time, all but the most unenlightened members of such
societies are at least dimly aware—and their leaders are acutely
aware—that the possibilities for social reform and material progress
they so intensely desire and are so determined to achieve rest with
increasing weight on their being enclosed in a reasonably large,
independent, powerful, well-ordered polity. The insistence on
recognition as someone who is visible and matters and the will to be
modern and dynamic thus tend to diverge, and much of the political
process in the new states pivots around an heroic effort to keep them
aligned.

II

A more exact phrasing of the nature of the problem involved here is
that, considered as societies, the new states are abnormally susceptible
to serious disaffection based on primordial attachments.⁹⁹ By a
primordial attachment is meant one that stems from the “givens”—or, more
precisely, as culture is inevitably involved in such matters, the
assumed “givens”—of social existence: immediate contiguity and kin
connection mainly, but beyond them the givenness that stems from being
born into a particular religious community, speaking a particular
language, or even a dialect of a language, and following particular
social practices. These congruities of blood, speech, custom, and so on,
are seen to have an ineffable, and at times overpowering, coerciveness
in and of themselves. One is bound to one’s kinsman, one’s neighbor,
one’s fellow believer, ipso facto; as the result not merely of personal
affection, practical necessity, common interest, or incurred obligation,
but at least in great part by virtue of some unaccountable absolute
import attributed to the very tie itself. The general strength of such
primordial bonds, and the types of them that are important, differ from
person to person, from society to society, and from time to time. But
for virtually every person, in every society, at almost all times, some
attachments seem to flow more from a sense of natural—some would say
spiritual—affinity than from social interaction.

In modern societies the lifting of such ties to the level of political
supremacy—though it has, of course, occurred and continues to occur—has
more and more come to be deplored as pathological. To an increasing
degree national unity is maintained not by calls to blood and land but
by a vague, intermittent, and routine allegiance to a civil state,
supplemented to a greater or lesser extent by governmental use of police
powers and ideological exhortation. The havoc wreaked, both upon
themselves and others, by those modern (or semimodern) states that did
passionately seek to become primordial rather than civil political
communities, as well as a growing realization of the practical
advantages of a wider-ranging pattern of social integration than
primordial ties can usually produce or even permit, have only
strengthened the reluctance publicly to advance race, language,
religion, and the like as bases for the definition of a terminal
community. But in modernizing societies, where the tradition of civil
politics is weak and where the technical requirements for an effective
welfare government are poorly understood, primordial attachments tend,
as Nehru discovered, to be repeatedly, in some cases almost continually,
proposed and widely acclaimed as preferred bases for the demarcation of
autonomous political units. And the thesis that truly legitimate
authority flows only from the inherent coerciveness such attachments are
conceived somehow to possess is frankly, energetically, and artlessly
defended:

The reasons why a unilingual state is stable and a multilingual state
unstable are quite obvious. A state is built on fellow feeling. What is
this fellow feeling? To state briefly it is a feeling of a corporate
sentiment of oneness which makes those who are charged with it feel that
they are kith and kin. This feeling is a double-edged feeling. It is at
once a feeling of “consciousness of kind” which, on the one hand, binds
together those who have it so strongly that it overrides all differences
arising out of economic conflicts or social gradations and, on the
other, severs them from those who are not of their kind. It is a longing
not to belong to any other group. The existence of this fellow feeling
is the foundation of a stable and democratic state.¹⁰¹⁰

It is this crystallization of a direct conflict between primordial and
civil sentiments—this “longing not to belong to any other group”—that
gives to the problem variously called tribalism, parochialism,
communalism, and so on, a more ominous and deeply threatening quality
than most of the other, also very serious and intractable, problems the
new states face. Here we have not just competing loyalties, but
competing loyalties of the same general order, on the same level of
integration. There are many other competing loyalties in the new states,
as in any state—ties to class, party, business, union, profession, or
whatever. But groups formed of such ties are virtually never considered
as possible self-standing, maximal social units, as candidates for
nationhood. Conflicts among them occur only within a more or less fully
accepted terminal community whose political integrity they do not, as a
rule, put into question. No matter how severe they become, they do not
threaten, at least not intentionally, its existence as such. They
threaten governments, or even forms of government, but they rarely at
best—and then usually when they have become infused with primordial
sentiments—threaten to undermine the nation itself, because they do not
involve alternative definitions of what the nation is, of what its scope
of reference is. Economic or class or intellectual disaffection
threatens revolution, but disaffection based on race, language, or
culture threatens partition, irredentism, or merger, a redrawing of the
very limits of the state, a new definition of its domain. Civil
discontent finds its natural outlet in the seizing, legally or
illegally, of the state apparatus. Primordial discontent strives more
deeply and is satisfied less easily. If severe enough, it wants not just
Sukarno’s or Nehru’s or Moulay Hasan’s head, it wants Indonesia’s or
India’s or Morocco’s.

The actual foci around which such discontent tends to crystallize are
various, and in any given case several are usually involved
concurrently, sometimes at cross-purposes with one another. On a merely
descriptive level they are, nevertheless, fairly readily enumerable:¹¹¹¹

Assumed Blood Ties. Here the defining element is quasi-kinship. “Quasi”
because kin units formed around known biological relationship (extended
families, lineages, and so on) are too small for even the most
tradition-bound to regard them as having more than limited significance,
and the referent is, consequently, to a notion of untraceable but yet
sociologically real kinship, as in a tribe. Nigeria, the Congo, and the
greater part of sub-Saharan Africa are characterized by a prominence of
this sort of primordialism. But so also are the nomads or seminomads of
the Middle East—the Kurds, Baluchis, Pathans, and so on; the Nagas,
Mundas, Santals, and so on, of India; and most of the so-called hill
tribes of Southeast Asia.

Race. Clearly, race is similar to assumed kinship, in that it involves
an ethnobiological theory. But it is not quite the same thing. Here, the
reference is to phenotypical physical features—especially, of course,
skin color, but also facial form, stature, hair type, and so on—rather
than any very definite sense of common descent as such. The communal
problems of Malaya in large part focus around these sorts of
differences, between, in fact, two phenotypically very similar Mongoloid
peoples. “Negritude” clearly draws much, though perhaps not all, of its
force from the notion of race as a significant primordial property, and
the pariah commercial minorities—like the Chinese in Southeast Asia or
the Indians and Lebanese in Africa—are similarly demarcated.

Language. Linguism—for some yet to be adequately explained reasons—is
particularly intense in the Indian subcontinent, has been something of
an issue in Malaya, and has appeared sporadically elsewhere. But as
language has sometimes been held to be the altogether essential axis of
nationality conflicts, it is worth stressing that linguism is not an
inevitable outcome of linguistic diversity. As indeed kinship, race, and
the other factors to be listed below, language differences need not in
themselves be particularly divisive; they have not been so for the most
part in Tanganyika, Iran (not a new state in the strict sense, perhaps),
the Philippines, or even in Indonesia, where despite a great confusion
of tongues linguistic conflict seems to be the one social problem the
country has somehow omitted to demonstrate in extreme form. Furthermore,
primordial conflicts can occur where no marked linguistic differences
are involved, as in Lebanon, among the various sorts of Batak-speakers
in Indonesia, and to a lesser extent perhaps between the Fulani and
Hausa in northern Nigeria.

Region. Although a factor nearly everywhere, regionalism naturally tends
to be especially troublesome in geographically heterogeneous areas.
Tonkin, Annam, and Cochin in prepartitioned Vietnam, the two baskets on
the long pole, were opposed almost purely in regional terms, sharing
language, culture, race, and so on. The tension between East and West
Pakistan [now separated into Bangladesh and Pakistan] involved
differences in language and culture too, but the geographic element was
of great prominence owing to the territorial discontinuity of the
country. Java versus the Outer Islands in archipelagic Indonesia, and
the Northeast versus the West Coast in mountain-bisected Malaya, are
other examples in which regionalism has been an important primordial
factor in national politics.

Religion. Indian partition is the outstanding case of the operation of
this type of attachment. But Lebanon, the Christian Karens and the
Moslem Arakenese in Burma, the Toba Bataks, Ambonese, and Minahassans in
Indonesia, the Moros in the Philippines, the Sikhs in Indian Punjab and
the Ahmadiyas in Pakistan, and the Hausa in Nigeria are other well-known
examples of its force in undermining or inhibiting a comprehensive civil
sense.

Custom. Again, differences in custom form a basis for a certain amount
of national disunity almost everywhere, and are of especial prominence
in those cases in which an intellectually and/or artistically rather
sophisticated group sees itself as the bearer of a “civilization” amid a
largely barbarian population that would be well advised to model itself
upon it: the Bengalis in India, the Javanese in Indonesia, the Arabs (as
against the Berbers) in Morocco, the Amhara in—another “old” new
state—Ethiopia, and so forth. But it is important also to point out that
even vitally opposed groups may differ rather little in their general
style of life: Hindu Gujeratis and Maharashtrians in India; Baganda and
Bunyoro in Uganda; Javanese and Sundanese in Indonesia. And the reverse
holds also: the Balinese have far and away the most divergent pattern of
customs in Indonesia, but they have been, so far, notable for the
absence of any sense of primordial discontent at all.

But beyond such a mere listing of the sorts of primordial ties that
tend, in one place or another, to become politicized, it is necessary to
go further and attempt also to classify, or somehow order, the concrete
patterns of primordial diversity and conflict that in fact exist in the
various new states and of which these ties are the components.

This seemingly routine exercise in political ethnography is a rather
more delicate task than at first appears, however, not only because
those communalistic challenges to the integrity of the civil state that
are at the moment being openly pressed must be discerned, but also
because those that are latent, lying concealed in the enduring structure
of primordial identifications, ready to take explicit political form
given only the proper sorts of social conditions, must be revealed. The
fact that the Indian minority in Malaya has not so far posed a very
serious threat to the viability of the state does not mean that it might
not do so if something odd happened to the world price of rubber or if
Mrs. Gandhi’s hands-off policy toward overseas Indians should be
replaced by one more like that of Mao toward the overseas Chinese. The
Moro problem, which provided postgraduate field training for select
members of several generations of West Pointers, now merely simmers in
the Philippines, but it may not do so forever. The Free Thai movement
seems dead at the moment, but it could revive with a change in
Thailand’s foreign policy or even with Pathet success in Laos. Iraq’s
Kurds, several times ostensibly mollified, continue to show signs of
restlessness. And so on. Primordially based political solidarities have
a deeply abiding strength in most of the new states, but it is not
always an active and immediately apparent one.

Initially, a useful analytic distinction can be made with respect to
this matter of classification between those allegiances that operate
more or less wholly within the confines of a single civil state and
those that do not but which run across them. Or, put somewhat
differently, one can contrast those cases in which the racial, tribal,
linguistic, and so on, reference group that is charged with a “corporate
sentiment of oneness” is smaller than the existing civil state, and
those where it is larger, or at least transcends its borders in some
fashion. In the first instance primordial discontent arises from a sense
of political suffocation; in the second, from a sense of political
dismemberment. Karen separatism in Burma, Ashanti in Ghana, or Baganda
in Uganda are examples of the former; pan-Arabism, greater Somaliism,
pan-Africanism, of the latter.

Many of the new states are plagued by both these sorts of problems at
once. In the first place, most interstate primordial movements do not
involve entire separate countries, as the pan-movements at least tend to
do, but rather minorities scattered through several, for example: the
Kurdistan movement to unite Kurds in Iran, Syria, Turkey, and the Soviet
Union, perhaps the most unlikely-to-succeed political movement of all
time; the Abako movement of the late Mr. Kasuvubu and his Republic of
The Congo and Angola allies; the Dravidistan movement, insofar as it
comes to see itself as extending across Palk Strait from South India
into Ceylon; the movement, or perhaps it is so far only a formless
sentiment, for a unified and sovereign Bengal—greater
Bangladesh—independent of both India and Pakistan. And there are even a
few classical irredentist-type problems scattered among the new
states—the Malays in South Thailand, the Pushtu speakers along the
Afghan border of Pakistan, and so on; and when political boundaries
become more firmly established in sub-Saharan Africa there will be a
great many more of them. In all these cases, there is—or there may
develop—both a desire to escape the established civil state and a
longing to reunite a politically divided primordial community.¹²¹²

In the second place, interstate and intrastate primordial attachments
often cross-cut one another in a complex network of balanced—if most
precariously balanced—commitments. In Malaya one of the more effective
binding forces that has, so far at least, held Chinese and Malays
together in a single state despite the tremendous centrifugal tendencies
the racial and cultural difference generates is the fear on the part of
either group that should the Federation dissolve they may become a
clearly submerged minority in some other political framework: the Malays
through the turn of the Chinese to Singapore or China; the Chinese
through the turn of the Malays to Indonesia. In a similar way, in Ceylon
both the Tamils and Sinhalese manage to see themselves as minorities:
the Tamils because 70 percent of the Ceylonese are Sinhalese; the
Sinhalese because the eight million of them in Ceylon are all there are,
while in addition to the two million Tamils on the island there are 28
million more in South India. In Morocco, there has tended to be both a
within-state split between Arab and Berber, and an extrastate split
between partisans of Nasser’s pan-Arabism and of Bourguiba’s
regroupement maghrebin. And Nasser himself, until his death perhaps the
new states’ most accomplished virtuoso in the primordial arts, was
absorbed in juggling pan-Arabist, pan-Islamic, and pan-African
sentiments in the interests of Egyptian hegemony among the Bandung
powers.

But whether the relevant attachments outrun state boundaries or not,
most of the major primordial battles are for the moment being fought
within them. A certain amount of international conflict focusing around,
or at least animated by, primordial issues does exist among the new
states. The hostility between Israel and her Arab neighbors and the
quarrel of India and Pakistan over Kashmir are the most prominent cases,
of course. But the embroilment of two older states, Greece and Turkey,
over Cyprus is another case; the tension between Somalia and Ethiopia
concerning an essentially irredentist problem a third; the Indonesian
difficulties vis-à-vis Peking with respect to the issue of “dual
citizenship” for Chinese residents of Indonesia a fourth, and so on. As
the new states solidify politically, such disputes may well grow both
more frequent and more intense. But as of now they have not yet
become—with the exception of the Israeli-Arab conflict and,
sporadically, the Kashmir problem—paramount political issues, and the
immediate significance of primordial differences is almost everywhere
primarily domestic, though this is not to say that they are therefore
without important international implications.¹³¹³

The construction of a typology of the concrete patterns of primordial
diversity that are found within the various new states is severely
hampered, however, by the simple lack of detailed and reliable
information in the overwhelming majority of the cases. But, again, a
gross and merely empirical classification can nonetheless fairly easily
be devised, and should prove useful as a rough-and-ready guide to a
wilderness otherwise uncharted, and facilitate a more incisive analysis
of the role of primordial sentiments in civil politics than is possible
in terms of “pluralism,” “tribalism,” “parochialism,” “communalism,” and
the other cliches of common-sense sociology:

1. One common and, relatively speaking, simple pattern seems to be that
of a single dominant and usually, though not inevitably, larger group
set over against a single strong and chronically troublesome minority:
Cyprus with Greeks and Turks; Ceylon with Sinhalese and Tamils; Jordan
with Jordanians and Palestinians, though in this last case the dominant
group is the smaller.

2. Similar in some ways to this first pattern, but more complex, is that
of one central—often enough in a geographic sense as well as a
political—group and several mediumly large and at least somewhat opposed
peripheral groups: the Javanese versus the Outer Island peoples in
Indonesia; the Irrawaddy Valley Burmese versus the various hill tribes
and upland valley peoples in Burma; the central plateau Persians and the
various tribes in Iran (though, again, this is not strictly a new
state); the Atlantic Plain Arabs encircled by the diverse Berber tribes
of the Rif, the Atlas, and the Sous; the Mekong Lao and the tribal
peoples in Laos; and so on. How far such a pattern is to be found in
black Africa is unclear. In the one case where it might have
crystallized, with the Ashanti in Ghana, the power of the central group
seems to have, at least temporarily, been broken. And whether in a new
state the Baganda will be able to maintain [or, perhaps now, regain]
their dominant position vis-à-vis the other Uganda groups through their
greater education, political sophistication, and so on, and despite
their comprising but about a fifth of the population, remains to be
seen.

3. Another pattern that forms an internally even less homogeneous type
is a bipolar one of two nearly evenly balanced major groups: Malays and
Chinese in Malaya (though there is also a smaller Indian group); or
Christians and Moslems in Lebanon (though here both groups are actually
aggregates of smaller sects); or Sunnis and Shiis in Iraq. The two
regions of Pakistan, although the Western region is far from wholly
homogeneous within itself, gave that state a sharply bipolar primordial
pattern, which has now torn it in half. Vietnam before partition tended
to take this form—Tonkin versus Cochin—this problem now having been
“solved” with the assistance of the great powers, though reunification
of the country might revive it. Even Libya, which has scarcely enough
people to develop decent group conflicts, has something of this pattern
with the Cyrenecia-Tripolitania contrast.

4. Next, there is the pattern of a relatively even gradation of groups
in importance, from several large ones through several medium-sized ones
to a number of small ones, with no clearly dominant ones and no sharp
cut-off points. India, the Philippines, Nigeria, and Kenya are perhaps
examples.

5. Finally, there is simple ethnic fragmentation, as Wallerstein has
called it, with multiple small groups, into which somewhat residual
category it is necessary to toss much of Africa, at least until more is
known about it.¹⁴¹⁴ One proposal, issuing from the
nothing-if-not-experimental Leopoldville Government, suggesting a
grouping of the Congo Republic’s estimated two hundred and fifty or so
separate tribal-linguistic groups into eighty autonomous tribal regions,
which would then be organized into twelve federated states, gives
something of an indication of the extent to which such fragmentation can
go, and the complexity of primordial allegiances it may involve.

The world of personal identity collectively ratified and publicly
expressed is thus an ordered world. The patterns of primordial
identification and cleavage within the existing new states are not
fluid, shapeless, and infinitely various, but are definitely demarcated
and vary in systematic ways. And as they vary, the nature of the
individual’s problem of social self-assertion varies with them, as it
does also according to his position within any one type of pattern. The
task of securing recognition as someone who is somebody to whom
attention must be paid appears in a different form and light to a
Sinhalese in Ceylon than it does to a Javanese in Indonesia or a Malay
in Malaya, because to be a member of a major group set over against one
minor one is a quite different matter from being a member of such a
group over against a plurality of minor ones or another major one. But
it appears also in a different form and light to a Turk in Cyprus than
to a Greek, to a Karen in Burma than to a Burmese, to a Tiv in Nigeria
than to a Hausa, because membership in a minor group places one in a
different position from that in which membership in a major group places
one, even within a single system.¹⁵¹⁵ The so-called pariah communities
of “foreign” traders that are found in so many of the new states—the
Lebanese in West Africa, the Indians in East Africa, the Chinese in
Southeast Asia and, in a somewhat different way, the Marwaris in South
India—live in an altogether different social universe, so far as the
problem of the maintenance of a recognized identity is concerned, than
do the settled agricultural groups, no matter how small and
insignificant, in the same societies. The network of primordial alliance
and opposition is a dense, intricate, but yet precisely articulated one,
the product, in most cases, of centuries of gradual crystallization. The
unfamiliar civil state, born yesterday from the meager remains of an
exhausted colonial regime, is superimposed upon this fine-spun and
lovingly conserved texture of pride and suspicion, and must somehow
contrive to weave it into the fabric of modern politics.

III

The reduction of primordial sentiments to civil order is rendered more
difficult, however, by the fact that political modernization tends
initially not to quiet such sentiments but to quicken them. The transfer
of sovereignty from a colonial regime to an independent one is more than
a mere shift of power from foreign hands to native ones; it is a
transformation of the whole pattern of political life, a metamorphosis
of subjects into citizens. Colonial governments, like the aristocratic
governments of premodern Europe in whose image they were fashioned, are
aloof and unresponsive; they stand outside the societies they rule, and
act upon them arbitrarily, unevenly, and unsystematically. But the
governments of the new states, though oligarchic, are popular and
attentive; they are located in the midst of the societies they rule, and
as they develop act upon them in progressively more continuous,
comprehensive, and purposeful manner. For the Ashanti cocoa farmer, the
Gujerati shopkeeper, or the Malayan Chinese tin miner, his country’s
attainment of political independence is also his own attainment,
willy-nilly, of modern political status, no matter how culturally
traditional he may remain nor how ineffectively and anachronistically
the new state may in practice function. He now becomes an integral part
of an autonomous and differentiated polity that begins to touch his life
at every point except the most strictly private. “The same people which
has hitherto been kept as far as possible from government affairs must
now be drawn into them,” the Indonesian nationalist Sjahrir wrote on the
eve of World War II, defining exactly the character of the “revolution”
that was in fact to follow in the Indies over the next decade—“That
people must be made politically conscious. Its political interest must
be stimulated and maintained.”¹⁶¹⁶

This thrusting of a modern political consciousness upon the mass of a
still largely unmodernized population does indeed tend to lead to the
stimulation and maintenance of a very intense popular interest in the
affairs of government. But, as a primordially based “corporate feeling
of oneness,” remains for many the fons et origo of legitimate
authority—the meaning of the term “self in “self-rule”—much of this
interest takes the form of an obsessive concern with the relation of
one’s tribe, region, sect, or whatever to a center of power that, while
growing rapidly more active, is not easily either insulated from the web
of primordial attachments, as was the remote colonial regime, or
assimilated to them as are the workaday authority systems of the “little
community.” Thus, it is the very process of the formation of a sovereign
civil state that, among other things, stimulates sentiments of
parochialism, communalism, racialism, and so on, because it introduced
into society a valuable new prize over which to fight and a frightening
new force with which to contend.¹⁷¹⁷ The doctrines of the nationalist
propagandists to the contrary notwithstanding, Indonesian regionalism,
Malayan racialism, Indian linguism, or Nigerian tribalism are, in their
political dimensions, not so much the heritage of colonial
divide-and-rule policies as they are products of the replacement of a
colonial regime by an independent, domestically anchored, purposeful
unitary state. Though they rest on historically developed distinctions,
some of which colonial rule helped to accentuate (and others of which it
helped to moderate), they are part and parcel of the very process of the
creation of a new polity and a new citizenship.

For a telling example in this connection one may look to Ceylon, which,
having made one of the quietest of entries into the family of new states
is now [1962] the scene of one of its noisiest communal uproars.
Ceylonese independence was won largely without struggle; in fact,
without even very much effort. There was no embittered nationalist mass
movement, as in most of the other new states, no loudly passionate
hero-leader, no diehard colonial opposition, no violence, no arrests—no
revolution really, for the 1947 transfer of sovereignty consisted of the
replacement of conservative, moderate, aloof British civil servants by
conservative, moderate, aloof British-educated Ceylonese notables who,
to more nativistic eyes at least, “resembled the former colonial rulers
in everything but the color of their skin.”¹⁸¹⁸ The revolution was to
come later, nearly a decade after formal independence and the British
governor’s valedictory expression of “profound satisfaction that Ceylon
has reached its goal of freedom without strife or bloodshed along the
path of peaceful negotiation”¹⁹¹⁹ proved to be somewhat premature: in
1956 wild Tamil-Sinhalese riots claimed more than a hundred lives, in
1958, perhaps as many as two thousand.

The country, 70 percent Sinhalese, 23 percent Tamil, has been marked by
a certain amount of group tension for centuries.²⁰²⁰ But such tension
has taken the distinctively modern form of an implacable, comprehensive,
and ideologically instigated mass hatred mainly since the late S. W. R.
D. Bandaranaike was swept into the premiership on a sudden wave of
Sinhalese cultural, religious, and linguistic revivalism in 1956.
Himself Oxford-educated, vaguely Marxist, and essentially secularist in
civil matters, Bandaranaike undermined the authority of the
English-speaking (and biethnic Colombo) patriciate by appealing openly,
and one suspects somewhat cynically, to the primordial sentiments of the
Sinhalese, promising a “Sinhala-only” linguistic policy, a place of
pride for Buddhism and the Buddhist clergy, and a radical reversal of
the supposed policy of “pampering” the Tamils, as well as rejecting
Western dress for the traditional “cloth and banian” of the Sinhalese
countryman.²¹²¹ And if, as one of his more uncritical apologists claims,
his “supreme ambition” was not “to set up an outmoded, parochial,
racialist government,” but to “stabilize democracy and convert his
country into a modern welfare state based on Nehru-style socialism,”²²²²
he soon found himself the helpless victim of a rising tide of primordial
fervor, and his death, after thirty hectic and frustrating months in
power, at the hands of an obscurely motivated Buddhist monk, was merely
that much more ironic.

The first definite move toward a resolute, popularly based, social
reform government led, therefore, not to heightened national unity, but
to the reverse—increased linguistic, racial, regional, and religious
parochialism, a strange dialectic whose actual workings have been
well-described by Wriggins.²³²³ The institution of universal suffrage
made the temptation to court the masses by appealing to traditional
loyalties virtually irresistible, and led Bandaranaike and his followers
to gamble, unsuccessfully as it turned out, on being able to tune
primordial sentiments up before elections and down after them. The
modernizing efforts of his government in the fields of health,
education, administration, and so on, threatened the status of
consequential rural personages—monks, ayurvedic doctors, village
schoolteachers, local officials—who were thereby rendered that much more
nativistic and insistent upon communal tokens of reassurance in exchange
for their political support. The search for a common cultural tradition
to serve as the content of the country’s identity as a nation now that
it had become, somehow, a state, led only to the revivification of
ancient, and better forgotten, Tamil-Sinhalese treacheries, atrocities,
insults, and wars. The eclipse of the Western-educated urban elite,
within which class loyalties and old-school ties tended to override
primordial differences, removed one of the few important points of
amicable contact between the two communities. The first stirrings of
fundamental economic change aroused fears that the position of the
industrious, frugal, aggressive Tamils would be strengthened at the
expense of the less methodical Sinhalese. The intensified competition
for government jobs, the increasing importance of the vernacular press,
and even government-instituted land-reclamation programs—because they
threatened to alter population distribution and so communal
representation in the parliament—all acted in a similarly provocative
manner. Ceylon’s aggravated primordial problem is not a mere legacy, an
inherited impediment to her political, social, and economic
modernization; it is a direct and immediate reflex of her first
serious—if still rather ineffective—attempt to achieve such
modernization.

And this dialectic, variously expressed, is a generic characteristic of
new-state politics. In Indonesia, the establishment of an indigenous
unitary state made the fact that the thinly populated but mineral-rich
Outer Islands produced the bulk of the country’s foreign-exchange
earnings, while densely populated, resource-poor Java consumed the bulk
of its income, painfully apparent in a way it could never become in the
colonial era, and a pattern of regional jealousy developed and hardened
to the point of armed revolt.²⁴²⁴ In Ghana, hurt Ashanti pride burst
into open separatism when, in order to accumulate development funds,
Nkrumah’s new national government fixed the cocoa price lower than what
Ashanti cocoa growers wished it to be.²⁵²⁵ In Morocco, Riffian Berbers,
offended when their substantial military contribution to the struggle
for independence was not followed by greater governmental assistance in
the form of schools, jobs, improved communications facilities, and so
on, revived a classic pattern of tribal insolence—refusal to pay taxes,
boycott of marketplaces, retreat to a predatory mountain life—in order
to gain Rabat’s regard.²⁶²⁶ In Jordan, Abdullah’s desperate attempt to
strengthen his newly sovereign civil state through the annexation of
Cis-Jordan, negotiation with Israel, and modernization of the army
provoked his assassination by an ethnically humiliated pan-Arab
Palestinian.²⁷²⁷ Even in those new states where such discontent has not
progressed to the point of open dissidence, there has almost universally
arisen around the developing struggle for governmental power as such a
broad penumbra of primordial strife. Alongside of, and interacting with,
the usual politics of party and parliament, cabinet and bureaucracy, or
monarch and army, there exists, nearly everywhere, a sort of
parapolitics of clashing public identities and quickening ethnocratic
aspirations.

What is more, this parapolitical warfare seems to have its own
characteristic battlegrounds; there are certain specific institutional
contexts outside the customary arenas of political combat into which it
has a strong inclination to settle. Though primordial issues do, of
course, turn up from time to time in parliamentary debates, cabinet
deliberations, judicial decisions, and, more often, in electoral
campaigns, they show a persistent tendency to emerge in purer, more
explicit, and more virulent form in some places where other sorts of
social issues do not ordinarily, or at least so often or so acutely,
appear.

One of the most obvious of these is the school system. Linguistic
conflicts, in particular, tend to emerge in the form of school
crises—witness the fierce dispute between Malay and Chinese teachers’
unions over the degree to which Malay should replace Chinese in Chinese
schools in Malaya, the three-way guerrilla war between partisans of
English, Hindi, and various local vernaculars as instruction media in
India, or the bloody riots staged by Bengali-speaking university
students to block the imposition of Urdu by West on East Pakistan. But
religious issues, too, tend to penetrate educational contexts quite
readily. In Moslem countries there is the enduring question of the
reform of traditional Koranic schools toward Western forms; in the
Philippines there is the clash between the American-introduced tradition
of the secular public school and the intensified clerical effort to
increase the teaching of religion in such schools; and in Madras there
are the Dravidian separatists announcing sanctimoniously that “education
must be free from political, religious or communal bias,” by which they
in fact mean that it “must not stress Hindu writings such as the epic
Ramayana.”²⁸²⁸ Even largely regional struggles tend to engulf the school
system: in Indonesia the rise of provincial discontent was accompanied
by a competitive multiplication of local institutions of higher learning
to the point where, despite the extreme shortage of qualified
instructors, there is now a faculty in nearly every major region of the
country, monuments to past resentments and perhaps cradles for future
ones; and a similar pattern may now be developing in Nigeria. If the
general strike is the classical political expression of class warfare,
and the coup d’état of the struggle between militarism and
parliamentarianism, then the school crisis is perhaps becoming the
classical political—or parapolitical—expression of the clash of
primordial loyalties.

There are a number of other poles around which parapolitical vortices
tend to form, but so far as the literature is concerned they have been
more noted in passing than analyzed in detail. Social statistics is an
example. In Lebanon there has not been a census since 1932, for fear
that taking one would reveal such changes in the religious composition
of the population as to make the marvelously intricate political
arrangements designed to balance sectarian interests unviable. In India,
with its national language problem, just what constitutes a Hindi
speaker has been a matter of some rather acrimonious dispute, because it
depends upon the rules of counting: Hindi enthusiasts use census figures
to prove that as many as half of India’s people speak “Hindi” (including
Urdu and Punjabi), while anti-Hindiists force the figure down as low as
30 percent by considering such matters as script differences, and
evidently even religious affiliation of the speaker, as linguistically
significant. Then, too, there is the closely related problem of what, in
connection with the strange fact that according to the 1941 census of
India there were 25 million tribal peoples but in the 1951 census only
1.7 million, Weiner has aptly called “genocide by census
redefinition.”²⁹²⁹ In Morocco, published figures for the percentage of
the population that is Berber run all the way from 35 to 60 percent, and
some nationalist leaders would like to believe, or have others believe,
that the Berbers are a French invention altogether.³⁰³⁰ Statistics, real
or fancied, concerning the ethnic composition of the civil service are a
favorite weapon of primordial demagogues virtually everywhere, being
particularly effective where a number of local officials are members of
a group other than the one they administrate. And in Indonesia a leading
newspaper was banned, at the height of the regionalist crisis, for
printing, in mock innocence, a simple bar graph depicting export
earnings and government expenditure by province.

Dress (in Burma hundreds of frontier tribesmen brought to Rangoon for
Union day to improve their patriotism are cannily sent home with gifts
of Burmese clothing), historiography (in Nigeria a sudden proliferation
of tendentious tribal histories strengthens the already very powerful
centrifugal tendencies plaguing the country), and the official insignia
of public authority (in Ceylon, Tamils have refused to use automobile
license plates marked with Sinhala characters, and in South India they
have painted over Hindi railroad signs) are other as yet but
impressionistically observed spheres of parapolitical controversy.³¹³¹
So, also, is the rapidly expanding complex of tribal unions, caste
organizations, ethnic, fraternities, regional associations, and
religious sodalities that seems to be accompanying urbanization in
virtually all the new states, and has made the major cities in some of
them—Lagos, Beirut, Bombay, Medan—caldrons of communal tension.³²³² But,
details aside, the point is that there swirl around the emerging
governmental institutions of the new states, and the specialized
politics they tend to support, a whole host of self-reinforcing
whirlpools of primordial discontent, and that this parapolitical
maelstrom is in great part an outcome—to continue the metaphor, a
backwash—of that process of political development itself. The growing
capacity of the state to mobilize social resources for public ends, its
expanding power, roils primordial sentiments because, given the doctrine
that legitimate authority is but an extension of the inherent moral
coerciveness such sentiments possess, to permit oneself to be ruled by
men of other tribes, other races, or other religions is to submit not
merely to oppression but to degradation—to exclusion from the moral
community as a lesser order of being whose opinions, attitudes, wishes,
and so on, simply do not fully count, as those of children, the
simple-minded, and the insane do not fully count in the eyes of those
who regard themselves as mature, intelligent, and sane.

Though it can be moderated, this tension between primordial sentiments
and civil politics probably cannot be entirely dissolved. The power of
the “givens” of place, tongue, blood, looks, and way-of-life to shape an
individual’s notion of who, at bottom, he is and with whom,
indissolubly, he belongs is rooted in the nonrational foundations of
personality. And, once established, some degree of involvement of this
unreflective sense of collective selfhood in the steadily broadening
political process of the national state is certain, because that process
seems to touch on such an extraordinarily wide range of matters. Thus,
what the new states—or their leaders—must somehow contrive to do as far
as primordial attachments are concerned is not, as they have so often
tried to do, wish them out of existence by belittling them or even
denying their reality, but domesticate them. They must reconcile them
with the unfolding civil order by divesting them of their legitimizing
force with respect to governmental authority, by neutralizing the
apparatus of the state in relationship to them, and by channeling
discontent arising out of their dislocation into properly political
rather than parapolitical forms of expression.

This goal, too, is not fully achievable or at least has never yet been
achieved—even in Mr. Ambedkar’s Canada and Switzerland (the less said of
South Africa in this connection, the better) with their supposed “genius
to unite.” But it is relatively so, and it is upon the possibility of
such relative achievement that the hope of the new states to turn the
attack upon their integrity and their legitimacy by unfettered
primordial enthusiasms rests. As with industrialization, urbanization,
restratification, and the various other social and cultural
“revolutions” these states seem fated to undergo, the containment of
diverse primordial communities under a single sovereignty promises to
tax the political capacity of their peoples to its utmost limits—in some
cases, no doubt, beyond them.

IV

This “integrative revolution” has, of course, already begun, and a
desperate search for ways and means to create a more perfect union is
everywhere under way. But it has merely begun and just got under way, so
that if one surveys the new states on a broadly comparative basis, one
is confronted with a bewildering picture of diverse institutional and
ideological responses to what, for all its variation in outward form, is
essentially a common problem—the political normalization of primordial
discontent.

The new states are, today, rather like naive or apprentice painters or
poets or composers, seeking their own proper style, their own
distinctive mode of solution for the difficulties posed by their medium.
Imitative, poorly organized, eclectic, opportunistic, subject to fads,
ill-defined, uncertain, they are exceedingly difficult to order
typologically, either in classical categories or invented ones, in the
same paradoxical way that it is usually so much more difficult to
classify immature artists firmly into schools or traditions than it is
mature ones who have found their own unique style and identity.
Indonesia, India, Nigeria, and the rest share, in the matter at hand,
only a predicament; but a predicament that is one of the main stimuli to
political creativity for them, pressing them on to a restless
experimentation in order to find ways to extricate themselves from it
and triumph over it. Again, this is not to say that all this creativity
will ultimately be successful; there are manqué states as there are
manqué artists, as France perhaps demonstrates. But it is the
recalcitrance of primordial issues that, among other things, keeps the
process of incessant political, and even constitutional, innovation
going, and gives to any attempt at systematic classification of new
state polities a radically provisional, if not simply premature,
quality.

An attempt to order the various governmental arrangements now emerging
in the new states as means for coping with problems arising from
linguistic, racial, and so on, heterogeneity must begin, therefore, with
a simple empirical review of a number of such arrangements, a mere
setting out in model form of existing experiments. From such a review it
should be possible to derive a sense of at least the ranges of variation
involved, a notion of the general dimensions of the social field within
which these arrangements are taking shape. Typologizing becomes, in this
approach, a matter, not of devising constructed types, ideal or
otherwise, which will isolate fundamental constancies of structure amid
the confusion of phenomenal variation, but of determining the limits
with which such variation takes place, the domain over which it plays.
Here, a sense of such ranges, dimensions, limits, and domains can
perhaps best be conveyed, in a kaleidoscopic sort of way, by the rapid
presentation of a series of snapshot pictures of the “integrative
revolution” as it seems to be proceeding in several selected new states
showing different concrete patterns of primordial diversity and
different modes of political response to those patterns. Indonesia,
Malaya, Burma, India, Lebanon, Morocco, and Nigeria, culturally distinct
and geographically scattered, are as appropriate subjects as any for
this type of flying survey of divided nations en route—ex hypothesi—to
unity.³³³³

INDONESIA

Until about the beginning of 1957, the regional tension between Java and
the Outer Islands was kept in bounds by a combination of the continuing
momentum of revolutionary solidarity, a broadly representative
multiparty system, and a characteristically Indonesian bisection of
paramount executive power in an institution called the
Dwi-Tunggal—loosely, “dual leadership”—in which the two veteran
nationalist leaders, Sukarno, a Javanese, and Mohammed Hatta, a
Sumatran, shared primacy as President and Vice-President of the
Republic. Since then, the solidarity has faded, the party system
collapsed, and the Dwi-Tunggal split. Despite the effective military
suppression of the regional rebellion of 1958, and despite Sukarno’s
feverish attempts to focus the government on his person as the
incarnation of “the spirit of ’45,” the political equilibrium thus lost
has not been restored, and the new nation has become an almost classic
case of integrative failure. With every step toward modernity has come
increased regional discontent; with each increase in regional discontent
has come a new revelation of political incapacity; and with each new
revelation of political incapacity has come a loss of political nerve
and a more desperate resort to an unstable amalgam of military coercion
and ideological revivalism.

It was the first general elections of 1955 that, by completing the
general outlines of a parliamentary system, made it inescapably apparent
to reflective Indonesians that they had either to find some way of
solving their problems within the framework of the modern civil order
that they had almost reluctantly created or face a rising crescendo of
primordial discontent and parapolitical conflict. Having been expected
to clear the air, the elections only stirred it. They shifted the
political center of gravity away from the Dwi-Tunggal toward the
parties. They crystallized the popular strength of the Communist Party,
which not only gained some 16 percent of the total vote, but drew nearly
90 percent of its support from Java, thus fusing regional and
ideological tensions. They dramatized the fact that the interest of some
of the more important centers of power in the society—the army, the
Chinese, certain Outer Island export traders, and so on—were not
adequately represented in the formal political system. And they shifted
the basis of qualification for political leadership away from
revolutionary distinction toward mass appeal. At once the elections
demanded that, if the existing civil order were to be maintained and
developed, a whole new set of relationships among the president,
vice-president, parliament, and cabinet be worked out; that an
aggressive, well-organized totalitarian party hostile to the very
conception of democratic, multiparty politics be contained; that
important groups outside the parliamentary framework be brought into
effective relation to it; and that a new basis for elite solidarity
other than the shared experiences of 1945–1949 be found. Given extremely
intractable economic problems, a cold-war international environment, and
a large number of long-standing personal vendettas among the highly
placed, it would perhaps have been surprising had this multiple demand
been met. But there is no reason to believe that given the requisite
political talents, it could not have been.

In any case, it was not. By the end of 1956 the always delicate
relationship between Sukarno and Hatta became so strained that the
latter resigned, an action that in essence withdrew the stamp of
legitimacy from the central government so far as many of the leading
military, financial, political, and religious groups in the Outer
Islands were concerned. The duumvirate had been the symbolic, and to a
great extent the real, guarantee of the recognition of the various Outer
Island peoples as full and equal partners with the so much more numerous
Javanese in the Republic, a quasi-constitutional warranty that the
Javanese tail would not be permitted to wag the Indonesian dog. Sukarno,
part Javanese mystic and part inveterate eclectic, and Hatta, part
Sumatran puritan and part shirtsleeve administrator, supplemented one
another not only politically but primordially. Sukarno summed up the
syncretic high culture of the elusive Javanese; Hatta, the Islamic
mercantilism of the less subtle Outer Islanders. The major political
parties—particularly the Communists, fusing Marxist ideology with
traditional Javanese “folk religion,” and the Moslem Masjumi, which
having gained nearly half of its popular vote in the more orthodox
regions outside Java became their major spokesman—aligned themselves
accordingly. Thus, when the Vice-President resigned and the President
moved to become, under his conception of a back-to-1945 (that is,
pre-elections) “guided democracy,” the sole axis of Indonesian national
life, the Republic’s political balance was upset and the advance toward
regional disaffection entered its radical phase.

Since then, spasmodic violence has alternated with a frantic search for
political panaceas. Abortive coups, misfired assassination attempts, and
unsuccessful insurrections have followed one after the other, punctuated
by an astounding wealth of ideological and institutional experiments.
New Life movements have given way to Guided Democracy movements, and
Guided Democracy movements to “Back to the 1945 Constitution” movements,
while governmental structures—national councils, state planning
commissions, constitutional conventions, and so on—have multiplied like
weeds in a neglected garden. But from all this nervous tinkering and
breathless sloganeering no form competent to contain the country’s
diversity has appeared, because such random improvisation represents not
a realistic search for a solution to the nation’s integrative problems
but a desperately laid smoke screen behind which to hide a growing
conviction of impending political catastrophe. For the moment, a new, de
facto duumvirate divides leadership—Sukarno, calling ever more shrilly
for a renewal of the “revolutionary spirit of unity,” and Lieutenant
General A. H. Nasution, Defense Minister and former Army Chief of Staff
(and another colorless Sumatran professional), directing the military in
its expanded role as a quasi-civil service. But their relationship to
each other, as well as the extent of their effective power, remains,
like just about everything else in Indonesian political life,
undetermined.

The “growing conviction of an impending political catastrophe” turned
out to be all too accurate. President Sukarno’s frenzied ideologism
continued to rise until the night of September 30, 1965, when the
Commander of the Presidential Guard mounted an attempted coup d’état.
Six ranking Army generals were murdered (General Nasution narrowly
escaped), but the coup failed when another General, Suharto, rallied the
army and crushed the rebels. There followed several months of
extraordinary popular savagery—mainly in Java and Bali, but also
sporadically in Sumatra—directed against individuals considered to be
followers of the Indonesian Communist Party, which was generally
regarded to have been behind the coup. Several hundred thousand people
were massacred, largely villagers by other villagers (though there were
some army executions as well), and, in Java at least, mainly along the
primordial lines—pious Moslems killing Indic syncretists—described
above. (There were some anti-Chinese actions, too, especially in
Sumatra, but the bulk of the killings were of Javanese by Javanese,
Balinese by Balinese, and so on.) Sukarno was gradually replaced as
leader of the country by Suharto and died in June 1970, Suharto having
officially succeeded to the presidency two years earlier. Since then the
country has been run by the army with the assistance of various civilian
technical experts and administrators. A second general election, held in
the summer of 1971, resulted in the victory of a government-sponsored
and -controlled party and the severe weakening of the older political
parties. At the moment, though tension between primordially defined
groups, religious, regional, and ethnic, remains intense, and in fact
may have been deepened by the events of 1965, open expression of it is
largely absent. That it will long remain so seems—to me at
least—unlikely.

MALAYA

In Malaya, the striking thing is the degree to which the overall
integration of the diverse groups in a rigidly multiracial society is
taking place not so much in terms of state structure as such, but of
that much more recent political invention, party organization. It is the
Alliance, a confederation of the United Malays National Organization,
the Malayan Chinese Association, and the less important Malayan Indian
Congress, within which primordial conflicts are being informally and
realistically adjusted and where the strong centrifugal tendencies, as
intense as perhaps any state—new, old, or middle-aged—has ever faced,
are, so far, being effectively absorbed, deflected, and contained.
Formed in 1952, at the height of the terrorist “emergency,” by
conservative, English-educated, upper-class elements in the Malay and
Chinese communities (the Indians, never quite certain which way to jump,
joined a year or two later), the Alliance is one of the most remarkable
examples of the successful practice of the art of the impossible in the
whole sphere of new-state politics—a federated, noncommunal party of
subparties, themselves frankly, explicitly, and on occasion
enthusiastically communal in appeal, set in a context of primordial
suspicion and hostility that would make the Habsburg Empire seem like
Denmark or Australia. On the mere surface of things, it ought not to
work.

The important question is, anyway, whether it will continue to work.
Malaya has been independent only since mid-1957, has benefited from
relatively favorable economic conditions, from—the Communist
insurrection aside—a fairly smooth transfer of sovereignty and the
continuing présence anglaise this has made possible, and the ability of
a conservative, somewhat rationalistic oligarchy to convince the mass of
the population that it is a more suitable vehicle for their aspirations
than the left-wing, emotionally populist sort of leadership that
characterizes most of the other new states. Is Alliance rule merely the
lull before the storm as was United National Party rule, which it rather
resembles, in Ceylon? Is it destined to weaken and disintegrate when the
social and economic seas roughen as did the Indonesian
Dwi-Tunggal-multiparty system? Is it, in a word, too good to last?

The omens are mixed. In the first general election, held prior to
revolution, the Alliance captured 80 percent of the popular vote and 51
of the 52 elected seats in the federal legislative council, to become
virtually the sole legitimate heir to the colonial regime; but in the
1959 elections, the first held subsequent to independence, it lost a
good deal of ground to more simply communal parties, its popular vote
falling to 51 percent and its seats to 73 of 103. The Malay sector, the
UMNO, was weakened by the unexpected sweep of the pious, rural, heavily
Malay northeast by an intensely communal party calling for an Islamic
theocratic state, “the restoration of Malay sovereignty,” and “Greater
Indonesia.” The Chinese and Indian wings were undercut by Marxist
parties in the large towns along the tin- and rubber-rich central west
coast, where large numbers of new, lower-class Chinese and Indian voters
had entered the rolls under the liberalized postindependence citizenship
laws, the Marxism adapting itself, here as elsewhere, to primordial
loyalties with little difficulty. Buffeted by these loses—which first
became apparent in the state elections held a couple of months prior to
the federal ones—the Alliance in fact came very close to splitting
altogether. The losses of the UMNO tempted younger, less conservative
elements in the MCA to press for a greater number of Chinese
candidacies, for an explicit condemnation by the Alliance of Malay
racialism, and for a review of state educational policy with respect to
the language problem in Chinese schools. Hothead elements in the UMNO
responded in kind, and though the rift was patched, or patched over, in
time for the elections, several of the younger leaders of the MCA
resigned, and the UMNO girded itself to expel primordial “agitators” in
its own midst.

Thus, although as in Indonesia, the holding of general elections brought
latent primordial issues into such a focus that they had to be faced
directly rather than concealed behind a facade of nationalist rhetoric,
in Malaya political talents seem, so far, to have been rather more
competent to this task. Though the Alliance is less absolutely dominant
and perhaps somewhat less integrated than it was in the immediate
post-independence period, it is still quite comfortably in power and
still an effective civil framework within which very intense primordial
issues can be adjusted and contained rather than allowed to run free in
parapolitical confusion. The pattern that seems to be developing, and
perhaps crystallizing, is one in which a comprehensive national party,
with its three subparts or subparties, comes almost to comprise the
state and is multiply assailed by a field of small parties—by class
parties for being too communal, and communal parties for not being
communal enough (and by both for being “undemocratic” and
“reactionary”)—each of which is trying to knock chips off one or another
part of it by attacking the points of strain that develop within it as
it functions and by appealing more openly to primordial sentiments. The
intricate inner working of the Alliance as it endeavors to hold the
vital center against efforts from all directions to undermine its basic
source of strength—a matter-of-fact, quid-pro-quo, all-in-the-same-boat
political understanding among Malay, Chinese, and Indian leaders—is thus
the quintessence of the integrative revolution as it is proceeding in
Malaya.

In 1963 Malaya became Malaysia, a federation of Malaya proper (i.e., the
peninsula), Singapore, and the north Bornean territories of Sarawak and
Sabah. The Alliance remained the majority party, but the major Singapore
party, the People’s Action Party, sought to make inroads among the
peninsula Chinese, undercutting the MCA and thus threatening the
Alliance and the Chinese-Malay political balance. In August 1965 the
strains became such that Singapore left the Federation and became
independent. Intense opposition to the new Federation from Indonesia and
to Sabah’s inclusion in it from the Philippines only added to the
stresses involved in the forming of the new political entity. In the
general elections of May 1969 the narrow Alliance majority was lost,
mainly because of the failure of the MCA to hold Chinese support (much
of which went to the essentially Chinese Democratic Action Party), but
also to further gains by the Islamist Malay communalist party mentioned
in the text, which got nearly a quarter of the vote. The MCA, feeling it
had lost the confidence of the Chinese community, then quit the
Alliance, bringing on a full-fledged crisis. Later in the same month
savage communal riots broke out in the capital, Kuala Lumpur, in which
about 150 persons were killed, most of them in an extremely brutal
fashion, and communications between the Chinese and Malay communities
broke down almost totally. Emergency rule was imposed, and the situation
calmed. In September 1970, Teunku Abdul Rahman, who had headed the UMNO
and the Alliance since their founding, retired and was replaced by his
long-time deputy and the strong man of the regime, Tun Abdul Razak. The
state of emergency was finally ended and parliamentary government
restored after twenty-one months, in February of 1971. For the moment
the situation seems to have stabilized, and the Alliance still holds
against the communalist attempts to chip away at it (a continuing
Chinese Communist guerrilla revolt persists, however, in Sarawak),
though the country as a whole may be in fact further away from communal
accord than it was in the first years of its existence.

BURMA

In Burma, the case is almost diametrically opposite to the Malayan.
Although again, and unlike Indonesia, a comprehensive national party (U
Nu’s “clean faction” of the Anti-Fascist People’s Freedom League)
governs [1962] a formally federal state with only weak, if bitter,
opposition, its power is mainly based on a direct appeal to the cultural
pride of the Burmans (that is, speakers of Burmese), while the
minorities, some of whom helped keep the country in a multisided civil
war for the first few years after independence, are catered to by a
rather intricate and highly peculiar constitutional system that protects
them in theory against the Burman dominance that the party system tends
to produce in fact. Here the government itself is to a very great extent
the obvious agency of a single, central primordial group, and it is
faced, therefore, with a very serious problem of maintaining legitimacy
in the eyes of members of peripheral groups—more than one-third of the
population—who are naturally inclined to see it as alien, a problem it
has attempted to solve largely by a combination of elaborate legal
gestures of reassurance and a good deal of aggressive assimilationism.

Briefly, the constitutional system designed to allay minority fears
consists of—to date [1962]—six juridically nonuniform “states,”
demarcated largely along regional-linguistic-cultural lines and
possessing dissimilar formal powers. Some states have a—surely
nominal—right of secession; others not. Each state has somewhat
different electoral arrangements, and controls its own elementary
schools. The elaboration of state governmental structure varies from the
Chin, which has hardly any local autonomy whatever, to the Shan, where
traditional “feudal” chiefs have been able to maintain a goodly number
of their traditional rights; while Burma proper is not viewed as a
constituent state within the Union at all, but as virtually
indistinguishable from it. The degree to which territorial boundaries
match primordial realities varies—with the Karen the most chronically
discontented, and the small Kayah State evidently resting on the
politically convenient invention of a “Red Karen” race. From each of
these states a delegation is elected to the upper house of the bicameral
Union legislature, the Chamber of Nationalities, which is heavily
weighted in favor of the minority peoples. In the Union government this
chamber is overshadowed by the popularly chosen lower house, the Chamber
of Deputies; but as each state delegation to it sits, along with the
lower-house representatives from its state, to form the State Council
that governs the state, it has significant local importance. Further,
the head of the state (that is, of the State Council) is appointed at
the same time to be minister for the state in the Union government, and
constitutional amendments demand two-thirds approval of both houses, so
that the minorities are given at least a formal check on the powers of
the government and the lower chamber to which it is responsible. And
finally, the presidency of the Union, a largely ceremonial office, is
rotated, by informal agreement rather than explicit constitutional
provision, among ethnic groups.

It is within this finely wrought constitutional structure, which so
artfully blurs the distinction between the Union and its constituent
members at precisely the time it seems to be formalizing it most
exactly, that the vigorously assimilationist policies of the AFPFL are
pursued. This tradition of “Burmanization,” or of what some minority
groups more bluntly call “AFPFL imperialism,” traces back to the very
beginnings of the nationalist movement in the Buddhist student clubs at
the turn of the century; and by the thirties the Thakins were calling
for an independent nation in which Burmese would be the national
language, Burman dress would be the national costume, and the classical
role of the (predominantly Burman) Buddhist monkhood as teacher, guide,
and counselor to the secular government would be restored. Since
independence and the accession of the pietistic Thakin Nu to the
premiership, the government has moved strenuously to bring about these
ends, the noticeable relaxation of the assimilative pressure during the
year and a half of military rule being followed by an even more intense
assertion of such pressure following U Nu’s landslide re-election on a
Buddhism-as-a-state-religion platform in 1960. (In Burma proper his
“clean” AFPFL captured outright about 80 percent of the lower-house
seats; in the states and the disaffected Arakan area, about a third.)

As a result, most of the political adjustments of primordial interests
in Burma have tended to be cast, in form at least, in juristic terms, to
be carried out in a rather odd and artificial vocabulary of
constitutional legalism. The Karens’ conviction that the official
boundaries of their state were too circumscribed to compensate for the
loss of the special privileges they enjoyed under the colonial regime
helped send them into revolt; their submission following military defeat
by Union forces was in turn sealed and symbolized by their acceptance of
those boundaries, plus a number of additional legal penalties imposed as
object lessons: an explicit denial of the right of secession, the
reduction of their representation in both houses of parliament, and the
revocation of an earlier decision to unite the Kayah State with the
Karen. Similarly, the primordial discontent of the Arakanese and the
Mons—which has also periodically flared into open violence—has been
expressed in demands for Arakanese and Mon states, which U Nu has at
length been forced to support despite his oft-reiterated opposition to
the formation of any more states. In Shan State the traditional chiefs
have brandished their constitutional right to secession and a states’
rights doctrine that they claim is written into the constitution, as
bargaining weapons in their higgle with the Union over the amount and
kind of compensation to be paid them for the surrender of various of
their traditional powers. And so on. This irregular and unorthodox
constitutional framework, which is so nicely exact in language and so
usefully vague in meaning that “not even [Burmese] lawyers seem able to
tell whether the Union is in fact a federal or a unitary state,”³⁴³⁴
allows the single-party, Burman-centered AFPFL regime to pursue its
strongly assimilationist policies in almost all aspects of actual
government, while maintaining at least minimal loyalty from the
non-Burman Burmese, something it did not have a decade ago—though if its
ethnic enthusiasm is not contained, it may not have it a decade hence
either.

In March of 1962 General Ne Win took over the Burmese government via a
military coup d’état from U Nu, who was imprisoned. Ne Win instituted a
policy of extreme isolationism for Burma, which, among other things, has
made it difficult to find out much in detail concerning what is going on
in the country. What does seem clear is that armed opposition by ethnic
minority groups has continued at about the previous level and has indeed
become almost institutionalized as a regular aspect of the national
scene. In January 1971, U Nu (who had by then been released from prison)
set up headquarters for a “National Liberation Front” in Western
Thailand, adjoining the rebellious Burmese Shan States. Little seems yet
to have come of that, but the Karen, Shan, and Kachin revolts seem to be
continuing apace. (The Karens were awarded a “state” in South Burma in
1969 by Ne Win, but, regarding the grant of “autonomy” as too limited,
launched an offensive in early 1971 aimed at toppling Ne Win.) In
February of 1971 a United National Liberation Front was formed including
(the rebel elements of) the Karens, Mons, Chins, and Shans. (The
Kachins, who have their own Independence Army, agreed to cooperate but
not to join.) Thus, although it is very difficult to tell, given the
near-closure of Burma to outside observation, how much all of this comes
to on the ground, it seems apparent that not only has the characteristic
pattern of Burmese primordial dissidence not changed under Ne Win but it
has hardened into an enduring feature of the political landscape.

INDIA

India, that vast and various labyrinth of religious, linguistic,
regional, racial, tribal, and caste allegiances, is developing a
many-sided political form to match for baffling irregularity her
daedalian social and cultural structure. Waddling in (in E. M. Forster’s
gently mocking image) at this late hour to take her seat among the
nations, she is beset by virtually the entire range of primordial
conflicts complexly superimposed one upon the other. One peels off
Punjabi linguism and finds Sikh religious communalism, scratches Tamil
regionalism and finds anti-Brahman racialism, views Bengali cultural
arrogance from a slightly different angle and sees Greater Bengal
patriotism. No general and uniform political solution to the problem of
primordial discontent seems possible in such a situation, only a loose
assemblage of diverse, locally adapted, ad hoc solutions, related to one
another only incidentally and pragmatically. The policies suitable for
the tribal dissidence of the Assam Naga are not generalizable to the
caste-based disaffection of peasant landlords in Andhra. The central
government stance taken toward Orissa princes cannot be taken toward
Gujerati industrialists. The problem of Hindu fundamentalism in Uttar
Pradesh, the heartland of Indic culture, takes a rather different form
in Dravidian Mysore. So far as primordial issues are concerned, Indian
civil politics amounts to a disconnected series of attempts to make the
temporary endure.

The major institutional vehicle through which these attempts are being
made is, of course, the Indian National Congress. Though, like the
Malayan Alliance and the Burmese AFPFL, the Congress is a comprehensive
national party that has largely pre-empted the governmental apparatus of
the new state and become its most important centralizing force, it has
done so neither as a confederation of frankly primordial subparties nor
as an agency of majority-group assimilationism. The first of these
courses is precluded by the multifarious nature of the primordial
pattern—the sheer number of different groups involved—and the second by
the absence of any one clearly central group within this pattern. As a
result, the Congress, its slightly North Indian complexion aside, has
tended to become an ethnically neutral, resolutely modernist, somewhat
cosmopolitan force on the national level at the same time that it has
built up a multiplicity of separate, and to a large extent independent,
parochial party machines to secure its power on the local level. The
image the Congress presents is thus a double one: in one focus,
lecturing Hindi zealot and Tamil xenophobe alike, stands Nehru, “a
reflective, cultivated, modern intellectual, full of wistfulness,
skepticism, dogmatism, and self-doubt in the presence of his own
country”;³⁵³⁵ in the other, deliberately manipulating (among other
things) the local realities of language, caste, culture, and religion to
keep the party dominant, stand a whole set of less pensive regional
bosses—Kamaraj Nadar in Madras, Chavan in Bombay, Atulya Ghosh in
Maharashtra, Patnaik in Orissa, Kairon in Punjab, and Sukhadia in
Rajahstan.

The States Reorganization Act of 1956—itself, as has been mentioned, the
culmination of a process begun within the Congress several decades
before independence—gave this pattern of civil hub and primordial rim
its official institutionalization. The division of the country into
linguistically demarcated subunits is, in fact, part and parcel of the
general approach of attempting to insulate parapolitical forces from
national concerns by sequestering them in local contexts. Unlike those
of Burma, the states of India have real and explicitly—perhaps too
explicitly—spelled out constitutional powers in every field from
education and agriculture to taxation and public health, so that the
political process centering around the state assemblies and the
formation of state governments is far from being an inconsequential
matter. It is on the state level that perhaps the bulk of the bitter
hand-to-hand clashes that form the everyday substance of Indian domestic
politics are coming to take place, and where the adjustments of
parochial interests are coming to be effected, insofar as they are
effected at all.

Thus, in the 1957 elections, even more than in those of 1952, the
Congress found itself engaged in a multifront war, fighting different
election battles in the various states, against different sorts of
opponents capitalizing on different sorts of discontents—against the
Communists in Kerala, Bengal, and Andhra; against communal religious
parties in Punjab, Uttar and Madhya Pradesh, and Rajahstan; against
tribal unions in Assam and Bihar; against ethno-linguistic fronts in
Madras, Maharashtra, and Gujerat; against feudal-prince restorationist
parties in Orissa, Bihar, and Rajahstan; against the Praja Socialists in
Bombay. Not all these struggles pivoted around primordial issues, but
virtually all—even those involving leftist “class” parties—seem to have
been significantly influenced by them.³⁶³⁶ In any case, as none of these
opposition parties was able to spread beyond the few strongholds where
the particular veins they tapped proved comparatively rich, the Congress
as the only genuinely national party was able to maintain overwhelming
control of both the central and—with a few exceptions—the state
governments, even though it captured less than half the popular vote.

How, out of this conglomerate hodgepodge of courthouse machinations
arises the rather cerebral, dispassionate, moralistic central Congress
government to serve as a kind of extraordinary committee for the conduct
of foreign policy, as a comprehensive social and economic planning
commission, and as a symbolic expression of all-India national identity,
is something of an Eastern mystery. Most observers put it down, rather
without analysis, to Nehru’s charismatic force as a nationalist hero.
His position as apostolic heir to Gandhi and avatar of independence
bridges the gulf between his own cosmopolitan intellectualism and the
provincial horizons of the mass of his people. And it is perhaps for
this reason, as well as for his matchless ability to keep local bosses
loyal, in line, and reasonably unambitious, that the problem of
succession—“after Nehru, who?”—has in India even more of a fundamentally
disquieting quality than in most of the other new states where
succession is also nearly always a prominent anxiety. The fact that
India has been held together up to now, Ambedkar says flatly, is due to
the force of Congress Party discipline—“but how long is the Congress to
last? The Congress is Pandit Nehru and Pandit Nehru is Congress. But is
Pandit Nehru immortal? Anyone who applies his mind to these questions
will realize that the Congress will not last until the sun and the
moon.”³⁷³⁷ If the Burmese integrative problem is to restrain primordial
enthusiasm at the center, the Indian seems to be to restrain it at the
periphery.

The fears surrounding the succession problem, real enough when the above
was written, proved to be baseless. After Nehru’s death in May 1964, and
a brief period of rule by Lal Bahadur Shastri, the “apostolic”
succession pattern was re-established with the accession to the Prime
Ministership of Nehru’s daughter and Gandhi’s namesake, Mrs. Indira
Gandhi. In the early phases of her regime, the Congress lost ground, and
a series of upheavals on the state level led to the imposition of direct
central government rule in several states. In May 1969, President Zakir
Husein, a Muslim, died, threatening the Hindu-Muslim understanding
within India and precipitating a showdown between Mrs. Gandhi and the
traditional Congress bosses, which Mrs. Gandhi decisively won. Though
faced with continued upheaval on the state level, Mrs. Gandhi won a
decisive victory in the general elections of March 1971, capturing
undisputed control of the government. The Bangladesh revolt, perhaps the
most dramatic, and certainly the most successful, primordial separatism
in the new states so far, broke out later in the year, followed by
Indian intervention and the short, successful war with Pakistan. With
all this, the Congress’ ability to keep India’s multiple primordial
groups under control has surely at least temporarily increased. But that
the problem persists is clear from a wide range of “events,” stretching
from the continuing Naga revolt in Assam to continuing Sikh riots in
Punjab. Indeed, the Bangladesh example may prove a two-sided one for
India in the long run, not only in Bengal itself, but elsewhere: in
February of this year (1972), the Dravidian Advancement Party launched a
campaign for Tamil Nadu, an autonomous Tamil state in South India,
drawing an open parallel with Bangladesh and accusing Mrs. Gandhi of
behaving like General Yahya Khan. Thus, though the increased strength of
the Congress central government has for one moment somewhat cooled down
India’s multifront war against primordialism, it has very far from ended
it.

LEBANON

Lebanon may be—as Phillip Hitti has pointed out—not much larger than
Yellowstone Park, but it is a good deal more astonishing. Although its
population is almost entirely Arabic-speaking and shares a generally
“Levantine” ethos, it is rigidly partitioned into seven major Moslem
(Sunni, Shi’a, and Druze) and Christian (Maronites, Greek Orthodox,
Greek Catholic, and Armenian Orthodox) sects and about that many minor
ones (Protestants, Jews, Armenian Catholics, and so on), a confessional
heterogeneity that not only forms the principal public framework of
individual self-identification, but is woven directly into the whole
structure of the state. Seats in the parliament are allotted on a
strictly sectarian basis according to demographic proportions that are
fixed by law and that have remained essentially unchanged in the five
elections held since independence. Paramount executive authority is not
merely bisected, but trisected, with the president of the country
conventionally a Maronite, the prime minister a Sunni, and the chairman
of parliament a Shi’i. Cabinet posts are carefully doled out on a
confessional basis, and a similar balance is maintained in the civil
service from ministry secretaries, district administrators, and
diplomatic posts all the way down to rank-and-file clerical jobs. The
judicial system is equally a maze of religious pluralism, with both the
laws themselves and the courts applying them varying as to sect, final
authority in personal law cases sometimes lying outside the boundaries
of the country altogether. Arab province and Christian outpost, modern
commercial entrepôt and last relic of the Ottoman millet system, Lebanon
is almost as much an entente as a state.

The sort of politics this entente supports are equally wondrous.
Political parties, though formally present, play as yet but a marginal
role. The struggle for pelf and power pivots instead around strong local
leaders, who tend to be either important absentee landlords or, in the
freehold sections of the country, heads of large and prominent extended
families. Each of these faction chiefs, whose following is bound to him
in essentially traditional rather than ideological terms, then forms
alliances with similar faction chiefs from other locally represented
sects, yielding in the election campaign a Tammany Hall sort of “one
Irishman, one Jew, one Italian” ticket-balancing.

This process is encouraged by the device of having the entire electorate
in any one district vote in all the local races regardless of sect. Thus
a Maronite voting in a district where there are also Sunni, Greek
Orthodox, and Druze seats at stake chooses among the Sunni, Greek
Orthodox, and Druze candidates as well as among his own—the Maronite
ones—and vice versa. This, in turn, leads to the forming of composite
lists through which the candidates in each sect attempt to link
themselves with popular candidates in other sects so as to attract the
necessary external votes. As lists are rarely split, because the
possibility of a candidate making effective alliances rests on his
ability to bring loyal voters with him (and because the average voter
has little knowledge of candidates of other sects on which to base
rational judgments of their worth, anyway), this means that although,
for any given seat, Maronite competes against Maronite, or Sunni against
Sunni, and so on, it is actually lists that are elected. The electoral
process thus acts to align certain leaders from the various sects over
against certain other such leaders in such a way that political ties
tend to cross-cut sectarian ones. Members of different sects are driven
into each other’s arms in interconfessional coalitions; members of the
same sect are driven apart into intraconfessional factions.

Such calculated forging (and breaking) of alliances between significant
political personalities is not confined merely to campaign tactics, but
extends over the whole of political life. Among the strongest leaders
the same principles come into play with respect to the higher national
offices; so that, in example, a leading Maronite who considers himself
as a possible president will attempt to align himself in public life
with a leading Sunni who is aiming for the premiership, and so on, both
in order to gain Sunni support and to prevent his immediate Maronite
rivals for the presidency from making so effective an alliance
themselves. Similar patterns operate throughout the system, at every
level and in every aspect of government.

As such coalitions are so opportunistically rather than ideologically
put together, they frequently dissolve overnight, as seeming bosom
companions suddenly fall out and mortal enemies unite amid a storm of
accusations and counteraccusations of betrayal, corruption,
incompetence, and ingratitude. The pattern is thus fundamentally an
individualistic, even egoistic, one, despite its grounding in
traditional religious, economic, and kinship groupings, with each
would-be political power scheming to advance his career by a skillful
manipulation of the system. Both places on tickets led by strong figures
and votes themselves are bought (during the 1960 elections the amount of
money in circulation rose three million Leb.); rivals are slandered and,
on occasion, physically attacked; favoritism, nepotic or otherwise, is
accepted procedure; and spoils are considered the normal reward of
office. “There is no right in Lebanon,” Ayoub’s Mount Lebanon Druzes
say, “there is only silver and the ‘fix.’”³⁸³⁸

Yet out of all this low cunning has come not only the most democratic
state in the Arab world, but the most prosperous; and one that has in
addition been able—with one spectacular exception—to maintain its
equilibrium under intense centrifugal pressures from two of the most
radically opposed extrastate primordial yearnings extant: that of the
Christians, especially the Maronites, to be part of Europe, and that of
the Moslems, especially the Sunnis, to be part of pan-Arabia. The first
of these motives finds expression mainly in a so-called isolationist
view of Lebanon as a special and unique phenomenon among the Arab
states, a “nice piece of mosaic,” whose distinctiveness must be
jealously conserved; the second takes the form of a call for reunion
with Syria. And insofar as Lebanese politics escapes the merely personal
and traditional and becomes involved with general ideas and issues, it
is in these terms that it tends to polarize.

The one spectacular exception to the maintenance of equilibrium, the
1958 civil war and American intervention, was in great part precipitated
by just this sort of atypical ideological polarization. On the one hand
President Sham’un’s unconstitutional attempt to succeed himself and,
presumably, to align Lebanon more closely with the West in order to
enhance Christian power against the rising tide of Nasserism, excited
the ever-present Moslem fears of Christian domination; on the other, the
sudden outburst of pan-Arab enthusiasm stimulated by the Iraqi
revolution and Syria’s turn toward Cairo led to the equally ever-present
Christian fear of drowning in a Moslem sea. But the crisis—and the
Americans—passed. Sham’un was, at least temporarily, discredited for
“dividing the country.” The pan-Arabist fever was, also at least
temporarily, checked by a renewed conviction, even within Sunni circles,
that the integrity of the Lebanese state must at all costs be preserved.
Civil rule was quickly restored, and by 1960 a new election could be
held peacefully enough, bringing back most of the old familiar faces to
the old familiar stands.

It seems, therefore, that Lebanese politics, as they are now
constituted, must remain personalistic, factional, opportunistic, and
unprogrammatic if they are to work at all. Given the extreme
confessional heterogeneity and the penetration of this heterogeneity
throughout the entire organization of the state, any increase in
ideologized party politics tends very quickly to lead to an unstable
Christian-Moslem polarization over the pan-Arab issue and to the
breakdown of the cross-sect links that in the course of normal political
maneuvering divide the sects and unite, if somewhat precariously, the
government. Machiavellian calculation and religious toleration are
opposite sides of the same coin in Lebanon; in the short run, anyway,
the alternative to “silver and ‘the fix’” may very well be national
dissolution.

Though sorely tried by the continuation of the Arab-Israeli
confrontation, and especially by the appearance of the Palestinian
commandos as an important political force in the area, the Lebanese
“nice piece of mosaic” remains intact. Indeed, of all the countries
reviewed here, Lebanon has continued to be the most effective in
containing its deep primordial cleavages, and though harassed by
economic difficulties, by the presence of small radical groups of Left
and Right (no major multisectarian parties have yet been able to form),
and by frequent outbursts of popular violence, the Lebanese political
system continues to function about as it has since the end of World War
II. Differences in view as to the appropriate attitude to take toward
the Palestine commandos (and toward Israeli incursions into the country)
have led to the fall of cabinets, extended government crises, and some
realignments among the major sectarian groupings. In 1970, the
Christian-supported president won by only one vote over his
Muslim-backed opponent, despite the unwritten rule that the post is
reserved for a Maronite. But as the cabinet continues to be headed by a
Muslim, the established arrangements persist, and the government’s
authority vis-à-vis the Palestinian commandos and their Lebanese
supporters has increased, especially since the defeat of the commandos
by the Jordanian army in September 1970. Nothing lasts forever,
especially in the Eastern Mediterranean, but to date Lebanon continues
to be a proof that although extreme primordial diversity may make
political equilibrium permanently precarious, it does not necessarily,
in and of itself, make it impossible.

MOROCCO

Across the whole of the Middle East—except for Nile-bound Egypt—runs an
ancient social contrast between, as Coon puts it, “the tame and the
insolent, the domestic and the independent”—between those living within
the political, economic, and cultural orbit of the great generative
cities and those living, if not precisely outside that orbit, along its
fringes and providing “the supply of rebels who, since the beginning of
the Bronze Age, have kept the urban civilizations refreshed and in
motion.”³⁹³⁹ Between the central power of the shahs and sultans and the
stubborn libertarianism of the outlying tribes there existed (and to a
great extent still exists) a delicate balance. When the state was
strong, the tribes were obliged to give it at least grudging recognition
and to check their anarchic impulses; when it was weak, they ignored it,
plundered it, or—one or another of them—even overthrew it to become in
turn the carriers and defenders of the urban great tradition. For the
better part of the time, however, neither fully effective despotism nor
mere tribal rampage prevailed. Rather, an uneasy truce between center
and perimeter was maintained, tying them together in “a loose system of
give and take” under which “mountaineers and nomads come to town freely,
their fastnesses are left alone, and they let the caravans of travelers,
traders, and pilgrims cross [their territories] without hindrance or
inconvenience over and above the normal rigors of travel.”⁴⁰⁴⁰

In Morocco, this contrast has always been particularly strong, in part
because so much of the terrain is mountainous, in part because of the
gradual superimposition, after the seventh century, of an Arabic culture
migrant from the East upon a relatively large indigenous Berber
population, and in part because of the country’s relatively great
distance from the primary foci of Middle Eastern civilization in Egypt
and Mesopotamia.

The complex early history of the region aside, the establishment of the
Arabized, Islamic reformist Sherifian dynasty toward the end of the
seventeenth century and the subsequent royal efforts to reduce the field
of Berber customary law in favor of Koranic law, to repress saint
worship and cultic practices, and to purify Islamic belief of local
pagan accretions, reinforced the distinction between bled al
makhzen—“the land of government”—and bled as siba—“the land of
insolence.” Claiming direct descent from the Prophet (the meaning of the
term “sherif”), the dynasty, which rules until today, attempted to
assert both spiritual and temporal power over the more Arabized
population of the Atlantic Plain as well as over the more Berberized
ones of the encircling Rif and Atlas mountains; but though the spiritual
claim—that of imamship—has been commonly accepted, the temporal has been
more of a sometime thing, particularly in the peripheral upland regions.
Thus arose perhaps the most striking and distinctive feature of the
Moroccan political system: the attachment of the urban and peasant
populations of the plain to the sultan as autocratic head of a rather
developed patrimonial bureaucracy (the Makhzen) of ministers, notables,
soldiers, magistrates, clerks, policemen, and tax collectors; and the
attachment of the tribal peoples to his person as “Lord of the
Believers,” but not to his secular government or its representatives.

By the time of the establishment of the French and Spanish protectorates
in 1912, the sultanate had become so seriously weakened by a combination
of internal corruption and external subversion that it was unable to
exert effective control not merely over the mountains but in the plain
as well. Though for a decade or so the seignoral proconsulship of
Marshal Lyautey held the tribes in check and, in a somewhat
paternalistic way, reinvigorated the Makhzen bureaucracy, after his
departure his successors initiated the so-called Berber Policy,
dedicated to drawing a sharp distinction between Arab and Berber and
isolating the latter from the influence of the Makhzen entirely. Special
Berber schools, designed to produce a “Berber elite,” were set up;
missionization increased; and—most important—the symbolic supremacy of
Koranic law (and thus of the sultan as imam) was undermined by the
placing of the mountain tribes under the French criminal code and
officially recognizing the judicial competence of customary law tribal
councils in civil disputes. Coinciding with the rise of the intense
Islamic puritanism of the Egyptian and Afghan-Parisian reformers Abduh
and Al-Afghani among the notables of the Arabized towns, and
particularly those around the ancient Qarawiyin University at Fez, the
Berber Policy and its implied threat to Islam stimulated the growth of
nationalism under the banner of defending the faith against
European-sponsored secularization and Christianization. Thus—even if
under rather seriously altered conditions—the national movement in
Morocco has also taken the classic form of attempting to strengthen the
integrative power of a generally mid-Eastern urban civilization against
the centrifugal tendencies of tribal particularism.

The exile of Sultan Mohammed V by the French in 1953 and his wildly
triumphant return as a national hero in 1955 put the cap on this
political and cultural revival of the Makhzen, and inaugurated, after
independence was achieved, a new-state regime perhaps most aptly
described as a “modernizing autocracy.”⁴¹⁴¹ With the French and the
Spanish gone, the Rabat Sultanate has become again the double-pronged
pivot of the system. The major nationalist party, the Istiqlal, its
independent power undercut by the lack, thus far, of national elections
of a genuine parliament, has become the incumbent of a somewhat
modernized but still essentially patrimonial Makhzen. Led by
conservative Arabized notables of the lowland cities and towns (and
again most especially of Fez—“la ville sainte de l’Islame . . . la
métropole de l’arabisme . . . [et] la vraie capitale du Maroc”),⁴²⁴² it
has acted as the administrative arm of the throne, a “college of
viziers” dominating the royal-appointed Councils of Government, the
party-rationalized civil bureaucracy, and the reinstated (and reformed)
Islamic judicial system. But as the attitude toward Istiqlal among the
tribesmen has been, like their attitude to earlier palace officialdoms,
at best lukewarm and at worst actively hostile, the relationship between
the sultan and at least the more intact, peripheral tribes has remained
essentially personal. Loyal to the king and resistant to his government,
the tribes have been, since the transfer of sovereignty as they were
before it, the main source of primordial threats to national
integration.

Since 1956, heartland-hinterland crises have come thick and fast. The
absorption into the Royal Army of the irregular military force formed
from among the tribes during the sultan’s exile—the so-called Liberation
Army—has proved to be a most ticklish task leading to open clashes; only
after the king firmly removed the Royal Army from Istiqlal influence and
attached it directly to the palace under his son, Prince Moulay Hasan,
as chief of staff, was the tension in part eased. In the fall of 1956, a
Berber chieftain from the Middle Atlas, an intimate of the king, and a
bitter opponent of the Istiqlal, resigned his post as interior minister
in the royal cabinet, and returned to the mountains to preach
primordialism to the tribes (“It is the tribes who have made the glory
of Morocco”), calling for the dissolution of all political parties (“It
is contrary to the interests of the country to confer responsibility on
men who totally ignore the tribes”) and a national rally around the
figure of Mohammed V. (“We have in this nation both weak and strong.
United on the same mountain and under the same skies, they are equal
before the king.”)⁴³⁴³ His effort soon ceased—at least openly—evidently
upon the advice of the king; but a few months later an even more
traditionalistic Berber, the governor of the southeastern province of
Tafilelt, went into semirevolt, simultaneously refusing to obey “a party
which hinders us from living as we wish,” and declaring his undying
loyalty to the sultan. The king soon secured his peaceful submission and
placed him in forced residence near the imperial palace; but in late
1958 and early 1959 sporadic uprisings also occurred in the north and
northeast, they too being contained within narrow limits largely through
the agency of the king’s personal popularity, diplomatic skill, military
strength, and religious charisma.

Yet the modernizing aspect of the new Moroccan state is as real as the
autocratic, and probably more enduring. The restlessness of the tribes
does not represent merely “the past and the province against the future
and the nation,” but the concern of the traditional, “land of insolence”
groups to find a secure and accepted place in that future and
nation.⁴⁴⁴⁴ The development, first clandestinely and then—as the various
parapolitical expressions of tribal dissatisfaction collapsed—openly, of
a new national political party, the Popular Movement, as the vehicle of
rural aspirations, is but one of the more obvious signs that mere
hostility to urban culture and unbending resistance to central authority
is coming to be replaced among the outlying peoples by a fear of being
relegated to second-class citizenship within a modern civil order. Under
the leadership of the former head of the Liberation Army, Ahardane, and
with the vaguest of programs—“Moslem Socialism” and a new union around
the king as imam, not just for Morocco, but for the whole Maghrib—the
new party has at best but one foot in that order. But as a rapid
sequence of very serious political mutations—the holding of local
elections; the breakaway of the left wing of Istiqlal to form a
proletarian party; the sudden, premature death of Mohammed V, and the
succession of his less popular son—have cast a cloud of uncertainty over
the future of monarchical government in the last couple of years, the
new state may well find itself increasingly hard pressed to satisfy and
contain the subtle fusion of traditional siba sentiments and modern
political ambitions neatly summed up in Ahardane’s stiff-necked slogan,
“We have not acquired independence in order to lose liberty.”.⁴⁵⁴⁵

Though it is perhaps true that in the long run the modernizing aspect of
the new Moroccan state is more enduring than the autocratic, over the
last decade it is the autocratic which has flourished. The king, Hassan
II, suspended the constitution and dissolved parliament in 1965 after
riots in Casablanca led to the death, largely at the hands of government
forces, of anywhere from thirty (the official count) to several hundred
people. The king took direct control of the government, ruling by
executive fiat and systematically reducing the influence of the two
major parties—the Islamist Istiqlal and the socialist Union Nationale
des Forces Populaires—and the urban Arab masses which, for the most
part, formed their constituencies. The period was one of accelerating
neotraditionalism, as Hassan attempted to draw various sorts of local
notables, many of them Berber, and army officers, the great majority of
them Berber, into direct, personal loyalty to the throne. In 1970, the
so-called state of exception was at least nominally ended when the king
promulgated a new constitution and announced general elections. The
parties (except for the Berber-dominated Mouvement Populaire) found the
constitution insufficiently democratic and the elections insufficiently
free, however, and regarded the whole maneuver as an effort by the king
to institutionalize and legitimize the throne-centered system of
neotraditional government he had evolved during his first decade of
rule. Thus, though the elections were held and the constitution
approved—under conditions generally held to be less than honest—the
pattern of court-and-notables politics persisted. This pattern came to
something of a dramatic dissolution with the attempted army coup at the
king’s forty-second birthday picnic in July of 1970, in which about a
hundred of the approximately five hundred guests (many of them foreign)
were killed. A major, five colonels, and four generals were executed
almost immediately (others, including its leader, died in the coup
attempt itself), and a number of other officers were imprisoned. The
degree to which primordial loyalties played a role in the attack is
unclear (almost all the leaders were Berbers, most of them from the Rif;
and most were outstanding beneficiaries of the king’s favors under the
throne-centered policy); but since the attack (which was followed in
August 1972 by another, which also failed) the king has moved to
de-emphasize the Berber role in the army as well as to find a basis of
support among the Arab-speaking populations of the large cities that the
two major parties, now united into a “National Action Bloc” claim to
represent. Thus, whatever the reality of the bled al makhzen/bled as
siba contrast might, or might not, ever have been (and I would now be
inclined to regard it as having never been as clear-cut or simple as
European scholarship described it), the distinction—partly cultural,
partly linguistic, partly social, partly a kind of ethnopolitical myth,
a traditional, almost instinctive way of perceiving group
differences—between “Arab” and “Berber” remains an important, if
elusive, factor in Moroccan national life.

NIGERIA

The distinctive feature of Nigerian political life as it has evolved
since World War II has been what Coleman has called “the regionalization
of nationalism.”⁴⁶⁴⁶ Whereas in most of the other new states the final
phases of the pursuit of independence saw a progressive unification of
diverse elements into an intensely solidary opposition to colonial rule,
open dissidence emerging only after devolution and the inevitable waning
of revolutionary comradeship, in Nigeria tension between various
primordial groups increased in the last decade of dependency. After 1946
the Nigerian struggle for freedom was less a matter of defying foreign
authority and more a matter of drawing boundaries, founding capitals,
and distributing powers in such a way as to dampen and contain
sharpening ethnoregional hostilities prior to the disappearance of that
authority. It was marked not so much by growing insurgency in order to
force the British to leave as by feverish negotiation, in both Lagos and
London, in order to create a modus vivendi among the Yoruba, Ibo, and
Hausa-Fulani so that they could leave.

The arrangement ultimately devised (in a 240-page, fine-print
constitution) was a radically federal one, composed of three powerful
constituent regions—the Northern, the (south-) Eastern, and the (south-)
Western—each with its own capital, its own parliament, cabinet, and high
court, and its own budget. Each region was dominated by a particular
ethnic group—respectively, the Hausa, Ibo, and Yoruba; a particular
political party—the Northern People’s Congress (NPC), the National
Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons (NCNC), and the Action Group (AG);
and a particular political personality—Alhaji Sir Ahmadu Bello, the
Sardauna (“Sultan”) of Sokoto, Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, and Chief Obafemi
Awolowo. Perched, somewhat insecurely, on top of these regional
strongholds was the federal government at Lagos as the arena in which
the sort of two-against-one coalition politics one would naturally
expect from this type of three-person game took place and out of whose
changeful processes the authoritative leadership to fill the vacuum at
the center of the system was supposed at length to emerge.

The sort of form that leadership was to take, who was to provide it, and
how, in the working of this Swiss-clock governmental mechanism, it was
to actually be produced remained, however, entirely obscure. In the
meantime, the triangular pattern of primordial identification
crystallized in the country at large, as the tribal societies of
traditional Nigeria gradually regrouped themselves into the
regional-linguistic (and in the Moslem North, religious) folk societies
of modern Nigeria. But though increasingly important as the country’s
ethnic skeleton, this pattern did not exhaust the full variety of
ingrained “consciousness of kind,” because in each region there remained
a large number of smaller groups outside the core Hausa, Yoruba, and Ibo
areas at least somewhat resistant to assimilation to these broader
subnational entities. And it was in these marginal areas—the southern
half of the North, the eastern edge of the West, and the southern and
eastern borders of the East—that the most vital electoral competition
between major ethnic groups tended to take place, as each party
attempted, with some success, to capitalize on minority resentments
within their opponents’ strongholds. What appeared at the center as a
three-way subnational competition, and at the regional capitals as (more
and more) a one-party ethnocracy, represented in the countryside a much
more complex and diversified network of tribal alliances and
oppositions.⁴⁷⁴⁷ It was a tiered system in which local loyalties
remained mostly organized in traditional terms, provincial ones became
organized in party-political terms, and national ones were only barely
organized at all.

Thus, although the regionalization of nationalism process led to the
establishment of a party system and constitutional structure in which
Nigeria’s several hundred primordial groups, ranging from the nearly six
million Hausa to tribal fragments of only a few hundred were able, for a
while, to live in at least reasonable amity, it also created a void at
the very heart of national political life and left the country more or
less acephalous.

After independence (in October, 1960), political attention consequently
turned toward the federal capital at Lagos as parties and their leaders
jockeyed for starting positions from which to launch their campaigns to
correct this condition. After an initial attempt to form a governing
alliance between the economically and politically more advanced Eastern
and Western regions against the more traditional North stumbled over the
entrenched hostility between the mobile, aggressive Ibo intelligentsia
and the stolid, wealthy Yoruba business class—and between the mercurial
Dr. Azikiwe and the lofty Chief Awolowo—the North and East formed such
an alliance, isolating the West. Azikiwe resigned the Eastern
premiership to become governor general, in theory a merely symbolic
office, but which he hoped to make into something more; the Sardauna of
Sokoto, choosing to remain lion of the North in his regional
premiership, sent his lieutenant, Alhaji Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, to
serve in his stead as federal prime minister; and Awolowo, odd man out
in this first of what was a series of two-against-one coalitions,
resigned his post as Western premier to become leader of the opposition
in the federal parliament.

Posts taken, the maneuvering began. The federal parliament decided to
form a fourth state, the Midwest, out of the minority area of the
Western Region; Awolowo shifted from a markedly right- to a markedly
left-wing ideological position in an attempt to shake the somewhat tory
government and ride the antineocolonialism horse to power, splitting the
Action Group in the process; tensions within the NCNC between the
increasingly accommodative old guard and the still radical Young Turks
increased, and so on.

But all this more confused issues than clarified them; complicated
matters rather than simplified them. Independent (as this is written)
for less than a year, Nigeria, the newest of the new states considered
here, offers but the most unformed materials upon which to base an
assessment of its essential character and probable future. Possessed of
what would appear to be an extraordinarily unwieldy set of political
institutions hurriedly put together in the last hectic years of
constitution-making before independence, lacking a comprehensive
national party, a supereminent political leader, an overarching
religious tradition or a common cultural background, and—seemingly—of
several minds about what to do with freedom now that it has, almost as a
matter of course, received it, it has an unusually tentative,
up-in-the-air quality, even for a new state.

Nigeria was the least well-defined of the generally ill-defined states
reviewed as examples in my original essay. At the time, its situation
seemed at once the most hopeful and the most ominous. Hopeful, because
it seemed to have escaped the usual upheavals of decolonization, to be
large enough to be economically viable, and to have inherited a
moderate, well-trained, and experienced elite; ominous, because its
primordial group tensions were both extremely great and unbelievably
complex. The sense of ominousness proved to be the prophetic one. In
January 1966 a military coup led to the death of a number of Northern
political leaders, including Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, and the
establishment of an Ibo-led military regime. A second coup, led by a
Northerner from a minor, that is, non-Hausa, tribe, Colonel Yakubu
Gowon, eventuated in the massacre of somewhere between ten and thirty
thousand Ibos living in the Hausa areas of the North, while anywhere
from two hundred thousand to a million and a half Ibos fled from the
North to their Eastern region homeland. In May of 1967, Colonel Gowon
assumed emergency powers and sought to divide the Eastern region into
three states as a device to increase the power of the non-Ibo Easterners
and decrease that of the Ibos. The Ibos, forming themselves into the
Republic of Biafra, rebelled, and, after nearly three years of some of
the most bitter warfare of modern times (perhaps more than two million
people were killed and countless others died of starvation), were
suppressed by the federal government under Gowon, now a general and head
of the country. After all this, surely one of the most dramatic examples
of the power of primordial loyalties and antipathies (though, again, the
causes of the coups and the war were not “merely” primordial, as the
involvement of the great powers demonstrates), the “tentative,”
“up-in-the-air” quality of the country remains, as does its complex,
intense, and but narrowly balanced pattern of group distrust.

V

Center-and-arc regionalism and dual leadership in Indonesia,
single-party interracial alliance in Malaya, aggressive assimilationism
wrapped in constitutional legalism in Burma, a cosmopolitan central
party with provincial machines fighting a multifront war against every
sort of parochialism known to man (and a few known only to Hindus) in
India, sectarian slate-making and log-rolling in Lebanon, Janus-faced
autocratic rule in Morocco, and unfocused check-and-balance scrimmaging
in Nigeria—are these systems as merely unique as they appear? From this
array of efforts after political order, does any evidence emerge for the
claim that the integrative revolution is a general process?

Over the cases reviewed here, at least, one common developmental
tendency does stand out: the aggregation of independently defined,
specifically outlined traditional primordial groups into larger, more
diffuse units whose implicit frame of reference is not the local scene
but the “nation”—in the sense of the whole society encompassed by the
new civil state. The leading principle in terms of which this lumping is
mainly carried out varies—region in Indonesia, race in Malaya, language
in India, religion in Lebanon, custom in Morocco, and quasi kinship in
Nigeria. Whether it involves becoming an Outer Islander in addition to a
Minangkabau, a Kachin over and above a Duleng, a Christian as well as a
Maronite, or a Yoruba rather than only an Egba, the process, though
variously advanced, both as between countries and within them, is
general. It is a progressive extension of the sense of primordial
similarity and difference generated from the direct and protracted
encounter of culturally diverse groups in local contexts to more broadly
defined groups of a similar sort interacting within the framework of the
entire national society, an extension Freedman has described
particularly well for Malaya:

Malaya was and remains a culturally plural society. Paradoxically, from
a purely structural point of view, its plural nature is more marked
today than ever before. Nationalism and political independence in their
early phases have tended to define, on a pan-Malayan basis, ethnic blocs
which in former times were merely categories. Then the social map of
Malaya was, so to speak, made up of a kaleidoscope of small culturally
defined units rearranging themselves in accordance with local
conditions. “The Malays” did not interact with “the Chinese” and “the
Indians.” Some Malays interacted with some Chinese and some Indians. But
as “Malays,” “Chinese” and “Indians” come to be realized as structural
entities on a nationwide scale, they can begin to have total relations
with one another.⁴⁸⁴⁸

The emergence of a nationwide system of “ethnic blocs” engaged in “total
relations with one another” sets the stage for a direct clash between
personal identity and political integrity in the new states. By
generalizing and extending tribal, racial, linguistic, or other
principles of primordial solidarity, such a system permits the
maintenance of a profoundly rooted “consciousness of kind,” and relates
that consciousness to the developing civil order. It allows one to
continue to claim public acknowledgement of one’s existence and import
in terms of the familiar symbols of group uniqueness, while at the same
time becoming more and more drawn into a political society cast in a
mold wholly different from the “natural” community those symbols define.
But, on the other hand, it also simplifies and concentrates group
antagonisms, raises the specter of separatism by superimposing a
comprehensive political significance upon those antagonisms, and,
particularly when the crystallizing ethnic blocs outrun state
boundaries, stirs international controversies. The integrative
revolution does not do away with ethnocentrism; it merely modernizes it.

Yet modernizing ethnocentrism does render it more easily reconciled to
the presence of developed national political institutions. The effective
operation of such institutions does not require the simple replacement
of primordial ties and identifications by civil ones. In all
probability, such a replacement is a sheer impossibility. What it does
demand is an adjustment between them, an adjustment such that the
processes of government can proceed freely without seriously threatening
the cultural framework of personal identity, and such that whatever
discontinuities in “consciousness of kind” happen to exist in the
general society do not radically distort political functioning. At least
as they have been conceived here, primordial and civil sentiments are
not ranged in direct and implicitly evolutionary opposition to one
another in the manner of so many of the theoretical dichotomies of
classical sociology—Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft, mechanical and
organic solidarity, folk and urban society; the history of their
development does not consist simply of the expansion of the one at the
expense of the other. Their marked tendency to interfere with one
another in the new states stems not from any natural and irremovable
antipathy between them but rather from dislocations arising from the
differing patterns of change intrinsic to each of them as they respond
to the disequilibrating forces of the mid-twentieth century. Their clash
is an outcome of the contrasting sorts of transformation that
traditional political institutions and traditional modes of
self-perception undergo as they move along their separate paths toward
modernity.

On the self-perception side, the nature of the modernizing process is
virtually uninvestigated; it is not usually even recognized that such a
process exists. The already mentioned aggregation of narrowly
circumscribed tribal, linguistic, religious, and so on, groups into
larger more generalized ethnic blocs set within the context of a common
social frame is certainly a crucial part of it. A simple, coherent,
broadly defined ethnic structure, such as is found in most industrial
societies, is not an undissolved residue of traditionalism but an
earmark of modernity. But how this reconstruction of the system of
primordial affiliation takes place, the stages through which it passes,
the forces that advance or retard it, the transformations in personality
structure it involves, all are largely unknown. The comparative
sociology (or social psychology) of ethnic change remains to be written.

With respect to the political side, it can hardly be said that the
problem is unrecognized, for the notion of a civil society, of the
nature of citizenship and the diffuse social sentiments on which it
rests, has been a central concern of political science since Aristotle.
But it remains nonetheless vague; much easier to point to than describe;
much easier to sense than to analyze. What the civic sense more than
anything else seems to involve is a definite concept of the public as a
separate and distinct body and an attendant notion of a genuine public
interest, which though not necessarily superior to, is independent of
and at times even in conflict with, both private and other sorts of
collective interest. When we talk about the changing forms of civil
politics in the new states or elsewhere, it is the vicissitudes of just
this sense of the public and the public interest, its waxings and
wanings, its alterations in mode of expression, to which we refer.
Again, however, though we have at least a general idea of the nature of
civility and the range of forms through which it is materialized in
industrial states, very little is known about the processes by which the
present patterns have come to be what they are. A genuine civil sense is
often even denied—incorrectly in my opinion—to traditional states at
all. In any case, the stages through which a modern sense of political
community arises out of a traditional one have been at best but
impressionistically traced, and thus both the roots and the character of
civility remain obscure.

A satisfactory understanding of the reasons for the chronic tension in
the new states between the need to maintain a socially ratified personal
identity and the desire to construct a powerful national community
demands, therefore, a more circumstantial tracing of the stages through
which their relationship to one another passes as each proceeds along
the special lines of its own development. And it is in the histories of
those states as they unfold before our eyes that such a tracing is most
readily to be accomplished. The diverse constitutional,
quasi-constitutional, or simply ad hoc experiments in government that
characterize at least those new states described here represent, among
other things, an attempt to establish a pattern of politics in which the
looming headlong clash of primordial and civil loyalties can be averted.
Whether ethnic differentiation is given its political expression in
terms of territorial subunits, political parties, government posts,
executive leadership, or, as is most common, one or another combination
of these, the effort is everywhere to find a formula that will keep the
pace of modernization of the nation’s sense of selfhood in step with the
parallel modernization not only of its political, but of its economic,
stratificatory, domestic, and so on, institutions as well. It is by
watching the integrative revolution happen that we shall understand it.
This may seem like a mere wait-and-see policy, inappropriate to the
predictive ambitions of science. But such a policy is at least
preferable, and more scientific, to waiting and not seeing, which has
been largely the case to date.

At any rate, the success of the efforts to find a formula for balance in
the midst of change now taking place in the new states is nowhere
assured. A high degree of governmental immobilism resulting from the
attempt to reconcile divergent primordial groups is everywhere apparent.
The mere prejudices that must be tolerated in order to effect such
reconciliations are often repugnant. But as the alternatives to such
attempts as these to construct a civil politics of primordial compromise
would seem to be either Balkanization, Herrenvolk fanaticism, or the
forcible suppression of ethnic assertion by a leviathan state, can they
be viewed, especially by members of a society that has notably failed to
resolve its own most troublesome primordial problem, with either
indifference or contempt?

[]

1 Quoted in S. Harrison, “The Challenge to Indian Nationalism,” Foreign
Affairs 34 (April 1956): 3.

2 For a very dim view, see S. Harrison, India: The Most Dangerous
Decades (Princeton, N.J., 1960). For a lively Indian view that sees the
“scheme of dividing India in the name of Linguistic States” as “full of
poison” but yet necessary “to make easy the way to democracy and to
remove racial and cultural tension,” see B. R. Ambedkar, Thoughts on
Linguistic States (Delhi, ca. 1955).

3 See, for example, K. Deutsch, Nationalism and Social Communication
(New York, 1953), pp. 1–14; R. Emerson, From Empire to Nation
(Cambridge, Mass., 1960); J. Coleman, Nigeria: Background to Nationalism
(Berkeley, 1958), p. 419 ff; F. Hertz, Nationalism in History and
Politics (New York, 1944), pp. 11–15.

4 W. Z. Laqueur, ed., The Middle East in Transition: Studies in
Contemporary History (New York, 1958).

5 Coleman, Nigeria, pp. 425–426.

6 Emerson, Empire to Nation, pp. 95–96.

7 1. Berlin, Two Concepts of Liberty (New York, 1958), p. 42.

8 E. Shils, “Political Development in the New States,” Comparative
Studies in Society and History 2 (1960): 265–292, 379–411.

9 E. Shils, “Primordial, Personal, Sacred and Civil Ties,” British
Journal of Sociology 8 (1957): 130–145.

10 Ambedkar, Thoughts on Linguistic States, p. 11. Noting that the
modern bilingual states of Canada, Switzerland, and (white) South Africa
might be quoted against him, Ambedkar adds: “It must not be forgotten
that the genius of India is quite different than the genius of Canada,
Switzerland, and South Africa. The genius of India is to divide—the
genius of Switzerland, South Africa and Canada to unite.” [In 1972, both
this note and my passage about the declining role of primordial
divisions in “modern” countries seem, to put it mildly, rather less
convincing than they did in 1962, when this essay was originally
written. But if events in Canada, Belgium, Ulster, and so on have made
primordial definition seem less predominantly a “new state” phenomenon,
they have made the general argument developed here seem even more
germane.]

11 For a similar but rather differently conceived and organized listing,
see Emerson, Empire to Nation, Chaps. 6, 7, and 8.

12 The intensity, prevalence, or even the reality of such desires in
each case is another matter, about which nothing is being asserted here.
How much, if any, feeling in favor of assimilation to Malaya exists
among the South Thailand Malays, the actual strength of the Abako idea,
or the attitudes of Tamils in Ceylon toward the Dravidian separatists of
Madras are matters for empirical research.

13 Nor does the interstate significance of primordial sentiments lie
wholly in their divisive power. Pan-African attitudes, weak and
ill-defined as they may be, have provided a useful context of mild
solidarity for the confrontation of leaders of major African countries.
Burma’s strenuous (and expensive) efforts to strengthen and revitalize
international Buddhism, as in the Sixth Great Council at Yegu in 1954,
served, at least temporarily, to link her more effectively with the
other Theravada countries—Ceylon, Thailand, Laos, and Cambodia. And a
vague, mainly racial, feeling of common “Malayness” has played a
positive role in the relations between Malaya and Indonesia and Malaya
and the Philippines, and even, more recently, between Indonesia and the
Philippines.

14 I. Wallerstein, “The Emergence of Two West African Nations: Ghana and
the Ivory Coast” (Ph.D. thesis, Columbia University, 1959).

15 For a brief discussion of this problem with respect to Indonesia, see
C. Geertz, “The Javanese Village,” in Local, Ethnic and National
Loyalties in Village Indonesia, ed. G. W. Skinner, Yale University,
Southeast Asia Studies, Cultural Report Series, No. 8 (New Haven, 1959),
pp. 34–41.

16 S. Sjahrir, Out of Exile (New York, 1949), p. 215.

17 As Talcott Parsons has pointed out, defined as the capacity to
mobilize social resources for social goals, is not a “zero-sum” quantity
within a social system, but, like wealth, is generated by the working of
particular, in this case political rather than economic, institutions.
“The Distribution of Power in American Society,” World Politics 10
(1957): 123–143. The growth of a modern state within a traditional
social context represents, therefore, not merely the shifting or
transfer of a fixed quantity of power between groups in such a manner
that aggregatively the gains of certain groups or individuals match the
losses of others, but rather the creation of a new and more efficient
machine for the production of power itself, and thus an increase in the
general political capacity of the society. This is a much more genuinely
“revolutionary” phenomenon than a mere redistribution, however radical,
of power within a given system.

18 D. K. Rangenekar, “The Nationalist Revolution in Ceylon,” Pacific
Affairs 33 (1960): 361–374.

19 Quoted in M. Weiner, “The Politics of South Asia,” in G. Almond and
J. Coleman, The Politics of the Developing Areas (Princeton, N.J.,
1960), pp. 153–246.

20 About half the Tamils are stateless “Indian Tamils”—that is,
individuals transported to Ceylon in the nineteenth century to work on
British tea estates, and now rejected as citizens by India on the ground
that they live in Ceylon, and by Ceylon on the ground that they are but
sojourners from India.

21 Commenting on the spectacular failure of Sir Ivor Jennings’ 1954
prediction that Bandaranaike was unlikely to win the leadership of the
nationalist movement because he was a “political Buddhist,” having been
educated as a Christian, Rangenekar shrewdly remarks, “In an Asian
setting a Western-educated politician who renounces his Westernization
and upholds indigenous culture and civilization wields a much greater
influence than the most dynamic local thoroughbred can ever hope to do.”
Rangenekar, “Nationalist Revolution in Ceylon.”

22 Ibid.

23 H. Wriggins, “Impediments to Unity in New Nations—The Case of Ceylon”
(unpublished).

24 H. Fieth, “Indonesia,” in G. McT. Kahin, ed., Government and Politics
of Southeast Asia (Ithaca, N.Y., 1959), pp. 155–238; and Kahin, G. McT.,
ed., Major Governments of Asia (Ithaca, N.Y., 1958), pp. 471–592. This
is not to say that the crystallization of regional enmities was the sole
motivating force in the Padang rebellion, nor that the Java-Outer
Islands contrast was the only axis of opposition. In all the quoted
examples in this essay, the desire to be recognized as a responsible
agent whose wishes, acts, hopes, and opinions matter is intertwined with
the more familiar desires for wealth, power, prestige, and so on. Simple
primordial determinism is no more defensible a position than economic
determinism.

25 D. Apter, The Gold Coast in Transition (Princeton, N.J., 1955), p.
68.

26 W. Lewis, “Feuding and Social Change in Morocco,” Journal of Conflict
Resolution 5 (1961): 43–54.

27 R. Nolte, “The Arab Solidarity Agreement,” American University Field
Staff Letter, Southwest Asia Series, 1957.

28 P. Talbot, “Raising a Cry for Secession,” American University Field
Staff Letter, South Asia Series, 1957.

29 M. Weiner, “Community Associations in Indian Politics” (unpublished).
The reverse process, “ethnogenesis by census redefinition,” also occurs,
as when in Libreville, the Gabon capital, Togolese and Dahomeans are
lumped statistically into a new category, “the Popo,” or in Northern
Rhodesia copperbelt towns Henga, Tonga, Tambuka, and so on, are “by
common consent” grouped together as Nyasalanders, these manufactured
groupings then taking on a real “ethnic” existence. I. Wallerstein,
“Ethnicity and National Integration in West Africa,” Cahiers d’études
africaines 3 (1960): 129–139.

30 The 35 percent figure can be found in N. Barbour, ed., A Survey of
North West Africa (New York, 1959), p. 79; the 60 percent figure in D.
Rustow, “The Politics of the Near East,” in Almond and Coleman, Politics
of Developing Areas, pp. 369–453.

31 On Burmese dress, see H. Tinker, The Union of Burma (New York, 1957),
p. 184. On Nigerian tribal histories, see Coleman, Nigeria, pp. 327–328.
On Ceylonese license plates, see Wriggins, “Ceylon’s Time of Troubles,
1956–8,” Far Eastern Survey 28 (1959): 33–38. On Hindi railroad signs,
see Weiner, “Community Associations.”

32 For a general discussion of the role of voluntary associations in the
urbanization process in modernizing societies, see Wallerstein, “The
Emergence of Two West African Nations,” pp. 144–230.

33 As, with the partial exception of Indonesia [and now—1972—Morocco],
all the following summaries are based on the literature rather than on
field research, a full bibliography of sources would obviously be too
lengthy for inclusion in an essay. I therefore list below only those
works upon which I have relied rather heavily. The best general survey
including the countries discussed is Almond and Coleman, Politics of
Developing Areas, and for Asia I have found the two previously cited
symposia edited by Kahin, Governments and Politics of Southeast Asia and
Major Governments of Asia, most useful. Emerson, Empire to Nation, also
offers some valuable comparative materials.

INDONESIA: H. Feith, The Wilopo Cabinet, 1952–1953 (Ithaca, N.Y., 1958);
H. Feith, The Indonesian Elections of 1955 (Ithaca, N.Y., 1952); G.
Pauker, “The Role of Political Organization in Indonesia,” Far Eastern
Survey 27 (1958): 129–142; G. W. Skinner, Local, Ethnic, and National
Loyalties in Village Indonesia.

MALAYA: M. Freedman, “The Growth of a Plural Society in Malaya,” Pacific
Affairs 33 (1960): 158–167; N. Ginsburg and C. F. Roberts, Jr., Malaya
(Seattle, 1958); J. N. Parmer, “Malaya’s First Year of Independence,”
Far Eastern Survey 27 (1958): 161–168; T. E. Smith, “The Malayan
Elections of 1959,” Pacific Affairs 33 (1960): 38–47.

BURMA: L. Bigelow, “The 1960 Elections in Burma,” Far Eastern Survey 29
(1960): 70–74; G. Fairbairn, “Some Minority Problems in Burma,” Pacific
Affairs 30 (1957): 299–311; J. Silverstein, “Politics in the Shan State:
The Question of the Secession from the Union of Burma,” The Journal of
Asian Studies 18 (1958): 43–58; H. Tinker, The Union of Burma.

INDIA: Ambedkar, Thoughts on Linguistic States; S. Harrison, India; R.
L. Park and I. Tinker, eds., Leadership and Political Institutions in
India (Princeton, N.J., 1959); Report of the States Reorganization
Commission (New Delhi, 1955); M. Weiner, Party Politics in India
(Princeton, N.J., 1957).

LEBANON: V. Ayoub, “Political Structure of a Middle East Community: A
Druze Village in Mount Lebanon” (Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University,
1955); P. Rondot, Les Institutions politiques du Liban (Paris, 1957); N.
A. Ziadeh, Syria and Lebanon (London, 1957); N. A. Ziadeh, “The Lebanese
Elections, 1960,” Middle East Journal 14 (1960): 367–381.

MOROCCO: D. Ashford, Political Change in Morocco (Princeton, N.J.,
1961); N. Barbour, ed., A Survey of North West Africa (New York, 1959);
H. Favre, “Le Maroc A L’Epreuve de la Démocratisation” (unpublished,
1958); J. and S. Lacouture, Le Maroc A L’Epreuve (Paris, 1958); W.
Lewis, “Rural Administration in Morocco,” Middle East Journal 14 (1960):
45–54; W. Lewis, “Feuding and Social Change in Morocco,” The Journal of
Conflict Resolution 5 (1961): 43–54.

NIGERIA: J. Coleman, Nigeria; Report of the Commission Appointed to
Enquire into the Fears of Minorities and the Means of Allaying Them
(London, 1958); H. and M. Smythe, The New Nigerian Elite (Stanford,
Calif., 1960).

For current events I have found the American University Field Staff
Letters, particularly those on Indonesia (W. Hanna), Malaya (W. Hanna),
India (P. Talbot), Morocco (C. Gallagher), and Nigeria (R. Frodin), very
useful.

[Since the above list was compiled, a decade ago, an enormous number of
new works bearing on our subject have appeared. So far as I know,
however, a comprehensive bibliography in this field does not yet exist.]

34 Fairbairn, “Some Minority Problems in Burma.”

35 E. Shils, The Intellectual Between Tradition and Modernity: The
Indian Situation, Comparative Studies in Society and History, Supplement
1 (The Hague, 1961), p. 95. [Now, of course, it is his daughter, Mrs.
Gandhi, who stands there, and rather less wistfully, but the pattern
remains.]

36 “The success of the Kerala Communist Party as the first regional
Communist Party in India to capture control of a state government can be
explained, above all, by its ability to manipulate the regional
patriotism of all Kerala at the same time that it manipulated
politically strategic class lobbies within linguistic
boundaries.”—Harrison, India, p. 193. In Bombay, both the Communists and
the Praja Socialists joined in the Maharashtra linguistic front; in
opposed Gujerat, the Gujerati one.

37 Ambedkar, Thoughts on Linguistic States, p. 12. The Chinese attack
may, of course, provide an even more powerful cement than Nehru—a common
enemy.

38 Ayoub, “Political Structure,” p. 82.

39 C. Coon, Caravan (London, 1952), p. 295.

40 Ibid., pp. 264–265.

41 For this concept and its analytic implications, see D. Apter, The
Political Kingdom in Uganda (Princeton, N.J., 1961), pp. 20–28.

42 Favre, “Le Maroc.” [Since working in Morocco, I would now formulate
some of these matters a bit differently: see C. Geertz, Islam Observed:
Religious Development in Morocco and Indonesia (New Haven, 1968), esp.
Chap. 3.]

43 Quotations in this sentence from Lahcen al-Youssi and in the
following from Addi ou Bihi taken from Lacouture, Le Maroc, p. 90.

44 Ibid., p. 93.

45 Quoted in Ashford, Political Change, p. 322.

46 Coleman, Nigeria, pp. 319–331.

47 The whole picture was further complicated, not only by the fact that
tribal identifications within the three major groups had not altogether
given way before the wider ethnolinguistic loyalty, but also that not
all members of such larger units were located in their home regions,
having migrated or spilled over into the others where they sometimes
formed, particularly in the towns, an important oppositional minority.
The whole problem of the allegiance of an individual living outside his
“home region” is an extremely ticklish one for all new states in which
integrative problems have been coped with by creating territorial
substates tinged with primordial significance, as Nehru’s continual
insistence that, for example, a Bengali living in Madras is a citizen of
the state level, of Madras, not of Bengal, and that all notions of a
“national homeland” for ethnic groups living elsewhere in India must be
stamped out demonstrates. The additional fact that some such groups are
more mobile than others (in Nigeria, the Ibo; in India, the Marwari and
so on) only intensifies this problem.

48 Freedman, “Plural Society in Malaya.”

Chapter 11/ The Politics of Meaning

[]

I

One of the things that everyone knows but no one can quite think how to
demonstrate is that a country’s politics reflect the design of its
culture. At one level, the proposition is indubitable—where else could
French politics exist but France? Yet, merely to state it is to raise
doubts. Since 1945, Indonesia has seen revolution, parliamentary
democracy, civil war, presidential autocracy, mass murder, and military
rule. Where is the design in that?

Between the stream of events that make up political life and the web of
beliefs that comprises a culture it is difficult to find a middle term.
On the one hand, everything looks like a clutter of schemes and
surprises; on the other, like a vast geometry of settled judgments. What
joins such a chaos of incident to such a cosmos of sentiment is
extremely obscure, and how to formulate it is even more so. Above all,
what the attempt to link politics and culture needs is a less breathless
view of the former and a less aesthetic view of the latter.

In the several essays which make up Culture and Politics in Indonesia,
the sort of theoretical reconstruction necessary to produce such a
change of perspective is undertaken, mainly from the cultural side by
Benedict Anderson and Taufik Abdullah, mainly from the political by
Daniel Lev and G. William Liddle, more or less evenly from both by
Sartono Kartodirdjo.¹¹ Whether the subject be law or party organization,
the Javanese idea of power or the Minangkabau idea of change, ethnic
conflict or rural radicalism, the effort is the same: to render
Indonesian political life intelligible by seeing it, even at its most
erratic, as informed by a set of conceptions—ideals, hypotheses,
obsessions, judgments—derived from concerns which far transcend it, and
to give reality to those conceptions by seeing them as having their
existence not in some gauzy world of mental forms but in the concrete
immediacy of partisan struggle. Culture, here, is not cults and customs,
but the structures of meaning through which men give shape to their
experience; and politics is not coups and constitutions, but one of the
principal arenas in which such structures publicly unfold. The two being
thus reframed, determining the connection between them becomes a
practicable enterprise, though hardly a modest one.

The reason the enterprise is immodest, or anyway especially venturesome,
is that there is almost no theoretical apparatus with which to conduct
it; the whole field—what shall we call it? thematic analysis?—is wedded
to an ethic of imprecision. Most attempts to find general cultural
conceptions displayed in particular social contexts are content to be
merely evocative, to place a series of concrete observations in
immediate juxtaposition and to pull out (or read in) the pervading
element by rhetorical suggestion. Explicit argument is rare because
there are, as much by design as neglect, hardly any terms in which to
cast it, and one is left with a collection of anecdotes connected by
insinuation, and with a feeling that though much has been touched little
has been grasped.²²

The scholar who wishes to avoid this sort of perfected impressionism has
thus to build his theoretical scaffold at the same time that he conducts
his analysis. That is why the authors in the [Holt] book have such
diverse approaches—why Liddle moves out from group conflicts and
Anderson from art and literature; why Lev’s puzzle is the politicization
of legal institutions, Sartono’s the durability of popular
millenarianism, Abdullah’s the fusion of social conservatism and
ideological dynamism. The unity here is neither of topic nor argument,
but of analytical style—of aim and of the methodological issues the
pursuit of such an aim entails.

These issues are multiple, involving questions of definition,
verification, causality, representativeness, objectivity, measurement,
communication. But at base they all boil down to one question: how to
frame an analysis of meaning—the conceptual structures individuals use
to construe experience—which will be at once circumstantial enough to
carry conviction and abstract enough to forward theory. These are equal
necessities; choosing one at the expense of the other yields blank
descriptivism or vacant generality. But they also, superficially at
least, pull in opposite directions, for the more one invokes details the
more he is bound to the peculiarities of the immediate case, the more
one omits them the more he loses touch with the ground on which his
arguments rest. Discovering how to escape this paradox—or more exactly,
for one never really escapes it, how to keep it at bay—is what,
methodologically, thematic analysis is all about.

And it is, consequently, what, beyond the particular findings concerning
particular subjects, the [Holt] book is about. Each study struggles to
draw broad generalizations out of special instances, to penetrate deeply
enough into detail to discover something more than detail. The
strategies adopted to accomplish this are again various, but the effort
to make parochial bodies of material speak for more than themselves is
uniform. The scene is Indonesia; but the goal, still far enough away to
sustain ambition, is an understanding of how it is that every people
gets the politics it imagines.

II

Indonesia is an excellent place to take up such a quest. As heir to
Polynesian, Indie, Islamic, Chinese, and European traditions, it
probably has more hieratic symbols per square foot than any other large
land expanse in the world, and moreover it had in Sukarno (who it is a
mistake to think was untypical in anything but his genius) a man both
wildly anxious and supremely equipped to assemble those symbols into a
pan-doctrinal Staatsreligion for the new-formed Republic. “Socialism,
Communism, incarnations of Vishnu Murti,” a newspaper call to arms cried
in 1921: “Abolish capitalism, propped up by the imperialism that is its
slave! God grant Islam the strength that it may succeed.”³³ “I am a
follower of Karl Marx. . . . I am also a religious man,” Sukarno
announced some decades later; “I have made myself the meeting place of
all trends and ideologies. I have blended, blended, and blended them
until finally they became the present Sukarno.”⁴⁴

Yet, on the other hand, the very density and variety of symbolic
reference has made of Indonesian culture a swirl of tropes and images
into which more than one incautious observer has merely disappeared.⁵⁵
With so much meaning lying scattered openly around it is nearly
impossible to frame an argument relating political events to one or
another strain of it which is totally lacking in plausibility. In one
sense, seeing cultural reflections in political activities is extremely
easy in Indonesia; but this only makes the isolation of precise
connections that much more difficult. Because in this garden of
metaphors almost any hypothesis discerning a form of thought in a piece
of action has a certain logic, developing hypotheses that have truth as
well is more a matter of resisting temptations than of seizing
opportunities.

The main temptation to be resisted is jumping to conclusions and the
main defense against it is explicitly to trace out the sociological
links between cultural themes and political developments, rather than to
move deductively from one to the other. Ideas—religious, moral,
practical, aesthetic—must, as Max Weber, among others, never tired of
insisting, be carried by powerful social groups to have powerful social
effects; someone must revere them, celebrate them, defend them, impose
them. They have to be institutionalized in order to find not just an
intellectual existence in society, but, so to speak, a material one as
well. The ideological wars which have wracked Indonesia for the past
twenty-five years must be seen not, as they so often have, as clashes of
opposed mentalities—Javanese “mysticism” versus Sumatran “pragmatism,”
Indic “syncretism” versus Islamic “dogmatism”—but as the substance of a
struggle to create an institutional structure for the country that
enough of its citizens would find sufficiently congenial to allow it to
function.

Hundreds of thousands of political dead testify to the fact that nowhere
nearly enough citizens did so, and it is questionable how far they do so
now. Organizing a cultural hodgepodge into a workable polity is more
than a matter of inventing a promiscuous civil religion to blunt its
variety. It requires either the establishment of political institutions
within which opposing groups can safely contend, or the elimination of
all groups but one from the political stage. Neither of these has, so
far, been more than marginally effected in Indonesia; the country has
been as incapable of totalitarianism as of constitutionalism. Rather,
almost every institution in the society—army, bureaucracy, court,
university, press, party, religion, village—has been swept by great
tremors of ideological passion which seem to have neither end nor
direction. If Indonesia gives any overall impression, it is of a state
manqué, a country which, unable to find a political form appropriate to
the temper of its people, stumbles on apprehensively from one
institutional contrivance to the next.

A great part of the problem, of course, is that the country is
archipelagic in more than geography. Insofar as it displays a pervasive
temper, it is one riven with internal contrasts and contradictions.
There are the regional differences (the rhetorical combativeness of the
Minangkabau and the reflective elusiveness of the Javanese, for
example); there are the faith-and-custom “ethnic” divergences among even
closely related groups, as in the East Sumatran “boiling pot”; there are
the class conflicts reflected in the nativistic movement material and
the vocational ones reflected in that of the struggle for a workable
legal system. There are racial minorities (Chinese and Papuans);
religious minorities (Christians and Hindus); local minorities (Djakarta
Batak, Surabaja Madurese). The nationalist slogan, “One People, One
Country, One Language,” is a hope, not a description.

The hope that the slogan represents, however, is not necessarily
unreasonable. Most of the larger nations of Europe grew out of a
cultural heterogeneity hardly less marked; if Tuscans and Sicilians can
live together in the same state and conceive of themselves as natural
compatriots, so can Javanese and Minangkabau. Rather than the mere fact
of internal diversity, it has been the refusal, at all levels of the
society, to come to terms with it that has impeded Indonesia’s search
for effective political form. The diversity has been denied as a
colonial slander, deplored as a feudal remnant, clouded over with ersatz
syncretisms, tendentious history, and utopian fantasies, while all the
time the bitter combat of groups who see in one another rivals not
merely for political and economic power, but for the right to define
truth, justice, beauty, and morality, the very nature of reality, rages
on virtually unguided by formal political institutions. By acting as
though it were culturally homogeneous like Japan or Egypt instead of
heterogeneous like India or Nigeria, Indonesia (or more exactly, I
suppose, the Indonesian elite) has managed to create anarchic politics
of meaning outside the established structures of civil government.

This politics of meaning is anarchic in the literal sense of unruled,
not the popular one of unordered. As each of the essays in the [Holt]
volume shows in its own way, what I have elsewhere called “the struggle
for the real,” the attempt to impose upon the world a particular
conception of how things at bottom are and how men are therefore obliged
to act, is, for all the inability thus far to bring it to workable
institutional expression, not a mere chaos of zeal and prejudice. It has
a shape, trajectory, and force of its own.

The political processes of all nations are wider and deeper than the
formal institutions designed to regulate them; some of the most critical
decisions concerning the direction of public life are not made in
parliaments and presidiums; they are made in the unformalized realms of
what Durkheim called “the collective conscience” (or “consciousness”;
the useful ambiguity of conscience is unavailable in English). But in
Indonesia the pattern of official life and the framework of popular
sentiment within which it sits have become so disjoined that the
activities of government, though centrally important, seem nevertheless
almost beside the point, mere routinisms convulsed again and again by
sudden irruptions from the screened-off (one almost wants to say,
repressed) political course along which the country is in fact moving.

The more accessible events of public life, political facts in the
narrower sense, do about as much to obscure this course as to reveal it.
Insofar as they reflect it, as of course they do, they do so obliquely
and indirectly, as dreams reflect desires or ideologies interests;
discerning it is more like interpreting a constellation of symptoms than
tracing a chain of causes. The studies in the [Holt] book therefore
diagnose and assess, rather than measure and predict. Fragmentation in
the party system bespeaks an intensification of ethnic
self-consciousness; enfeeblement of formal law, renewed commitment to
conciliatory methods of dispute settlement. Behind the moral quandaries
of provincial modernizers lie complexities in traditional accounts of
tribal history; behind the explosiveness of rural protest, enthrallment
with cataclysmic images of change; behind the theatrics of Guided
Democracy, archaic conceptions of the sources of authority. Taken
together, these exercises in political exegesis begin to expose the
faint outlines of what the Indonesian Revolution in fact amounts to: an
effort to construct a modern state in contact with its citizens’
conscience; a state with which they can, in both senses of the word,
come to an understanding. One of the things Sukarno was right about,
though in fact he had something rather different in mind, was that it
is, this Revolution, not over.

III

The classical problem of legitimacy—how do some men come to be credited
with the right to rule over others—is peculiarly acute in a country in
which long-term colonial domination created a political system that was
national in scope but not in complexion. For a state to do more than
administer privilege and defend itself against its own population, its
acts must seem continuous with the selves of those whose state it
pretends it is, its citizens—to be, in some stepped-up, amplified sense,
their acts. This is not a mere question of consensus. A man does not
have to agree with his government’s acts to see himself as embodied in
them any more than he has to approve of his own acts to acknowledge that
he has, alas, himself performed them. It is a question of immediacy, of
experiencing what the state “does” as proceeding naturally from a
familiar and intelligible “we.” A certain amount of psychological
sleight of hand is always required on the part of government and
citizenry in this in the best of cases. But when a country has been
governed for two hundred years or so by foreigners, it is, even after
they have been displaced, a yet more difficult trick.

The political tasks that loomed so formidable as independence was
reached for—ending the domination of outside powers, creating leadership
cadres, stimulating economic growth, and sustaining a sense of national
unity—have indeed turned out to be that and more since independence has
been gained. But they have been joined by another task, less clearly
envisaged then and less consciously recognized now, that of dispelling
the aura of alienness from the institutions of modern government. Much
of the symbol-mongering that went on under the Sukarno regime, and which
has been moderated rather than ended under its successor, was a
half-deliberate attempt to close the cultural gulf between the state and
society that, if not altogether created by colonial rule, had been
enormously widened by it. The great crescendo of slogans, movements,
monuments, and demonstrations which reached a pitch of almost hysterical
intensity in the early sixties was, in part anyway, designed to make the
nation-state seem indigenous. As it was not indigenous, disbelief and
disorder spiraled upward together, and Sukarno was destroyed, along with
his regime, in the collapse which ensued.

Even without the complicating factor of colonial rule, however, the
modern state would seem alien to local tradition in a country like
Indonesia, if only because such a state’s conception of itself as a
specialized instrument for the coordination of all aspects of public
life has no real counterpart in such a tradition. Traditional rulers,
and not only in Indonesia, may have been, when they could manage it and
were so inclined, despotic, arbitrary, selfish, unresponsive,
exploitative, or merely cruel (though, under the influence of the Cecil
B. DeMille view of history, the degree to which they were has commonly
been exaggerated); but they never imagined themselves, nor did their
subjects imagine them, to be executives of an omnicompetent state.
Mostly they governed to proclaim their status, protect (or, where
possible, enlarge) their privileges, and exercise their style of life;
and insofar as they regulated matters beyond their immediate reach—which
was commonly very little—they did so only derivatively, as a reflex of
concerns more stratificatory than properly political. The notion that
the state is a machine whose function is to organize the general
interest comes into such a context as something of a strange idea.

So far as popular reaction is concerned, the results of that strangeness
have been the usual ones: a degree of curiosity, a degree more of fear,
heightened expectancy, and a great deal of puzzlement. It was to such a
confusion of sentiment that Sukarno’s symbol-wielding was a failed
response; but the various matters discussed in the [Holt] book are
others, less concocted so less ephemeral. In them, one can see in
concrete detail what being abruptly confronted with the prospect of an
activist, comprehensive central government—what de Jouvenel has called
“the power-house state”—means to a people used to masters but not to
managers.⁶⁶

Such a confrontation means that the received concepts of justice, power,
protest, authenticity, identity (as well, of course, as a host of others
these essays do not explicitly treat) are all thrown into jeopardy by
the requirements, or seeming such, of effective national existence in
the contemporary world. This conceptual dislocation—the putting into
question of the most familiar frames of moral and intellectual
perception and the vast shift of sensibility thereby set in motion—forms
the proper subject of cultural studies of new state politics. “What this
country needs,” Sukarno once said, in a characteristic burst of
linguistic syncretism, “is ke-up-to-date-an.” He didn’t quite give it
that, merely gestures toward it, but they were gestures graphic enough
to convince all but the most provincial of Indonesians that not just the
form but the nature of government had changed and that they had, in
result, some mental adjustments to make.⁷⁷

IV

This sort of social changing of the mind is a great deal easier to sense
than to document, not only because its manifestations are so various and
indirect, but because it is so hesitant, shot through with uncertainty
and contradiction. For every belief, practice, ideal, or institution
that is condemned as backward, one, often the same one and by the same
people, is celebrated as the very essence of contemporaneity; for every
one attacked as alien, one, again often the same one, is hailed as a
sacred expression of the national soul.

There is, in such matters, no simple progression from “traditional” to
“modern,” but a twisting, spasmodic, unmethodical movement which turns
as often toward repossessing the emotions of the past as disowning them.
Some of Sartono’s peasants read their future in medieval myths, some in
Marxist visions, some in both. Lev’s lawyers waver between the formal
dispassion of Justice’s scales and the sheltering paternalism of the
banyan tree. The publicist whose career Abdullah traces as an example of
his society’s reaction to the challenge of modernism, editorializes
simultaneously for the restoration of “the genuine Minangkabau adat
[custom],” and for headlong entry “unto the path of kemadjuan
[progress].” In Java, Anderson finds “archaic-magical” and
“developed-rational” theories of power existing side by side; in
Sumatra, Liddle finds localism and nationalism advancing pari passu.

This undeniable, commonly denied, fact—that whatever the curve of
progress may be, it fits no graceful formula—disables any analysis of
modernization which starts from the assumption that it consists of the
replacement of the indigenous and obsolescent with the imported and
up-to-date. Not just in Indonesia, but throughout the Third
World—throughout the world—men are increasingly drawn to a double goal:
to remain themselves and to keep pace, or more, with the twentieth
century. A tense conjunction of cultural conservatism and political
radicalism is at the nerve of new state nationalism, and nowhere more
conspicuously so than in Indonesia. What Abdullah says of the
Minangkabau—that accommodating to the contemporary world has required
“continuing revision of the meaning of modernization,” involved “new
attitudes toward tradition itself and [an unending] search for a
suitable basis of modernization”—is said, in one manner or another,
throughout each of the essays. What they reveal is not a linear advance
from darkness to light, but a continuous redefinition of where “we”
(peasants, lawyers, Christians, Javanese, Indonesians . . . ) have been,
now are, and have yet to go—images of group history, character,
evolution, and destiny that have only to emerge to be fought over.

In Indonesia, such bending backward and forward at the same time has
been apparent from the beginning of the nationalist movement and merely
grown more marked since.⁸⁸ Sarekat Islam, the first really sizable
organization (its membership increased from approximately four thousand
in 1912 to approximately four hundred thousand in 1914), appealed at
once to visionary mystics, Islamic purists, Marxist radicals,
trading-class reformers, paternal aristocrats, and messianic peasants.
When this commotion disguised as a party came to pieces, as it did in
the twenties, it separated not into the “reactionary” and “progressive”
wings of revolutionary mythology, but into a whole series of factions,
movements, ideologies, clubs, conspiracies—what Indonesians call aliran
(streams)—seeking to fasten one or another form of modernism on to one
or another strand of tradition.

“Enlightened” gentry—physicians, lawyers, schoolteachers, sons of civil
servants—attempted to marry “spiritual” East and “dynamic” West by
fusing a sort of cultic aestheticism with an evolutionary, noblesse
oblige program of mass uplift. Rural Koranic religious teachers sought
to transform anti-Christian sentiments into anticolonial ones, and
themselves into links between urban activism and village piety. Muslim
modernists tried at once to purify popular faith of heterodox accretions
and work out a properly Islamic program of social and economic reform.
Left-wing revolutionaries sought to identify rural collectivism and
political, peasant discontent and class struggle; Eurasian half-castes
to reconcile their Dutch and Indonesian identities and provide a
rationale for multiracial independence; Western-educated intellectuals
to reconnect themselves to Indonesian reality by tapping indigenous,
antifeudal (and to some extent anti-Javanese) attitudes in the interests
of democratic socialism. Everywhere one looks, in the fevered days of
the nationalist awakening (ca. 1912–1950), someone is matching advanced
ideas and familiar sentiments in order to make some variety of progress
look less disruptive and some pattern of custom less dispensable.

The heterogeneity of Indonesian culture and that of modern political
thought thus played into one another to produce an ideological situation
in which a highly generalized consensus at one level—that the country
must collectively storm the heights of modernity while clinging, also
collectively, to the essentials of its heritage—was countered on another
by an accelerating dissensus as to what direction the heights should be
stormed from and what the essentials were. After Independence, the
fragmentation of the elite and the active sectors of the population
along such lines was completed as the society regrouped into competing
families d’esprit, some huge, some minute, some in between, which were
concerned not just with governing Indonesia but with defining it.

Thus, a paralyzing incongruity grew up between the ideological framework
within which the formal institutions of the would-be powerhouse state
were constructed and operated and that within which the overall
political formation of the, also would-be, nation took shape; between
the “blended, blended, blended” integralism of Guided Democracy, the
Pantjasila, Nasakom, and the like, and the “boiling pot”
compartmentalization of popular sentiment.⁹⁹ The contrast was not a
simple center and periphery one—integralism in Djakarta,
compartmentalism in the provinces; but it appeared, and in not very
different form, on all levels of the political system. From the village
coffee shops where Sartono’s peasants laid their small plans to the
bureaus of Merdeka Square where Anderson’s “ministeriales” laid their
larger ones, political life proceeded in a curious kind of double-level
way, in which a rivalry, again not just for power but for the power
above power—the right to specify the terms under which direction of the
state, or even mere official existence, is granted—went on, wrapped in
the generous phrases of common struggle, historic identity, and national
brotherhood.

That is, political life proceeded in this way until October 1, 1965. The
bungled coup and its savage aftermath—perhaps a quarter of a million
dead in three or four months—brought to open view the cultural disarray
fifty years of political change had created, advanced, dramatized, and
fed upon.¹⁰¹⁰ The wash of nationalist cliches soon clouded the scene
again, for one can no more stare at the abyss than at the sun. But there
can be very few Indonesians now who do not know that, however clouded,
the abyss is there, and they are scrambling along the edge of it, a
change of awareness which may prove to be the largest step in the
direction of a modern mentality they have yet made.

V

Whatever social scientists might desire, there are some social phenomena
whose impact is immediate and profound, even decisive, but whose
significance cannot effectively be assessed until well after their
occurrence; and one of these is surely the eruption of great domestic
violence. The Third World has seen a number of these eruptions over the
twenty-five years it has been coming into being—the partition of India,
the Congo mutiny, Biafra, Jordan. But none can have been more shattering
than the Indonesian, nor more difficult to evaluate. Since the terrible
last months of 1965, all scholars of Indonesia, and especially those
trying to penetrate the country’s character, are in the uncomfortable
situation of knowing that a vast internal trauma has shaken their
subject but not knowing, more than vaguely, what its effects have been.
The sense that something has happened for which no one was prepared, and
about which no one yet quite knows what to say, haunts the essays [in
the Holt volume], making them read, sometimes, like the agon of a play
with the crisis left out. But there is no help for this: the crisis is
still happening.¹¹¹¹

Of course, some of the outward effects are clear. The Indonesian
Communist Party, on its claims the third largest in the world, has been,
at least for the present, essentially destroyed. There is military rule.
Sukarno was first immobilized, then, with that controlled, relentless
grace the Javanese call halus, deposed, and has since died. The
“confrontation” with Malaysia has ended. The economic situation has
markedly improved. Domestic security, at the cost of large-scale
political detentions, has come to virtually the entire country for
almost the first time since Independence. The flamboyant desperation of
what now is called the “Old Order” has been replaced by the muted
desperation of the “New Order.” But the question “What has changed?” is
still, when it refers to the culture, a baffling one. Surely, so great a
catastrophe, especially as it mostly occurred in villages among
villagers, can hardly have left the country unmoved, yet how far and how
permanently it has been moved is impossible to say. Emotions surface
extremely gradually, if extremely powerfully, in Indonesia: “The
crocodile is quick to sink,” they say, “but slow to come up.” Both
writings on Indonesian politics and those politics themselves are
permeated right now with the inconfidence derived from waiting for that
crocodile to come up.

In the history of comparable political seizures, however (and when one
looks at the history of the modern world, they are easy enough to find),
some outcomes seem more common than others. Perhaps the most common is a
failure of nerve, a constriction of the sense of possibility. Massive
internal bloodlettings like the American or the Spanish civil wars have
often subjected political life to the sort of muffled panic we associate
with psychic trauma more generally: obsession with signs, most of them
illusory, that “it is about to happen again”; perfection of elaborate
precautions, most of them symbolic, to see that it doesn’t; and
irremovable conviction, most of it visceral, that it is going to
anyway—all resting, perhaps, on the half-recognized desire that it do so
and to get it over with. For a society, as for an individual, an inner
catastrophe, especially when it occurs in the process of a serious
attempt to change, can be both a subtly addictive and a profoundly
rigidifying force.

This is particularly so (and here the analogy—which, as public disasters
refract through private lives, is not entirely an analogy—with
individual response continues) when the truth of what has happened is
obscured by convenient stories, and passions are left to flourish in the
dark. Accepted for what they were, as terrible as they were, the events
of 1965 could free the country from many of the illusions which
permitted them to happen, and most especially the illusion that the
Indonesian population is embarked as a body on a straight-line march to
modernity, or that, even guided by the Koran, the Dialectic, the Voice
in the Quiet, or Practical Reason, such a march is possible. Denied, by
means of another cooked-up ideological synthesis, the half-suppressed
memory of the events will perpetuate and infinitely widen the gulf
between the processes of government and the struggle for the real. At an
enormous cost, and one which need not have been paid, the Indonesians
would seem to an outsider to have now demonstrated to themselves with
convincing force the depth of their dissensus, ambivalence, and
disorientation. Whether the demonstration has in fact been convincing to
the insiders, for whom such revelations about themselves must inevitably
be terrifying, is another question; indeed, it is the central question
of Indonesian politics at this juncture of history. For all their
before-the-storm quality, the studies in the [Holt] volume contribute,
if not an answer, at least a sense of what the probabilities are.

However great a disruptive force the massacres may (or may not) have
been, the conceptual matrix within which the country has been moving
cannot have changed radically, if only because it is deeply embedded in
the realities of Indonesian social and economic structure, and they have
not. Java is still spectacularly overcrowded, the export of primary
products is still the main source of foreign exchange, there are still
as many islands, languages, religions, and ethnic groups as there ever
were (even, now that West New Guinea has been added, a few more), and
the cities are still full of intellectuals without places, the towns of
merchants without capital, and the villages of peasants without
land.¹²¹²

Lev’s lawyers, Abdullah’s reformers, Liddle’s politicians, Sartono’s
peasants, and Anderson’s functionaries, as well as the soldiers who now
police them, face the same range of problems with about the same range
of alternatives and the same stock of prejudices as they did before the
holocaust. Their frame of mind may be different—after such horrors it is
hard to believe that it is not—but the society within which they are
enclosed and the structures of meaning which inform it are largely the
same. Cultural interpretations of politics are powerful to the degree
that they can survive, in an intellectual sense, the events of politics;
and their ability to do that depends on the degree to which they are
well grounded sociologically, not on their inner coherence, their
rhetorical plausibility, or their aesthetic appeal. When they are
properly anchored, whatever happens reinforces them; when they are not,
whatever happens explodes them.

So what is written [in the Holt volume] is, if not predictive, still
testable. The worth of these essays—the authors of which may or may not
agree with my interpretation of their findings—will, in the long run, be
determined less by their fit to the facts from which they are derived,
though it is that which recommends them to our attention in the first
place, than by whether they illumine the future course of Indonesian
politics. As the consequences of the last decade appear in the next, we
shall begin to see whether what has been said here about Indonesian
culture is penetrating or wrongheaded, whether it enables us to construe
what happens in terms of it or leaves us straining for understanding
against the grain of what we thought was so. Meanwhile, we can only wait
for the crocodile along with everyone else, recalling, as a bar to the
sort of moral presumptuousness that neither Americans nor Indonesians
are at this time very well positioned to affect, what Jakob Burckhardt,
who perhaps deserves to be called the founder of thematic analysis, said
in 1860 about the dubious business of judging peoples:

It may be possible to indicate many contrasts and shades of difference
among different nations, but to strike the balance of the whole is not
given to human insight. The ultimate truth with respect to the
character, the conscience, and the guilt of a people remains for ever a
secret; if only for the reason that its defects have another side, where
they reappear as peculiarities or even as virtues. We must leave those
who find pleasure in passing sweeping censures on whole nations, to do
so as they like. The people of Europe can maltreat, but happily not
judge one another. A great nation, interwoven by its civilization, its
achievements, and its fortunes with the whole life of the modern world,
can afford to ignore both its advocates and its accusers. It lives on
with or without the approval of theorists.¹³¹³

[]

1 See C. Holt, ed., Culture and Politics in Indonesia (Ithaca, 1972), in
which the present essay first appeared as an “Afterword,” pp. 319–336.

2 Perhaps the foremost, as well as the most uncompromising, practitioner
of this paratactic approach to relating politics to culture is Nathan
Leites. See especially his A Study of Bolshevism (Glencoe, III., 1953),
and The Rules of the Game in Paris (Chicago, 1969).

3 Quoted (from Utusan Hindia) in B. Dahm, Sukarno and the Struggle for
Indonesian Independence (Ithaca, 1969), p. 39.

4 Quoted in L. Fischer, The Story of Indonesia (New York, 1959), p. 154.
For a similar statement from a public speech of Sukarno, see Dahm,
Sukarno and the Struggle, p. 200.

5 For an example, see H. Luethy, “Indonesia Confronted,” Encounter 25
(1965): 80–89; 26 (1966): 75–83, along with my comment “Are the Javanese
Mad?” and Luethy’s “Reply,” ibid., August 1966, pp. 86–90.

6 B. de Jouvenel, On Power (Boston, 1962).

7 The quotation is from Sukarno’s letters attacking traditionalist
Islam, written while he was in prison exile in Flores, Surat-surat Dari
Endeh, eleventh letter, August 18, 1936, in K. Goenadi and H. M.
Nasution, eds., Dibawah Bendera Revolusi 1 (Djakarta, 1959): 340.

8 For the history of Indonesian nationalism, on which my remarks here
are but passing commentary, see J. M. Pluvier, Overzicht van de
Ontwikkeling der Nationalistische Beweging in Indonesie in de Jaren 1930
tot 1942 (The Hague, 1953); A. K. Pringgodigdo, Sedjarah Pergerakan
Rakjat Indonesia (Djakarta, 1950); D. M. G. Koch, Om de Vrijheid
(Djakarta, 1950); Dahm, Sukarno and the Struggle; G. McT. Kahin,
Nationalism and Revolution in Indonesia (Ithaca, 1952); H. Benda, The
Crescent and the Rising Sun: Indonesian Islam under the Japanese
Occupation, 1942–1945 (The Hague, 1958); W. F. Wertheim, Indonesian
Society in Transition (The Hague, 1956).

9 For the state ideology of the Republic until the mid-sixties, see H.
Feith, “Dynamics of Guided Democracy,” in R. T. McVey, ed., Indonesia
(New Haven, 1963), pp. 309–409; for popular divisions, R. R. Jay,
Religion and Politics in Rural Central Java, Southeast Asia Studies,
Cultural Reports Series no. 12 (New Haven, 1963); G. W. Skinner, ed.,
Local, Ethnic and National Loyalties in Village Indonesia, Southeast
Asia Studies, Cultural Report Series no. 8 (New Haven, 1959); and R. W.
Liddle, Ethnicity, Party, and National Integration (New Haven, 1970).
The rather schizoid political atmosphere thus created can be sensed in
the debates of the constitutional convention of 1957–1958; see Tentang
Dasar Negara Republik Indonesia Dalam Konstituante, 3 vols. [Djakarta
(?), 1958(?)].

10 The death estimate is that of John Hughes, The End of Sukarno
(London, 1968), p. 189. Estimates range from 50,000 to a million; no one
really knows, and the killing was on so grand a scale that to debate
numbers seems obtuse. Hughes’ account of the coup, the massacres, and
the ascendency of Suharto, though not very analytic, is probably as
reliable and evenhanded as any. For other discussions, from varying
points of view, see R. Shaplen, Time Out of Hand (New York, 1969); D. S.
Lev, “Indonesia 1965: The Year of the Coup,” Asian Survey 6, no. 2
(1966): 103–110; W. F. Wertheim, “Indonesia Before and After the Untung
Coup,” Pacific Affairs 39 (1966): 115–127; B. Gunawan, Kudeta:
Staatsgreep in Djakarta (Meppel, 1968); J. M. van der Kroef,
“Interpretations of the 1965 Indonesian Coup: A Review of the
Literature,” Pacific Affairs 43, no. 4 (1970–1971): 557–577; E. Utrecht,
Indonesie’s Nieuwe Orde: Ontbinding en Herkolonisatie (Amsterdam, 1970);
H. P. Jones, Indonesia: The Possible Dream (New York, 1971); L. Rey,
“Dossier on the Indonesian Drama,” New Left Review (1966): 26–40; A. C.
Brackman, The Communist Collapse in Indonesia (New York, 1969). To my
mind, the literature on the coup, right, left, and center, has been
marred by obsessive concern with the exact roles of Sukarno and of the
Indonesian Communist Party in the immediate events of the plot (not
unimportant issues, but more important for understanding the moment than
for understanding the country), at the expense of its meaning for the
development of Indonesian political consciousness.

11 The fact that no one predicted the massacres has sometimes been
instanced as an example of the futility of social science. Many studies
did stress the enormous tensions and the potential for violence in
Indonesian society. Moreover, anyone who announced before the fact that
a quarter of a million or so people were about to be slaughtered in
three months of rice-field carnage would have been regarded, and
rightly, as having a rather warped mind. What this says about reason
faced with unreason is a complicated matter; but what it does not say is
that reason is powerless because not clairvoyant.

12 It should perhaps be remarked that the external parameters have also
not changed very much—China, Japan, the United States, and the Soviet
Union are still more or less where and what they were, and so, for that
matter, are the terms of trade. If so-called outside factors seem to
have been slighted in favor of so-called inside ones [in the Holt
volume], it is not because they are considered unimportant, but because
in order to have local effects they must first have local expressions,
and any attempt to trace them beyond such expressions to their sources
would, in studies of this scale, soon get out of hand.

13 J. Burckhardt, The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy (New
York, 1954); orig. (1860), p. 318.

Chapter 12/ Politics Past, Politics Present: Some Notes on the Uses of
Anthropology in Understanding the New States

[]

I

In recent years, the main meeting ground of the various branches of
learning which in some uncertain way make up the social sciences has
been the study of the so-called Third World: the forming nations and
tottering states of Asia, Africa, and Latin America. In this enigmatical
setting, anthropology, sociology, political science, history, economics,
psychology, as well as that oldest of our disciplines, soothsaying, have
found themselves in the unfamiliar position of dealing severally with
essentially the same body of data.

The experience has not always been a comfortable one. The meeting ground
has often turned into a battleground, and the lines of professional
demarcation have hardened: as Englishmen abroad are often more British
than in London, so economists abroad are often more econometrical than
at M.I.T. Then, too, a few of the more enthusiastic have abandoned their
professions almost altogether for a kind of Alexandrian eclecticism
which has produced some very strange hippogriffs indeed: Freud, Marx,
and Margaret Mead in one ungainly package.

But the general effect has certainly been salutary. The sense of
intellectual self-sufficiency, that peculiar conceptual and
methodological arrogance which comes from dealing too long and too
insistently with a pocket universe all one’s own (the American business
cycle; French party politics; class mobility in Sweden; the kinship
system of some up-country African tribe), and which is perhaps the most
formidable enemy of a general science of society, has been seriously,
and I think permanently, shaken. The closed society has been as
thoroughly exploded for most of those who have studied the new nations
as it has for most of those who live in them. It is coming at last to
dawn upon even the most isolationist-minded of such scholars that theirs
is not only a special science, but a special science which cannot even
function without a great deal of help from other special sciences
previously despised. Here, anyway, the notion that we are all members of
one another has made a certain measure of progress.

Among the more striking examples of this convergence from several
directions upon the same body of material is the revival of interest in
the structure and functioning of traditional states. In the past several
years the need to develop a general political science of preindustrial
societies in order to have, as the sociologist Frank Sutton has put it,
“a base point from which to understand the transitional societies which
crowd the present scene” has been felt with increasing intensity on a
wide variety of quarters.¹¹ As the quarters have been various, so too
have the responses. But Max Weber’s half-century-old essay on
patrimonialism in Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft is no longer the “isolated
monument” that Sutton, writing only a decade or so ago, then rightly
called it. It is now but one among a whole set of discourses, some more
monumental than others and a few too monumental altogether, on the
nature of government in, to have a word for them, peasant societies:
societies with too many resemblances to our own for us to stigmatize
them as primitive and too few for us to celebrate them as modern.

To simplify, there have been four major lines of attack developing over
the last decade or so on this question of the nature of traditional
politics.

First, there has been the revival, largely in the hands of Karl
Wittfogel, of Marx’s old notion of an Asiatic mode of production, now
interpreted to be hydraulic agriculture, and of a radically despotic
state—“total terror, total submission, total loneliness,” in Wittfogel’s
broadsheet rhetoric—regarded as causally reflective of it.²²

Second, there has been the work by social anthropologists, most of them
British and virtually all of them Africanists, on the so-called
segmentary states—states in which kinship groups and kinship loyalties
play a central role—and which, quite contrary to the monolithic view of
traditional states that emerges from the Wittfogel approach, sees such
states as delicate balances among scattered centers of semi-independent
power, now building up under the guidance of tribal myth and civic
ritual toward some apical point, now sliding away into clan jealousy,
local rivalry, and fraternal intrigue.³³

Third, there has been a renewed emphasis on what might be called
comparative feudalism, on the question of whether feudalism is an
historical category with one, itself rather unhomogeneous, instance, the
European, or a scientific category with many at least roughly similar
instances. Here, the motive figure is beyond doubt Marc Bloch, the depth
of whose impact upon the social sciences is still not fully appreciated,
even by many of those upon whom the impact has been exercised.⁴⁴ But
this interest is also, of course, the main continuation of the Weberian
tradition, and in the hands of a sociologist like Eisenstadt with his
interest in the role of bureaucracy in early empires, or of an economic
historian like Karl Polanyi with his interest in the political
management of commercial activity in such empires, it widens out beyond
feudalism proper to concern itself with the range of authority
structures found in societies in which feudalization is only one of a
number, but a limited number, of institutional possibilities.⁵⁵

And fourth, there has been the reconsideration among
prehistorians—archeologists mostly, but some orientalists and
ethnologists as well—of the size and scope of ancient states and of the
developmental stages through which those states seem to have passed.
Maya, Teotihuacan, Indus, Angkor, Madjapahit, Inca, Mesopotamia,
Egypt—all the magical names—stand less these days for glittering
bronze-age barbarisms born adult out of Gordon Childe’s “Urban
Revolution” and more for extended, gradualistic developmental cycles,
some of them similar, some of them different. Or, rather, they stand for
phases, momentary ones often, in such cycles; phases which may have been
both less grandiose than their legends proclaim or their architectural
remains seem at first glance to indicate, and more complexly related to
the material conditions upon which they rested than Marxist theorists,
even revisionist Marxist theorists, usually imagine.⁶⁶

Anthropologists have been deeply involved in all four of these lines of
attack upon the nature of government in peasant societies. Two of
them—the study of segmentary states and of the developmental cycles of
prehistorical states—have been almost exclusively anthropological. But
Wittfogel’s theories have had an enormous impact as well. We have had
applications of them by anthropologists to Tibet, the Valley of Mexico,
the Pueblos of the Southwestern United States, and certain parts of
Africa. The comparative-institutions approach has been less frequently
pursued, partly because Weber tends to frighten anthropologists, but his
fine Germanic hand can be seen quite clearly in a number of recent
studies of some of the more developed of black African states—Buganda,
Busoga, Fulani, Ethiopia, Ashanti.

In becoming thus involved, anthropologists have, as I have suggested,
been drawn willy-nilly into an enterprise far wider than the confines of
their own discipline and so find themselves faced with the unforeseen
question of what, qua anthropologists rather than as self-made
sociologists, historians, political scientists or whatever, they have to
offer to this wider enterprise. The easy answer to this, still preferred
in certain circles, is data, preferably anomalous data which will
demolish some sociologist’s high-wrought theory. But to accept that
answer is to reduce anthropology to a kind of spiteful ethnography,
capable, like some literary censor, of disapproving of intellectual
constructions but not of creating, or perhaps even of understanding,
any.

With respect to Professor Sutton’s large vision of “a general
comparative political science of pre-industrial societies,” I, for one,
think it can contribute more than that. And in order to indicate
(certainly not, in the space available to me here, to establish) what
sort of thing that “more” might be, I want to do two things which are
quintessentially anthropological: to discuss a curious case from a
distant land; and to draw from that case some conclusions of fact and
method more far-reaching than any such isolated example can possibly
sustain.

II

The distant land is Bali; the curious case the state as it existed there
during the nineteenth century. Though in formal terms part of the
Netherlands East Indies from, I suppose you would have to say, about
1750 on, Bali was in any realistic sense a part of the Dutch empire only
after the invasion of the Southern part of the island in 1906. For all
intents and purposes, the Balinese state in the nineteenth century was
an indigenous structure; and although, like any social institution, it
had changed over the course of the centuries—not the least as a result
of the Dutch presence in Java, it had done so but slowly and marginally.

To simplify my description of what, in fact, totally resists
simplification, I shall first discuss the cultural foundations of the
state—the beliefs and values, for the most part religious ones, which
animated it, gave it direction, meaning, and form; and second, I shall
discuss the social structural arrangements, the political instruments,
in terms of which it attempted, with but intermittent success, to
sustain such direction and achieve such form. This separation between
ideas and institutions will later turn out not to have been so merely
pragmatic as it looks, however, but to have been the very axis of my
argument.

In connection with the cultural foundations of the state, let me present
briefly three Balinese notions of what, speaking now in the ethnographic
present, supralocal politics are all about. The first of these I shall
call the doctrine of the exemplary center; the second, the concept of
sinking status; and the third, the expressive conception of politics—the
conviction that the principal instrumentalities of rule lie less in the
techniques of administration than in the arts of the theatre.

The doctrine of the exemplary center is in essence a theory of the
nature and basis of sovereignty. This theory holds that the
court-and-capital is at once a microcosm of supernatural order—“an
image,” as Robert Heine-Geldern has put it, “of the universe on a
smaller scale”—and the material embodiment of political order.⁷⁷ It is
not just the nucleus, the engine, or the pivot of the state: it is the
state.

And this curious equation of the seat of rule with the dominion of rule
is more than a passing metaphor, it is a statement of a ruling political
idea: namely, that by the mere act of providing a model, a paragon, a
faultless image of civilized existence, the court shapes the world
around it into at least a rough facsimile of its own excellence. The
ritual life of the court, and in fact the life of the court generally,
is thus paradigmatic, not merely reflective of social order. What it is
reflective of, as the priests declare, is the supernatural order, “the
timeless Indian world of the gods” upon which men should, in strict
proportion to their status, seek to pattern their lives.⁸⁸

The crucial task of legitimation, the reconciliation of this political
metaphysic with the actual distribution of power in classical Bali, was
effected by means of a myth; characteristically enough a colonizing
myth. In 1343, the armies of the great East Javanese kingdom of
Madjapahit were supposed to have defeated, near a place called Gelgel,
those of “the king of Bali,” a supernatural monster with the head of a
pig—a surpassing event in which the Balinese see the source of virtually
their entire civilization, even (as, with but a handful of exceptions,
they regard themselves as descendents of the Javanese invaders, not the
ur-Balinese defenders) of themselves. Like the myth of “The Founding
Fathers” in the United States, the myth of “The Madjapahit Conquest”
became the origin tale by means of which actual relations of command and
obedience were explained and justified.

Whatever scattered elements of genuine historicity this legend may have
aside (and I have in any case given only the most schematized summary of
what is a very involved and multiversioned tale indeed), it expresses in
the concrete images of a just-so story the Balinese view of their
political development. In Balinese eyes, the foundation of a Javanese
court at Gelgel (where, it is held, the palace was designed to mirror in
exact detail the palace of that most exemplary of exemplary centers,
Madjapahit itself) created not just a center of power—that had existed
before—but a standard of civilization. The Madjapahit Conquest was
considered the great watershed of Balinese history because it cut off
the ancient Bali of animal barbarism from the renascent Bali of
aesthetic elegance and liturgical splendor. The transfer of the capital
(and the dispatch of a Javanese noble, draped with magical
paraphernalia, to inhabit it) was the transfer of a civilization, the
establishment of a court which in the very act of reflecting divine
order generated human order.

This reflection and this ordering were not, however, conceived to have
maintained their purity and their force until the nineteenth century,
but rather to have clouded and weakened as time passed. Despite the fact
that they are both in a sense “colonial” myths, beginning with
settlement from more cultured foreign shores, the Balinese conception of
their political history does not, like the American, present a picture
of the forging of unity out of an original diversity, but the
dissolution of an original unity into a growing diversity; not a
relentless progress toward the good society, but a gradual fading from
view of a classic model of perfection.

This fading is conceived to have taken place both over space and through
time. The notion, certainly incorrect, is that during the Gelgel period
(from about 1300 to about 1700) Bali was ruled from a single capital,
but that after that period a series of revolts and fissions took place
leading to the establishment of capitals in each of the major regions as
lesser members of the royal house fled to them to set up shop as
exemplary rulers on their own. In turn, splinters from these splinters
led to tertiary capitals in the regions of the various secondary
capitals, and so on, if not quite ad infinitum, very nearly so.

Details aside, the final (that is, nineteenth century) result was an
acrobat’s pyramid of “kingdoms” of varying degrees of substantial
autonomy and effective power, the main lords of Bali holding the
paramount lord upon their shoulders and standing in turn upon the
shoulders of the lords whose status was derivative for their own as
theirs was from him, and so on down the line. The exemplary center among
exemplary centers was still Gelgel, or rather its direct heir,
Klungkung, its radiance dimming, naturally, as it diffused through this
progressively coarser medium.

More than that, however, its own luster weakened as its pristine
concentration of charisma, brought over as a package from Java, diffused
out into these lesser centers. The general picture is one of an overall
decline in status and spiritual power, not only of peripheral lines as
they move away from the core of the ruling class, but of the core itself
as the peripheral lines move away from it. Through the course of its
development the exemplary force of the once unitary Balinese state
weakened at its heart as it thinned at its edges. Or so the Balinese
think; and it is this dying-fire view of history, which permeates
actually into the very corners of Balinese society, that I refer to as
the concept of sinking status.

Yet this was not felt to be an inevitable deterioration, a predestined
decline from a golden age. For the Balinese, the decline was the way
history had happened to happen, not the way it had had to happen. And
the efforts of men, and especially of their spiritual and political
leaders, ought consequently to be directed neither toward reversing it
(which as events are incorrigible is impossible) nor celebrating it
(which as it amounted to a series of retreats from an ideal would be
pointless) but rather toward nullifying it, toward re-expressing
directly, immediately, and with the greatest possible force and
vividness the cultural paradigm by which the men of Gelgel and
Madjapahit had in their time guided their lives. As Gregory Bateson has
pointed out, the Balinese view of the past is not, in the proper sense
of the term, really historical at all. For all their explanatory
myth-making, the Balinese search the past not so much for the causes of
the present as for the standard by which to judge it, for the unchanging
pattern upon which the present ought properly to be modeled but, which
through accident, ignorance, indiscipline, or neglect, it so often fails
to follow.

This almost aesthetic correction of the present on the basis of what the
past had at one point been, the lords sought to effect through the
holding of great ceremonial tableaux. From the most petty to the most
high they were continuously trying to establish, each at his own level,
a more truly exemplary center, which if it could not match or even
approach Gelgel in brilliance (and a few of the more ambitious hoped
even for that) could at least seek to imitate it ritually and so
re-create, to some degree, the radiant image of civilization the classic
state had embodied and postclassic history had obscured.

The expressive nature of the Balinese state, and of the political life
it supported, was apparent through the whole of its known history, for
it was always pointed, not toward tyranny, whose systematic
concentration of power it was hopelessly incompetent to effect, not even
very methodically toward government, which it pursued indifferently and
even hesitantly, but rather toward spectacle, toward ceremony, toward
the public dramatization of the ruling obsessions of Balinese culture:
social inequality and status pride. It was a theatre-state in which the
kings and princes were the impresarios, the priests the directors, the
peasantry the supporting cast, stage crew, and audience. The stupendous
cremations, teeth-filings, temple dedications, the pilgrimages and blood
sacrifices, mobilizing hundreds, even thousands of people and great
quantities of wealth, were not means to political ends, they were the
ends themselves, they were what the state was for. Court ceremonialism
was the driving force of court politics. Mass ritual was not a device to
shore up the state; the state was a device for the enactment of mass
ritual. To govern was not so much to choose as to perform. Ceremony was
not form but substance. Power served pomp, not pomp power.

Turning to the social framework which was designed to support this
effort but in fact acted more to undercut it, I shall have to be even
more ruthless in reducing facts to their shadows, for classical Balinese
political institutions were about as complicated as such institutions
can get and still function. But the main point to grasp about the
Balinese state as a concrete structure of authority is that, far from
conducing toward the centralization of power, it conduced, and mightily,
toward its dispersion. Very few political elites can have as intensely
sought loyalty by means so ingeniously designed to produce treachery as
did the Balinese.

In the first place, the elite itself was, as I have indicated, not an
organized ruling class, but a crowd of intensely competitive sovereigns,
or rather would-be sovereigns. Even noble lineages, the various royal
houses which formed the various courts, were not solidary units but were
faction-ridden factions, collections of sublineages and sub-sublineages
each intent on weakening the others to its own profit.

In the second place, most effective government in the proper sense of
the term was local. Hamlets not only had written constitutions, popular
councils, and executive arms, but they resisted, quite effectively,
court participation in local affairs. Irrigation was in the hands of a
separate, also local, corporate body, of which there were hundreds over
the countryside; and rather than leading to the development of a
centralized bureaucracy to manage waterworks this system effectively
precluded the emergence of such a bureaucracy. Local lineages, temple
congregations, voluntary groups were equally autonomous, equally jealous
of their rights vis-à-vis both one another and the state.

In the third place, the structural ties between the state (that is, any
particular court) and this complex of local institutions (the “village,”
if you will) were themselves multiple and noncoordinate. The three main
obligations laid by the gentry on the peasantry—military-ritual support,
land rent, and taxation—were not fused but distributed among three
different sorts of ties. A man might well owe ritual and military
support to one lord, render rent to a second, and pay taxes to yet a
third. Even worse, such ties were not, for the most part, territorially
concentrated, so a man and his neighbor, who might well be his brother,
could, and often did, owe political allegiance to different lords.

But to break this off before we disappear into the enchanted woods
altogether, the point is that supralocal political organization in Bali
did not consist in a neat set of hierarchically organized sovereign
states, sharply demarcated from one another and engaged in “foreign
relations” across well-drawn frontiers. Still less did it consist in any
overall domination by a “single-centered apparatus state” under an
absolute despot, “hydraulic” or otherwise. What it consisted in was an
extended field of highly dissimilar political ties, thickening into
nodes of varying size and solidity at strategic points on the landscape
and then thinning out again to connect, in a marvelously convolute way,
virtually everything with everything else.

The struggle at each point in this diverse and mobile field was more for
men, for their deference, their support and their personal loyalty, than
it was for land. Political power was embodied less in property than in
people, was more a matter of the accumulation of prestige than of
territory. The disagreements among the various princedoms were virtually
never concerned with border problems but with delicate questions of
mutual status and most especially with right to mobilize particular
bodies of men, even particular men, for state ritual and (what was
really the same thing) warfare.

Korn relates an anecdote concerning South Celebes, where political
arrangements approximated those of Bali, which makes this point with the
grave irony of traditional wit.⁹⁹ The Dutch, who wanted, for the usual
administrative reasons, to get the boundary between two petty princedoms
straight once and for all, called in the princes concerned and asked
them where indeed the borders lay. Both agreed that the border of
princedom A lay at the furthest point from which a man could still see
the swamps, while the border of princedom B lay at the furthest point
from which a man could still see the sea. Had they, then, never fought
over the land in between, from which one could see neither swamp nor
sea? “Mijnheer,” one of the old princes replied, “we had much better
reasons to fight with one another than these shabby hills.”

In sum, nineteenth century Balinese politics can be seen as stretched
taut between two opposing forces; the centripetal one of state ritual
and the centrifugal one of state structure. On the one hand, there was
the unifying effect of mass ceremonial under the leadership of this or
that lord; on the other there was the intrinsically dispersive,
segmental character of the polity considered as a concrete social
institution, a power system, composed as it was of dozens of
independent, semi-independent, and quarter-independent rulers.

The first, the cultural element, came from the top down, the center
outward; the second, the power element, came from the bottom up and from
the periphery inward. As a result, the broader the scope to which
exemplary leadership aspired, the more fragile the political structure
supporting it, for the more it was forced to rest on alliance, intrigue,
cajolery and bluff. The lords, pulled on by the cultural ideal of the
consummately expressive state, strove constantly to extend their ability
to mobilize men and material so as to hold larger and more splendid
ceremonies and larger and more splendid temples and palaces in which to
hold them.

In so doing they were working directly against a form of political
organization whose natural tendency, especially under intensified
pressures for unification, was toward progressive fragmentation. But,
against the grain or not, they struggled with this paradox of cultural
megalomania and organizational pluralism to the very end, and not always
without some degree of temporary success. Had not the modern world, in
the form of Dutch battalions, at length caught up with them, they would,
no doubt, be struggling with it still.

III

To redeem, now, my promise to generalize beyond the data, let me make
two points in conclusion about the contribution of anthropology to a
general comparative political science of peasant societies.

The first is that distinguishing the cultural ambitions of traditional
states on the one hand and the social institutions in terms of which
these cultural ambitions were, usually quite incompletely, realized on
the other, makes for what we may call sociological realism. Professor
Sutton’s “base point” for understanding more recent developments becomes
less a kind of retrospective ideal type, a model constructed to account
for what its designer takes to be the more interesting features of the
present, and more a historical reality rooted in its own time and place;
the sort of thing out of which presents in the world, rather than merely
in books, grow.

And second, this increase in sociological realism makes it possible to
approach the central question in this area—what in fact are the
relationships between the way in which New State polities behave and the
way in which traditional ones behaved—without succumbing to either of
two equally misleading (and, at the moment, equally popular)
propositions: that contemporary states are the mere captives of their
pasts, re-enactments in thinly modern dress of archaic dramas; or that
such states have completely escaped their pasts, are absolute products
of an age which owes nothing to anything but itself.

On the first point, it is apparent that the Balinese data, if they are
as I say they are, support much better the segmentary state concept of
traditional polities as consisting of unstable pyramids of power
wreathed in symbols of a grandeur more wished for than achieved, than
they do the “Despotic Power—Total and not Benevolent” vision of
Wittfogel. But the question is not whether Wittfogel (who has been
uncautious enough to quote Bali in support of his arguments) has given
us a viable theory or not. I myself think not; but I don’t want to try
to counter assertions about China with facts about Bali. My argument is
merely that in separating, as any close ethnographic study of actual
traditional polities inevitably must separate, the ambitions of rulers,
the ideas and ideals which pull them on toward some consummating end,
from the social instrumentalities by means of which those ends are
sought, anthropology contributes to the realization that, in traditional
states as in modern ones, the reach of a politician is not quite the
same thing as his grasp.

Thus stated, my message may seem the usual negative one for which
anthropology is justly famous: “Not on Easter Island.” In fact, I think
the work on segmentary states, as well as that of the developmental
archeologists, promises to make, has already made, an important
contribution to a more just image of traditional polities, and along
precisely the lines I have indicated. What Evans-Pritchard did for the
Shilluk divine king (disentangled his ritual role from his political and
thus dissolved at least one African despotism into its true fragility)
and a host of scholars have done for the Maya (distinguished the
splendid religious edifice of the society from the rather more ordinary
sort of shifting cultivation community which underlay it, and thus
resolved the paradox of Byzantium in a jungle) is going to be done, I am
sure, for more and more traditional states with results which not only
will not be negative but will transform our whole conception of the
sources of power, the nature of authority, and the techniques of
administration in such states.¹⁰¹⁰

But, so far as the politics past, politics present question is
concerned, my second point is the more significant. The conceptual
separation of the ideas of order by which the actors in any polity are
guided and the institutional context within which they act makes it
possible to approach the issue of the relations between what once was
and what now is with more than reversible truisms—“There is nothing in
the present but the past”; “The past is a bucket of ashes”—to assist
one. More specifically, it makes it possible to distinguish the
ideological contribution to a contemporary state of the cultural
traditions to which it is heir from the organizational contribution to
such a state of the systems of government which preceded it, and to see
that the former, the ideological contribution, is, with some exceptions,
of much greater significance than the latter. As concrete governmental
structures, today’s Ghana, today’s Indonesia, or even today’s Morocco,
have but the most distant of relations with the institutions of the
Ashanti Confederation, the Javano-Balinese theatre-state, or that motley
collection of bodyguards and tax farmers, the Magrebine Makhzen. But as
embodiments of one or another view of what government and politics are
all about, the relation between traditional states and transitional ones
may be a great deal less distant than the borrowed vocabularies within
which Third World ideologies are usually stated might lead one to
believe.

As the cultural apparatus of a traditional state—the detailed myths, the
elaborate rituals, the high-wrought politesse—dissolves, as it has in
the majority of Third World states and doubtless will shortly in most of
the rest, it comes to be replaced by a rather more abstract, rather more
willed, and, in the formal sense of the term anyway, rather more
reasoned set of notions concerning the nature and purpose of politics.
Whether written down in a formal constitution, built into a new set of
governmental institutions, or puffed up into a universal creed (or, as
is not uncommon, all three), these notions, which I would call ideology
in the proper sense of the term, play a similar role to the
less-tutored, preideological ones they have succeeded. That is to say,
they provide a guide for political activity; an image by which to grasp
it, a theory by which to explain it, and a standard by which to judge
it. This carrying forward into a more self-conscious, or anyway more
explicit dimension, of what were once but established attitudes and
received conventions is one of the central features of what we have come
to call, half wistfully, half worriedly, “nation building.”

All this is not to say that the ideological frameworks within which the
Third World states operate are merely updated versions of the ideas and
ideals of the past. Their elites have clearly learned much from other,
quite nontraditional sources. Sukarno’s close-up observation of the
Japanese in action was probably the most revelatory experience of his
career; we can assume that Nkrumah read at least some of those tracts
his successors so demonstratively burned; and one has only to glance at
the political publics of either India or Algeria to see that neither
Harold Laski nor Jean-Paul Sartre have labored entirely in vain.

It is in fact just this confusion of the more recognizable voices of the
present with the stranger, but no less insistent voices of the past
which makes it so difficult to determine just what the politicians,
civilian or military, of any particular Third World state think they are
up to. At one moment they seem Jacobin beyond compare; at the next
haunted by ghosts as ancient and unshakable as the furies. At one moment
they seem to be so many self-taught Madisons and Jeffersons building
ingenious political contrivances such as have never before been seen on
land or sea; at the next, so many preening Mussolinis erecting inferior
imitations of the more comic-opera examples of European Fascism. At one
moment they seem confident possessors of a settled sense of direction,
full of hope and high purpose; at the next frantic opportunists, swept
by confusion, fear, and boundless self-hatred.

It will not do, however, either to plump for one or another side of
these several antinomies or merely to announce sagely that they are
antinomies, that both sides are indeed present and the situation is
complex. The mingled voices must be distinguished so that we can hear
what each of them is saying and assess the ideological climate, if not
with very great assurance at least with some definiteness and
circumstantiality.

In such an effort, the precise determination of the ideological
contribution of politics past to politics present—in the case at hand,
of exemplary leadership, waning charisma, and dramaturgical
statecraft—is an essential element. And for the providing of this
element, anthropology, to give one last rap on my drum, is ideally
placed. At least it is if it can now remember what, on a Pacific island,
it was so easy to forget: that it is not alone in the world.

[]

1 F. X. Sutton, “Representation and the Nature of Political Systems,”
Comparative Studies in Society and History 2 (1959): 1–10.

2 K. Wittfogel, Oriental Despotism (New Haven, 1957).

3 For a representative example of this line of thought, see A. Southall,
Alur Society (Cambridge, England, 1954).

4 R. Coulburn, ed., Feudalism in History (Princeton, 1956), presents a
useful review of such studies. For M. Bloch, see his Feudal Society
(Chicago, 1961).

5 S. M. Eisenstadt, The Political Systems of Empires (New York, 1963);
K. Polanyi, C. Arensberg, and H. Pearson, eds., Trade and Markets in
Early Empires (Glencoe, III., 1957).

6 For a survey and examination of such work, see R. Braidwood and G.
Willey, Courses toward Urban Life (New York, 1962). See also R. M.
Adams, The Evolution of Urban Society (New York / Chicago, 1966).

7 R. Heine-Geldern, “Conceptions of State and Kingship in Southeast
Asia,” Far Eastern Quarterly 2 (1942): 15–30.

8 J. L. Swellengrebel, Introduction in J. L. Swellengrebel et al., Bali:
Life, Thought and Ritual (The Hague/Bandung, 1960).

9 V. E. Korn, Het Adatrecht van Bali (The Hague, 1932), p. 440.

10 On the Shilluk, E. E. Evans-Pritchard, The Divine Kingship of the
Shilluk of the Nilotic Sudan (Oxford, 1948). The Maya discussion is more
scattered and still developing, but for a useful summary, see G. Willey.
“Mesoamerica,” in Braidwood and Willey, Courses toward Urban Life, pp.
84–101.

