PART II

Chapter 2/ The Impact of the Concept of Culture on the Concept of Man

[]

I

Toward the end of his recent study of the ideas used by tribal peoples,
La Pensée Sauvage, the French anthropologist Lévi-Strauss remarks that
scientific explanation does not consist, as we have been led to imagine,
in the reduction of the complex to the simple. Rather, it consists, he
says, in a substitution of a complexity more intelligible for one which
is less. So far as the study of man is concerned, one may go even
further, I think, and argue that explanation often consists of
substituting complex pictures for simple ones while striving somehow to
retain the persuasive clarity that went with the simple ones.

Elegance remains, I suppose, a general scientific ideal; but in the
social sciences, it is very often in departures from that ideal that
truly creative developments occur. Scientific advancement commonly
consists in a progressive complication of what once seemed a beautifully
simple set of notions but now seems an unbearably simplistic one. It is
after this sort of disenchantment occurs that intelligibility, and thus
explanatory power, comes to rest on the possibility of substituting the
involved but comprehensible for the involved but incomprehensible to
which Lévi-Strauss refers. Whitehead once offered to the natural
sciences the maxim “Seek simplicity and distrust it”; to the social
sciences he might well have offered “Seek complexity and order it.”

Certainly the study of culture has developed as though this maxim were
being followed. The rise of a scientific concept of culture amounted to,
or at least was connected with, the overthrow of the view of human
nature dominant in the Enlightenment—a view that, whatever else may be
said for or against it, was both clear and simple—and its replacement by
a view not only more complicated but enormously less clear. The attempt
to clarify it, to reconstruct an intelligible account of what man is,
has underlain scientific thinking about culture ever since. Having
sought complexity and, on a scale grander than they ever imagined, found
it, anthropologists became entangled in a tortuous effort to order it.
And the end is not yet in sight.

The Enlightenment view of man was, of course, that he was wholly of a
piece with nature and shared in the general uniformity of composition
which natural science, under Bacon’s urging and Newton’s guidance, had
discovered there. There is, in brief, a human nature as regularly
organized, as thoroughly invariant, and as marvelously simple as
Newton’s universe. Perhaps some of its laws are different, but there are
laws; perhaps some of its immutability is obscured by the trappings of
local fashion, but it is immutable.

A quotation that Lovejoy (whose magisterial analysis I am following
here) gives from an Enlightenment historian, Mascou, presents the
position with the useful bluntness one often finds in a minor writer:

The stage setting [in different times and places] is, indeed, altered,
the actors change their garb and their appearance; but their inward
motions arise from the same desires and passions of men, and produce
their effects in the vicissitudes of kingdoms and peoples.¹¹

Now, this view is hardly one to be despised; nor, despite my easy
references a moment ago to “overthrow,” can it be said to have
disappeared from contemporary anthropological thought. The notion that
men are men under whatever guise and against whatever backdrop has not
been replaced by “other mores, other beasts.”

Yet, cast as it was, the Enlightenment concept of the nature of human
nature had some much less acceptable implications, the main one being
that, to quote Lovejoy himself this time, “anything of which the
intelligibility, verifiability, or actual affirmation is limited to men
of a special age, race, temperament, tradition or condition is [in and
of itself] without truth or value, or at all events without importance
to a reasonable man.”²² The great, vast variety of differences among
men, in beliefs and values, in customs and institutions, both over time
and from place to place, is essentially without significance in defining
his nature. It consists of mere accretions, distortions even, overlaying
and obscuring what is truly human—the constant, the general, the
universal—in man.

Thus, in a passage now notorious, Dr. Johnson saw Shakespeare’s genius
to lie in the fact that “his characters are not modified by the customs
of particular places, unpractised by the rest of the world; by the
peculiarities of studies or professions, which can operate upon but
small numbers; or by the accidents of transient fashions or temporary
opinions.”³³ And Racine regarded the success of his plays on classical
themes as proof that “the taste of Paris . . . conforms to that of
Athens; my spectators have been moved by the same things which, in other
times, brought tears to the eyes of the most cultivated classes of
Greece.”⁴⁴

The trouble with this kind of view, aside from the fact that it sounds
comic coming from someone as profoundly English as Johnson or as French
as Racine, is that the image of a constant human nature independent of
time, place, and circumstance, of studies and professions, transient
fashions and temporary opinions, may be an illusion, that what man is
may be so entangled with where he is, who he is, and what he believes
that it is inseparable from them. It is precisely the consideration of
such a possibility that led to the rise of the concept of culture and
the decline of the uniformitarian view of man. Whatever else modern
anthropology asserts—and it seems to have asserted almost everything at
one time or another—it is firm in the conviction that men unmodified by
the customs of particular places do not in fact exist, have never
existed, and most important, could not in the very nature of the case
exist. There is, there can be, no backstage where we can go to catch a
glimpse of Mascou’s actors as “real persons” lounging about in street
clothes, disengaged from their profession, displaying with artless
candor their spontaneous desires and unprompted passions. They may
change their roles, their styles of acting, even the dramas in which
they play; but—as Shakespeare himself of course remarked—they are always
performing.

This circumstance makes the drawing of a line between what is natural,
universal, and constant in man and what is conventional, local, and
variable extraordinarily difficult. In fact, it suggests that to draw
such a line is to falsify the human situation, or at least to misrender
it seriously.

Consider Balinese trance. The Balinese fall into extreme dissociated
states in which they perform all sorts of spectacular activities—biting
off the heads of living chickens, stabbing themselves with daggers,
throwing themselves wildly about, speaking with tongues, performing
miraculous feats of equilibration, mimicking sexual intercourse, eating
feces, and so on—rather more easily and much more suddenly than most of
us fall asleep. Trance states are a crucial part of every ceremony. In
some, fifty or sixty people may fall, one after the other (“like a
string of firecrackers going off,” as one observer puts it), emerging
anywhere from five minutes to several hours later, totally unaware of
what they have been doing and convinced, despite the amnesia, that they
have had the most extraordinary and deeply satisfying experience a man
can have. What does one learn about human nature from this sort of thing
and from the thousand similarly peculiar things anthropologists
discover, investigate, and describe? That the Balinese are peculiar
sorts of beings, South Sea Martians? That they are just the same as we
at base, but with some peculiar, but really incidental, customs we do
not happen to have gone in for? That they are innately gifted or even
instinctively driven in certain directions rather than others? Or that
human nature does not exist and men are pure and simply what their
culture makes them?

It is among such interpretations as these, all unsatisfactory, that
anthropology has attempted to find its way to a more viable concept of
man, one in which culture, and the variability of culture, would be
taken into account rather than written off as caprice and prejudice, and
yet, at the same time, one in which the governing principle of the
field, “the basic unity of mankind,” would not be turned into an empty
phrase. To take the giant step away from the uniformitarian view of
human nature is, so far as the study of man is concerned, to leave the
Garden. To entertain the idea that the diversity of custom across time
and over space is not a mere matter of garb and appearance, of stage
settings and comedic masques, is to entertain also the idea that
humanity is as various in its essence as it is in its expression. And
with that reflection some well-fastened philosophical moorings are
loosed and an uneasy drifting into perilous waters begins.

Perilous, because if one discards the notion that Man with a capital
“M,” is to be looked for “behind,” “under,” or “beyond” his customs and
replaces it with the notion that man, uncapitalized, is to be looked for
“in” them, one is in some danger of losing sight of him altogether.
Either he dissolves, without residue, into his time and place, a child
and a perfect captive of his age, or he becomes a conscripted soldier in
a vast Tolstoian army, engulfed in one or another of the terrible
historical determinisms with which we have been plagued from Hegel
forward. We have had, and to some extent still have, both of these
aberrations in the social sciences—one marching under the banner of
cultural relativism, the other under that of cultural evolution. But we
also have had, and more commonly, attempts to avoid them by seeking in
culture patterns themselves the defining elements of a human existence
which, although not constant in expression, are yet distinctive in
character.

II

Attempts to locate man amid the body of his customs have taken several
directions, adopted diverse tactics; but they have all, or virtually
all, proceeded in terms of a single overall intellectual strategy: what
I will call, so as to have a stick to beat it with, the “stratigraphic”
conception of the relations between biological, psychological, social,
and cultural factors in human life. In this conception, man is a
composite of “levels,” each superimposed upon those beneath it and
underpinning those above it. As one analyzes man, one peels off layer
after layer, each such layer being complete and irreducible in itself,
revealing another, quite different sort of layer underneath. Strip off
the motley forms of culture and one finds the structural and functional
regularities of social organization. Peel off these in turn and one
finds the underlying psychological factors—“basic needs” or
what-have-you—that support and make them possible. Peel off
psychological factors and one is left with the biological
foundations—anatomical, physiological, neurological—of the whole edifice
of human life.

The attraction of this sort of conceptualization, aside from the fact
that it guaranteed the established academic disciplines their
independence and sovereignty, was that it seemed to make it possible to
have one’s cake and eat it. One did not have to assert that man’s
culture was all there was to him in order to claim that it was,
nonetheless, an essential and irreducible, even a paramount ingredient
in his nature. Cultural facts could be interpreted against the
background of noncultural facts without dissolving them into that
background or dissolving that background into them. Man was a
hierarchically stratified animal, a sort of evolutionary deposit, in
whose definition each level—organic, psychological, social, and
cultural—had an assigned and incontestable place. To see what he really
was, we had to superimpose findings from the various relevant
sciences—anthropology, sociology, psychology, biology—upon one another
like so many patterns in a moiré; and when that was done, the cardinal
importance of the cultural level, the only one distinctive to man, would
naturally appear, as would what it had to tell us, in its own right,
about what he really was. For the eighteenth century image of man as the
naked reasoner that appeared when he took his cultural costumes off, the
anthropology of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
substituted the image of man as the transfigured animal that appeared
when he put them on.

At the level of concrete research and specific analysis, this grand
strategy came down, first, to a hunt for universals in culture, for
empirical uniformities that, in the face of the diversity of customs
around the world, and over time, could be found everywhere in about the
same form, and, second, to an effort to relate such universals, once
found, to the established constants of human biology, psychology, and
social organization. If some customs could be ferreted out of the
cluttered catalogue of world culture as common to all local variants of
it, and if these could then be connected in a determinate manner with
certain invariant points of reference on the subcultural levels, then at
least some progress might be made toward specifying which cultural
traits are essential to human existence and which merely adventitious,
peripheral, or ornamental. In such a way, anthropology could determine
cultural dimensions of a concept of man commensurate with the dimensions
provided, in a similar way, by biology, psychology, or sociology.

In essence, this is not altogether a new idea. The notion of a consensus
gentium (a consensus of all mankind)—the notion that there are some
things that all men will be found to agree upon as right, real, just, or
attractive and that these things are, therefore, in fact right, real,
just, or attractive—was present in the Enlightenment and probably has
been present in some form or another in all ages and climes. It is one
of those ideas that occur to almost anyone sooner or later. Its
development in modern anthropology, however—beginning with Clark
Wissler’s elaboration in the 1920s of what he called “the universal
cultural pattern,” through Bronislaw Malinowski’s presentation of a list
of “universal institutional types” in the early forties, up to G. P.
Murdock’s elaboration of a set of “common-denominators of culture”
during and since World War II—added something new. It added the notion
that, to quote Clyde Kluckhohn, perhaps the most persuasive of the
consensus gentium theorists, “some aspects of culture take their
specific forms solely as a result of historical accidents; others are
tailored by forces which can properly be designated as universal.”⁵⁵
With this, man’s cultural life is split in two: part of it is, like
Mascou’s actors’ garb, independent of men’s Newtonian “inward motions”;
part is an emanation of those motions themselves. The question that then
arises is: Can this halfway house between the eighteenth and twentieth
centuries really stand?

Whether it can or not depends on whether the dualism between empirically
universal aspects of culture rooted in subcultural realities and
empirically variable aspects not so rooted can be established and
sustained. And this, in turn, demands (1) that the universals proposed
be substantial ones and not empty categories; (2) that they be
specifically grounded in particular biological, psychological, or
sociological processes, not just vaguely associated with “underlying
realities”; and (3) that they can convincingly be defended as core
elements in a definition of humanity in comparison with which the much
more numerous cultural particularities are of clearly secondary
importance. On all three of these counts it seems to me that the
consensus gentium approach fails; rather than moving toward the
essentials of the human situation it moves away from them.

The reason the first of these requirements—that the proposed universals
be substantial ones and not empty or near-empty categories—has not been
met is that it cannot be. There is a logical conflict between asserting
that, say, “religion,” “marriage,” or “property” are empirical
universals and giving them very much in the way of specific content, for
to say that they are empirical universals is to say that they have the
same content, and to say they have the same content is to fly in the
face of the undeniable fact that they do not. If one defines religion
generally and indeterminately—as man’s most fundamental orientation to
reality, for example—then one cannot at the same time assign to that
orientation a highly circumstantial content; for clearly what composes
the most fundamental orientation to reality among the transported
Aztecs, lifting pulsing hearts torn live from the chests of human
sacrifices toward the heavens, is not what comprises it among the stolid
Zuñi, dancing their great mass supplications to the benevolent gods of
rain. The obsessive ritualism and unbuttoned polytheism of the Hindus
express a rather different view of what the “really real” is really like
from the uncompromising monotheism and austere legalism of Sunni Islam.
Even if one does try to get down to less abstract levels and assert, as
Kluckhohn did, that a concept of the afterlife is universal, or as
Malinowski did, that a sense of Providence is universal, the same
contradiction haunts one. To make the generalization about an afterlife
stand up alike for the Confucians and the Calvinists, the Zen Buddhists
and the Tibetan Buddhists, one has to define it in most general terms,
indeed—so general, in fact, that whatever force it seems to have
virtually evaporates. So, too, with any notion of a sense of Providence,
which can include under its wing both Navajo notions about the relations
of gods to men and Trobriand ones. And as with religion, so with
“marriage,” “trade,” and all the rest of what A. L. Kroeber aptly called
“fake universals,” down to so seemingly tangible a matter as “shelter.”
That everywhere people mate and produce children, have some sense of
mine and thine, and protect themselves in one fashion or another from
rain and sun are neither false nor, from some points of view,
unimportant; but they are hardly very much help in drawing a portrait of
man that will be a true and honest likeness and not an unteneted “John
Q. Public” sort of cartoon.

My point, which should be clear and I hope will become even clearer in a
moment, is not that there are no generalizations that can be made about
man as man, save that he is a most various animal, or that the study of
culture has nothing to contribute toward the uncovering of such
generalizations. My point is that such generalizations are not to be
discovered through a Baconian search for cultural universals, a kind of
public-opinion polling of the world’s peoples in search of a consensus
gentium that does not in fact exist, and, further, that the attempt to
do so leads to precisely the sort of relativism the whole approach was
expressly designed to avoid. “Zuñi culture prizes restraint,” Kluckhohn
writes; “Kwakiutl culture encourages exhibitionism on the part of the
individual. These are contrasting values, but in adhering to them the
Zuñi and Kwakiutl show their allegiance to a universal value; the
prizing of the distinctive norms of one’s culture.”⁶⁶ This is sheer
evasion, but it is only more apparent, not more evasive, than
discussions of cultural universals in general. What, after all, does it
avail us to say, with Herskovits, that “morality is a universal, and so
is enjoyment of beauty, and some standard for truth,” if we are forced
in the very next sentence, as he is, to add that “the many forms these
concepts take are but products of the particular historical experience
of the societies that manifest them”?⁷⁷ Once one abandons
uniformitarianism, even if, like the consensus gentium theorists, only
partially and uncertainly, relativism is a genuine danger; but it can be
warded off only by facing directly and fully the diversities of human
culture, the Zuñi’s restraint and the Kwakiutl’s exhibitionism, and
embracing them within the body of one’s concept of man, not by gliding
past them with vague tautologies and forceless banalities.

Of course, the difficulty of stating cultural universals which are at
the same time substantial also hinders fulfillment of the second
requirement facing the consensus gentium approach, that of grounding
such universals in particular biological, psychological, or sociological
processes. But there is more to it than that: the “stratigraphic”
conceptualization of the relationships between cultural and noncultural
factors hinders such a grounding even more effectively. Once culture,
psyche, society, and organism have been converted into separate
scientific “levels,” complete and autonomous in themselves, it is very
hard to bring them back together again.

The most common way of trying to do so is through the utilization of
what are called “invariant points of reference.” These points are to be
found, to quote one of the most famous statements of this strategy—the
“Toward a Common Language for the Areas of the Social Sciences”
memorandum produced by Talcott Parsons, Kluckhohn, O. H. Taylor, and
others in the early forties—

in the nature of social systems, in the biological and psychological
nature of the component individuals, in the external situations in which
they live and act, in the necessity of coordination in social systems.
In [culture] . . . these “foci” of structure are never ignored. They
must in some way be “adapted to” or “taken account of.”

Cultural universals are conceived to be crystallized responses to these
unevadable realities, institutionalized ways of coming to terms with
them.

Analysis consists, then, of matching assumed universals to postulated
underlying necessities, attempting to show there is some goodness of fit
between the two. On the social level, reference is made to such
irrefragable facts as that all societies, in order to persist, must
reproduce their membership or allocate goods and services, hence the
universality of some form of family or some form of trade. On the
psychological level, recourse is had to basic needs like personal
growth—hence the ubiquity of educational institutions—or to panhuman
problems, like the Oedipal predicament—hence the ubiquity of punishing
gods and nurturant goddesses. Biologically, there is metabolism and
health; culturally, dining customs and curing procedures. And so on. The
tack is to look at underlying human requirements of some sort or other
and then to try to show that those aspects of culture that are universal
are, to use Kluckhohn’s figure again, “tailored” by these requirements.

The problem here is, again, not so much whether in a general way this
sort of congruence exists, but whether it is more than a loose and
indeterminate one. It is not difficult to relate some human institutions
to what science (or common sense) tells us are requirements for human
existence, but it is very much more difficult to state this relationship
in an unequivocal form. Not only does almost any institution serve a
multiplicity of social, psychological, and organic needs (so that to say
marriage is a mere reflex of the social need to reproduce, or that
dining customs are a reflex of metabolic necessities, is to court
parody), but there is no way to state in any precise and testable way
the interlevel relationships that are conceived to hold. Despite first
appearances, there is no serious attempt here to apply the concepts and
theories of biology, psychology, or even sociology to the analysis of
culture (and, of course, not even a suggestion of the reverse exchange)
but merely a placing of supposed facts from the cultural and subcultural
levels side by side so as to induce a vague sense that some kind of
relationship between them—an obscure sort of “tailoring”—obtains. There
is no theoretical integration here at all but a mere correlation, and
that intuitive, of separate findings. With the levels approach, we can
never, even by invoking “invariant points of reference,” construct
genuine functional interconnections between cultural and noncultural
factors, only more or less persuasive analogies, parallelisms,
suggestions, and affinities.

However, even if I am wrong (as, admittedly, many anthropologists would
hold) in claiming that the consensus gentium approach can produce
neither substantial universals nor specific connections between cultural
and noncultural phenomena to explain them, the question still remains
whether such universals should be taken as the central elements in the
definition of man, whether a lowest-common-denominator view of humanity
is what we want anyway. This is, of course, now a philosophical
question, not as such a scientific one; but the notion that the essence
of what it means to be human is most clearly revealed in those features
of human culture that are universal rather than in those that are
distinctive to this people or that is a prejudice we are not necessarily
obliged to share. Is it in grasping such general facts—that man has
everywhere some sort of “religion”—or in grasping the richness of this
religious phenomenon or that—Balinese trance or Indian ritualism, Aztec
human sacrifice or Zuñi rain-dancing—that we grasp him? Is the fact that
“marriage” is universal (if it is) as penetrating a comment on what we
are as the facts concerning Himalayan polyandry, or those fantastic
Australian marriage rules, or the elaborate bride-price systems of Bantu
Africa? The comment that Cromwell was the most typical Englishman of his
time precisely in that he was the oddest may be relevant in this
connection, too: it may be in the cultural particularities of people—in
their oddities—that some of the most instructive revelations of what it
is to be generically human are to be found; and the main contribution of
the science of anthropology to the construction—or reconstruction—of a
concept of man may then lie in showing us how to find them.

III

The major reason why anthropologists have shied away from cultural
particularities when it came to a question of defining man and have
taken refuge instead in bloodless universals is that, faced as they are
with the enormous variation in human behavior, they are haunted by a
fear of historicism, of becoming lost in a whirl of cultural relativism
so convulsive as to deprive them of any fixed bearings at all. Nor has
there not been some occasion for such a fear: Ruth Benedict’s Patterns
of Culture, probably the most popular book in anthropology ever
published in this country, with its strange conclusion that anything one
group of people is inclined toward doing is worthy of respect by
another, is perhaps only the most outstanding example of the awkward
positions one can get into by giving oneself over rather too completely
to what Marc Bloch called “the thrill of learning singular things.” Yet
the fear is a bogey. The notion that unless a cultural phenomenon is
empirically universal it cannot reflect anything about the nature of man
is about as logical as the notion that because sickle-cell anemia is,
fortunately, not universal, it cannot tell us anything about human
genetic processes. It is not whether phenomena are empirically common
that is critical in science—else why should Becquerel have been so
interested in the peculiar behavior of uranium?—but whether they can be
made to reveal the enduring natural processes that underly them. Seeing
heaven in a grain of sand is not a trick only poets can accomplish.

In short, we need to look for systematic relationships among diverse
phenomena, not for substantive identities among similar ones. And to do
that with any effectiveness, we need to replace the “stratigraphic”
conception of the relations between the various aspects of human
existence with a synthetic one; that is, one in which biological,
psychological, sociological, and cultural factors can be treated as
variables within unitary systems of analysis. The establishment of a
common language in the social sciences is not a matter of mere
coordination of terminologies or, worse yet, of coining artificial new
ones; nor is it a matter of imposing a single set of categories upon the
area as a whole. It is a matter of integrating different types of
theories and concepts in such a way that one can formulate meaningful
propositions embodying findings now sequestered in separate fields of
study.

In attempting to launch such an integration from the anthropological
side and to reach, thereby, a more exact image of man, I want to propose
two ideas. The first of these is that culture is best seen not as
complexes of concrete behavior patterns—customs, usages, traditions,
habit clusters—as has, by and large, been the case up to now, but as a
set of control mechanisms—plans, recipes, rules, instructions (what
computer engineers call “programs”)—for the governing of behavior. The
second idea is that man is precisely the animal most desperately
dependent upon such extragenetic, outside-the-skin control mechanisms,
such cultural programs, for ordering his behavior.

Neither of these ideas is entirely new, but a number of recent
developments, both within anthropology and in other sciences
(cybernetics, information theory, neurology, molecular genetics) have
made them susceptible of more precise statement as well as lending them
a degree of empirical support they did not previously have. And out of
such reformulations of the concept of culture and of the role of culture
in human life comes, in turn, a definition of man stressing not so much
the empirical commonalities in his behavior, from place to place and
time to time, but rather the mechanisms by whose agency the breadth and
indeterminateness of his inherent capacities are reduced to the
narrowness and specificity of his actual accomplishments. One of the
most significant facts about us may finally be that we all begin with
the natural equipment to live a thousand kinds of life but end in the
end having lived only one.

The “control mechanism” view of culture begins with the assumption that
human thought is basically both social and public—that its natural
habitat is the house yard, the marketplace, and the town square.
Thinking consists not of “happenings in the head” (though happenings
there and elsewhere are necessary for it to occur) but of a traffic in
what have been called, by G. H. Mead and others, significant
symbols—words for the most part but also gestures, drawings, musical
sounds, mechanical devices like clocks, or natural objects like
jewels—anything, in fact, that is disengaged from its mere actuality and
used to impose meaning upon experience. From the point of view of any
particular individual, such symbols are largely given. He finds them
already current in the community when he is born, and they remain, with
some additions, subtractions, and partial alterations he may or may not
have had a hand in, in circulation after he dies. While he lives he uses
them, or some of them, sometimes deliberately and with care, most often
spontaneously and with ease, but always with the same end in view: to
put a construction upon the events through which he lives, to orient
himself within “the ongoing course of experienced things,” to adopt a
vivid phrase of John Dewey’s.

Man is so in need of such symbolic sources of illumination to find his
bearings in the world because the nonsymbolic sort that are
constitutionally ingrained in his body cast so diffused a light. The
behavior patterns of lower animals are, at least to a much greater
extent, given to them with their physical structure; genetic sources of
information order their actions within much narrower ranges of
variation, the narrower and more thoroughgoing the lower the animal. For
man, what are innately given are extremely general response capacities,
which, although they make possible far greater plasticity, complexity,
and, on the scattered occasions when everything works as it should,
effectiveness of behavior, leave it much less precisely regulated. This,
then, is the second face of our argument: Undirected by culture
patterns—organized systems of significant symbols—man’s behavior would
be virtually ungovernable, a mere chaos of pointless acts and exploding
emotions, his experience virtually shapeless. Culture, the accumulated
totality of such patterns, is not just an ornament of human existence
but—the principal basis of its specificity—an essential condition for
it.

Within anthropology some of the most telling evidence in support of such
a position comes from recent advances in our understanding of what used
to be called the descent of man: the emergence of Homo sapiens out of
his general primate background. Of these advances three are of critical
importance: (1) the discarding of a sequential view of the relations
between the physical evolution and the cultural development of man in
favor of an overlap or interactive view; (2) the discovery that the bulk
of the biological changes that produced modern man out of his most
immediate progenitors took place in the central nervous system and most
especially in the brain; (3) the realization that man is, in physical
terms, an incomplete, an unfinished, animal; that what sets him off most
graphically from nonmen is less his sheer ability to learn (great as
that is) than how much and what particular sorts of things he has to
learn before he is able to function at all. Let me take each of these
points in turn.

The traditional view of the relations between the biological and the
cultural advance of man was that the former, the biological, was for all
intents and purposes completed before the latter, the cultural, began.
That is to say, it was again stratigraphic: Man’s physical being
evolved, through the usual mechanisms of genetic variation and natural
selection, up to the point where his anatomical structure had arrived at
more or less the status at which we find it today; then cultural
development got under way. At some particular stage in his phylogenetic
history, a marginal genetic change of some sort rendered him capable of
producing and carrying culture, and thenceforth his form of adaptive
response to environmental pressures was almost exclusively cultural
rather than genetic. As he spread over the globe, he wore furs in cold
climates and loin cloths (or nothing at all) in warm ones; he didn’t
alter his innate mode of response to environmental temperature. He made
weapons to extend his inherited predatory powers and cooked foods to
render a wider range of them digestible. Man became man, the story
continues, when, having crossed some mental Rubicon, he became able to
transmit “knowledge, belief, law, morals, custom” (to quote the items of
Sir Edward Tylor’s classical definition of culture) to his descendants
and his neighbors through teaching and to acquire them from his
ancestors and his neighbors through learning. After that magical moment,
the advance of the hominids depended almost entirely on cultural
accumulation, on the slow growth of conventional practices, rather than,
as it had for ages past, on physical organic change.

The only trouble is that such a moment does not seem to have existed. By
the most recent estimates the transition to the cultural mode of life
took the genus Homo several million years to accomplish; and stretched
out in such a manner, it involved not one or a handful of marginal
genetic changes but a long, complex, and closely ordered sequence of
them.

In the current view, the evolution of Homo sapiens—modern man—out of his
immediate presapiens background got definitely under way nearly four
million years ago with the appearance of the now famous
Australopithecines—the so-called ape men of southern and eastern
Africa—and culminated with the emergence of sapiens himself only some
one to two or three hundred thousand years ago. Thus, as at least
elemental forms of cultural, or if you wish protocultural, activity
(simple toolmaking, hunting, and so on) seem to have been present among
some of the Australopithecines, there was an overlap of, as I say, well
over a million years between the beginning of culture and the appearance
of man as we know him today. The precise dates—which are tentative and
which further research may later alter in one direction or another—are
not critical; what is critical is that there was an overlap and that it
was a very extended one. The final phases (final to date, at any rate)
of the phylogenetic history of man took place in the same grand
geological era—the so-called Ice Age—as the initial phases of his
cultural history. Men have birthdays, but man does not.

What this means is that culture, rather than being added on, so to
speak, to a finished or virtually finished animal, was ingredient, and
centrally ingredient, in the production of that animal itself. The slow,
steady, almost glacial growth of culture through the Ice Age altered the
balance of selection pressures for the evolving Homo in such a way as to
play a major directive role in his evolution. The perfection of tools,
the adoption of organized hunting and gathering practices, the
beginnings of true family organization, the discovery of fire, and, most
critically, though it is as yet extremely difficult to trace it out in
any detail, the increasing reliance upon systems of significant symbols
(language, art, myth, ritual) for orientation, communication, and
self-control all created for man a new environment to which he was then
obliged to adapt. As culture, step by infinitesimal step, accumulated
and developed, a selective advantage was given to those individuals in
the population most able to take advantage of it—the effective hunter,
the persistent gatherer, the adept toolmaker, the resourceful
leader—until what had been a small-brained, protohuman Australopithecus
became the large-brained fully human Homo sapiens. Between the cultural
pattern, the body, and the brain, a positive feedback system was created
in which each shaped the progress of the other, a system in which the
interaction among increasing tool use, the changing anatomy of the hand,
and the expanding representation of the thumb on the cortex is only one
of the more graphic examples. By submitting himself to governance by
symbolically mediated programs for producing artifacts, organizing
social life, or expressing emotions, man determined, if unwittingly, the
culminating stages of his own biological destiny. Quite literally,
though quite inadvertently, he created himself.

Though, as I mentioned, there were a number of important changes in the
gross anatomy of genus Homo during this period of his crystallization—in
skull shape, dentition, thumb size, and so on—by far the most important
and dramatic were those that evidently took place in the central nervous
system; for this was the period when the human brain, and most
particularly the forebrain, ballooned into its present top-heavy
proportions. The technical problems are complicated and controversial
here; but the main point is that though the Australopithecines had a
torso and arm configuration not drastically different from our own, and
a pelvis and leg formation at least well-launched toward our own, they
had cranial capacities hardly larger than those of the living apes—that
is to say, about a third to a half of our own. What sets true men off
most distinctly from protomen is apparently not overall bodily form but
complexity of nervous organization. The overlap period of cultural and
biological change seems to have consisted in an intense concentration on
neural development and perhaps associated refinements of various
behaviors—of the hands, bipedal locomotion, and so on—for which the
basic anatomical foundations—mobile shoulders and wrists, a broadened
ilium, and so on—had already been securely laid. In itself, this is
perhaps not altogether startling; but, combined with what I have already
said, it suggests some conclusions about what sort of animal man is that
are, I think, rather far not only from those of the eighteenth century
but from those of the anthropology of only ten or fifteen years ago.

Most bluntly, it suggests that there is no such thing as a human nature
independent of culture. Men without culture would not be the clever
savages of Golding’s Lord of the Flies thrown back upon the cruel wisdom
of their animal instincts; nor would they be the nature’s noblemen of
Enlightenment primitivism or even, as classical anthropological theory
would imply, intrinsically talented apes who had somehow failed to find
themselves. They would be unworkable monstrosities with very few useful
instincts, fewer recognizable sentiments, and no intellect: mental
basket cases. As our central nervous system—and most particularly its
crowning curse and glory, the neocortex—grew up in great part in
interaction with culture, it is incapable of directing our behavior or
organizing our experience without the guidance provided by systems of
significant symbols. What happened to us in the Ice Age is that we were
obliged to abandon the regularity and precision of detailed genetic
control over our conduct for the flexibility and adaptability of a more
generalized, though of course no less real, genetic control over it. To
supply the additional information necessary to be able to act, we were
forced, in turn, to rely more and more heavily on cultural sources—the
accumulated fund of significant symbols. Such symbols are thus not mere
expressions, instrumentalities, or correlates of our biological,
psychological, and social existence; they are prerequisites of it.
Without men, no culture, certainly; but equally, and more significantly,
without culture, no men.

We are, in sum, incomplete or unfinished animals who complete or finish
ourselves through culture—and not through culture in general but through
highly particular forms of it: Dobuan and Javanese, Hopi and Italian,
upper-class and lower-class, academic and commercial. Man’s great
capacity for learning, his plasticity, has often been remarked, but what
is even more critical is his extreme dependence upon a certain sort of
learning: the attainment of concepts, the apprehension and application
of specific systems of symbolic meaning. Beavers build dams, birds build
nests, bees locate food, baboons organize social groups, and mice mate
on the basis of forms of learning that rest predominantly on the
instructions encoded in their genes and evoked by appropriate patterns
of external stimuli: physical keys inserted into organic locks. But men
build dams or shelters, locate food, organize their social groups, or
find sexual partners under the guidance of instructions encoded in flow
charts and blueprints, hunting lore, moral systems and aesthetic
judgments: conceptual structures molding formless talents.

We live, as one writer has neatly put it, in an “information gap.”
Between what our body tells us and what we have to know in order to
function, there is a vacuum we must fill ourselves, and we fill it with
information (or misinformation) provided by our culture. The boundary
between what is innately controlled and what is culturally controlled in
human behavior is an ill-defined and wavering one. Some things are, for
all intents and purposes, entirely controlled intrinsically: we need no
more cultural guidance to learn how to breathe than a fish needs to
learn how to swim. Others are almost certainly largely cultural; we do
not attempt to explain on a genetic basis why some men put their trust
in centralized planning and others in the free market, though it might
be an amusing exercise. Almost all complex human behavior is, of course,
the interactive, nonadditive outcome of the two. Our capacity to speak
is surely innate; our capacity to speak English is surely cultural.
Smiling at pleasing stimuli and frowning at unpleasing ones are surely
in some degree genetically determined (even apes screw up their faces at
noxious odors); but sardonic smiling and burlesque frowning are equally
surely predominantly cultural, as is perhaps demonstrated by the
Balinese definition of a madman as someone who, like an American, smiles
when there is nothing to laugh at. Between the basic ground plans for
our life that our genes lay down—the capacity to speak or to smile—and
the precise behavior we in fact execute—speaking English in a certain
tone of voice, smiling enigmatically in a delicate social situation—lies
a complex set of significant symbols under whose direction we transform
the first into the second, the ground plans into the activity.

Our ideas, our values, our acts, even our emotions, are, like our
nervous system itself, cultural products—products manufactured, indeed,
out of tendencies, capacities, and dispositions with which we were born,
but manufactured nonetheless. Chartres is made of stone and glass. But
it is not just stone and glass; it is a cathedral, and not only a
cathedral, but a particular cathedral built at a particular time by
certain members of a particular society. To understand what it means, to
perceive it for what it is, you need to know rather more than the
generic properties of stone and glass and rather more than what is
common to all cathedrals. You need to understand also—and, in my
opinion, most critically—the specific concepts of the relations among
God, man, and architecture that, since they have governed its creation,
it consequently embodies. It is no different with men: they, too, every
last one of them, are cultural artifacts.

IV

Whatever differences they may show, the approaches to the definition of
human nature adopted by the Enlightenment and by classical anthropology
have one thing in common: they are both basically typological. They
endeavor to construct an image of man as a model, an archetype, a
Platonic idea or an Aristotelian form, with respect to which actual
men—you, me, Churchill, Hitler, and the Bornean headhunter—are but
reflections, distortions, approximations. In the Enlightenment case, the
elements of this essential type were to be uncovered by stripping the
trappings of culture away from actual men and seeing what then was
left—natural man. In classical anthropology, it was to be uncovered by
factoring out the commonalities in culture and seeing what then
appeared—consensual man. In either case, the result is the same as that
which tends to emerge in all typological approaches to scientific
problems generally: the differences among individuals and among groups
of individuals are rendered secondary. Individuality comes to be seen as
eccentricity, distinctiveness as accidental deviation from the only
legitimate object of study for the true scientist: the underlying,
unchanging, normative type. In such an approach, however elaborately
formulated and resourcefully defended, living detail is drowned in dead
stereotype: we are in quest of a metaphysical entity, Man with a capital
“M,” in the interests of which we sacrifice the empirical entity we in
fact encounter, man with a small “m.”

The sacrifice is, however, as unnecessary as it is unavailing. There is
no opposition between general theoretical understanding and
circumstantial understanding, between synoptic vision and a fine eye for
detail. It is, in fact, by its power to draw general propositions out of
particular phenomena that a scientific theory—indeed, science itself—is
to be judged. If we want to discover what man amounts to, we can only
find it in what men are: and what men are, above all other things, is
various. It is in understanding that variousness—its range, its nature,
its basis, and its implications—that we shall come to construct a
concept of human nature that, more than a statistical shadow and less
than a primitivist dream, has both substance and truth.

It is here, to come round finally to my title, that the concept of
culture has its impact on the concept of man. When seen as a set of
symbolic devices for controlling behavior, extrasomatic sources of
information, culture provides the link between what men are
intrinsically capable of becoming and what they actually, one by one, in
fact become. Becoming human is becoming individual, and we become
individual under the guidance of cultural patterns, historically created
systems of meaning in terms of which we give form, order, point, and
direction to our lives. And the cultural patterns involved are not
general but specific—not just “marriage” but a particular set of notions
about what men and women are like, how spouses should treat one another,
or who should properly marry whom; not just “religion” but belief in the
wheel of karma, the observance of a month of fasting, or the practice of
cattle sacrifice. Man is to be defined neither by his innate capacities
alone, as the Enlightenment sought to do, nor by his actual behaviors
alone, as much of contemporary social science seeks to do, but rather by
the link between them, by the way in which the first is transformed into
the second, his generic potentialities focused into his specific
performances. It is in man’s career, in its characteristic course, that
we can discern, however dimly, his nature, and though culture is but one
element in determining that course, it is hardly the least important. As
culture shaped us as a single species—and is no doubt still shaping
us—so too it shapes us as separate individuals. This, neither an
unchanging subcultural self nor an established cross-cultural consensus,
is what we really have in common.

Oddly enough—though on second thought, perhaps not so oddly—many of our
subjects seem to realize this more clearly than we anthropologists
ourselves. In Java, for example, where I have done much of my work, the
people quite flatly say, “To be human is to be Javanese.” Small
children, boors, simpletons, the insane, the flagrantly immoral, are
said to be ndurung djawa, “not yet Javanese.” A “normal” adult capable
of acting in terms of the highly elaborate system of etiquette,
possessed of the delicate aesthetic perceptions associated with music,
dance, drama, and textile design, responsive to the subtle promptings of
the divine residing in the stillnesses of each individual’s
inward-turning consciousness, is sampun djawa, “already Javanese,” that
is, already human. To be human is not just to breathe; it is to control
one’s breathing, by yogalike techniques, so as to hear in inhalation and
exhalation the literal voice of God pronouncing His own name—“hu Allah.”
It is not just to talk, it is to utter the appropriate words and phrases
in the appropriate social situations in the appropriate tone of voice
and with the appropriate evasive indirection. It is not just to eat; it
is to prefer certain foods cooked in certain ways and to follow a rigid
table etiquette in consuming them. It is not even just to feel but to
feel certain quite distinctively Javanese (and essentially
untranslatable) emotions—“patience,” “detachment,” “resignation,”
“respect.”

To be human here is thus not to be Everyman; it is to be a particular
kind of man, and of course men differ: “Other fields,” the Javanese say,
“other grasshoppers.” Within the society, differences are recognized,
too—the way a rice peasant becomes human and Javanese differs from the
way a civil servant does. This is not a matter of tolerance and ethical
relativism, for not all ways of being human are regarded as equally
admirable by far; the way the local Chinese go about it is, for example,
intensely dispraised. The point is that there are different ways; and to
shift to the anthropologist’s perspective now, it is in a systematic
review and analysis of these—of the Plains Indian’s bravura, the Hindu’s
obsessiveness, the Frenchman’s rationalism, the Berber’s anarchism, the
American’s optimism (to list a series of tags I should not like to have
to defend as such)—that we shall find out what it is, or can be, to be a
man.

We must, in short, descend into detail, past the misleading tags, past
the metaphysical types, past the empty similarities to grasp firmly the
essential character of not only the various cultures but the various
sorts of individuals within each culture, if we wish to encounter
humanity face to face. In this area, the road to the general, to the
revelatory simplicities of science, lies through a concern with the
particular, the circumstantial, the concrete, but a concern organized
and directed in terms of the sort of theoretical analyses that I have
touched upon—analyses of physical evolution, of the functioning of the
nervous system, of social organization, of psychological process, of
cultural patterning, and so on—and, most especially, in terms of the
interplay among them. That is to say, the road lies, like any genuine
Quest, through a terrifying complexity.

“Leave him alone for a moment or two,” Robert Lowell writes, not as one
might suspect of the anthropologist but of that other eccentric inquirer
into the nature of man, Nathaniel Hawthorne.

                                 Leave him alone for a moment or two,

                                 and you’ll see him with his head

                                 bent down, brooding, brooding,

                                 eyes fixed on some chip,

                                 some stone, some common plant,

                                 the commonest thing,

                                 as if it were the clue.

                                 The disturbed eyes rise,

                                 furtive, foiled, dissatisfied

                                 from meditation on the true

                                 and insignificant.⁸⁸

Bent over his own chips, stones, and common plants, the anthropologist
broods, too, upon the true and insignificant, glimpsing in it, or so he
thinks, fleetingly and insecurely, the disturbing, changeful image of
himself.

[]

1 A. O. Lovejoy, Essays in the History of Ideas (New York, 1960), p.
173.

2 Ibid., p. 80.

3 “Preface to Shakespeare,” Johnson on Shakespeare (London, 1931), pp.
11–12.

4 From the Preface to Iphigénie.

5 A. L. Kroeber, ed., Anthropology Today (Chicago. 1953). p. 516.

6 C. Kluckhohn, Culture and Behavior (New York, 1962), p. 280.

7 M. J. Herskovits, Cultural Anthropology (New York, 1955), p. 364.

8 Reprinted with permission of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Inc., and Faber
& Faber, Ltd., from “Hawthorne,” in For the Union Dead, p. 39. Copyright
© 1964 by Robert Lowell.

Chapter 3/ The Growth of Culture and the Evolution of Mind

[]

            The statement “the mind is its own place,” as theorists
might construe it, is not true, for the mind is not even a metaphorical
“place.” On the contrary, the chessboard, the platform, the scholar’s
desk, the judge’s bench, the lorry-driver’s seat, the studio and the
football field are among its places. These are where people work and
play stupidly or intelligently. “Mind” is not the name of another
person, working or frolicking behind an impenetrable screen; it is not
the name of another place where work is done or games are played; and it
is not the name of another tool with which work is done, or another
appliance with which games are played.

GILBERT RYLE

I

In the intellectual history of the behavioral sciences the concept of
“mind” has played a curious double role. Those who have regarded the
development of such sciences as involving a rectilinear extension of the
methods of physical science into the realm of the organic have used it
as a devil word, the referent of which was all those methods and
theories which failed to measure up to a rather heroic ideal of
“objectivism.” Terms such as insight, understanding, conceptual
thinking, image, idea, feeling, reflection, fantasy, and so on, have
been stigmatized as mentalistic, “i.e., contaminated with the
subjectivity of consciousness,” and the appeal to them castigated as a
lamentable failure of scientific nerve.¹¹ But those who have, on the
contrary, regarded the move from a physical to an organic, and most
especially to a human, subject matter as implying far-reaching revisions
in theoretical approach and research procedure have tended to use “mind”
as a cautionary concept, one intended more to point to defects in
understanding than to repair them, more to stress the limits of positive
science than to extend them. For such thinkers its main function has
been to give a vaguely defined but intuitively valid expression to their
settled conviction that human experience has important dimensions of
order which physical theory (and, pari passu, psychological and social
theories modeled on physical theory) omits to consider. Sherrington’s
image of “naked mind”—“all that counts in life. Desire, zest, truth,
love, knowledge, values”—going “in our spatial world more ghostly than a
ghost,” serves as an epitome of this position, as Pavlov’s reported
practice of levying fines on any of his students who so much as uttered
mentalistic words in his laboratory does of the opposite.²²

In fact, with some exceptions, the term “mind” has not functioned as a
scientific concept at all but as a rhetorical device, even when its use
has been forbidden. More exactly, it has acted to communicate—and
sometimes to exploit—a fear rather than to define a process, a fear of
subjectivism on the one hand and of mechanism on the other. “Even when
fully aware of the nature of anthropomorphic subjectivism and its
dangers,” Clark Hull warns us solemnly, “the most careful and
experienced thinker is likely to find himself a victim to its
seductions,” and urges as a “prophylaxis” the strategy of viewing all
behavior as if it were produced by a dog, an albino rat, or, safest of
all, a robot.³³ While, for the opposition, Gordon Allport professes to
see a threat to human dignity in such an approach, complaining that “the
models we have been following lack the long-range orientation which is
the essence of morality . . . . An addiction to machines, rats, or
infants leads us to overplay those features of human behavior that are
peripheral, signal-oriented, or genetic [and] to underplay those
features that are central, future-oriented, or symbolic.”⁴⁴ In the face
of such contradictory descriptions of the specter that is haunting the
study of man, it is small wonder that a recent group of psychologists,
torn between their wish to present a convincing analysis of the
directional aspects of human behavior and to meet scientific canons of
objectivity, found themselves tempted by the rather desperate stratagem
of referring to themselves as “subjective behaviorists.”⁵⁵

So far as the concept of mind is concerned, this state of affairs is
extremely unfortunate because an extraordinarily useful notion and one
for which there is no precise equivalent, save perhaps the archaism
“psyche,” is turned into a shibboleth. It is even more unfortunate
because the fears which have so crippled the term are largely baseless,
the dying echoes of the great mock civil war between materialism and
dualism generated by the Newtonian revolution. Mechanism, as Ryle has
said, is a bogey, because the fear of it rests on the assumption that it
is somehow contradictory to say that one and the same occurrence is
governed by mechanical laws and moral principles, as though a golfer
cannot at once conform to the laws of ballistics, obey the rules of
golf, and play with elegance.⁶⁶ But subjectivism is a bogey too, for the
fear of it rests on the equally peculiar assumption that because I
cannot know what you dreamed of last night, thought of while memorizing
a string of nonsense syllables, or feel about the doctrine of infant
damnation unless you choose to tell me, any theorizing I may do about
the role such mental facts play in your behavior must be based on a
false “anthropomorphic” analogy from what I know or think I know, about
the role they play in mine. Lashley’s tart comment that “metaphysicians
and theologians have spent so many years weaving fairy tales about
[mind] that they have come to believe one another’s phantasies,” is
inaccurate only in that it neglects to note that a great many behavioral
scientists have been engaged in the same sort of collective autism.⁷⁷

One of the most frequently suggested methods for rehabilitating mind as
a useful scientific concept is to transform it into a verb or
participle, “Mind is minding, the reaction of an organism as a whole as
a coherent unit . . . [a view which] releases us from the verbal bondage
of a sterile and paralyzing metaphysics, and sets us free to sow and
reap in a field what will bear fruit.”⁸⁸ But this “cure” involves
falling in with the school bench story that “a noun is a word that names
a person, place, or thing,” which was not true in the first place. The
use of nouns as dispositional terms—i.e., words denoting capacities and
propensities rather than entities or activities—is actually a standard
and indispensable practice in English, both natural and scientific.⁹⁹ If
“mind” is to go, “faith,” “hope,” and “charity” will have to go with it,
as well as “cause,” “force,” and “gravitation” and “motive,” “role,” and
“culture.” “Mind is minding” may be all right, “science is sciencing” at
least bearable.¹⁰¹⁰ But “superego is superegoing” is a little awkward.
Even more important, although it is true that part of the fog of
confusion which has arisen around the concept of mind is a result of a
false analogy with nouns which do name persons, places, or things, it
mainly springs from much deeper sources than the merely linguistic.
Consequently, making it into a verb is no real protection at all against
“a sterile and paralyzing metaphysics.” Like mechanists, subjectivists
are men of infinite resource, and an occult activity may simply be
substituted for an occult entity, as in the case, for example, of
“introspecting.”

From the scientific point of view, to identify mind with behavior, “the
reaction of the organism as a whole,” is to render it as uselessly
redundant as to identify it with an entity “more ghostly than a ghost.”
The notion that it is more defensible to transform a reality into
another reality than to transform it into an unreality is not correct: a
rabbit disappears just as completely when he is magically changed into a
horse as he does when he is changed into a centaur. “Mind” is a term
denoting a class of skills, propensities, capacities, tendencies,
habits; it refers in Dewey’s phrase to an “active and eager background
which lies in wait and engages whatever comes its way.”¹¹¹¹ And, as
such, it is neither an action nor a thing, but an organized system of
dispositions which finds its manifestation in some actions and some
things. As Ryle has pointed out, if a clumsy man trips accidentally, we
do not regard it proper to ascribe his actions to the workings of his
mind, but if a clown trips on purpose, we do feel it proper to say this:

The cleverness of the clown may be exhibited in his tripping and
tumbling. He trips and tumbles just as clumsy people do, except that he
trips and tumbles on purpose and after much rehearsal and at the golden
moment and where the children can see him and so as not to hurt himself.
The spectators applaud his skill at seeming clumsy, but what they
applaud is not some extra hidden performance executed “in his head.” It
is his visible performance that they admire, but they admire it not for
being an effect of any hidden internal causes but for being an exercise
of skill. Now a skill is not an act. It is therefore neither a
witnessable nor an unwitnessable act. To recognize that a performance is
an exercise of a skill is indeed to appreciate it in the light of a
factor which could not be separately recorded by a camera. But the
reason why the skill exercised in a performance cannot be separately
recorded by a camera is not that it is an occult or ghostly happening,
but that it is not a happening at all. It is a disposition, or complex
of dispositions, and a disposition is a factor of the wrong logical type
to be seen or unseen, recorded or unrecorded. Just as the habit of
talking loudly is not itself loud or quiet, since it is not the sort of
term of which “loud” or “quiet” can be predicated, or just as a
susceptibility to headaches is for the same reason not itself
unendurable or endurable, so the skills, tastes, and bents which are
exercised in overt or internal operations are not themselves overt or
internal, witnessable or unwitnessable.¹²¹²

A similar argument applies to objects; we would not refer, save in a
metaphorical way, to the legendary burned pig the Chinese produced by
accidentally setting fire to his house as “cooked,” even though he ate
it, because it did not result from the exercise of a mental capability
called “knowledge of cooking.” But we would so refer to the second such
pig the now-educated Chinese produced by deliberately burning down his
house again, because it did result from such a capability, no matter how
crude. Such judgments, being empirical, may be wrong; a man may have
really tripped when we thought he was only clowning, or a pig really
been cooked when we thought it merely burned. But the point is that when
we attribute mind to an organism, we are talking about neither the
organism’s actions nor its products per se, but about its capacity and
its proneness, its disposition, to perform certain kinds of actions and
produce certain kinds of products, a capacity and a proneness we of
course infer from the fact that he does sometimes perform such actions
and produce such products. There is nothing extramundane about this; it
merely indicates that a language lacking dispositional terms would make
the scientific description and analysis of human behavior
extraordinarily difficult, and severely cripple its conceptual
development, in the same way that a language, such as the Arapesh, in
which you must enumerate by saying “one, two, two and one, one dog
(i.e., ‘four’), one dog and one, one dog and two, one dog and two and
one, two dogs, . . . etc.,” cripples mathematical development by making
counting so troublesome that people find it such an effort to go beyond
two dogs and two dogs and two dogs (i.e., “twenty-four”) that they refer
to all larger quantities as “a lot.”¹³¹³

Further, within such a general conceptual framework it is possible to
discuss the biological, psychological, sociological, and cultural
determinants of man’s mental life concurrently without making any
reductionist hypotheses at all. This is because a capacity for
something, or a proneness to do something, not being an entity or a
performance, is simply not susceptible to reduction. In the case of
Ryle’s clown, I could say, no doubt incorrectly, that his tumbling was
reducible to a chain of conditioned reflexes, but I could not say that
his skill was so reducible, because by his skill I only mean to say that
he can tumble. For “the clown can tumble,” it is possible, if
simplistic, to write “(this organism) can (produce the described reflex
series),” but it is possible to get the “can” out of the sentence only
by replacing it with “is able to,” “has the capacity to,” etc., which is
not a reduction but merely an immaterial shift from a verbal to an
adjectival or nounal form. All one can do in the analysis of skills is
to show the way in which they are (or are not) dependent upon various
factors such as nervous system complexity, repressed desires to exhibit,
the existence of social institutions such as circuses, or the presence
of a cultural tradition of mimicking clumsiness for the purposes of
satire. Once dispositional predicates are admitted into scientific
description they are not eliminated by shifts in the “level” of
description employed. And, with the recognition of this fact, a whole
range of pseudoproblems, false issues, and unrealistic fears can simply
be set aside.

In perhaps no area of inquiry is such an avoidance of manufactured
paradoxes more useful than that of the study of mental evolution.
Burdened in the past by almost all the classic anthropological
fallacies—ethnocentrism, an overconcern with human uniqueness,
imaginatively reconstructed history, a superorganic concept of culture,
a priori stages of evolutionary change—the whole search for the origins
of human mentality has tended to fall into disrepute, or at any rate to
be neglected. But legitimate questions—and how man came to have his mind
is a legitimate question—are not invalidated by misconceived answers. So
far as anthropology is concerned, at least, one of the most important
advantages of a dispositional answer to the question, “What is mind?” is
that it permits us to reopen a classic issue without reviving classic
controversies.

II

Over the past half century, two views of the evolution of the human
mind, both inadequate, have been current. The first is the thesis that
the sort of human thought processes Freud called “primary”—substitution,
reversal, condensation, and so on—are phylogenetically prior to those he
called “secondary”—directed, logically ordered, reasoning, and so
on.¹⁴¹⁴ Within the confines of anthropology, this thesis has been based
on the assumption that it is possible simply to identify patterns of
culture and modes of thought.¹⁵¹⁵ On such an assumption, groups of
people lacking the cultural resources of modern science which have been,
at least in certain contexts, so effectively employed in directive
reasoning in the West are considered ipso facto to lack the very
capacity for intellection these resources serve; as though the
confinement of the Arapesh to combinations of “one,” “two,” and “dog”
were a result rather than a cause of their lack of mathematical
facility. If one then adds to this argument the invalid empirical
generalization that tribal peoples employ whatever meager culture
resources they do have for intellection less frequently, less
persistently, and less circumspectly than do Western peoples, the
proposition that primary process thinking proceeds secondary process
thinking phylogenetically needs only the final mistake of viewing tribal
peoples as primitive forms of humanity, “living fossils,” to complete
it.¹⁶¹⁶

It was in reaction to this tissue of errors that the second view of
human mental evolution arose, namely, that not only is the existence of
the human mind in essentially its modern form a prerequisite for the
acquisition of culture, but the growth of culture in itself has been
without any significance for mental evolution:

The bird gave up a pair of walking limbs to acquire wings. It added a
new faculty by transforming part of an old one. . . . The airplane, on
the contrary, gave men a new faculty without diminishing or even
impairing any of those they had previously possessed. It led to no
visible bodily changes, no alterations of mental capacity.¹⁷¹⁷

But, in turn, this argument implies two corollaries, one of which, the
doctrine of the psychic unity of mankind, has found increasing empirical
substantiation as anthropological research has proceeded, but the other
of which, the “critical point” theory of the appearance of culture, has
become increasingly tenuous. The doctrine of the psychic unity of
mankind, which so far as I am aware, is today not seriously questioned
by any reputable anthropologist, is but the direct contradictory of the
primitive mentality argument; it asserts that there are no essential
differences in the fundamental nature of the thought process among the
various living races of man. If the existence of a modern type of mind
is held to be prerequisite to the acquisition of culture, the universal
possession of culture by all contemporary human groups, of course, makes
of the psychic unity doctrine a simple tautology; but whether genuinely
tautological or not, it is a proposition for whose empirical validity
the ethnographic and psychological evidence is altogether
overwhelming.¹⁸¹⁸

As for the critical point theory of the appearance of culture, it
postulates that the development of the capacity for acquiring culture
was a sudden, all-or-none type of occurrence in the phylogeny of the
primates.¹⁹¹⁹ At some specific moment in the new unrecoverable history
of hominidization a portentous, but in genic or anatomical terms
probably quite minor, organic alteration took place—presumably in
cortical structure—in which an animal whose parents had not been
disposed “to communicate, to learn and to teach, to generalize from the
endless chain of discrete feelings and attitudes” was so disposed and
“therewith he began to be able to act as a receiver and transmitter and
begin the accumulation that is culture.”²⁰²⁰ With him culture was born,
and, once born, set on its own course so as to grow wholly independently
of the further organic evolution of man. The whole process of the
creation of modern man’s capacity for producing and using culture, his
most distinctive mental attribute, is conceptualized as one of a
marginal quantitative change giving rise to a radical qualitative
difference, as when water, reduced degree by degree without any loss of
fluidity suddenly freezes at 0°C., or when a taxiing plane gains
sufficient speed to launch itself into flight.²¹²¹

But we are talking of neither water nor airplanes, and the question is
can the sharp line between enculturated man and nonenculturated non-man
that this view implies in fact be drawn, or, if we must have analogies,
would not a more historical one, such as the unbroken gradual rise of
modern out of medieval England, be more apt. Within the physical branch
of anthropology, the doubt that one can talk about the appearance of man
“as if he had suddenly been promoted from colonel to brigadier general,
and had a date of rank” has grown with increasing rapidity as the
Australopithecine fossils originally of South Africa but now quite
widely found, have come to be placed more and more in the hominid
line.²²²² These fossils, which date from the upper Pliocene and lower
Pleistocene periods of three or four million years ago, show a striking
mosaic of primitive and advanced morphological characteristics, in which
the most outstanding features are a pelvis and leg formation strikingly
similar to that of modern man and a cranial capacity hardly larger than
that of living apes.²³²³ Although the initial tendency was to regard
this conjunction of a “manlike” bipedal locomotive system and an
“apelike” brain as indicating that the Australopithecines represented an
aberrant and ill-fated line of development separate from both hominids
and pongids, the contemporary consensus follows Howells’ conclusion that
“the first hominids were small-brained, newly bipedal, protoaustralopith
hominoids, and that what we have always meant by ‘man’ represents later
forms of this group with secondary adaptations in the direction of large
brains and modified skeletons of the same form.”²⁴²⁴

Now, these more-or-less erect, small-brained hominids, their hands freed
from locomotion, manufactured tools and probably hunted small animals.
But that they could have had a developed culture comparable to that of,
say, the Australian aborigine or possessed language in the modern sense
of the term with 500 cubic centimeters of brain is unlikely.²⁵²⁵ In the
Australopithecines we seem to have, therefore, an odd sort of “man” who
evidently was capable of acquiring some elements of culture—simple
toolmaking, sporadic “hunting,” and perhaps some system of communication
more advanced than that of contemporary apes and less advanced than that
of true speech—but not others, a state of affairs which casts fairly
serious doubt on the viability of the “critical point” theory.²⁶²⁶ In
fact, as the Homo sapiens brain is about three times as large as that of
the Australopithecines, the greater part of human cortical expansion has
followed, not preceded, the “beginning” of culture, a rather
inexplicable circumstance if the capacity for culture is considered to
have been the unitary outcome of a quantitatively slight but
qualitatively metastatic change of the freezing-of-water sort.²⁷²⁷ Not
only has it now become misleading to employ the appointment of rank
image for the appearance of man, but “it is equally doubtful whether we
should any longer talk in terms of the ‘appearance of culture,’ as if
culture, too, along with ‘man,’ had suddenly leaped into existence.”²⁸²⁸

As paradox is a sign of antecedent error, the fact that one of its
corollaries seems to be valid while the other does not suggests that the
thesis which holds mental evolution and cultural accumulation to be two
wholly separate processes, the first having been essentially completed
before the second began, is itself incorrect. And if this is the case,
it becomes necessary to find some way in which we can rid ourselves of
such a thesis without at the same time undermining the doctrine of
psychic unity, in whose absence “we should have to consign most of
history, anthropology and sociology to the scrap heap and begin over
again with a psychosomatic genetic interpretation of man and his
varieties.”²⁹²⁹ We need to be able both to deny any significant
relationship between (group) cultural achievement and innate mental
capacity in the present, and to affirm such a relationship in the past.

The means by which to accomplish this oddly two-headed task lies in what
may appear to be a simple technical trick, but is actually an important
methodological reorientation, the choice of a more finely graduated time
scale in terms of which to discriminate the stages of evolutionary
change which have produced Homo sapiens out of an Eocene protohominoid.
Whether one sees the appearance of the capacity for culture as a
more-or-less abrupt, instantaneous occurrence, or a slowly moving,
continuous development, obviously depends, at least in part, on the size
of the elementary units in one’s time scale; for a geologist, measuring
by eons, the whole evolution of the primates may look like an
undifferentiated qualitative burst. In fact, the argument against the
critical point theory might be more precisely phrased in terms of a
complaint that it derives from an inappropriate choice of time scale, a
time scale whose basal intervals are too large for a refined analysis of
recent evolutionary history, in the same way as a biologist foolish
enough to study human maturation with decades as his interval would see
adulthood as a sudden transformation of childhood and miss adolescence
altogether.

A good example of such a cavalier approach to temporal considerations is
implicit in what is probably the most frequent kind of scientific data
invoked in support of the “difference in kind rather than difference in
degree” view of human culture; the comparison of man with his closest
living relatives, the pongids, and particularly the chimpanzee. Man can
talk, can symbolize, can acquire culture, this argument goes, but the
chimpanzee (and, by extension, all less-endowed animals) cannot.
Therefore, man is unique in this regard, and insofar as mentality is
concerned “we are confronted by a series of leaps, not an ascending
continuum.”³⁰³⁰ But this overlooks the fact that, although the pongids
may be man’s closest relatives, “close” is an elastic term and, given a
realistic time scale from the evolutionary point of view, they are
really not so close at all, last common ancestor being at the very least
an upper Pliocene (and at the very most an upper Oligocene) ape and
phyletic differentiation having proceeded with ever-increasing rapidity
since that time. The fact that chimpanzees do not talk is both
interesting and important, but to draw from that fact the conclusion
that speech is an all-or-nothing-at-all phenomenon is to collapse
anywhere from one to forty million years into a single instant of time
and lose the whole pre-sapiens hominid line as surely as our biologist
lost adolescence. Interspecific comparison of living animals is, if
handled with care, a legitimate and, in fact, indispensable device for
deducing general evolutionary trends; but in the same way that the
finite wave length of light limits the discrimination possible in
physical measurements, so the fact that the closest living relatives of
man are at best pretty far removed cousins (not ancestors) limits the
degree of refinement in the measure of evolutionary change in the
hominoid line when one confines oneself entirely to contrasts between
extant forms.³¹³¹

If, on the contrary, we spread hominid phylogeny out along a more
appropriate time scale, training our attention on what seems to have
happened in the “human” line since the radiation of the hominoids, and
in particular since the emergence of Australopithecus toward the end of
the Pliocene, a subtler analysis of the evolutionary growth of mind is
made possible. Most crucially, it then becomes apparent that not only
was cultural accumulation under way well before organic development
ceased, but that such accumulation very likely played an active role in
shaping the final stages of that development. Though it is apparently
true enough that the invention of the airplane led to no visible bodily
changes, no alterations of (innate) mental capacity, this was not
necessarily the case for the pebble tool or the crude chopper, in whose
wake seems to have come not only more erect stature, reduced dentition,
and a more thumb-dominated hand, but the expansion of the human brain to
its present size.³²³² Because tool manufacture puts a premium on manual
skill and foresight, its introduction must have acted to shift selection
pressures so as to favor the rapid growth of the forebrain as, in all
likelihood, did the advances in social organization, communication, and
moral regulation which there is reason to believe also occurred during
this period of overlap between cultural and biological change. Nor were
such nervous system changes merely quantitative; alterations in the
interconnections among neurons and their manner of functioning may have
been of even greater importance than the simple increase in their
number. Details aside, however—and the bulk of them remain to be
determined—the point is that the innate, generic constitution of modern
man (what used, in a simpler day, to be called “human nature”) now
appears to be both a cultural and a biological product in that “it is
probably more correct to think of much of our structure as a result of
culture rather than to think of men anatomically like ourselves slowly
discovering culture.”³³³³

The Pleistocene period, with its rapid and radical variations in
climate, land formations, and vegetation, has long been recognized to be
a period in which conditions were ideal for the speedy and efficient
evolutionary development of man; now it seems also to have been a period
in which a cultural environment increasingly supplemented the natural
environment in the selection process so as to further accelerate the
rate of hominid evolution to an unprecedented speed. The Ice Age appears
not to have been merely a time of receding brow ridges and shrinking
jaws, but a time in which were forged nearly all those characteristics
of man’s existence which are most graphically human: his thoroughly
encephelated nervous system, his incest-taboo-based social structure,
and his capacity to create and use symbols. The fact that these
distinctive features of humanity emerged together in complex interaction
with one another rather than serially as for so long supposed is of
exceptional importance in the interpretation of human mentality, because
it suggests that man’s nervous system does not merely enable him to
acquire culture, it positively demands that he do so if it is going to
function at all. Rather than culture acting only to supplement, develop,
and extend organically based capacities logically and genetically prior
to it, it would seem to be ingredient to those capacities themselves. A
cultureless human being would probably turn out to be not an
intrinsically talented though unfulfilled ape, but a wholly mindless and
consequently unworkable monstrosity. Like the cabbage it so much
resembles, the Homo sapiens brain, having arisen within the framework of
human culture, would not be viable outside of it.³⁴³⁴

In fact, this type of reciprocally creative relationship between somatic
and extrasomatic phenomena seems to have been of crucial significance
during the whole of the primate advance. That any (living or extinct)
infrahominid primates can be said to possess true culture—in the
narrowed sense of “an ordered system of meaning and symbols . . . in
terms of which individuals define their world, express their feelings
and make their judgments”—is, of course, extremely doubtful.³⁵³⁵ But
that apes and monkeys are such through-and-through social creatures as
to be unable to achieve emotional maturity in isolation, to acquire a
great many of their most important performance capacities through
imitative learning, and to develop distinctive, intraspecifically
variable collective social traditions which are transmitted as a
nonbiological heritage from generation to generation is now well
established.³⁶³⁶ As DeVore remarks in summary of the available material,
“Primates literally have a ‘social brain’.”³⁷³⁷ Thus, well before it was
influenced by cultural forces as such, the evolution of what eventually
developed into the human nervous system was positively shaped by social
ones.³⁸³⁸

On the other hand, however, a denial of a simple independence of
sociocultural and biological processes in pre-Homo sapiens man does not
imply a rejection of the doctrine of psychic unity, because phyletic
differentiation within the hominid line effectively ceased with the
terminal Pleistocene spread of Homo sapiens over nearly the whole world
and the extinction of whatever other Homo species may have been in
existence at that time. Thus, although some minor evolutionary changes
have no doubt occurred since the rise of modern man, all living peoples
form part of a single polytypical species and, as such, vary
anatomically and physiologically within a very narrow range.³⁹³⁹ The
combination of weakened mechanisms of reproductive isolation, an
extended period of individual sexual immaturity, and the accumulation of
culture to the point where its importance as an adaptive factor almost
wholly dominated its role as a selective one, produced such an extreme
deceleration of the hominid rate of evolution that the development of
any significant variation in innate mental capacity among human
subgroups seems to have been precluded. With the unequivocal triumph of
Homo sapiens and the cessation of the glaciations, the link between
organic and cultural change was, if not severed, at least greatly
weakened. Since that time organic evolution in the human line has slowed
to a walk, while the growth of culture had continued to proceed with
ever-increasing rapidity. It is, therefore, unnecessary to postulate
either a discontinuous, “difference-in-kind” pattern of human evolution
or a nonselective role for culture during all phases of hominid
development in order to preserve the empirically established
generalization that “as far as their [inborn] capacity to learn,
maintain, transmit, and transform culture is concerned, different groups
of Homo sapiens must be regarded as equally competent.”⁴⁰⁴⁰ Psychic
unity may no longer be a tautology, but it is still a fact.

III

One of the more encouraging—if strangely delayed—developments in the
behavioral sciences is the current attempt of physiological psychology
to arouse itself from its long enthrallment with the wonders of the
reflex arc. The conventional picture of a sensory impulse making its way
through a maze of synapses to a motor nerve culmination is coming to be
revised, a quarter century after its most illustrious proponent pointed
out that it was inadequate to explain the integrative aspects of the
behavior of a sparrow or a sheep dog, much less that of a man.⁴¹⁴¹
Sherrington’s solution was a spectral mind to pull things together (as
Hull’s was a no less mysterious automatic switchboard).⁴²⁴² But today
the stress is upon a more verifiable construct: the concept of rhythmic,
spontaneous, centrally proceeding pattern of nervous activity upon which
peripheral stimulus configurations are superimposed and out of which
authoritative effector commands emerge. Advancing under the banner of
“an active organism,” and supported by the closed circuit anatomizing of
Cayal and de No,⁴³⁴³ this new persuasion emphasizes the way in which the
ongoing processes both of the brain and subordinate neuronal aggregates
select precepts, fix experiences, and order responses so as to produce a
delicately modulated pattern of behavior:

The working of the central nervous system is a hierarchic affair in
which functions at the higher levels do not deal directly with the
ultimate structural units, such as neurons or motor units, but operate
by activating lower patterns that have their own relatively autonomous
structural unity. The same is true for the sensory input, which does not
project itself down to the last final path of motor neurons, but
operates by affecting, distorting, and somehow modifying the
pre-existing, preformed patterns of central coordination, which, in
turn, then confer their distortions upon the lower patterns of effection
and so on. The final output is then the outcome of this hierarchical
passing down of distortions and modifications of intrinsically performed
patterns of excitation which are in no way replicas of the input. The
structure of the input does not produce the structure of the output, but
merely modifies intrinsic nervous activities that have a structural
organization of their own.⁴⁴⁴⁴

Further development of this theory of an autonomously excited,
hierarchically organized central nervous system not only promises to
make the brisk competence of Sherrington’s sheep dog as it collects its
scattered flock from the hillside less of a physiological mystery, but
it should also prove valuable in providing a credible neurological
underpinning for the complex of skills and propensities which constitute
the human mind; the ability to follow a logic proof or a tendency to
become flustered when called upon to speak demand more than a reflex
are, conditioned or otherwise, to support them biologically. And, as
Hebb has pointed out, the very notion of “higher” and “lower”
evolutionary levels of mentality seems in itself to imply a comparable
gradation in degree of central nervous system autonomy:

I hope I do not shock biological scientists by saying that one feature
of the phylogenetic development is an increasing evidence of what is
known in some circles as free will; in my student days also referred to
as the Harvard Law, which asserts that any well-trained experimental
animal, on controlled stimulation, will do as he damn well pleases. A
more scholarly formulation is that the higher animal is less
stimulus-bound. Brain action is less fully controlled by afferent input,
behavior therefore less fully predictable from the situation in which
the animal is put. A greater role of ideational activity is recognizable
in the animal’s ability to “hold” a variety of stimulations for some
time before acting on them and in the phenomenon of purposive behavior.
There is more autonomous activity in the higher brain, and more
selectivity as to which afferent activity will be integrated with the
“stream of thought,” the dominant, ongoing activity in control of
behavior. Traditionally, we say that the subject is “interested” in this
part of the environment, not interested in that; in these terms, the
higher animal has a wider variety of interests and the interest of the
moment plays a greater part in behavior, which means a greater
unpredictability as to what stimulus will be responded to and as to the
form of the response.⁴⁵⁴⁵

These overall evolutionary trends—increasing ability to focus attention,
delay response, vary interest, sustain purpose, and, in general, deal
positively with the complexities of present stimulation—culminate in man
to make of him the most active of active organisms, as well as the most
unpredictable. The extreme intricacy, flexibility, and comprehensiveness
of what Kluckhohn and Murray have aptly called regnant processes in the
human brain—the processes which make these abilities physically
possible—are but the outcome of a definable phylogenetic development
which is traceable back at least to the coelenterates.⁴⁶⁴⁶ Though they
lack a central nervous concentration—a brain—and therefore the various
parts of the animal operate in relative independence, each possessing
its own set of sensory, neural, and motor elements, these humble
jellyfish, sea anemones, and the like nevertheless show a surprising
degree of intrinsic modulation of nervous activity: a strong stimulus
received in the daytime may be followed by locomotion during the
following night; certain corals experimentally subjected to excessive
stimulation luminesce for several minutes afterward with a spontaneous
frenzy which suggests “beserking”; and regularized stimulation may lead,
through some still obscure form of “memory” to a coordination of
activity in different muscles and to a patterned recurrence of activity
over time.⁴⁷⁴⁷ In the higher invertebrates (crustaceans, etc.) multiple
pathways, graded synaptic potentials, and triggered responses all
appear, permitting precise pacemaker control of internal functions as in
the lobster heart, while with the arrival of the lower vertebrates both
peripheral sensory and effector elements and neuronal conduction between
them—i.e., the celebrated reflex arc—are essentially perfected.⁴⁸⁴⁸ And,
finally, the bulk of the fundamental innovations in the design of
nervous circuits—i.e., closed loops, the superposition of higher level
loops on lower ones, and so on—probably were accomplished with the
arrival of the mammals, at which time at least the basic
differentiations of the fore-brain were also achieved.⁴⁹⁴⁹ In functional
terms, the whole process seems to be one of a relatively steady
expansion and diversification of endogenous nervous activity and the
consequent increasing centralization of what were previously more
isolated, independently acting part-processes.

What sort of neural evolution has taken place during the phyletic
differentiation of the mammals—i.e., in particular, during the advance
of the primates and hominids—is evidently rather less clear and more
controversial, however. On the one hand, Gerard has argued that the
changes have been almost entirely quantitative, a growth in the sheer
number of neurons, as reflected in the rapid expansion of the brain
size:

The further gains in capacity, seen most strikingly in the primate line
and culminating in man are due to simple increase in numbers rather than
to improvement in units or patterns. The increasing brain size parallels
richer performance, even for particular regions and functions (e.g.,
tongue motor area and speech), is a commonplace; how this operates is
less clear. Sheer increase in number, without secondary specification
(which does also occur), might seem unable to generate new capacities
but only to intensify old ones, but this is not the case. . . . In the
brain, an increase in the anatomical neurone population raises the limit
on the physiological neurone reserve and so allows greater variety of
selection and greater richness of analysis and combination expressed in
modifiable and insightful behavior.⁵⁰⁵⁰

But Bullock, though agreeing that the nervous systems of the higher
animals and man show no important differences in terms of known
neurophysiological mechanisms or architecture, sharply questions this
point of view, and argues that there is a pressing need to search for
yet undiscovered parameters of nervous functioning, “emergent levels of
physiological relations between neurons in masses,” to account for the
subtleties of behavior in advanced organisms:

Though we cannot point to fundamentally new elements in the neuronal
mechanisms of the higher centers, still it is difficult to assume that
their greatly enlarged accomplishments are solely attributable to the
great increase in numbers and interconnections between them, unless this
in itself brings on new properties and mechanisms. Many apparently
assume as a first approximation that the main factor in increasing
behavioral complexity in evolution is the number of neurons—even
invoking a kind of critical mass which permits new levels of behavior .
. . [but] it seems clear that the number of neurons correlates with
behavioral complexity so poorly as to explain little unless we add as
the really essential part that certain kinds of neurons, not now
definable, or—what is the same thing—certain kinds of newer properties
of consequences or neuronal architecture, are the important substratum
of advance. . . . I do not believe that our present physiology of
neurons, extrapolated, can account for behavior. The main factor in
evolutionary advance is not just numbers of cells and connections. . . .
Our hope lies in the discovery of new parameters of neuronal
systems.⁵¹⁵¹

To an outsider, perhaps the most striking aspect of this controversy is
the degree to which both parties seem somewhat uneasy and vaguely
dissatisfied with the unalloyed versions of their own argument, the
degree to which it seems not to be entirely plausible even to
themselves. On the one side there is an admission that the precise
nature of the relation between brain size and behavioral complexity is
indeed unclear and some sotto voce reservations about “secondary
specification”; on the other, a frank puzzlement concerning the apparent
absence of novel mechanisms in advanced nervous systems and a hopeful
murmuring about “emergent properties.” There is actually something of an
agreement that the attribution of the secular increase in mammalian
mental capacity solely and simply to a gross increase in neuron
population taxes credulity. The difference is that in one case doubts
are quieted by a stress on the fact that a parallelism between
increasing brain size and richer performance does, anyhow, obtain;
while, on the other, doubts are accentuated by a stress on the fact that
something seems to be missing to make this parallelism satisfactorily
explicable.

This issue may eventually be clarified as Gerard suggests, by advances
in work with computer circuits where performance does improve with a
simple multiplication of identical units; or, as Bullock suggests, by
further refinements in the analysis of chemical differences between
nerve cells.⁵²⁵² But it is even more likely that the main avenue to its
resolution lies in the abandonment of the wholly nativistic
conceptualization of nervous functioning in the higher mammals which
seems to be implicit in both these approaches. The synchronic emergence
in primates of an expanded forebrain, developed forms of social
organization, and, at least after Australopithecines got their hands on
tools, institutionalized patterns of culture indicates that the standard
procedure of treating biological, social, and cultural parameters
serially—the first being taken as primary to the second, and the second
to the third—is ill-advised. On the contrary, these so-called levels
should be seen as reciprocally interrelated and considered conjointly.
And if this is done, the sort of novel properties we shall search for
within the central nervous system to serve as a physical basis for the
striking development of autonomous fields of recurrent neural excitation
in primates generally, and in man particularly, will differ radically
from the sort of properties we would seek were we to regard those fields
as “logically and genetically prior” to society and culture, and
therefore requiring a full determination in terms of intrinsic
physiological parameters alone. Perhaps we have been asking too much of
neurons; or, if not too much, at least the wrong things.

In fact, so far as man is concerned, one of the most striking
characteristics of his central nervous system is the relative
incompleteness with which, acting within the confines of autogenous
parameters alone, it is able to specify behavior. By and large, the
lower an animal, the more it tends to respond to a “threatening”
stimulus with an intrinsically connected series of performed activities
which taken together comprise a comparatively stereotyped—which is not
to say unlearned—“flight” or “fight” response.⁵³⁵³ Man’s intrinsic
response to such a stimulus tends to consist, however, of a diffuse,
variably intense, “fear” or “rage” excitability accompanied by few, if
any, automatically preset, well-defined behavioral sequences.⁵⁴⁵⁴ Like a
frightened animal, a frightened man may run, hide, bluster, dissemble,
placate, or, desperate with panic, attack; but in his case the precise
patterning of such overt acts is guided predominantly by cultural rather
than genetic templates. In the always diagnostic area of sex, where
control of behavior proceeds phylogenetically from gonadal, to
pituitary, to central nervous system prepotency, a similar evolutionary
trend away from fixed activity sequences toward generalized arousal and
“increasing flexibility and modifiability of sexual patterns” is
apparent; a trend of which the justly famous cultural variation in the
sexual practices of man would seem to represent a logical extension.⁵⁵⁵⁵
Thus, in apparent paradox, an increasing autonomy, hierarchical
complexity, and regnancy of ongoing central nervous system activity seem
to go hand in hand with a less fully detailed determination of such
activity by the structure of the central nervous system in and of
itself; i.e., intrinsically. All of which suggests that some of the more
important developments in neural evolution which occurred during the
period of overlap between biological and sociocultural change may turn
out to consist of the appearance of properties which improve the
performance capacity of the central nervous system but reduce its
functional self-sufficiency.

From this standpoint, the accepted view that mental functioning is
essentially an intracerebral process, which can only be secondarily
assisted or amplified by the various artificial devices which that
process has enabled man to invent, appears to be quite wrong. On the
contrary, a fully specified, adaptively sufficient definition of regnant
neural processes in terms of intrinsic parameters being impossible, the
human brain is thoroughly dependent upon cultural resources for its very
operation; and those resources are, consequently, not adjuncts to, but
constituents of, mental activity. In fact, thinking as an overt, public
act, involving the purposeful manipulation of objective materials, is
probably fundamental to human beings; and thinking as a covert, private
act, and without recourse to such materials, a derived, though not
unuseful, capability. As the observation of how school children learn to
calculate shows, adding numbers in your head is actually a more
sophisticated mental accomplishment than adding them with a paper and
pencil, through an arrangement of tally sticks, or by counting,
piggy-fashion, one’s fingers and toes. Reading aloud is a more
elementary achievement than reading to oneself, the latter ability
having only arisen, as a matter of fact, in the Middle Ages.⁵⁶⁵⁶ And a
similar point about speech has often been made; except in our less naive
moments, we are all like Forester’s little old lady—we don’t know what
we think until we see what we say.

It has sometimes been argued against this last point that “the
comparative evidence, as well as the literature on aphasia, clearly
makes thought prior to speech, not conditional on it.”⁵⁷⁵⁷ But, though
true enough in itself, this does not undermine the general position
taken here—namely, that human culture is an ingredient not supplementary
to human thought—for several reasons. First, the fact that subhuman
animals learn to reason with sometimes startling effectiveness, without
learning to speak, does not prove that men can do so, any more than the
fact that a rat can copulate without the mediation of imitative learning
or practice proves that a chimpanzee can do so. Second, aphasics are
people who have learned to speak and to interiorize speech, and then
lost (or, more usually, partially lost) the former capacity, not people
who have never learned to speak at all. Third, and most important,
speech in the specific sense of vocalized talk is far from being the
sole public instrumentality available to individuals projected into a
pre-existing cultural milieu. Such phenomena as Helen Keller learning to
think through a combination of the manipulation of such cultural objects
as mugs and water taps and the purposeful patterning (by Miss Sullivan)
of tactile sensations on her hand, or a prespeech child developing the
concept of ordinal number through the setting up of two parallel lines
of matched blocks, demonstrate that what is essential is the existence
of an overt symbol system of any sort.⁵⁸⁵⁸ For man, in particular, to
conceive of thinking as essentially a private process is to overlook
almost completely what people actually do when they go about reasoning:

Imaginal thinking is neither more nor less than constructing an image of
the environment, running the model faster than the environment, and
predicting that the environment will behave as the model does. . . . The
first step in the solution of a problem consists in the construction of
a model or image of the “relevant features” of the [environment]. These
models can be constructed from many things, including parts of the
organic tissue of the body and, by man, paper and pencil or actual
artifacts. Once a model has been constructed it can be manipulated under
various hypothetical conditions and constraints. The organism is then
able to “observe” the outcome of these manipulations, and to project
them onto the environment so that prediction is possible. According to
this view, an aeronautical engineer is thinking when he manipulates a
model of a new airplane in a wind tunnel. The motorist is thinking when
he runs his finger over a line on a map, the finger serving as a model
of the relevant aspects of the automobile, the map as a model of the
road. External models of this kind are often used in thinking about
complex [environments]. Images used in covert thinking depend upon the
availability of the physico-chemical events of the organism which must
be used to form models.⁵⁹⁵⁹

It is a further implication of this view of reflective thought as
consisting not of happenings in the head but of a matching of the states
and processes of symbolic models against the states and processes of the
wider world, that it is stimulus deficit which initiates mental activity
and stimulus “discovery” which terminates it.⁶⁰⁶⁰ The motorist running
his finger over a road map is doing so because he lacks information
about how to get where he is going, and he will cease doing so when he
has acquired that information. The engineer performs his experiments in
the wind tunnel in order to find out how his model airplane behaves
under various artificially produced aerodynamic conditions, and he will
quit performing it if and when he indeed finds out. A man searching for
a coin in his pocket does so because he lacks a coin in hand, and he
stops searching when he gets hold of one—or, of course, when he comes to
the conclusion that the whole project is bootless, because it happens
that there is no coin in his pocket, or that it is uneconomical, because
the effort involved is such that the search “costs more than it comes
to.”⁶¹⁶¹ Motivational problems (which involve another sense of
“because”) aside, directive reasoning begins in puzzlement and ends in
either the abandonment of inquiry or the resolution of puzzlement: “The
function of reflective thought is . . . to transform a situation in
which there is experienced obscurity . . . of some sort, into a
situation that is clear, coherent, settled, harmonious.”⁶²⁶²

In sum, human intellection, in the specific sense of directive
reasoning, depends upon the manipulation of certain kinds of cultural
resources in such a manner as to produce (discover, select)
environmental stimuli needed—for whatever purpose—by the organism; it is
a search for information. And this search is the more pressing because
of the high degree of generality of the information intrinsically
available to the organism from genetic sources. The lower an animal, the
less it needs to find out in detail from the environment prior to
behavioral performance; birds need not build wind tunnels to test
aerodynamic principles before learning to fly—those they already “know.”
The “uniqueness” of man has often been expressed in terms of how much
and how many different sorts of things he is capable of learning.
Although monkeys, pigeons, and even octopuses may now and then
disconcert us with the rather “human” things they prove capable of
learning to do, in a general way this is true enough. But it is of
perhaps even more fundamental theoretical importance to stress how much
and how many things man has to learn. That, “fetalized,” “domesticated,”
and generally unhardy as he is, man would be a physically unviable
animal independently of culture has often been pointed out.⁶³⁶³ That he
would be mentally unviable as well has been rather less frequently
noted.⁶⁴⁶⁴

All this is no less true for the affective side of human thought than it
is for the intellective. In a series of books and papers, Hebb has
developed the intriguing theory that the human nervous system (and to a
correspondingly lesser extent, that of lower animals) demands a
relatively continuous stream of optimally existing environmental stimuli
as a precondition to competent performance.⁶⁵⁶⁵ On the one hand, man’s
brain is “not like a calculating machine operated by an electric motor,
which can lie idle, without input, for indefinite periods; instead it
must be kept warmed up and working by a constantly varied input during
the waking period at least, if it is to function effectively.”⁶⁶⁶⁶ On
the other hand, given the tremendous intrinsic emotional susceptibility
of man, such input cannot be too intense, too varied, too disturbing,
because then emotional collapse and a complete breakdown of the thought
process ensue. Both boredom and hysteria are enemies of reason.⁶⁷⁶⁷

Thus, as “man is the most emotional as well as the most rational
animal,” a very careful cultural control of frightening, enraging,
suggestive, etc., stimuli—through taboos, homogenization of behavior,
rapid “rationalization” of strange stimuli in terms of familiar
concepts, and so on—is necessary to prevent continual affective
instability, a constant oscillation between the extremes of
passion.⁶⁸⁶⁸” But, as man cannot perform efficiently in the absence of a
fairly high degree of reasonably persistent emotional activation,
cultural mechanisms assuring the ready availability of the continually
varying sort of sensory experience that can sustain such activities are
equally essential. Institutionalized regulations against the open
display of corpses outside of well-defined contexts (funerals, etc.)
protect a peculiarly high-strung animal against the fears aroused by
death and bodily destruction; watching or participating in automobile
races (not all of which take place at tracks) deliciously stimulates the
same fears. Prize fighting arouses hostile feelings; a firmly
institutionalized interpersonal affability moderates them. Erotic
impulses are titillated by a series of devious artifices of which there
is, evidently, no end; but they are kept from running riot by an
insistence on the private performance of explicitly sexual activities.

But, contrary to what these rather simplistic examples suggest, the
achievement of a workable, well-ordered, clearly articulated emotional
life in man is not a simple matter of ingenious instrumental control, a
kind of clever hydraulic engineering of affect. Rather, it is a matter
of giving specific, explicit, determinate form to the general, diffuse,
ongoing flow of bodily sensation; of imposing upon the continual shifts
in sentience to which we are inherently subject a recognizable,
meaningful order, so that we may not only feel but know what we feel and
act accordingly:

[It is] mental activity . . . [that] chiefly determines the way a person
meets his surrounding world. Pure sensation—now pain, now pleasure—would
have no unity, and would change the receptivity of the body for future
pains and pleasures only in rudimentary ways. It is sensation,
remembered and anticipated, feared or sought, or even imagined and
eschewed that is important in human life. It is perception molded by
imagination that gives us the outward world that we know. And it is the
continuity of thought that systematizes our emotional reactions into
attitudes with distinct feeling tones, and sets a certain scope for the
individual’s passions. In other words: by virtue of our thought and
imagination we have not only feelings, but a life of feeling.⁶⁹⁶⁹

In this context our mental task shifts from a gathering of information
about the pattern of events in the external world per se toward a
determining of the affective significance, the emotional import of that
pattern of events. We are concerned not with solving problems, but with
clarifying feelings. Nevertheless, the existence of cultural resources,
of an adequate system of public symbols, is just as essential to this
sort of process as it is to that of directive reasoning. And therefore,
the development, maintenance, and dissolution of “moods,” “attitudes,”
“sentiments,” and so on—which are “feelings” in the sense of states or
conditions, not sensations or motives—constitute no more a basically
private activity in human beings than does directive “thinking.” The use
of a road map enables us to make our way from San Francisco to New York
with precision; the reading of Kafka’s novels enables us to form a
distinct and well-defined attitude toward modern bureaucracy. We acquire
the ability to design flying planes in wind tunnels; we develop the
capacity to feel true awe in church. A child counts on his fingers
before he counts “in his head”; he feels love on his skin before he
feels it “in his heart.” Not only ideas, but emotions too, are cultural
artifacts in man.⁷⁰⁷⁰

Given the lack of specificity of intrinsic affect in man, the attainment
of an optimal flow of stimulation to his nervous system is a much more
complicated operation than a prudent steering between the extremes of
“too much” and “too little.” Rather, it involves a very delicate
qualitative regulation of what comes in through the sensory apparatus; a
matter, here again, more of an active seeking for required stimuli than
a mere watchful waiting for them. Neurologically, this regulation is
achieved by efferent impulses from the central nervous system which
modify receptor activity.⁷¹⁷¹ Psychologically, the same process may be
phrased in terms of the attitudinal control of perception.⁷²⁷² But the
point is that in man neither regnant fields nor mental sets can be
formed with sufficient precision in the absence of guidance from
symbolic models of emotion. In order to make up our minds we must know
how we feel about things; and to know how we feel about things we need
the public images of sentiment that only ritual, myth, and art can
provide.

IV

The term “mind” refers to a certain set of dispositions of an organism.
The ability to count is a mental characteristic; so is chronic
cheerfulness; so also—though it has not been possible to discuss the
problem of motivation here—is greed. The problem of the evolution of
mind is, therefore, neither a false issue generated by a misconceived
metaphysic, nor one of discovering at which point in the history of life
an invisible anima was superadded to organic material. It is a matter of
tracing the development of certain sorts of abilities, capacities,
tendencies, and propensities in organisms and delineating the factors or
types of factors upon which the existence of such characteristics
depends.

Recent research in anthropology suggests that the prevailing view that
the mental dispositions of man are genetically prior to culture and that
his actual capabilities represent the amplification or extension of
these pre-existent dispositions by cultural means is incorrect.⁷³⁷³ The
apparent fact that the final stages of the biological evolution of man
occurred after the initial stages of the growth of culture implies that
“basic,” “pure,” or “unconditioned,” human nature, in the sense of the
innate constitution of man, is so functionally incomplete as to be
unworkable. Tools, hunting, family organization, and, later, art,
religion, and “science” molded man somatically; and they are, therefore,
necessary not merely to his survival but to his existential realization.

The application of this revised view of human evolution leads to the
hypothesis that cultural resources are ingredient, not accessory, to
human thought. As one moves from lower to higher animals
phylogenetically, behavior is characterized by increasing active
unpredictability with reference to present stimuli, a trend apparently
supported physiologically by an increasing complexity and regnancy of
centrally proceeding patterns of nervous activity. Up to the level of
the lower mammals, at least the major part of this growth of autonomous
central fields can be accounted for in terms of the development of novel
neural mechanisms. But in the higher mammals such novel mechanisms have
as yet not been found. Although, conceivably, mere increase in numbers
of neurons may in itself prove able fully to account for the florescence
of mental capacity in man, the fact that the large human brain and human
culture emerged synchronically, not serially, indicates that the most
recent developments in the evolution of nervous structure consist in the
appearance of mechanisms which both permit the maintenance of more
complex regnant fields and make the full determination of these fields
in terms of intrinsic (innate) parameters increasingly impossible. The
human nervous system relies, inescapably, on the accessibility of public
symbolic structures to build up its own autonomous, ongoing pattern of
activity.

This, in turn, implies that human thinking is primarily an overt act
conducted in terms of the objective materials of the common culture, and
only secondarily a private matter. In the sense both of directive
reasoning and the formulation of sentiment, as well as the integration
of these into motives, man’s mental processes indeed take place at the
scholar’s desk or the football field, in the studio or lorry-driver’s
seat, on the platform, the chessboard, or the judge’s bench.
Isolationist claims for the closed-system substantiality of culture,
social organization, individual behavior, or nervous physiology to the
contrary notwithstanding, progress in the scientific analysis of the
human mind demands a joint attack from virtually all of the behavioral
sciences, in which the findings of each will force continual theoretical
reassessments upon all of the others.

[]

1 M. Scheerer, “Cognitive Theory,” in Handbook of Social Psychology
(Reading, Mass., 1954).

2 C. Sherrington, Man on His Nature, 2nd ed. (New York, 1953), p. 161;
L. S. Kubie, “Psychiatric and Psychoanalytic Considerations of the
Problem of Consciousness,” in Brain Mechanisms and Consciousness, ed. E.
Adrian et al. (Oxford, England, 1954), pp. 444–467.

3 C. L. Hull, Principles of Behavior (New York, 1943).

4 G. W. Allport, “Scientific Models and Human Morals,” Psychol. Rev. 54
(1947):182–192.

5 G. A. Miller, E. H. Galanter, and K. H. Pribram, Plans and the
Structure of Behavior (New York, 1960).

6 G. Ryle, The Concept of Mind (New York, 1949).

7 K. S. Lashley, “Cerebral Organization and Behavior,” in The Brain and
Human Behavior, ed. H. Solomon et al. (Baltimore, 1958).

8 L. A. White, The Science of Culture (New York, 1949).

9 Ryle, The Concept of Mind.

10 White, The Science of Culture.

11 J. Dewey, Art as Experience (New York, 1934).

12 Ryle, The Concept of Mind, p. 33. Quoted by permission of Barnes &
Noble Books and Hutchinson Publishing Group Ltd.

13 M. Mead, “Comment,” in Discussions in Child Development, ed. J.
Tanner and B. Inhelder (New York, n.d.), 1:480–503.

14 S. Freud, “The Interpretation of Dreams,” trans. in The Basic
Writings of Sigmund Freud, ed. A. A. Brill (New York, 1938), pp.
179–548; S. Freud, “Formulations Regarding Two Principles in Mental
Functioning,” in Collected Papers of Sigmund Freud (London, 1946),
4:13–27.

15 L. Levy-Bruhl, Primitive Mentality (London, 1923).

16 In addition, this proposition has been supported, as Hallowell (A. I.
Hallo-well, “The Recapitulation Theory and Culture,” reprinted in
Culture and Experience, by A. I. Hallowell [Philadelphia, 1939], pp.
14–31) has pointed out, by an uncritical application of Haeckel’s now
rejected “law of recapitulation,” in which presumed parallels in the
thought of children, psychotics, and savages were used as evidence of
the phylogenetic priority of autism. For suggestions that primary
processes are not even ontogenetically prior to secondary ones, see: H.
Hartmann, “Ego Psychology and the Problem of Adaptation.” trans, and
abridged in Organization and Pathology of Thought, ed. D. Rappaport (New
York, 1951), pp. 362–396; and H. Hartmann, E. Kris, and R. Lowenstein,
“Comments on the Formation of Psychic Structure,” in The Psychoanalytic
Study of the Child (New York, 1946), 2:11–38.

17 A. L. Kroeber, Anthropology (New York, 1948).

18 C. Kluckhohn, “Universal Categories of Culture,” in Anthropology
Today, ed. A. L. Kroeber (Chicago, 1953), pp. 507–523; see also,
Kroeber, Anthropology, p. 573.

19 Kroeber, Anthropology, pp. 71–72.

20 Ibid.

21 Ibid; White, The Science of Culture, p. 33.

22 W. W. Howells, “Concluding Remarks of the Chairman,” in Cold Spring
Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 15 (1950):79–86.

23 On the original discoveries of Australopithecines, see R. A. Dart,
Adventures with the Missing Link (New York, 1959); for a recent review,
see P. V. Tobias, “The Taxonomy and Phylogeny of the
Australopithecines,” in Taxonomy and Phylogeny of Old World Primates
with Reference to the Origin of Man, ed. B. Chiarelli (Turin, 1968), pp.
277–315.

24 By “hominoid” is meant the superfamily of animals, living and
extinct, to which both man and the pongid apes (gorilla, orang,
chimpanzee, and gibbon) belong, and by “hominid,” the family of animals,
living and extinct, to which man belongs, but not the apes. For the
“aberrant” view, see E. Hooton, Up From the Ape, rev. ed. (New York,
1949); for the consensus, Howells, “Concluding Remarks of the Chairman.”
The statement that the Australopithecines were the “first hominids”
would now, I think, have to be modified.

25 For a general review, see A. I. Hallowell, “Self, Society and Culture
in Phylogenetic Perspective,” in The Evolution of Man, ed. S. Tax
(Chicago, 1960), pp. 309–372. In the past decade, the whole discussion
has proceeded with accelerating speed and increasing precision. For a
series of references, see the inventory article by R. L. Holloway and
Elizabeth Szinyei-Merse, “Human Biology: a Catholic Review,” in Biennial
Review of Anthropology, 1971, ed. B. J. Siegel (Stanford, 1972). pp.
83–166.

26 For a general discussion of “critical point” theory in light of
recent anthropological work, see C. Geertz, “The Transition to
Humanity,” in Horizons of Anthropology, ed. S. Tax (Chicago, 1964), pp.
37–48.

27 S. L. Washburn, “Speculations on the Interrelations of Tools and
Biological Evolution,” in The Evolution of Man’s Capacity for Culture,
ed. J. M. Spuhler (Detroit, 1959), pp. 21–31.

28 A. L. Hallowell, “Culture, Personality and Society,” in Anthropology
Today, ed. A. L. Kroeber (Chicago, 1953), pp. 597–620. Cf. A. I.
Hallowell, “Behavioral Evolution and the Emergence of the Self,” in
Evolution and Anthropology: A Centennial Appraisal, ed. B. J. Meggers
(Washington, D.C., 1959), pp. 36–60.

29 Kroeber, Anthropology, p. 573.

30 L. A. White, “Four Stages in the Evolution of Minding,” in The
Evolution of Man, ed. S. Tax (Chicago, 1960), pp. 239–253; the argument
is very common.

31 For a general discussion of the dangers involved in an uncritical use
of comparisons among contemporaneous forms to generate historical
hypotheses, see G. Simpson, “Some Principles of Historical Biology
Bearing on Human Organisms,” in Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on
Quantitative Biology 15 (1950); 55–66.

32 Washburn, “Speculations on the Interrelations.”

33 Ibid.

34 As for “wolf-children” and other feral fantasies, see K. Lorenz,
“Comment,” in Discussions on Child Development, ed. J. Tanner and B.
Inhelder (New York, n.d.), 1:95–96.

35 See Chapter 6 in this book, p. 145.

36 On isolation, see H. Harlow, “Basic Social Capacity of Primates,” in
The Evolution of Man’s Capacity for Culture, ed. J. Spuhler (Detroit,
1959), pp. 40–52; on imitative learning, H. W. Nissen, “Problems of
Mental Evolution in the Primates,” in The Non-Human Primates and Human
Evolution, ed. J. Gavan (Detroit, 1955), pp. 99–109.

37 B. I. DeVore, “Primate Behavior and Social Evolution” (unpublished,
n.d.).

38 Some subprimate mammals also follow a definitely social mode of life,
so that this whole process probably predates primates altogether. The
social behavior of some birds and insects is of less immediate
relevance, however, because these orders are tangential to the human
developmental line.

39 M. F. A. Montagu. “A Consideration of the Concept of Race,” in Cold
Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 15 (1950):315–334.

40 M. Mead, “Cultural Determinants of Behavior,” in Culture and
Behavior, ed. A. Roe and G. Simpson (New Haven, 1958).

41 C. Sherrington, Man.

42 C. L. Hull, Principles.

43 L. de No, “Cerebral Cortex Architecture,” in The Physiology of the
Nervous System, ed. J. F. Fulton (New York, 1943); J. S. Bruner, “Neural
Mechanisms in Perception,” in The Brain and Human Behavior, ed. H.
Solomon et al. (Baltimore, 1958), pp. 118–143; R. W. Gerard, “Becoming:
The Residue of Change,” in The Evolution of Man, ed. S. Tax (Chicago,
1960), pp. 255–268; K. S. Lashley, “The Problem of Serial Order in
Behavior,” in Cerebral Mechanisms and Behavior, ed. L. Jeffress (New
York, 1951), pp. 112–136.

44 P. Weiss, “Comment on Dr. Lashley’s Paper,” in Cerebral Mechanisms in
Behavior, ed. L. A. Jeffress (New York, 1951), pp. 140–142.

45 D. O. Hebb, “The Problem of Consciousness and Introspection,” in
Brain Mechanics and Consciousness, ed. E. Adrian et al. (Oxford, 1954),
pp. 402–417. References omitted.

46 C. Kluckhohn and H. Murray, eds., Personality in Nature, Society and
Culture (New York, 1948); T. H. Bullock, “Evolution of
Neurophysiological Mechanisms,” in Behavior and Evolution, ed. A. Roe
and G. Simpson (New Haven, 1958), pp. 165–177.

47 Bullock, “Evolution.”

48 Ibid.; Gerard, “Becoming.”

49 Bullock, “Evolution”; K. H. Pribram, “Comparative Neurology and the
Evolution of Behavior,” in Behavior and Evolution, ed. A. Roe and G.
Simpson (New Haven, 1958), pp. 140–164.

50 Gerard, “Becoming”; see also R. W. Gerard, “Brains and Behavior,” in
The Evolution of Man’s Capacity for Culture, ed. J. Spuhler (Detroit,
1959), pp. 14–20.

51 Bullock, “Evolution.”

52 R. W. Gerard, “Brains and Behavior”; Bullock, “Evolution.”

53 K. Lorenz, King Solomon’s Ring (London, 1952).

54 D. O. Hebb and W. R. Thompson, “The Social Significance of Animal
Studies,” in Handbook of Psychology (Reading, Mass., 1954), pp. 532–561.
The uncritical use of the term “instinct” so as to confuse three
separate (but not unrelated) contrasts—that between behavior patterns
which rest on learning and those which do not; that between behavior
patterns which are innate (i.e., an outcome of genetically programmed
physical processes) and those which are not (i.e., an outcome of
extragenetically programmed physical processes); and that between
behavior patterns which are inflexible (stereotyped) and those which are
flexible (variable)—has led to an incorrect assumption that to say a
behavior pattern is innate is to say that it is inflexible in its
expression. (See K. H. Pribram, “Comparative Neurology and Evolution”;
and F. A. Beach, “The Descent of Instinct,” Psychol. Rev. 62 [1955]
:401–410.) Here, the term “intrinsic,” as against “extrinsic,” is used
to characterize behavior which, on comparative grounds, seems to rest
largely, or at least preponderantly, on innate dispositions,
independently of questions of learning or flexibility as such.

55 F. A. Beach, “Evolutionary Aspects of Psycho-Endocrinology,” in
Culture and Behavior, ed. A. Roe and G. Simpson (New Haven, 1958), pp.
81–102; C. S. Ford and F. A. Beach, Patterns of Sexual Behavior (New
York, 1951). But, again, this general trend appears already well
established in the subhuman primates: “Some [male] chimpanzees have to
learn to copulate. It has been noted that sexually mature but
inexperienced males placed with the receptive female show signs of
marked sexual excitement, but the resulting attempts to accomplish
copulation are usually unsuccessful. The naive male appears incapable of
carrying out his part of the mating act, and it has been suggested that
a great deal of practice and learning is essential to biologically
effective coition in this species. Adult male rodents which have been
reared in isolation copulate normally the first time they are offered an
estrous female.” [F. A. Beach, “Evolutionary Changes in the
Physiological Control of Mating Behavior in Mammals,” Psychol. Rev. 54
(1947):293–315.] For some vivid descriptions of generalized fear and
rage in chimpanzees, see Hebb and Thompson, “Social Significance.”

56 Ryle, The Concept of Mind, p. 27.

57 Hebb, “Problem of Consciousness and Introspection.”

58 On ordinal numbers, see K. S. Lashley, “Persistent Problems in the
Evolution of Mind,” Quart. Rev. 24 (1949):28–42. It is perhaps advisable
also to point out explicitly that the view that humans normally learn to
talk intelligently aloud and with others before they learn to “talk” to
themselves, in silence, does not involve either a motor theory of
thought or an argument that all covert mentation takes place in terms of
imagined words.

59 E. Galanter and M. Gerstenhaber, “On Thought: The Extrinsic Theory,”
Psychol. Rev. 63 (1956):2l8–227.

60 J. A. Deutsch, “A New Type of Behavior Theory,” British Journal of
Psychology 44 (1953):304–317.

61 Ibid.

62 J. Dewey, Intelligence and the Modern World, ed. J. Ratner (New York,
1939), p. 851.

63 For example, W. La Barre, The Human Animal (Chicago, 1954).

64 But see J. Dewey, “The Need for a Social Psychology,” Psychol. Rev.
24 (1917):266–277; A. I. Hallowell, “Culture, Personality and Society.”

65 D. O. Hebb, “Emotion in Man and Animal: An Analysis of the Intuitive
Process of Recognition,” Psychol. Rev. 53 (1946):88–106; D. O. Hebb, The
Organization of Behavior (New York, 1949); D. O. Hebb, “Problem of
Consciousness and Introspection”; D. O. Hebb and W. R. Thompson, “Social
Significance of Animal Studies.”

66 D. O. Hebb, “Problem of Consciousness and Introspection.”

67 P. Solomon et al., “Sensory Deprivation: A Review,” American Journal
of Psychiatry, 114 (1957):357–363; L. F. Chapman, “Highest Integrative
Functions of Man During Stress,” in The Brain and Human Behavior, ed. H.
Solomon (Baltimore, 1958), pp. 491–534.

68 D. O. Hebb and W. R. Thompson, “Social Significance of Animal
Studies.”

69 S. Langer, Feeling and Form (New York, 1953), p. 372; italics in
original.

70 The kind of cultural symbols that serve the intellective and
affective sides of human mentality tend to differ—discursive language,
experimental routines, mathematics, and so on, on the one hand; myth,
ritual, and art on the other. But this contrast should not be drawn too
sharply: mathematics has its affective uses, poetry its intellectual;
and the difference in any case is only functional, not substantial.

71 R. Granit, Receptors and Sensory Perception (New Haven, 1955).

72 J. S. Bruner and L. Postman, “Emotional Selectivity in Perception and
Reaction,” J. Personality 16 (1947):69–77.

73 In using such variably employed terms as “mind” and “culture,” the
decision of how far down the phylogenetic ladder to extend them—i.e.,
how broadly to define them—is in great part but a matter of custom,
policy, and taste. Here, perhaps somewhat inconsistently, but in line
with what seems to be common usage, opposite choices have been made for
mind and culture: mind has been defined broadly to include the learned
capacities of monkeys to communicate or rats to solve T-mazes; culture
has been defined narrowly to include only post-toolmaking symbolic
patterns. For an argument that culture should be defined as “a learned
pattern of the meaning of signals and signs” and extended through the
whole world of living organisms, see T. Parsons, “An Approach to
Psychological Theory in Terms of the Theory of Action,” in Psychology: A
Study of a Science, ed. S. Koch (New York, 1959), 3:612–711.

