PART III

Chapter 4/ Religion As a Cultural System

[]

            Any attempt to speak without speaking any particular
language is not more hopeless than the attempt to have a religion that
shall be no religion in particular . . . . Thus every living and healthy
religion has a marked idiosyncrasy. Its power consists in its special
and surprising message and in the bias which that revelation gives to
life. The vistas it opens and the mysteries it propounds are another
world to live in; and another world to live in—whether we expect ever to
pass wholly over into it or no—is what we mean by having a religion.

SANTAYANA, Reason in Religion

I

Two characteristics of anthropological work on religion accomplished
since the second world war strike me as curious when such work is placed
against that carried out just before and just after the first. One is
that it has made no theoretical advances of major importance. It is
living off the conceptual capital of its ancestors, adding very little,
save a certain empirical enrichment, to it. The second is that it draws
what concepts it does use from a very narrowly defined intellectual
tradition. There is Durkheim, Weber, Freud, or Malinowski, and in any
particular work the approach of one or two of these transcendent figures
is followed, with but a few marginal corrections necessitated by the
natural tendency to excess of seminal minds or by the expanded body of
reliable descriptive data. But virtually no one even thinks of looking
elsewhere—to philosophy, history, law, literature, or the “harder”
sciences—as these men themselves looked, for analytical ideas. And it
occurs to me, also, that these two curious characteristics are not
unrelated.

If the anthropological study of religion is in fact in a state of
general stagnation, I doubt that it will be set going again by producing
more minor variations on classical theoretical themes. Yet one more
meticulous case in point for such well-established propositions as that
ancestor worship supports the jural authority of elders, that initiation
rites are means for the establishment of sexual identity and adult
status, that ritual groupings reflect political oppositions, or that
myths provide charters for social institutions and rationalizations of
social privilege, may well finally convince a great many people, both
inside the profession and out, that anthropologists are, like
theologians, firmly dedicated to proving the indubitable. In art, this
solemn reduplication of the achievements of accepted masters is called
academicism; and I think this is the proper name for our malady also.
Only if we abandon, in a phrase of Leo Steinberg’s, that sweet sense of
accomplishment which comes from parading habitual skills and address
ourselves to problems sufficiently unclarified as to make discovery
possible, can we hope to achieve work which will not just reincarnate
that of the great men of the first quarter of this century, but match
it.¹¹

The way to do this is not to abandon the established traditions of
social anthropology in this field, but to widen them. At least four of
the contributions of the men who, as I say, dominate our thought to the
point of parochializing it—Durkheim’s discussion of the nature of the
sacred, Weber’s Verstehenden methodology, Freud’s parallel between
personal rituals and collective ones, and Malinowski’s exploration of
the distinction between religion and common sense—seem to me inevitable
starting-points for any useful anthropological theory of religion. But
they are starting-points only. To move beyond them we must place them in
a much broader context of contemporary thought than they, in and of
themselves, encompass. The dangers of such a procedure are obvious:
arbitrary eclecticism, superficial theory-mongering, and sheer
intellectual confusion. But I, at least, can see no other road of escape
from what, referring to anthropology more generally, Janowitz has called
the dead hand of competence.²²

In working toward such an expansion of the conceptual envelope in which
our studies take place, one can, of course, move in a great number of
directions; and perhaps the most important initial problem is to avoid
setting out, like Stephen Leacock’s mounted policeman, in all of them at
once. For my part, I shall confine my effort to developing what,
following Parsons and Shils, I refer to as the cultural dimension of
religious analysis.³³ The term “culture” has by now acquired a certain
aura of ill-repute in social anthropological circles because of the
multiplicity of its referents and the studied vagueness with which it
has all too often been invoked. (Though why it should suffer more for
these reasons than “social structure” or “personality” is something I do
not entirely understand.) In any case, the culture concept to which I
adhere has neither multiple referents nor, so far as I can see, any
unusual ambiguity: it denotes an historically transmitted pattern of
meanings embodied in symbols, a system of inherited conceptions
expressed in symbolic forms by means of which men communicate,
perpetuate, and develop their knowledge about and attitudes toward life.
Of course, terms such as “meaning,” “symbol,” and “conception” cry out
for explication. But that is precisely where the widening, the
broadening, and the expanding come in. If Langer is right that “the
concept of meaning, in all its varieties, is the dominant philosophical
concept of our time,” that “sign, symbol, denotation, signification,
communication . . . are our [intellectual] stock in trade,” it is
perhaps time that social anthropology, and particularly that part of it
concerned with the study of religion, became aware of the fact.⁴⁴

II

As we are to deal with meaning, let us begin with a paradigm: viz., that
sacred symbols function to synthesize a people’s ethos—the tone,
character, and quality of their life, its moral and aesthetic style and
mood—and their world view—the picture they have of the way things in
sheer actuality are, their most comprehensive ideas of order. In
religious belief and practice a group’s ethos is rendered intellectually
reasonable by being shown to represent a way of life ideally adapted to
the actual state of affairs the world view describes, while the world
view is rendered emotionally convincing by being presented as an image
of an actual state of affairs peculiarly well-arranged to accommodate
such a way of life. This confrontation and mutual confirmation has two
fundamental effects. On the one hand, it objectivizes moral and
aesthetic preferences by depicting them as the imposed conditions of
life implicit in a world with a particular structure, as mere common
sense given the unalterable shape of reality. On the other, it supports
these received beliefs about the world’s body by invoking deeply felt
moral and aesthetic sentiments as experiential evidence for their truth.
Religious symbols formulate a basic congruence between a particular
style of life and a specific (if, most often, implicit) metaphysic, and
in so doing sustain each with the borrowed authority of the other.

Phrasing aside, this much may perhaps be granted. The notion that
religion tunes human actions to an envisaged cosmic order and projects
images of cosmic order onto the plane of human experience is hardly
novel. But it is hardly investigated either, so that we have very little
idea of how, in empirical terms, this particular miracle is
accomplished. We just know that it is done, annually, weekly, daily, for
some people almost hourly; and we have an enormous ethnographic
literature to demonstrate it. But the theoretical framework which would
enable us to provide an analytic account of it, an account of the sort
we can provide for lineage segmentation, political succession, labor
exchange, or the socialization of the child, does not exist.

Let us, therefore, reduce our paradigm to a definition, for, although it
is notorious that definitions establish nothing, in themselves they do,
if they are carefully enough constructed, provide a useful orientation,
or reorientation, of thought, such that an extended unpacking of them
can be an effective way of developing and controlling a novel line of
inquiry. They have the useful virtue of explicitness: they commit
themselves in a way discursive prose, which, in this field especially,
is always liable to substitute rhetoric for argument, does not. Without
further ado, then, a religion is:

(1) a system of symbols which acts to (2) establish powerful, pervasive,
and long-lasting moods and motivations in men by (3) formulating
conceptions of a general order of existence and (4) clothing these
conceptions with such an aura of factuality that (5) the moods and
motivations seem uniquely realistic.

a system of symbols which acts to . . .

Such a tremendous weight is being put on the term “symbol” here that our
first move must be to decide with some precision what we are going to
mean by it. This is no easy task, for, rather like “culture,” “symbol”
has been used to refer to a great variety of things, often a number of
them at the same time.

In some hands it is used for anything which signifies something else to
someone: dark clouds are the symbolic precursors of an on-coming rain.
In others it is used only for explicitly conventional signs of one sort
or another: a red flag is a symbol of danger, a white of surrender. In
others it is confined to something which expresses in an oblique and
figurative manner that which cannot be stated in a direct and literal
one, so that there are symbols in poetry but not in science, and
symbolic logic is misnamed. In yet others, however, it is used for any
object, act, event, quality, or relation which serves as a vehicle for a
conception—the conception is the symbol’s “meaning”—and that is the
approach I shall follow here.⁵⁵ The number 6, written, imagined, laid
out as a row of stones, or even punched into the program tapes of a
computer, is a symbol. But so also is the Cross, talked about,
visualized, shaped worriedly in air or fondly fingered at the neck, the
expanse of painted canvas called “Guernica” or the bit of painted stone
called a churinga, the word “reality,” or even the morpheme “-ing.” They
are all symbols, or at least symbolic elements, because they are
tangible formulations of notions, abstractions from experience fixed in
perceptible forms, concrete embodiments of ideas, attitudes, judgments,
longings, or beliefs. To undertake the study of cultural
activity—activity in which symbolism forms the positive content—is thus
not to abandon social analysis for a Platonic cave of shadows, to enter
into a mentalistic world of introspective psychology or, worse,
speculative philosophy, and wander there forever in a haze of
“Cognitions,” “Affections,” “Conations,” and other elusive entities.
Cultural acts, the construction, apprehension, and utilization of
symbolic forms, are social events like any other; they are as public as
marriage and as observable as agriculture.

They are not, however, exactly the same thing; or, more precisely, the
symbolic dimension of social events is, like the psychological, itself
theoretically abstractable from those events as empirical totalities.
There is still, to paraphrase a remark of Kenneth Burke’s, a difference
between building a house and drawing up a plan for building a house, and
reading a poem about having children by marriage is not quite the same
thing as having children by marriage.⁶⁶ Even though the building of the
house may proceed under the guidance of the plan or—a less likely
occurrence—the having of children may be motivated by a reading of the
poem, there is something to be said for not confusing our traffic with
symbols with our traffic with objects or human beings, for these latter
are not in themselves symbols, however often they may function as
such.⁷⁷ No matter how deeply interfused the cultural, the social, and
the psychological may be in the everyday life of houses, farms, poems,
and marriages, it is useful to distinguish them in analysis, and, so
doing, to isolate the generic traits of each against the normalized
background of the other two.

So far as culture patterns, that is, systems or complexes of symbols,
are concerned, the generic trait which is of first importance for us
here is that they are extrinsic sources of information. By “extrinsic,”
I mean only that—unlike genes, for example—they lie outside the
boundaries of the individual organism as such in that intersubjective
world of common understandings into which all human individuals are
born, in which they pursue their separate careers, and which they leave
persisting behind them after they die. By “sources of information,” I
mean only that—like genes—they provide a blueprint or template in terms
of which processes external to themselves can be given a definite form.
As the order of bases in a strand of DNA forms a coded program, a set of
instructions, or a recipe, for the synthesis of the structurally complex
proteins which shape organic functioning, so culture patterns provide
such programs for the institution of the social and psychological
processes which shape public behavior. Though the sort of information
and the mode of its transmission are vastly different in the two cases,
this comparison of gene and symbol is more than a strained analogy of
the familiar “social heredity” sort. It is actually a substantial
relationship, for it is precisely because of the fact that genetically
programmed processes are so highly generalized in men, as compared with
lower animals, that culturally programmed ones are so important; only
because human behavior is so loosely determined by intrinsic sources of
information that extrinsic sources are so vital. To build a dam a beaver
needs only an appropriate site and the proper materials—his mode of
procedure is shaped by his physiology. But man, whose genes are silent
on the building trades, needs also a conception of what it is to build a
dam, a conception he can get only from some symbolic source—a blueprint,
a textbook, or a string of speech by someone who already knows how dams
are built—or, of course, from manipulating graphic or linguistic
elements in such a way as to attain for himself a conception of what
dams are and how they are built.

This point is sometimes put in the form of an argument that cultural
patterns are “models,” that they are sets of symbols whose relations to
one another “model” relations among entities, processes or what-have-you
in physical, organic, social, or psychological systems by “paralleling,”
“imitating,” or “simulating” them.⁸⁸ The term “model” has, however, two
senses—an “of” sense and a “for” sense—and though these are but aspects
of the same basic concept they are very much worth distinguishing for
analytic purposes. In the first, what is stressed is the manipulation of
symbol structures so as to bring them, more or less closely, into
parallel with the pre-established nonsymbolic system, as when we grasp
how dams work by developing a theory of hydraulics or constructing a
flow chart. The theory or chart models physical relationships in such a
way—that is, by expressing their structure in synoptic form—as to render
them apprehensible; it is a model of “reality.” In the second, what is
stressed is the manipulation of the nonsymbolic systems in terms of the
relationships expressed in the symbolic, as when we construct a dam
according to the specifications implied in an hydraulic theory or the
conclusions drawn from a flow chart. Here, the theory is a model under
whose guidance physical relationships are organized: it is a model for
“reality.” For psychological and social systems, and for cultural models
that we would not ordinarily refer to as “theories,” but rather as
“doctrines,” “melodies,” or “rites,” the case is in no way different.
Unlike genes, and other nonsymbolic information sources, which are only
models for, not models of, culture patterns have an intrinsic double
aspect: they give meaning, that is, objective conceptual form, to social
and psychological reality both by shaping themselves to it and by
shaping it to themselves.

It is, in fact, this double aspect which sets true symbols off from
other sorts of significative forms. Models for are found, as the gene
example suggests, through the whole order of nature; for wherever there
is a communication of pattern, such programs are, in simple logic,
required. Among animals, imprint learning is perhaps the most striking
example, because what such learning involves is the automatic
presentation of an appropriate sequence of behavior by a model animal in
the presence of a learning animal which serves, equally automatically,
to call out and stabilize a certain set of responses genetically built
into the learning animal.⁹⁹ The communicative dance of two bees, one of
which has found nectar and the other of which seeks it, is another,
somewhat different, more complexly coded, example.¹⁰¹⁰ Craik has even
suggested that the thin trickle of water which first finds its way down
from a mountain spring to the sea and smooths a little channel for the
greater volume of water that follows after it plays a sort of model for
function.¹¹¹¹ But models of—linguistic, graphic, mechanical, natural,
etc., processes which function not to provide sources of information in
terms of which other processes can be patterned, but to represent those
patterned processes as such, to express their structure in an
alternative medium—are much rarer and may perhaps be confined, among
living animals, to man. The perception of the structural congruence
between one set of processes, activities, relations, entities, and so
on, and another set for which it acts as a program, so that the program
can be taken as a representation, or conception—a symbol—of the
programmed, is the essence of human thought. The intertransposability of
models for and models of which symbolic formulation makes possible is
the distinctive characteristic of our mentality.

 

 

             . . . to establish powerful, pervasive, and long-lasting
moods and motivations in men by . . .

So far as religious symbols and symbol systems are concerned this
intertransposability is clear. The endurance, courage, independence,
perseverance, and passionate willfulness in which the vision quest
practices the Plains Indian are the same flamboyant virtues by which he
attempts to live: while achieving a sense of revelation he stabilizes a
sense of direction.¹²¹² The consciousness of defaulted obligation,
secreted guilt, and, when a confession is obtained, public shame in
which Manus’ seance rehearses him are the same sentiments that underlie
the sort of duty ethic by which his property-conscious society is
maintained: the gaining of an absolution involves the forging of a
conscience.¹³¹³ And the same self-discipline which rewards a Javanese
mystic staring fixedly into the flame of a lamp with what he takes to be
an intimation of divinity drills him in that rigorous control of
emotional expression which is necessary to a man who would follow a
quietistic style of life.¹⁴¹⁴ Whether one sees the conception of a
personal guardian spirit, a family tutelary, or an immanent God as
synoptic formulations of the character of reality or as templates for
producing reality with such a character seems largely arbitrary, a
matter of which aspect, the model of or model for, one wants for the
moment to bring into focus. The concrete symbols involved—one or another
mythological figure materializing in the wilderness, the skull of the
deceased household head hanging censoriously in the rafters, or a
disembodied “voice in the stillness” soundlessly chanting enigmatic
classical poetry—point in either direction. They both express the
world’s climate and shape it.

They shape it by inducing in the worshipper a certain distinctive set of
dispositions (tendencies, capacities, propensities, skills, habits,
liabilities, pronenesses) which lend a chronic character to the flow of
his activity and the quality of his experience. A disposition describes
not an activity or an occurrence but a probability of an activity being
performed or an occurrence occurring in certain circumstances: “When a
cow is said to be a ruminant, or a man is said to be a cigarette-smoker,
it is not being said that the cow is ruminating now or that the man is
smoking a cigarette now. To be a ruminant is to tend to ruminate from
time to time, and to be a cigarette-smoker is to be in the habit of
smoking cigarettes.”¹⁵¹⁵ Similarly, to be pious is not to be performing
something we would call an act of piety, but to be liable to perform
such acts. So, too, with the Plains Indian’s bravura, the Manus’
compunctiousness, or the Javanese’s quietism, which, in their contexts,
form the substance of piety. The virtue of this sort of view of what are
usually called “mental traits” or, if the Cartesianism is unavowed,
“psychological forces” (both unobjectionable enough terms in themselves)
is that it gets them out of any dim and inaccessible realm of private
sensation into that same well-lit world of observables in which reside
the brittleness of glass, the inflammability of paper, and, to return to
the metaphor, the dampness of England.

So far as religious activities are concerned (and learning a myth by
heart is as much a religious activity as detaching one’s finger at the
knuckle), two somewhat different sorts of disposition are induced by
them: moods and motivations.

A motivation is a persisting tendency, a chronic inclination to perform
certain sorts of acts and experience certain sorts of feeling in certain
sorts of situations, the “sorts” being commonly very heterogenous and
rather ill-defined classes in all three cases:

On hearing that a man is vain [i.e., motivated by vanity] we expect him
to behave in certain ways, namely to talk a lot about himself, to cleave
to the society of the eminent, to reject criticisms, to seek the
footlights and to disengage himself from conversations about the merits
of others. We expect him to indulge in roseate daydreams about his own
successes, to avoid recalling past failures and to plan for his own
advancement. To be vain is to tend to act in these and innumerable other
kindred ways. Certainly we also expect the vain man to feel certain
pangs and flutters in certain situations; we expect him to have an acute
sinking feeling when an eminent person forgets his name, and to feel
buoyant of heart and light of toe on hearing of the misfortunes of his
rivals. But feelings of pique and buoyancy are not more directly
indicative of vanity than are public acts of boasting or private acts of
daydreaming.¹⁶¹⁶

Similarly for any motivations. As a motive, “flamboyant courage”
consists in such enduring propensities as to fast in the wilderness, to
conduct solitary raids on enemy camps, and to thrill to the thought of
counting coup. “Moral circumspection” consists in such ingrained
tendencies as to honor onerous promises, to confess secret sins in the
face of severe public disapproval, and to feel guilty when vague and
generalized accusations are made at seances. And “dispassionate
tranquility” consists in such persistent inclinations as to maintain
one’s poise come hell or high water, to experience distaste in the
presence of even moderate emotional displays, and to indulge in
contentless contemplations of featureless objects. Motives are thus
neither acts (that is, intentional behaviors) nor feelings, but
liabilities to perform particular classes of act or have particular
classes of feeling. And when we say that a man is religious, that is,
motivated by religion, this is at least part—though only part—of what we
mean.

Another part of what we mean is that he has, when properly stimulated, a
susceptibility to fall into certain moods, moods we sometimes lump
together under such covering terms as “reverential,” “solemn,” or
“worshipful.” Such generalized rubrics actually conceal, however, the
enormous empirical variousness of the dispositions involved, and, in
fact, tend to assimilate them to the unusually grave tone of most of our
own religious life. The moods that sacred symbols induce, at different
times and in different places, range from exultation to melancholy, from
self-confidence to self-pity, from an incorrigible playfulness to a
bland listlessness—to say nothing of the erogenous power of so many of
the world’s myths and rituals. No more than there is a single sort of
motivation one can call piety is there a single sort of mood one can
call worshipful.

The major difference between moods and motivations is that where the
latter are, so to speak, vectorial qualities, the former are merely
scalar. Motives have a directional cast, they describe a certain overall
course, gravitate toward certain, usually temporary, consummations. But
moods vary only as to intensity: they go nowhere. They spring from
certain circumstances but they are responsive to no ends. Like fogs,
they just settle and lift; like scents, suffuse and evaporate. When
present they are totalistic: if one is sad everything and everybody
seems dreary; if one is gay, everything and everybody seems splendid.
Thus, though a man can be vain, brave, willful, and independent at the
same time, he can’t very well be playful and listless, or exultant and
melancholy, at the same time.¹⁷¹⁷ Further, where motives persist for
more or less extended periods of time, moods merely recur with greater
or lesser frequency, coming and going for what are often quite
unfathomable reasons. But perhaps the most important difference, so far
as we are concerned, between moods and motivations is that motivations
are “made meaningful” with reference to the ends toward which they are
conceived to conduce, whereas moods are “made meaningful” with reference
to the conditions from which they are conceived to spring. We interpret
motives in terms of their consummations, but we interpret moods in terms
of their sources. We say that a person is industrious because he wishes
to succeed; we say that a person is worried because he is conscious of
the hanging threat of nuclear holocaust. And this is no less the case
when the interpretations are ultimate. Charity becomes Christian charity
when it is enclosed in a conception of God’s purposes; optimism is
Christian optimism when it is grounded in a particular conception of
God’s nature. The assiduity of the Navaho finds its rationale in a
belief that, since “reality” operates mechanically, it is coercible;
their chronic fearfulness finds its rationale in a conviction that,
however “reality” operates, it is both enormously powerful and terribly
dangerous.¹⁸¹⁸

 

 

             . . . by formulating conceptions of a general order of
existence and . . .

That the symbols or symbol systems which induce and define dispositions
we set off as religious and those which place those dispositions in a
cosmic framework are the same symbols ought to occasion no surprise. For
what else do we mean by saying that a particular mood of awe is
religious and not secular, except that it springs from entertaining a
conception of all-pervading vitality like mana and not from a visit to
the Grand Canyon? Or that a particular case of asceticism is an example
of a religious motivation, except that it is directed toward the
achievement of an unconditioned end like nirvana and not a conditioned
one like weight-reduction? If sacred symbols did not at one and the same
time induce dispositions in human beings and formulate, however
obliquely, inarticulately, or unsystematically, general ideas of order,
then the empirical differentia of religious activity or religious
experience would not exist. A man can indeed be said to be “religious”
about golf, but not merely if he pursues it with passion and plays it on
Sundays: he must also see it as symbolic of some transcendent truths.
And the pubescent boy gazing soulfully into the eyes of the pubescent
girl in a William Steig cartoon and murmuring, “There is something about
you, Ethel, which gives me a sort of religious feeling,” is, like most
adolescents, confused. What any particular religion affirms about the
fundamental nature of reality may be obscure, shallow, or, all too
often, perverse; but it must, if it is not to consist of the mere
collection of received practices and conventional sentiments we usually
refer to as moralism, affirm something. If one were to essay a minimal
definition of religion today, it would perhaps not be Tylor’s famous
“belief in spiritual beings,” to which Goody, wearied of theoretical
subtleties, has lately urged us to return, but rather what Salvador de
Madariaga has called “the relatively modest dogma that God is not
mad.”¹⁹¹⁹

Usually, of course, religions affirm very much more than this: we
believe, as James remarked, all that we can and would believe everything
if we only could.²⁰²⁰ The thing we seem least able to tolerate is a
threat to our powers of conception, a suggestion that our ability to
create, grasp, and use symbols may fail us, for were this to happen, we
would be more helpless, as I have already pointed out, than the beavers.
The extreme generality, diffuseness, and variability of man’s innate
(that is, genetically programmed) response capacities means that without
the assistance of cultural patterns he would be functionally incomplete,
not merely a talented ape who had, like some underprivileged child,
unfortunately been prevented from realizing his full potentialities, but
a kind of formless monster with neither sense of direction nor power of
self-control, a chaos of spasmodic impulses and vague emotions. Man
depends upon symbols and symbol systems with a dependence so great as to
be decisive for his creatural viability and, as a result, his
sensitivity to even the remotest indication that they may prove unable
to cope with one or another aspect of experience raises within him the
gravest sort of anxiety:

[Man] can adapt himself somehow to anything his imagination can cope
with; but he cannot deal with Chaos. Because his characteristic function
and highest asset is conception, his greatest fright is to meet what he
cannot construe—the “uncanny,” as it is popularly called. It need not be
a new object; we do meet new things, and “understand” them promptly, if
tentatively, by the nearest analogy, when our minds are functioning
freely; but under mental stress even perfectly familiar things may
become suddenly disorganized and give us the horrors. Therefore our most
important assets are always the symbols of our general orientation in
nature, on the earth, in society, and in what we are doing: the symbols
of our Weltanschauung and Lebensanschauung, Consequently, in a primitive
society, a daily ritual is incorporated in common activities, in eating,
washing, fire-making, etc., as well as in pure ceremonial; because the
need of reasserting the tribal morale and recognizing its cosmic
conditions is constantly felt. In Christian Europe the Church brought
men daily (in some orders even hourly) to their knees, to enact if not
to contemplate their assent to the ultimate concepts.²¹²¹

There are at least three points where chaos—a tumult of events which
lack not just interpretations but interpretability—threatens to break in
upon man: at the limits of his analytic capacities, at the limits of his
powers of endurance, and at the limits of his moral insight. Bafflement,
suffering, and a sense of intractable ethical paradox are all, if they
become intense enough or are sustained long enough, radical challenges
to the proposition that life is comprehensible and that we can, by
taking thought, orient ourselves effectively within it—challenges with
which any religion, however “primitive,” which hopes to persist must
attempt somehow to cope.

Of the three issues, it is the first which has been least investigated
by modern social anthropologists (though Evans-Pritchard’s classic
discussion of why granaries fall on some Azande and not on others, is a
notable exception).²²²² Even to consider people’s religious beliefs as
attempts to bring anomalous events or experiences—death, dreams, mental
fugues, volcanic eruptions, or marital infidelity—within the circle of
the at least potentially explicable seems to smack of Tyloreanism or
worse. But it does appear to be a fact that at least some men—in all
probability, most men—are unable to leave unclarified problems of
analysis merely unclarified, just to look at the stranger features of
the world’s landscape in dumb astonishment or bland apathy without
trying to develop, however fantastic, inconsistent, or simple-minded,
some notions as to how such features might be reconciled with the more
ordinary deliverances of experience. Any chronic failure of one’s
explanatory apparatus, the complex of received culture patterns (common
sense, science, philosophical speculation, myth) one has for mapping the
empirical world, to explain things which cry out for explanation tends
to lead to a deep disquiet—a tendency rather more widespread and a
disquiet rather deeper than we have sometimes supposed since the
pseudoscience view of religious belief was, quite rightfully, deposed.
After all, even that high priest of heroic atheism, Lord Russell, once
remarked that although the problem of the existence of God had never
bothered him, the ambiguity of certain mathematical axioms had
threatened to unhinge his mind. And Einstein’s profound dissatisfaction
with quantum mechanics was based on a—surely religious—inability to
believe that, as he put it, God plays dice with the universe.

But this quest for lucidity and the rush of metaphysical anxiety that
occurs when empirical phenomena threaten to remain intransigently opaque
is found on much humbler intellectual levels. Certainly, I was struck in
my own work, much more than I had at all expected to be, by the degree
to which my more animistically inclined informants behaved like true
Tyloreans. They seemed to be constantly using their beliefs to “explain”
phenomena: or, more accurately, to convince themselves that the
phenomena were explainable within the accepted scheme of things, for
they commonly had only a minimal attachment to the particular soul
possession, emotional disequilibrium, taboo infringement, or bewitchment
hypothesis they advanced and were all too ready to abandon it for some
other, in the same genre, which struck them as more plausible given the
facts of the case. What they were not ready to do was abandon it for no
other hypothesis at all; to leave events to themselves.

And what is more, they adopted this nervous cognitive stance with
respect to phenomena which had no immediate practical bearing on their
own lives, or for that matter on anyone’s. When a peculiarly shaped,
rather large toadstool grew up in a carpenter’s house in the short space
of a few days (or, some said, a few hours), people came from miles
around to see it, and everyone had some sort of explanation—some
animist, some animatist, some not quite either—for it. Yet it would be
hard to argue that the toadstool had any social value in
Radcliffe-Brown’s sense, or was connected in any way with anything which
did and for which it could have been standing proxy, like the Andaman
cicada.²³²³ Toadstools play about the same role in Javanese life as they
do in ours, and in the ordinary course of things Javanese have about as
much interest in them as we do. It was just that this one was “odd,”
“strange,” “uncanny”—aneh. And the odd, strange, and uncanny simply must
be accounted for—or, again, the conviction that it could be accounted
for sustained. One does not shrug off a toadstool which grows five times
as fast as a toadstool has any right to grow. In the broadest sense the
“strange” toadstool did have implications, and critical ones, for those
who heard about it. It threatened their most general ability to
understand the world, raised the uncomfortable question of whether the
beliefs which they held about nature were workable, the standards of
truth they used valid.

Nor is this to argue that it is only, or even mainly, sudden eruptions
of extraordinary events which engender in man the disquieting sense that
his cognitive resources may prove unavailing or that this intuition
appears only in its acute form. More commonly it is a persistent,
constantly re-experienced difficulty in grasping certain aspects of
nature, self, and society, in bringing certain elusive phenomena within
the sphere of culturally formulatable fact, which renders man
chronically uneasy and toward which a more equable flow of diagnostic
symbols is consequently directed. It is what lies beyond a relatively
fixed frontier of accredited knowledge that, looming as a constant
background to the daily round of practical life, sets ordinary human
experience in a permanent context of metaphysical concern and raises the
dim, back-of-the-mind suspicions that one may be adrift in an absurd
world:

Another subject which is matter for this characteristic intellectual
enquiry [among the latmul] is the nature of ripples and waves on the
surface of water. It is said secretly that men, pigs, trees, grass—all
the objects in the world—are only patterns of waves. Indeed there seems
to be some agreement about this, although it perhaps conflicts with the
theory of reincarnation, according to which the ghost of the dead is
blown as a mist by the East Wind up the river and into the womb of the
deceased’s son’s wife. Be that as it may—there is still the question of
how ripples and waves are caused. The clan which claims the East Wind as
a totem is clear enough about this: the Wind with her mosquito fan
causes the waves. But other clans have personified the waves and say
that they are a person (Kontum-mali) independent of the wind. Other
clans, again, have other theories. On one occasion I took some latmul
natives down to the coast and found one of them sitting by himself
gazing with rapt attention at the sea. It was a windless day, but a slow
swell was breaking on the beach. Among the totemic ancestors of his clan
he counted a personified slit gong who had floated down the river to the
sea and who was believed to cause the waves. He was gazing at the waves
which were heaving and breaking when no wind was blowing, demonstrating
the truth of his clan myth.²⁴²⁴

The second experiential challenge in whose face the meaningfulness of a
particular pattern of life threatens to dissolve into a chaos of
thingless names and nameless things—the problem of suffering—has been
rather more investigated, or at least described, mainly because of the
great amount of attention given in works on tribal religion to what are
perhaps its two main loci; illness and mourning. Yet for all the
fascinated interest in the emotional aura that surrounds these extreme
situations, there has been, with a few exceptions such as Lienhardt’s
recent discussion of Dinka divining, little conceptual advance over the
sort of crude confidence-type theory set forth by Malinowski: viz., that
religion helps one to endure “situations of emotional stress” by
“open[ing] up escapes from such situations and such impasses as offer no
empirical way out except by ritual and belief into the domain of the
supernatural.”²⁵²⁵ The inadequacy of this “theology of optimism,” as
Nadel rather dryly called it, is, of course, radical.²⁶²⁶ Over its
career religion has probably disturbed men as much as it has cheered
them; forced them into a head-on, unblinking confrontation of the fact
that they are born to trouble as often as it has enabled them to avoid
such a confrontation by projecting them into sort of infantile
fairy-tale worlds where—Malinowski again—“hope cannot fail nor desire
deceive.”²⁷²⁷ With the possible exception of Christian Science, there
are few if any religious traditions, “great” or “little,” in which the
proposition that life hurts is not strenuously affirmed, and in some it
is virtually glorified:

She was an old [Ba-Ila] woman of a family with a long genealogy. Leza,
“the Besetting One”, stretched out his hand against the family. He slew
her mother and father while she was yet a child, and in the course of
years all connected with her perished. She said to herself, “Surely I
shall keep those who sit on my thighs.” But no, even they, the children
of her children, were taken from her. . . . Then came into her heart a
desperate resolution to find God and to ask the meaning of it all. . . .
So she began to travel, going through country after country, always with
the thought in her mind: “I shall come to where the earth ends and there
I shall find a road to God and I shall ask him: ‘What have I done to
thee that thou afflictest me in this manner?’” She never found where the
earth ends, but though disappointed she did not give up her search, and
as she passed through the different countries they asked her, “What have
you come for, old woman?” And the answer would be, “I am seeking Leza.”
“Seeking Leza! For what?” “My brothers, you ask me! Here in the nations
is there one who suffers as I have suffered?” And they would ask again,
“How have you suffered?” “In this way. I am alone. As you see me, a
solitary old woman; that is how I am!” And they answered, “Yes, we see.
That is how you are! Bereaved of friends and husband? In what do you
differ from others? The Besetting-One sits on the back of every one of
us and we cannot shake him off.” She never obtained her desire; she died
of a broken heart.²⁸²⁸

As a religious problem, the problem of suffering is, paradoxically, not
how to avoid suffering but how to suffer, how to make of physical pain,
personal loss, wordly defeat, or the helpless contemplation of others’
agony something bearable, supportable—something, as we say, sufferable.
It was in this effort that the Ba-Ila woman—perhaps necessarily, perhaps
not—failed and, literally not knowing how to feel about what had
happened to her, how to suffer, perished in confusion and despair. Where
the more intellective aspects of what Weber called the Problem of
Meaning are a matter affirming the ultimate explicability of experience,
the more affective aspects are a matter of affirming its ultimate
sufferableness. As religion on one side anchors the power of our
symbolic resources for formulating analytic ideas in an authoritative
conception of the overall shape of reality, so on another side it
anchors the power of our, also symbolic, resources for expressing
emotions—moods, sentiments, passions, affections, feelings—in a similar
conception of its pervasive tenor, its inherent tone and temper. For
those able to embrace them, and for so long as they are able to embrace
them, religious symbols provide a cosmic guarantee not only for their
ability to comprehend the world, but also, comprehending it, to give a
precision to their feeling, a definition to their emotions which enables
them, morosely or joyfully, grimly or cavalierly, to endure it.

Consider in this light the well-known Navaho curing rites usually
referred to as “sings.”²⁹²⁹ A sing—the Navaho have about sixty different
ones for different purposes, but virtually all of them are dedicated to
removing some sort of physical or mental illness—is a kind of religious
psychodrama in which there are three main actors: the “singer” or curer,
the patient, and, as a kind of antiphonal chorus, the patient’s family
and friends. The structure of all the sings, the drama’s plot, is quite
similar. There are three main acts: a purification of the patient and
audience; a statement, by means of repetitive chants and ritual
manipulations, of the wish to restore well-being (“harmony”) in the
patient; an identification of the patient with the Holy People and his
consequent “cure.” The purification rites involve forced sweating,
induced vomiting, and so on, to expel the sickness from the patient
physically. The chants, which are numberless, consist mainly of simple
optative phrases (“may the patient be well,” “I am getting better all
over,” etc.). And, finally, the identification of the patient with the
Holy People, and thus with cosmic order generally, is accomplished
through the agency of a sand painting depicting the Holy People in one
or another appropriate mythic setting. The singer places the patient on
the painting, touching the feet, hands, knees, shoulders, breast, back,
and head of the divine figures and then the corresponding parts of the
patient, performing thus what is essentially a bodily identification of
the human and the divine.³⁰³⁰ This is the climax of the sing: the whole
curing process may be likened, Reichard says, to a spiritual osmosis in
which the illness in man and the power of the deity penetrate the
ceremonial membrane in both directions, the former being neutralized by
the latter. Sickness seeps out in the sweat, vomit, and other
purification rites; health seeps in as the Navaho patient touches,
through the medium of the singer, the sacred sand painting. Clearly, the
symbolism of the sing focuses upon the problem of human suffering and
attempts to cope with it by placing it in a meaningful context,
providing a mode of action through which it can be expressed, being
expressed understood, and being understood, endured. The sustaining
effect of the sing (and since the commonest disease is tuberculosis, it
can in most cases be only sustaining), rests ultimately on its ability
to give the stricken person a vocabulary in terms of which to grasp the
nature of his distress and relate it to the wider world. Like a calvary,
a recitation of Buddha’s emergence from his father’s palace, or a
performance of Oedipus Tyrannos in other religious traditions, a sing is
mainly concerned with the presentation of a specific and concrete image
of truly human, and so endurable, suffering powerful enough to resist
the challenge of emotional meaninglessness raised by the existence of
intense and unremovable brute pain.

The problem of suffering passes easily into the problem of evil, for if
suffering is severe enough it usually, though not always, seems morally
undeserved as well, at least to the sufferer. But they are not, however,
exactly the same thing—a fact I think Weber, too influenced by the
biases of a monotheistic tradition in which, as the various aspects of
human experience must be conceived to proceed from a single,
voluntaristic source, man’s pain reflects directly on God’s goodness,
did not fully recognize in his generalization of the dilemmas of
Christian theodicy Eastward. For where the problem of suffering is
concerned with threats to our ability to put our “undisciplined squads
of emotion” into some sort of soldierly order, the problem of evil is
concerned with threats to our ability to make sound moral judgments.
What is involved in the problem of evil is not the adequacy of our
symbolic resources to govern our affective life, but the adequacy of
those resources to provide a workable set of ethical criteria, normative
guides to govern our action. The vexation here is the gap between things
as they are and as they ought to be if our conceptions of right and
wrong make sense, the gap between what we deem various individuals
deserve and what we see that they get—a phenomenon summed up in that
profound quatrain:

                                 The rain falls on the just

                                 And on the unjust fella;

                                 But mainly upon the just.

                                 Because the unjust has the just’s
umbrella.

Or if this seems too flippant an expression of an issue that, in
somewhat different form, animates the Book of Job and the Baghavad Gita,
the following classical Javanese poem, known, sung, and repeatedly
quoted in Java by virtually everyone over the age of six, puts the
point—the discrepancy between moral prescriptions and material rewards,
the seeming inconsistency of “is” and “ought”—rather more elegantly:

                                 We have lived to see a time without
order

                                 In which everyone is confused in his
mind.

                                 One cannot bear to join in the madness,

                                 But if he does not do so

                                 He will not share in the spoils,

                                 And will starve as a result.

                                 Yes, God; wrong is wrong:

                                 Happy are those who forget,

                                 Happier yet those who remember and have
deep insight.

Nor is it necessary to be theologically self-conscious to be religiously
sophisticated. The concern with intractable ethical paradox, the
disquieting sense that one’s moral insight is inadequate to one’s moral
experience, is as alive on the level of so-called primitive religion as
it is on that of the so-called civilized. The set of notions about
“division in the world” that Lienhardt describes for the Dinka is a
useful case in point.³¹³¹ Like so many peoples, the Dinka believe that
the sky, where “Divinity” is located, and earth, where man dwells, were
at one time contiguous, the sky lying just above the earth and being
connected to it by a rope, so that men could move at will between the
two realms. There was no death and the first man and woman were
permitted but a single grain of millet a day, which was all that they at
that time required. One day, the woman—of course—decided, out of greed,
to plant more than the permitted grain of millet, and in her avid haste
and industry accidentally struck Divinity with the handle of the hoe.
Offended, he severed the rope, withdrew into the distant sky of today,
and left man to labor for his food, to suffer sickness and death, and to
experience separation from the source of his being, his Creator. Yet the
meaning of this strangely familiar story to the Dinka is, as indeed is
Genesis to Jews and Christians, not homiletic but descriptive:

Those [Dinka] who have commented on these stories have sometimes made it
clear that their sympathies lie with Man in his plight, and draw
attention to the smallness of the fault for which Divinity withdrew the
benefits of his closeness. The image of striking Divinity with a hoe . .
. often evokes a certain amusement, almost as though the story were
indulgently being treated as too childish to explain the consequences
attributed to the event. But it is clear that the point of the story of
Divinity’s withdrawal from men is not to suggest an improving moral
judgment on human behaviour. It is to represent a total situation known
to the Dinka today. Men now are—as the first man and woman then
became—active, self-assertive, inquiring, acquisitive. Yet they are also
subject to suffering and death, ineffective, ignorant and poor. Life is
insecure; human calculations often prove erroneous, and men must often
learn by experience that the consequences of their acts are quite other
than they may have anticipated or consider equitable. Divinity’s
withdrawal from Man as the result of a comparatively trifling offence,
by human standards, presents the contrast between equitable human
judgments and the action of the Power which are held ultimately to
control what happens in Dinka life. . . . To the Dinka, the moral order
is ultimately constituted according to principles which often elude men,
which experience and tradition in part reveal, and which human action
cannot change. . . . The myth of Divinity’s withdrawal then reflects the
facts of existence as they are known. The Dinka are in a universe which
is largely beyond their control, and where events may contradict the
most reasonable human expectations.³²³²

Thus the problem of evil, or perhaps one should say the problem about
evil, is in essence the same sort of problem of or about bafflement and
the problem of or about suffering. The strange opacity of certain
empirical events, the dumb senselessness of intense or inexorable pain,
and the enigmatic unaccountability of gross iniquity all raise the
uncomfortable suspicion that perhaps the world, and hence man’s life in
the world, has no genuine order at all—no empirical regularity, no
emotional form, no moral coherence. And the religious response to this
suspicion is in each case the same: the formulation, by means of
symbols, of an image of such a genuine order of the world which will
account for, and even celebrate, the perceived ambiguities, puzzles, and
paradoxes in human experience. The effort is not to deny the
undeniable—that there are unexplained events, that life hurts, or that
rain falls upon the just—but to deny that there are inexplicable events,
that life is unendurable, and that justice is a mirage. The principles
which constitute the moral order may indeed often elude men, as
Lienhardt puts it, in the same way as fully satisfactory explanations of
anomalous events or effective forms for the expression of feeling often
elude them. What is important, to a religious man at least, is that this
elusiveness be accounted for, that it be not the result of the fact that
there are no such principles, explanations, or forms, that life is
absurd and the attempt to make moral, intellectual, or emotional sense
out of experience is bootless. The Dinka can admit, in fact insist upon,
the moral ambiguities and contradictions of life as they live it because
these ambiguities and contradictions are seen not as ultimate, but as
the “rational,” “natural,” “logical” (one may choose one’s own adjective
here, for none of them is truly adequate) outcome of the moral structure
of reality which the myth of the withdrawn “Divinity” depicts, or as
Lienhardt says, “images.”

The Problem of Meaning in each of its intergrading aspects (how these
aspects in fact intergrade in each particular case, what sort of
interplay there is between the sense of analytic, emotional, and moral
impotence, seems to me one of the outstanding, and except for Weber
untouched, problems for comparative research in this whole field) is a
matter of affirming, or at least recognizing, the inescapability of
ignorance, pain, and injustice on the human plane while simultaneously
denying that these irrationalities are characteristic of the world as a
whole. And it is in terms of religious symbolism, a symbolism relating
man’s sphere of existence to a wider sphere within which it is conceived
to rest, that both the affirmation and the denial are made.³³³³

 

 

             . . . and clothing those conceptions with such an aura of
factuality that. . .

There arises here, however, a more profound question: how is it that
this denial comes to be believed? How is it that the religious man moves
from a troubled perception of experienced disorder to a more or less
settled conviction of fundamental order? Just what does “belief” mean in
a religious context? Of all the problems surrounding attempts to conduct
anthropological analysis of religion this is the one that has perhaps
been most troublesome and therefore the most often avoided, usually by
relegating it to psychology, that raffish outcast discipline to which
social anthropologists are forever consigning phenomena they are unable
to deal with within the framework of a denatured Durkheimianism. But the
problem will not go away, it is not “merely” psychological (nothing
social is), and no anthropological theory of religion which fails to
attack it is worthy of the name. We have been trying to stage Hamlet
without the Prince quite long enough.

It seems to me that it is best to begin any approach to this issue with
frank recognition that religious belief involves not a Baconian
induction from everyday experience—for then we should all be
agnostics—but rather a prior acceptance of authority which transforms
that experience. The existence of bafflement, pain, and moral paradox—of
The Problem of Meaning—is one of the things that drives men toward
belief in gods, devils, spirits, totemic principles, or the spiritual
efficacy of cannibalism (an enfolding sense of beauty or a dazzling
perception of power are others), but it is not the basis upon which
those beliefs rest, but rather their most important field of
application:

We point to the state of the world as illustrative of doctrine, but
never as evidence for it. So Belsen illustrates a world of original sin,
but original sin is not an hypothesis to account for happenings like
Belsen. We justify a particular religious belief by showing its place in
the total religious conception; we justify a religious belief as a whole
by referring to authority. We accept authority because we discover it at
some point in the world at which we worship, at which we accept the
lordship of something not ourselves. We do not worship authority, but we
accept authority as defining the worshipful. So someone may discover the
possibility of worship in the life of the Reformed Churches and accept
the Bible as authoritative; or in the Roman Church and accept papal
authority.³⁴³⁴

This is, of course, a Christian statement of the matter; but it is not
to be despised on that account. In tribal religions authority lies in
the persuasive power of traditional imagery; in mystical ones in the
apodictic force of supersensible experience; in charismatic ones in the
hypnotic attraction of an extraordinary personality. But the priority of
the acceptance of an authoritative criterion in religious matters over
the revelation which is conceived to flow from that acceptance is not
less complete than in scriptural or hieratic ones. The basic axiom
underlying what we may perhaps call “the religious perspective” is
everywhere the same: he who would know must first believe.

But to speak of “the religious perspective” is, by implication, to speak
of one perspective among others. A perspective is a mode of seeing, in
that extended sense of “see” in which it means “discern,” “apprehend,”
“understand,” or “grasp.” It is a particular way of looking at life, a
particular manner of construing the world, as when we speak of an
historical perspective, a scientific perspective, an aesthetic
perspective, a common-sense perspective, or even the bizarre perspective
embodied in dreams and in hallucinations.³⁵³⁵ The question then comes
down to, first, what is “the religious perspective” generically
considered, as differentiated from other perspectives; and second, how
do men come to adopt it.

If we place the religious perspective against the background of three of
the other major perspectives in terms of which men construe the
world—the common-sensical, the scientific, and the aesthetic—its special
character emerges more sharply. What distinguishes common sense as a
mode of “seeing” is, as Schutz has pointed out, a simple acceptance of
the world, its objects, and its processes as being just what they seem
to be—what is sometimes called naive realism—and the pragmatic motive,
the wish to act upon that world so as to bend it to one’s practical
purposes, to master it, or so far as that proves impossible, to adjust
to it.³⁶³⁶ The world of everyday life, itself, of course, a cultural
product, for it is framed in terms of the symbolic conceptions of
“stubborn fact” handed down from generation to generation, is the
established scene and given object of our actions. Like Mt. Everest it
is just there, and the thing to do with it, if one feels the need to do
anything with it at all, is to climb it. In the scientific perspective
it is precisely this givenness which disappears.³⁷³⁷ Deliberate doubt
and systematic inquiry, the suspension of the pragmatic motive in favor
of disinterested observation, the attempt to analyze the world in terms
of formal concepts whose relationship to the informal conceptions of
common sense become increasingly problematic—there are the hallmarks of
the attempt to grasp the world scientifically. And as for the aesthetic
perspective, which under the rubric of “the aesthetic attitude” has been
perhaps most exquisitely examined, it involves a different sort of
suspension of naive realism and practical interest, in that instead of
questioning the credentials of everyday experience, one merely ignores
that experience in favor of an eager dwelling upon appearances, an
engrossment in surfaces, an absorption in things, as we say, “in
themselves”: “The function of artistic illusion is not ‘make-believe’. .
. but the very opposite, disengagement from belief—the contemplation of
sensory qualities without their usual meanings of ‘here’s that chair’,
‘that’s my telephone’. . . etc. The knowledge that what is before us has
no practical significance in the world is what enables us to give
attention to its appearance as such.”³⁸³⁸ And like the common sensical
and the scientific (or the historical, the philosophical, and the
artistic), this perspective, this “way of seeing” is not the product of
some mysterious Cartesian chemistry, but is induced, mediated, and in
fact created by means of curious quasi objects—poems, dramas,
sculptures, symphonies—which, dissociating themselves from the solid
world of common sense, take on the special sort of eloquence only sheer
appearances can achieve.

The religious perspective differs from the common-sensical in that, as
already pointed out, it moves beyond the realities of everyday life to
wider ones which correct and complete them, and its defining concern is
not action upon those wider realities but acceptance of them, faith in
them. It differs from the scientific perspective in that it questions
the realities of everyday life not out of an institutionalized
scepticism which dissolves the world’s givenness into a swirl of
probabilistic hypotheses, but in terms of what it takes to be wider,
nonhypothetical truths. Rather than detachment, its watchword is
commitment; rather than analysis, encounter. And it differs from art in
that instead of effecting a disengagement from the whole question of
factuality, deliberately manufacturing an air of semblance and illusion,
it deepens the concern with fact and seeks to create an aura of utter
actuality. It is this sense of the “really real” upon which the
religious perspective rests and which the symbolic activities of
religion as a cultural system are devoted to producing, intensifying,
and, so far as possible, rendering inviolable by the discordant
revelations of secular experience. It is, again, the imbuing of a
certain specific complex of symbols—of the metaphysic they formulate and
the style of life they recommend—with a persuasive authority which, from
an analytic point of view, is the essence of religious action.

Which brings us, at length, to ritual. For it is in ritual—that is,
consecrated behavior—that this conviction that religious conceptions are
veridical and that religious directives are sound is somehow generated.
It is in some sort of ceremonial form—even if that form be hardly more
than the recitation of a myth, the consultation of an oracle, or the
decoration of a grave—that the moods and motivations which sacred
symbols induce in men and the general conceptions of the order of
existence which they formulate for men meet and reinforce one another.
In a ritual, the world as lived and the world as imagined, fused under
the agency of a single set of symbolic forms, turn out to be the same
world, producing thus that idiosyncratic transformation in one’s sense
of reality to which Santayana refers in my epigraph. Whatever role
divine intervention may or may not play in the creation of faith—and it
is not the business of the scientist to pronounce upon such matters one
way or the other—it is, primarily at least, out of the context of
concrete acts of religious observance that religious conviction emerges
on the human plane.

However, though any religious ritual, no matter how apparently automatic
or conventional (if it is truly automatic or merely conventional it is
not religious), involves this symbolic fusion of ethos and world view,
it is mainly certain more elaborate and usually more public ones, ones
in which a broad range of moods and motivations on the one hand and of
metaphysical conceptions on the other are caught up, which shape the
spiritual consciousness of a people. Employing a useful term introduced
by Singer, we may call these full-blown ceremonies “cultural
performances” and note that they represent not only the point at which
the dispositional and conceptual aspects of religious life converge for
the believer, but also the point at which the interaction between them
can be most readily examined by the detached observer:

Whenever Madrasi Brahmans (and non-Brahmans, too, for that matter)
wished to exhibit to me some feature of Hinduism, they always referred
to, or invited me to see, a particular rite or ceremony in the life
cycle, in a temple festival, or in the general sphere of religious and
cultural performances. Reflecting on this in the course of my interviews
and observations I found that the more abstract generalizations about
Hinduism (my own as well as those I heard) could generally be checked,
directly or indirectly, against these observable performances.³⁹³⁹

Of course, all cultural performances are not religious performances, and
the line between those that are and artistic, or even political, ones is
often not so easy to draw in practice, for, like social forms, symbolic
forms can serve multiple purposes. But the point is that, paraphrasing
slightly, Indians—“and perhaps all peoples”—seem to think of their
religion “as encapsulated in these discrete performances which they
[can] exhibit to visitors and to themselves.”⁴⁰⁴⁰ The mode of exhibition
is however radically different for the two sorts of witness, a fact
seemingly overlooked by those who would argue that “religion is a form
of human art.”⁴¹⁴¹ Where for “visitors” religious performances can, in
the nature of the case, only be presentations of a particular religious
perspective, and thus aesthetically appreciated or scientifically
dissected, for participants they are in addition enactments,
materializations, realizations of it—not only models of what they
believe, but also models for the believing of it. In these plastic
dramas men attain their faith as they portray it.

As a case in point, let me take a spectacularly theatrical cultural
performance from Bali—that in which a terrible witch called Rangda
engages in a ritual combat with an endearing monster called Barong.⁴²⁴²
Usually, but not inevitably presented on the occasion of a death temple
celebration, the drama consists of a masked dance in which the
witch—depicted as a wasted old widow, prostitute, and eater of
infants—comes to spread plague and death upon the land and is opposed by
the monster—depicted as a kind of cross between a clumsy bear, a silly
puppy, and a strutting Chinese dragon. Rangda, danced by a single male,
is a hideous figure. Her eyes bulge from her forehead like swollen
boils. Her teeth become tusks curving up over her cheeks and fangs
protruding down over her chin. Her yellowed hair falls down around her
in a matted tangle. Her breasts are dry and pendulous dugs edged with
hair, between which hang, like so many sausages, strings of colored
entrails. Her long red tongue is a stream of fire. And as she dances she
splays her dead-white hands, from which protrude ten-inch claw-like
fingernails, out in front of her and utters unnerving shrieks of
metallic laughter. Barong, danced by two men fore-and-aft in vaudeville
horse fashion, is another matter. His shaggy sheepdog coat is hung with
gold and mica ornaments that glitter in the half-light. He is adorned
with flowers, sashes, feathers, mirrors, and a comical beard made from
human hair. And though a demon too, his eyes also pop and he snaps his
fanged jaws with seemly fierceness when faced with Rangda or other
affronts to his dignity; the cluster of tinkling bells which hang from
his absurdly arching tail somehow contrives to take most of the edge off
his fearfulness. If Rangda is a satanic image, Barong is a farcical one,
and their clash is a clash (an inconclusive one) between the malignant
and the ludicrous.

This odd counterpoint of implacable malice and low comedy pervades the
whole performance. Rangda, clutching her magical white cloth, moves
around in a slow stagger, now pausing immobile in thought or
uncertainty, now lurching suddenly forward. The moment of her entry (one
sees those terrible long-nailed hands first as she emerges through the
split gateway at the top of a short flight of stone stairs) is one of
terrific tension when it seems, to a “visitor” at least, that everyone
is about to break and run in panic. She herself seems insane with fear
and hatred as she screams deprecations at Barong amid the wild clanging
of the gamelan. She may in fact go amok. I have myself seen Rangdas hurl
themselves headlong into the gamelan or run frantically about in total
confusion, being subdued and reoriented only by the combined force of a
half-dozen spectators; and one hears many tales of amok Rangdas holding
a whole village in terror for hours and of impersonators becoming
permanently deranged by their experiences. But Barong, though he is
charged with the same mana-like sacred power (sakti in Balinese) as
Rangda, and his impersonators are also entranced, seems to have very
great difficulty in being serious. He frolics with his retinue of demons
(who add to the gaiety by indelicate pranks of their own), lies down on
a metallaphone while it is being played or beats on a drum with his
legs, moves in one direction in his front half and another in his rear
or bends his segmented body into foolish contortions, brushes flies from
his body or sniffs aromas in the air, and generally prances about in
paroxysms of narcissistic vanity. The contrast is not absolute, for
Rangda is sometimes momentarily comic as when she pretends to polish the
mirrors on Barong’s coat, and Barong becomes rather more serious after
Rangda appears, nervously clacking his jaws at her and ultimately
attacking her directly. Nor are the humorous and the horrible always
kept rigidly separated, as in that strange scene in one section of the
cycle in which several minor witches (disciples of Rangda) toss the
corpse of a stillborn child around to the wild amusement of the
audience; or another, no less strange, in which the sight of a pregnant
woman alternating hysterically between tears and laughter while being
knocked about by a group of gravediggers, seems for some reason
excruciatingly funny. The twin themes of horror and hilarity find their
purest expression in the two protagonists and their endless, indecisive
struggle for dominance, but they are woven with deliberate intricacy
through the whole texture of the drama. They—or rather the relations
between them—are what it is about.

It is unnecessary to attempt a thoroughgoing description of a
Rangda–Barong performance here. Such performances vary widely in detail,
consist of several not too closely integrated parts, and in any case are
so complex in structure as to defy easy summary. For our purposes, the
main point to be stressed is that the drama is, for the Balinese, not
merely a spectacle to be watched but a ritual to be enacted. There is no
aesthetic distance here separating actors from audience and placing the
depicted events in an unenterable world of illusion, and by the time a
full-scale Rangda–Barong encounter has been concluded a majority, often
nearly all, of the members of the group sponsoring it will have become
caught up in it not just imaginatively but bodily. In one of Belo’s
examples I count upwards of seventy-five people—men, women, and
children—taking part in the activity at some point or other, and thirty
to forty participants is in no way unusual. As a performance, the drama
is like a high mass, not like a presentation of Murder in the Cathedral:
it is a drawing near, not a standing back.

In part, this entry into the body of the ritual takes place through the
agency of the various supporting roles contained in it—minor witches,
demons, various sorts of legendary and mythical figures—which selected
villagers enact. But mostly it takes place through the agency of an
extraordinarily developed capacity for psychological dissociation on the
part of a very large segment of the population. A Rangda-Barong struggle
is inevitably marked by anywhere from three or four to several dozen
spectators becoming possessed by one or another demon, falling into
violent trances “like firecrackers going off one after the other,”⁴³⁴³
and, snatching up krisses, rushing to join the fray. Mass trance,
spreading like a panic, projects the individual Balinese out of the
commonplace world in which he usually lives into that most uncommonplace
one in which Rangda and Barong live. To become entranced is, for the
Balinese, to cross a threshold into another order of existence—the word
for trance is nadi, from dadi, often translated “to become” but which
might be even more simply rendered as “to be.” And even those who, for
whatever reasons, do not make this spiritual crossing are caught up in
the proceedings, for it is they who must keep the frenzied activities of
the entranced from getting out of hand by the application of physical
restraint if they are ordinary men, by the sprinkling of holy water and
the chanting of spells if they are priests. At its height a
Rangda–Barong rite hovers, or at least seems to hover, on the brink of
mass amok with the diminishing band of the unentranced striving
desperately (and, it seems, almost always successfully) to control the
growing band of the entranced.

In its standard form—if it can be said to have a standard form—the
performance begins with an appearance of Barong, prancing and preening,
as a general prophylactic against what is to follow. Then may come
various mythic scenes relating the story—not always precisely the same
ones—upon which the performance is based, until finally Barong and then
Rangda appear. Their battle begins. Barong drives Rangda back toward the
gate of the death temple. But he has not the power to expel her
completely, and he is in turn driven back toward the village. At length,
when it seems as though Rangda will finally prevail, a number of
entranced men rise, krisses in hand, and rush to support Barong. But as
they approach Rangda (who has turned her back in meditation), she wheels
upon them and, waving her sakti white cloth, leaves them comatose on the
ground. Rangda then hastily retires (or is carried) to the temple, where
she herself collapses, hidden from the aroused crowd which, my
informants said, would kill her were it to see her in a helpless state.
The Barong moves among the kris dancers and wakens them by snapping his
jaws at them or nuzzling them with his beard. As they return, still
entranced, to “consciousness,” they are enraged by the disappearance of
Rangda, and unable to attack her they turn their krisses (harmlessly
because they are entranced) against their own chests in frustration.
Usually sheer pandemonium breaks out at this point with members of the
crowd, of both sexes, falling into trance all around the courtyard and
rushing out to stab themselves, wrestle with one another, devour live
chicks or excrement, wallow convulsively in the mud, and so on, while
the nonentranced attempt to relieve them of their krisses and keep them
at least minimally in order. In time, the trancers sink, one by one,
into coma, from which they are aroused by the priests’ holy water and
the great battle is over—once more a complete stand-off. Rangda has not
been conquered, but neither has she conquered.

One place to search for the meaning of this ritual is in the collection
of myths, tales, and explicit beliefs which it supposedly enacts.
However, not only are these various and variable—for some people Rangda
is an incarnation of Durga, Siva’s malignant consort; for others she is
Queen Mahendradatta, a figure from a court legend set in eleventh
century Java; for yet others, the spiritual leader of witches as the
Brahmana Priest is the spiritual leader of men. Notions of who (or
“what”) Barong is are equally diverse and even vaguer—but they seem to
play only a secondary role in the Balinese’ perception of the drama. It
is in the direct encounter with the two figures in the context of the
actual performance that the villager comes to know them as, so far as he
is concerned, genuine realities. They are, then, not representations of
anything, but presences. And when the villagers go into trance they
become—nadi—themselves part of the realm in which those presences exist.
To ask, as I once did, a man who has been Rangda whether he thinks she
is real is to leave oneself open to the suspicion of idiocy.

The acceptance of authority that underlies the religious perspective
that the ritual embodies thus flows from the enactment of the ritual
itself. By inducing a set of moods and motivations—an ethos—and defining
an image of cosmic order—a world view—by means of a single set of
symbols, the performance makes the model for and model of aspects of
religious belief mere transpositions of one another. Rangda evokes fear
(as well as hatred, disgust, cruelty, horror, and, though I have not
been able to treat the sexual aspects of the performance here, lust);
but she also depicts it:

The fascination which the figure of the Witch holds for the Balinese
imagination can only be explained when it is recognized that the Witch
is not only a fear inspiring figure, but that she is Fear. Her hands
with their long menacing finger-nails do not clutch and claw at her
victims, although children who play at being witches do curl their hands
in such gestures. But the Witch herself spreads her arms with palms out
and her finger flexed backward, in the gesture the Balinese call kapar,
a term which they apply to the sudden startled reaction of a man who
falls from a tree. . . . Only when we see the Witch as herself afraid,
as well as frightening, is it possible to explain her appeal, and the
pathos which surrounds her as she dances, hairy, forbidding, tusked and
alone, giving her occasional high eerie laugh.⁴⁴⁴⁴

And on his side Barong not only induces laughter, he incarnates the
Balinese version of the comic spirit—a distinctive combination of
playfulness, exhibitionism, and extravagant love of elegance, which,
along with fear, is perhaps the dominant motive in their life. The
constantly recurring struggle of Rangda and Barong to an inevitable draw
is thus—for the believing Balinese—both the formulation of a general
religious conception and the authoritative experience which justifies,
even compels, its acceptance.

             . . . that the moods and motivations seem uniquely
realistic

But no one, not even a saint, lives in the world religious symbols
formulate all of the time, and the majority of men live in it only at
moments. The everyday world of common-sense objects and practical acts
is, as Schutz says, the paramount reality in human experience—paramount
in the sense that it is the world in which we are most solidly rooted,
whose inherent actuality we can hardly question (however much we may
question certain portions of it), and from whose pressures and
requirements we can least escape.⁴⁵⁴⁵ A man, even large groups of men,
may be aesthetically insensitive, religiously unconcerned, and
unequipped to pursue formal scientific analysis, but he cannot be
completely lacking in common sense and survive. The dispositions which
religious rituals induce thus have their most important impact—from a
human point of view—outside the boundaries of the ritual itself as they
reflect back to color the individual’s conception of the established
world of bare fact. The peculiar tone that marks the Plains vision
quest, the Manus confession, or the Javanese mystical exercise pervades
areas of the life of these peoples far beyond the immediately religious,
impressing upon them a distinctive style in the sense both of a dominant
mood and a characteristic movement. The interweaving of the malignant
and the comic, which the Rangda-Barong combat depicts, animates a very
wide range of everyday Balinese behavior, much of which, like the ritual
itself, has an air of candid fear narrowly contained by obsessive
playfulness. Religion is sociologically interesting not because, as
vulgar positivism would have it, it describes the social order (which,
in so far as it does, it does not only very obliquely but very
incompletely), but because, like environment, political power, wealth,
jural obligation, personal affection, and a sense of beauty, it shapes
it.

The movement back and forth between the religious perspective and the
common-sense perspective is actually one of the more obvious empirical
occurrences on the social scene, though, again, one of the most
neglected by social anthropologists, virtually all of whom have seen it
happen countless times. Religious belief has usually been presented as a
homogeneous characteristic of an individual, like his place of
residence, his occupational role, his kinship position, and so on. But
religious belief in the midst of ritual, where it engulfs the total
person, transporting him, so far as he is concerned, into another mode
of existence, and religious belief as the pale, remembered reflection of
that experience in the midst of everyday life are not precisely the same
thing, and the failure to realize this has led to some confusion, most
especially in connection with the so-called primitive-mentality problem.
Much of the difficulty between Lévy-Bruhl and Malinowski on the nature
of “native thought,” for example, arises from a lack of full recognition
of this distinction; for where the French philosopher was concerned with
the view of reality savages adopted when taking a specifically religious
perspective, the Polish-English ethnographer was concerned with that
which they adopted when taking a strictly common-sense one.⁴⁶⁴⁶ Both
perhaps vaguely sensed that they were not talking about exactly the same
thing, but where they went astray was in failing to give a specific
accounting of the way in which these two forms of “thought”—or, as I
would rather say, these two modes of symbolic formulations—interacted,
so that where Lévy-Bruhl’s savages tended to live, despite his
postludial disclaimers, in a world composed entirely of mystical
encounters, Malinowski’s tended to live, despite his stress on the
functional importance of religion, in a world composed entirely of
practical actions. They became reductionists (an idealist is as much of
a reductionist as a materialist) in spite of themselves because they
failed to see man as moving more or less easily, and very frequently,
between radically contrasting ways of looking at the world, ways which
are not continuous with one another but separated by cultural gaps
across which Kierkegaardian leaps must be made in both directions:

There are as many innumerable kinds of different shock experiences as
there are different finite provinces of meaning upon which I may bestow
the accent of reality. Some instances are: the shock of falling asleep
as the leap into the world of dreams; the inner transformation we endure
if the curtain in the theatre rises as the transition to the world of
the stageplay; the radical change in our attitude if, before a painting,
we permit our visual field to be limited by what is within the frame as
the passage into the pictorial world; our quandary relaxing into
laughter, if, in listening to a joke, we are for a short time ready to
accept the fictitious world of the jest as a reality in relation to
which the world of our daily life takes on the character of foolishness;
the child’s turning toward his toy as the transition into the
play-world; and so on. But also the religious experiences in all their
varieties—for instance, Kierkegaard’s experience of the “instant” as the
leap into the religious sphere—are examples of such a shock, as well as
the decision of the scientist to replace all passionate participation in
the affairs of “this world” by a disinterested [analytical]
attitude.⁴⁷⁴⁷

The recognition and exploration of the qualitative difference—an
empirical, not a transcendental difference—between religion pure and
religion applied, between an encounter with the supposedly “really real”
and a viewing of ordinary experience in light of what that encounter
seems to reveal, will, therefore, take us further toward an
understanding of what a Bororo means when he says “I am a parakeet,” or
a Christian when he says “I am a sinner,” than either a theory of
primitive mysticism in which the commonplace world disappears into a
cloud of curious ideas or of a primitive pragmatism in which religion
disintegrates into a collection of useful fictions. The parakeet
example, which I take from Percy, is a good one.⁴⁸⁴⁸ For, as he points
out, it is unsatisfactory to say either that the Bororo thinks he is
literally a parakeet (for he does not try to mate with other parakeets),
that his statement is false or nonsense (for, clearly, he is not
offering—or at least not only offering—the sort of class-membership
argument which can be confirmed or refuted as, say, “I am a Bororo” can
be confirmed or refuted), or yet again that it is false scientifically
but true mythically (because that leads immediately to the pragmatic
fiction notion which, as it denies the accolade of truth to “myth” in
the very act of bestowing it, is internally self-contradictory). More
coherently it would seem to be necessary to see the sentence as having a
different sense in the context of the “finite province of meaning” which
makes up the religious perspective and of that which makes up the
common-sensical. In the religious, our Bororo is “really” a “parakeet,”
and given the proper ritual context might well “mate” with other
“parakeets”—with metaphysical ones like himself, not commonplace ones
such as those which fly bodily about in ordinary trees. In the
common-sensical perspective he is a parakeet in the sense—I assume—that
he belongs to a clan whose members regard the parakeet as their totem, a
membership from which, given the fundamental nature of reality as the
religious perspective reveals it, certain moral and practical
consequences flow. A man who says he is a parakeet is, if he says it in
normal conversation, saying that, as myth and ritual demonstrate, he is
shot through with parakeetness and that this religious fact has some
crucial social implications—we parakeets must stick together, not marry
one another, not eat mundane parakeets, and so on, for to do otherwise
is to act against the grain of the whole universe. It is this placing of
proximate acts in ultimate contexts that makes religion, frequently at
least, socially so powerful. It alters, often radically, the whole
landscape presented to common sense, alters it in such a way that the
moods and motivations induced by religious practice seem themselves
supremely practical, the only sensible ones to adopt given the way
things “really” are.

Having ritually “lept” (the image is perhaps a bit too athletic for the
actual facts—“slipped” might be more accurate) into the framework of
meaning which religious conceptions define, and the ritual ended,
returned again to the common-sense world, a man is—unless, as sometimes
happens, the experience fails to register—changed. And as he is changed,
so also is the common-sense world, for it is now seen as but the partial
form of a wider reality which corrects and completes it.

But this correction and completion is not, as some students of
“comparative religion” would have it, everywhere the same in content.
The nature of the bias religion gives to ordinary life varies with the
religion involved, with the particular dispositions induced in the
believer by the specific conceptions of cosmic order he has come to
accept. On the level of the “great” religions, organic distinctiveness
is usually recognized, at times insisted upon to the point of zealotry.
But even at its simplest folk and tribal levels—where the individuality
of religious traditions has so often been dissolved into such desiccated
types as “animism,” “animatism,” “totemism,” “shamanism,” “ancestor
worship,” and all the other insipid categories by means of which
ethnographers of religion devitalize their data—the idiosyncratic
character of how various groups of men behave because of what they
believe they have experienced is clear. A tranquil Javanese would be no
more at home in guilt-ridden Manus than an activist Crow would be in
passionless Java. And for all the witches and ritual clowns in the
world, Rangda and Barong are not generalized but thoroughly singular
figurations of fear and gaiety. What men believe is as various as what
they are—a proposition that holds with equal force when it is inverted.

It is this particularity of the impact of religious systems upon social
systems (and upon personality systems) which renders general assessments
of the value of religion in either moral or functional terms impossible.
The sorts of moods and motivations which characterize a man who has just
come from an Aztec human sacrifice are rather different from those of
one who has just put off his Kachina mask. Even within the same society,
what one “learns” about the essential pattern of life from a sorcery
rite and from a commensal meal will have rather diverse effects on
social and psychological functioning. One of the main methodological
problems in writing about religion scientifically is to put aside at
once the tone of the village atheist and that of the village preacher,
as well as their more sophisticated equivalents, so that the social and
psychological implications of particular religious beliefs can emerge in
a clear and neutral light. And when that is done, overall questions
about whether religion is “good” or “bad,” “functional” or
“dysfunctional,” “ego strengthening” or “anxiety producing,” disappear
like the chimeras they are, and one is left with particular evaluations,
assessments, and diagnoses in particular cases. There remains, of
course, the hardly unimportant questions of whether this or that
religious assertion is true, this or that religious experience genuine,
or whether true religious assertions and genuine religious experiences
are possible at all. But such questions cannot even be asked, much less
answered, within the self-imposed limitations of the scientific
perspective.

III

For an anthropologist, the importance of religion lies in its capacity
to serve, for an individual or for a group, as a source of general, yet
distinctive, conceptions of the world, the self, and the relations
between them, on the one hand—its model of aspect—and of rooted, no less
distinctive “mental” dispositions—its model for aspect—on the other.
From these cultural functions flow, in turn, its social and
psychological ones.

Religious concepts spread beyond their specifically metaphysical
contexts to provide a framework of general ideas in terms of which a
wide range of experience—intellectual, emotional, moral—can be given
meaningful form. The Christian sees the Nazi movement against the
background of The Fall which, though it does not, in a causal sense,
explain it, places it in a moral, a cognitive, even an affective sense.
An Azande sees the collapse of a granary upon a friend or relative
against the background of a concrete and rather special notion of
witchcraft and thus avoids the philosophical dilemmas as well as the
psychological stress of indeterminism. A Javanese finds in the borrowed
and reworked concept of rasa (“sense-taste-feeling-meaning”) a means by
which to “see” choreographic, gustatory, emotional, and political
phenomena in a new light. A synopsis of cosmic order, a set of religious
beliefs, is also a gloss upon the mundane world of social relationships
and psychological events. It renders them graspable.

But more than gloss, such beliefs are also a template. They do not
merely interpret social and psychological processes in cosmic terms—in
which case they would be philosophical, not religious—but they shape
them. In the doctrine of original sin is embedded also a recommended
attitude toward life, a recurring mood, and a persisting set of
motivations. The Azande learns from witchcraft conceptions not just to
understand apparent “accidents” as not accidents at all, but to react to
these spurious accidents with hatred for the agent who caused them and
to proceed against him with appropriate resolution. Rasa, in addition to
being a concept of truth, beauty, and goodness, is also a preferred mode
of experiencing, a kind of affectless detachment, a variety of bland
aloofness, an unshakable calm. The moods and motivations a religious
orientation produces cast a derivative, lunar light over the solid
features of a people’s secular life.

The tracing of the social and psychological role of religion is thus not
so much a matter of finding correlations between specific ritual acts
and specific secular social ties—though these correlations do, of
course, exist and are very worth continued investigation, especially if
we can contrive something novel to say about them. More, it is a matter
of understanding how it is that men’s notions, however implicit, of the
“really real” and the dispositions these notions induce in them, color
their sense of the reasonable, the practical, the humane, and the moral.
How far they do so (for in many societies religion’s effects seem quite
circumscribed, in others completely pervasive), how deeply they do so
(for some men, and groups of men, seem to wear their religion lightly so
far as the secular world goes, while others seem to apply their faith to
each occasion, no matter how trivial), and how effectively they do so
(for the width of the gap between what religion recommends and what
people actually do is most variable cross-culturally)—all these are
crucial issues in the comparative sociology and psychology of religion.
Even the degree to which religious systems themselves are developed
seems to vary extremely widely, and not merely on a simple evolutionary
basis. In one society, the level of elaboration of symbolic formulations
of ultimate actuality may reach extraordinary degrees of complexity and
systematic articulation; in another, no less developed socially, such
formulations may remain primitive in the true sense, hardly more than
congeries of fragmentary by-beliefs and isolated images, of sacred
reflexes and spiritual pictographs. One need only think of the
Australians and the Bushmen, the Toradja and the Alorese, the Hopi and
the Apache, the Hindus and the Romans, or even the Italians and the
Poles, to see that degree of religious articulateness is not a constant
even as between societies of similar complexity.

The anthropological study of religion is therefore a two-stage
operation: first, an analysis of the system of meanings embodied in the
symbols which make up the religion proper, and, second, the relating of
these systems to social-structural and psychological processes. My
dissatisfaction with so much of contemporary social anthropological work
in religion is not that it concerns itself with the second stage, but
that it neglects the first, and in so doing takes for granted what most
needs to be elucidated. To discuss the role of ancestor worship in
regulating political succession, of sacrificial feasts in defining
kinship obligations, of spirit worship in scheduling agricultural
practices, of divination in reinforcing social control, or of initiation
rites in propelling personality maturation, are in no sense unimportant
endeavors, and I am not recommending they be abandoned for the kind of
jejune cabalism into which symbolic analysis of exotic faiths can so
easily fall. But to attempt them with but the most general, common-sense
view of what ancestor worship, animal sacrifice, spirit worship,
divination, or initiation rites are as religious patterns seems to me
not particularly promising. Only when we have a theoretical analysis of
symbolic action comparable in sophistication to that we now have for
social and psychological action, will we be able to cope effectively
with those aspects of social and psychological life in which religion
(or art, or science, or ideology) plays a determinant role.

[]

1 L. Steinberg, “The Eye Is Part of the Mind,” Partisan Review 70
(1953): 194–212

2 M. Janowitz, “Anthropology and the Social Sciences,” Current
Anthropology 4 (1963):139, 146–154.

3 T. Parsons and E. Shils, Toward a General Theory of Action (Cambridge,
Mass., 1951).

4 S. Langer, Philosophical Sketches (Baltimore, 1962).

5 S. Langer, Philosophy in a New Key, 4th ed. (Cambridge, Mass., 1960).

6 K. Burke, The Philosophy of Literary Form (Baton Rouge, La.: Louisiana
State University Press, 1941), p. 9.

7 The reverse mistake, especially common among neo-Kantians such as
Cassirer, of taking symbols to be identical with, or “constitutive of,”
their referents is equally pernicious. [Cf. E. Cassirer, The Philosophy
of Symbolic Forms (New Haven: 1953–1957), 3 vols.] “One can point to the
moon with one’s finger,” some, probably well-invented, Zen Master is
supposed to have said, “but to take one’s finger for the moon is to be a
fool.”

8 K. Craik, The Nature of Explanation (Cambridge, 1952).

9 K. Lorenz, King Solomon’s Ring (London, 1952).

10 K. von Frisch, “Dialects in the Language of the Bees,” Scientific
American, August 1962.

11 Craik, Nature of Explanation.

12 R. H. Lowie, Primitive Religion (New York, 1924).

13 R. F. Fortune, Manus Religion (Philadelphia, 1935).

14 C. Geertz, The Religion of Java (Glencoe, III., 1960).

15 G. Ryle, The Concept of Mind (London and New York, 1949).

16 Ibid., p. 86. Quoted by permission of Barnes & Noble Books and
Hutchinson Publishing Group Ltd.

17 Ibid., p. 99.

18 C. Kluckhohn, “The Philosophy of the Navaho Indians,” in Ideological
Differences and World Order, ed. F. S. C. Northrop (New Haven, 1949),
pp. 356–384.

19 J. Goody, “Religion and Ritual: The Definition Problem,” British
Journal of Psychology 12 (1961):143–164.

20 W. James, The Principles of Psychology, 2 vols. (New York, 1904).

21 Langer, Philosophy in a New Key, p. 287. Italics in original.

22 E. Evans-Pritchard, Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic Among the Azande
(Oxford, 1937).

23 A. R. Radcliffe-Brown, Structure and Function in Primitive Society
(Glencoe, III., 1952).

24 G. Bateson, Naven, 2nd ed. (Stanford, 1958). That the chronic and
acute forms of this sort of cognitive concern are closely interrelated,
and that responses to the more unusual occasions of it are patterned on
responses established in coping with the more usual is also clear from
Bateson’s description, however, as he goes on to say: “On another
occasion I invited one of my informants to witness the development of
photographic plates. I first desensitized the plates and then developed
them in an open dish in moderate light, so that my informant was able to
see the gradual appearance of the images. He was much interested, and
some days later made me promise never to show this process to members of
other clans. Kontum-mali was one of his ancestors, and he saw in the
process of photographic development the actual embodiment of ripples
into images, and regarded this as a demonstration of the clan’s secret.”

25 G. Lienhardt, Divinity and Experience (Oxford, 1961), p. 151ff; B.
Malinowski, Magic, Science and Religion (Boston, 1948), p. 67.

26 S. F. Nadel, “Malinowski on Magic and Religion,” in Man and Culture,
ed. R. Firth (London, 1957), pp. 189–208.

27 Malinowski, Magic, Science and Religion (Boston, 1948), p. 67.

28 C. W. Smith and A. M. Dale, The Ila-Speaking Peoples of Northern
Rhodesia (London, 1920), p. 197ff.; quoted in P. Radin, Primitive Man as
a Philosopher (New York, 1957), pp. 100–101.

29 C. Kluckhohn and D. Leighton, The Navaho (Cambridge, Mass., 1946); G.
Reichard, Navaho Religion, 2 vols. (New York, 1950).

30 Reichard, Navaho Religion.

31 Ibid., pp. 28–55.

32 Ibid.

33 This is not, however, to say that everyone in every society does
this; for as the immortal Don Marquis once remarked, you don’t have to
have a soul unless you really want one. The oft-heard generalization
that religion is a human universal embodies a confusion between the
probably true (though on present evidence unprovable) proposition that
there is no human society in which cultural patterns that we can, under
the present definition or one like it, call religious are totally
lacking, and the surely untrue proposition that all men in all societies
are, in any meaningful sense of the term, religious. But if the
anthropological study of religious commitment is underdeveloped, the
anthropological study of religious noncommitment is nonexistent. The
anthropology of religion will have come of age when some more subtle
Malinowski writes a book called “Belief and Unbelief (or even “Faith and
Hypocrisy”) in a Savage Society.”

34 A. MacIntyre, “The Logical Status of Religious Belief,” in
Metaphysical Beliefs, ed. A. MacIntyre (London, 1957), pp. 167–211.

35 The term “attitude” as in “aesthetic attitude” or “natural attitude”
is another, perhaps more common term for what I have here called
“perspective.” [For the first, see C. Bell, Art, London, 1914; for the
second, though the phrase is originally Husserl’s, see A. Schutz, The
Problem of Social Reality, vol. 1 of Collected Papers (The Hague,
1962).] But I have avoided it because of its strong subjectivist
connotations, its tendency to place the stress upon a supposed inner
state of an actor rather than on a certain sort of relation—a
symbolically mediated one—between an actor and a situation. This is not
to say, of course, that a phenomenological analysis of religious
experience, if cast in intersubjective, nontranscendental, genuinely
scientific terms [e.g., W. Percy, “Symbol, Consciousness and
Intersubjectivity,” Journal of Philosophy 15 (1958):631–641] is not
essential to a full understanding of religious belief, but merely that
that is not the focus of my concern here. “Outlook,” “frame of
reference,” “frame of mind,” “orientation,” “stance,” “mental set,” and
so on, are other terms sometimes employed, depending upon whether the
analyst wishes to stress the social, psychological, or cultural aspects
of the matter.

36 Schutz, The Problem of Social Reality.

37 Ibid.

38 S. Langer, Feeling and Form (New York, 1953), p. 49.

39 M. Singer, “The Cultural Pattern of Indian Civilization,” Far Eastern
Quarterly 15 (1955):23–26.

40 M. Singer, “The Great Tradition in a Metropolitan Center: Madras,” in
Traditional India, ed. M. Singer (Philadelphia, 1958), pp. 140–182.

41 R. Firth, Elements of Social Organization (London and New York,
1951), p. 250.

42 The Rangda-Barong complex has been extensively described and analyzed
by a series of unusually gifted ethnographers and I shall make no
attempt to present it here in more than schematic form. [See, for
example, J. Belo, Bali: Rangda and Barong (New York, 1949); J. Belo,
Trance in Bali (New York, 1960); B. DeZoete and W. Spies, Dance and
Drama in Bali (London, 1938); G. Bateson and M. Mead, Balinese Character
(New York, 1942); M. Covarrubias, The Island of Bali (New York, 1937).]
Much of my interpretation of the complex rests on personal observations
made in Bali during 1957–1958.

43 Belo, Trance in Bali.

44 G. Bateson and M. Mead, Balinese Character, p. 36.

45 Schutz, The Problem of Social Reality, p. 226ff.

46 Malinowski, Magic, Science and Religion; L. Lévy-Bruhl, How Natives
Think (New York, 1926).

47 Schutz, The Problem of Social Reality, p. 231.

48 W. Percy, “The Symbolic Structure of Interpersonal Process,”
Psychiatry 24 (1961): 39–52.

Chapter 5/ Ethos, World View, and the Analysis of Sacred Symbols

[]

I

Religion is never merely metaphysics. For all peoples the forms,
vehicles, and objects of worship are suffused with an aura of deep moral
seriousness. The holy bears within it everywhere a sense of intrinsic
obligation: it not only encourages devotion, it demands it; it not only
induces intellectual assent, it enforces emotional commitment. Whether
it be formulated as mana, as Brahma, or as the Holy Trinity, that which
is set apart as more than mundane is inevitably considered to have
far-reaching implications for the direction of human conduct. Never
merely metaphysics, religion is never merely ethics either. The source
of its moral vitality is conceived to lie in the fidelity with which it
expresses the fundamental nature of reality. The powerfully coercive
“ought” is felt to grow out of a comprehensive factual “is,” and in such
a way religion grounds the most specific requirements of human action in
the most general contexts of human existence.

In recent anthropological discussion, the moral (and aesthetic) aspects
of a given culture, the evaluative elements, have commonly been summed
up in the term “ethos,” while the cognitive, existential aspects have
been designated by the term “world view.” A people’s ethos is the tone,
character, and quality of their life, its moral and aesthetic style and
mood; it is the underlying attitude toward themselves and their world
that life reflects. Their world view is their picture of the way things
in sheer actuality are, their concept of nature, of self, of society. It
contains their most comprehensive ideas of order. Religious belief and
ritual confront and mutually confirm one another; the ethos is made
intellectually reasonable by being shown to represent a way of life
implied by the actual state of affairs which the world view describes,
and the world view is made emotionally acceptable by being presented as
an image of an actual state of affairs of which such a way of life is an
authentic expression. This demonstration of a meaningful relation
between the values a people holds and the general order of existence
within which it finds itself is an essential element in all religions,
however those values or that order be conceived. Whatever else religion
may be, it is in part an attempt (of an implicit and directly felt
rather than explicit and consciously thought-about sort) to conserve the
fund of general meanings in terms of which each individual interprets
his experience and organizes his conduct.

But meanings can only be “stored” in symbols: a cross, a crescent, or a
feathered serpent. Such religious symbols, dramatized in rituals or
related in myths, are felt somehow to sum up, for those for whom they
are resonant, what is known about the way the world is, the quality of
the emotional life it supports, and the way one ought to behave while in
it. Sacred symbols thus relate an ontology and a cosmology to an
aesthetics and a morality: their peculiar power comes from their
presumed ability to identify fact with value at the most fundamental
level, to give to what is otherwise merely actual, a comprehensive
normative import. The number of such synthesizing symbols is limited in
any culture, and though in theory we might think that a people could
construct a wholly autonomous value system independent of any
metaphysical referent, an ethics without ontology, we do not in fact
seem to have found such a people. The tendency to synthesize world view
and ethos at some level, if not logically necessary, is at least
empirically coercive; if it is not philosophically justified, it is at
least pragmatically universal.

Let me give as an example of this fusion of the existential and the
normative a quotation from one of James Walker’s Oglala (Sioux)
informants, which I find in Paul Radin’s neglected classic, Primitive
Man as a Philosopher:

The Oglala believe the circle to be sacred because the great spirit
caused everything in nature to be round except stone. Stone is the
implement of destruction. The sun and the sky, the earth and the moon
are round like a shield, though the sky is deep like a bowl. Everything
that breathes is round like the stem of a plant. Since the great spirit
has caused everything to be round mankind should look upon the circle as
sacred, for it is the symbol of all things in nature except stone. It is
also the symbol of the circle that makes the edge of the world and
therefore of the four winds that travel there. Consequently it is also
the symbol of the year. The day, the night, and the moon go in a circle
above the sky. Therefore the circle is a symbol of these divisions of
time and hence the symbol of all time.

For these reasons the Oglala make their tipis circular, their
camp-circle circular, and sit in a circle at all ceremonies. The circle
is also the symbol of the tipi and of shelter. If one makes a circle for
an ornament and it is not divided in any way, it should be understood as
the symbol of the world and of time.¹¹

Here is a subtle formulation of the relation between good and evil, and
of their grounding in the very nature of reality. Circle and eccentric
form, sun and stone, shelter and war are segregated into pairs of
disjunct classes whose significance is aesthetic, moral, and
ontological. The reasoned articulateness of this statement is atypical:
for most Oglala the circle, whether found in nature, painted on a
buffalo skin, or enacted in a sun dance, is but an unexamined luminous
symbol whose meaning is intuitively sensed, not consciously interpreted.
But the power of the symbol, analyzed or not, clearly rests on its
comprehensiveness, on its fruitfulness in ordering experience. Again and
again the idea of a sacred circle, a natural form with a moral import,
yields, when applied to the world within which the Oglala lives, new
meanings; continually it connects together elements within their
experience which would otherwise seem wholly disparate and, wholly
disparate, incomprehensible.

The common roundness of a human body and plant stem, of a moon and a
shield, of a tipi and a camp-circle, give them a vaguely conceived but
intensely felt significance. And this meaningful common element, once
abstracted, can then be employed for ritual purposes—as when in a peace
ceremony the pipe, the symbol of social solidarity, moves deliberately
in a perfect circle from one smoker to the next, the purity of the form
evoking the beneficence of the spirits—or to construe mythologically the
peculiar paradoxes and anomalies of moral experience, as when one sees
in a round stone the shaping power of good over evil.

II

It is a cluster of sacred symbols, woven into some sort of ordered
whole, which makes up a religious system. For those who are committed to
it, such a religious system seems to mediate genuine knowledge,
knowledge of the essential conditions in terms of which life must, of
necessity, be lived. Particularly where these symbols are uncriticized,
historically or philosophically, as they are in most of the world’s
cultures, individuals who ignore the moral-aesthetic norms the symbols
formulate, who follow a discordant style of life, are regarded not so
much as evil as stupid, insensitive, unlearned, or in the case of
extreme dereliction, mad. In Java, where I have done field work, small
children, simpletons, boors, the insane, and the flagrantly immoral are
all said to be “not yet Javanese,” and, not yet Javanese, not yet human.
Unethical behavior is referred to as “uncustomary,” the more serious
crimes (incest, sorcery, murder) are commonly accounted for by an
assumed lapse of reason, the less serious ones by a comment that the
culprit “does not know order,” and the word for “religion” and that for
“science” are the same. Morality has thus the air of simple realism, of
practical wisdom; religion supports proper conduct by picturing a world
in which such conduct is only common sense.

It is only common sense because between ethos and world view, between
the approved style of life and the assumed structure of reality, there
is conceived to be a simple and fundamental congruence such that they
complete one another and lend one another meaning. In Java, for example,
this view is summed up in a concept one hears continually invoked, that
of tjotjog. Tjotjog means to fit, as a key does in a lock, as an
efficacious medicine does to a disease, as a solution does to an
arithmetic problem, as a man does with the woman he marries (if he does
not, they will divorce). If your opinion agrees with mine we tjotjog; if
the meaning of my name fits my character (and if it brings me luck), it
is said to be tjotjog. Tasty food, correct theories, good manners,
comfortable surroundings, gratifying outcomes are all tjotjog. In the
broadest and most abstract sense, two items tjotjog when their
coincidence forms a coherent pattern which gives to each a significance
and a value it does not in itself have. There is implied here a
contrapuntal view of the universe in which that which is important is
what natural relationship the separate elements have to one another, how
they must be arranged to strike a chord and to avoid a dissonance. And,
as in harmony, the ultimately correct relationships are fixed,
determinate, and knowable, so religion, like harmony, is ultimately a
kind of practical science, producing value out of fact as music is
produced out of sound. In its specificity, tjotjog is a peculiarly
Javanese idea, but the notion that life takes on its true import when
human actions are tuned to cosmic conditions is widespread.

The sort of counterpoint between style of life and fundamental reality
which the sacred symbols formulate varies from culture to culture. For
the Navaho, an ethic prizing calm deliberateness, untiring persistence,
and dignified caution complements an image of nature as tremendously
powerful, mechanically regular, and highly dangerous. For the French, a
logical legalism is a response to the notion that reality is rationally
structured, that first principles are clear, precise, and unalterable
and so need only be discerned, memorized, and deductively applied to
concrete cases. For the Hindus, a transcendental moral determinism in
which one’s social and spiritual status in a future incarnation is an
automatic outcome of the nature of one’s action in the present, is
completed by a ritualistic duty-ethic bound to caste. In itself, either
side, the normative or the metaphysical, is arbitrary, but taken
together they form a gestalt with a peculiar kind of inevitability; a
French ethic in a Navaho world, or a Hindu one in a French world would
seem only quixotic, for it would lack the air of naturalness and simple
factuality which it has in its own context. It is this air of the
factual, of describing, after all, the genuinely reasonable way to live
which, given the facts of life, is the primary source of such an ethic’s
authoritativeness. What all sacred symbols assert is that the good for
man is to live realistically; where they differ is in the vision of
reality they construct.

However, it is not only positive values that sacred symbols dramatize,
but negative ones as well. They point not only toward the existence of
good but also of evil, and toward the conflict between them. The
so-called problem of evil is a matter of formulating in world-view terms
the actual nature of the destructive forces within the self and outside
of it, of interpreting murder, crop failure, sickness, earthquakes,
poverty, and oppression in such a way that it is possible to come to
some sort of terms with them. Declaring evil fundamentally unreal—as in
Indian religions and some versions of Christianity—is but one, rather
uncommon, solution to the problem; more often, the reality of evil is
accepted and characterized positively, and an attitude toward
it—resignation, active opposition, hedonistic escape, self-recrimination
and repentance, or a humble plea for mercy—is enjoined as reasonable and
proper, given its nature. Among the African Azande, where all natural
misfortune (death, illness, crop failure) is seen as caused by the
hatred of one man for another acting mechanically through witchcraft,
the attitude toward evil is a straightforward and practical one: it is
to be dealt with by means of reliably established divination in order to
discover the witch, and proven methods of social pressure to force him
to abandon his attack, or failing this, by effective vengeance-magic to
kill him. Among the Melanesian Manus, the conception that illness,
death, or financial failure are the result of a secret sin (adultery,
stealing, lying) which has offended the moral sensibilities of the
household spirit is coupled with an emphasis on public confession and
repentance as the rational way to cope with evil. For the Javanese, evil
results from unregulated passion and is resisted by detachment and
self-control. Thus, both what a people prizes and what it fears and
hates are depicted in its world view, symbolized in its religion, and in
turn expressed in the whole quality of its life. Its ethos is
distinctive not merely in terms of the sort of nobility it celebrates,
but also in terms of the sort of baseness it condemns; its vices are as
stylized as its virtues.

The force of a religion in supporting social values rests, then, on the
ability of its symbols to formulate a world in which those values, as
well as the forces opposing their realization, are fundamental
ingredients. It represents the power of the human imagination to
construct an image of reality in which, to quote Max Weber, “events are
not just there and happen, but they have a meaning and happen because of
that meaning.” The need for such a metaphysical grounding for values
seems to vary quite widely in intensity from culture to culture and from
individual to individual, but the tendency to desire some sort of
factual basis for one’s commitments seems practically universal; mere
conventionalism satisfies few people in any culture. However its role
may differ at various times, for various individuals, and in various
cultures, religion, by fusing ethos and world view, gives to a set of
social values what they perhaps most need to be coercive: an appearance
of objectivity. In sacred rituals and myths values are portrayed not as
subjective human preferences but as the imposed conditions for life
implicit in a world with a particular structure.

III

The sort of symbols (or symbol complexes) regarded by a people as sacred
varies very widely. Elaborate initiation rites, as among the
Australians; complex philosophical tales, as among the Maori; dramatic
shamanistic exhibitions, as among the Eskimo; cruel human sacrifice
rites, as among the Aztecs; obsessive curing ceremonies, as among the
Navaho; large communal feasts, as among various Polynesian groups—all
these patterns and many more seem to one people or another to sum up
most powerfully what it knows about living. Nor is there commonly but
one such complex: Malinowski’s famous Trobrianders seem equally
concerned with the rituals of gardening and those of trade. In a complex
civilization such as that of the Javanese—in which Hinduistic, Islamic,
and pagan influences all remain very strong—one could choose any of
several symbol complexes as revealing one or another aspect of the
integration of ethos and world view. But perhaps the clearest and most
direct insight into the relation between Javanese values and Javanese
metaphysics can be gained through a brief analysis of one of the most
deeply rooted and highly developed of their art forms which is at the
same time a religious rite: the shadow-puppet play, or wajang.

The shadow play is called so because the puppets, which are flat cutouts
of leather, painted in golds, reds, blues, and blacks, are made to cast
large shadows on a white screen. The dalang, as the puppeteer is called,
sits on a mat in front of the screen, with a gamelan percussion
orchestra behind him, an oil lamp hanging over his head. A banana tree
trunk lies horizontally in front of him into which the puppets, each of
them fastened to a tortoiseshell handle, are stuck. A performance lasts
a whole night. As the play progresses, the dalang takes and replaces
characters from the tree trunk as he needs them, holding them up in
either hand over his head and interposing them between the light and the
screen. From the dalang’s side of the screen—where traditionally only
the men were permitted to sit—one sees the puppets themselves, their
shadows rising up dominant on the screen behind them; from the reverse
side of the screen—where the women and children sit—one sees their
shadows only.

The stories dramatized are mostly episodes taken from the Indian epic
Mahabarata, somewhat adapted and placed in a Javanese setting. (Stories
from the Ramayana are sometimes dramatized, but they are less popular.)
In this cycle there are three major groups of characters. First, there
are the gods and goddesses, headed by Siva and his wife Durga. As in the
Greek epics, the gods are far from uniformly righteous, are marked by
human frailties and human passions, and seem peculiarly interested in
the things of this world. Second, there are the kings and nobles, who
are, in theory, the ancestors of the present-day Javanese. The two most
important groups of these nobles are the Pendawas and the Korawas. The
Pendawas are the famous five hero brothers—Yudistira, Bima, Arjuna, and
the identical twins, Nakula and Sadéwa—who are usually accompanied, as a
general advisor and protector, by Krisna, an incarnation of Visnu. The
Korawas, of whom there are a hundred, are cousins of the Pendawas. They
have usurped the kingdom of Ngastina from them, and it is the struggle
over this disputed country which provides the major theme of the wajang;
a struggle which culminates in the great Bratajuda war of kinsmen, as
related in the Bhagavad Gita, in which the Korawas are defeated by the
Pendawas. And, third, there are those Javanese additions to the original
Hindu cast of characters, the great low clowns—Semar, Petruk, and
Garèng, constant companions of the Pendawas, at once their servants and
their protectors. Semar, the father of the other two, is actually a god
in all-too-human form, a brother to Siva, king of the gods. The guardian
spirit of all Javanese from their first appearance until the end of
time, this gross and clumsy fool is perhaps the most important figure in
the whole wajang mythology.

The types of action characteristic of the wajang also are three: there
are the “talking” episodes in which two groups of opposed nobles
confront one another and discuss (the dalang imitates all the voices)
the issues between them; there are the fighting episodes, in which
diplomacy having failed, the two groups of nobles fight (the dalang
knocks the puppets together and kicks a clapper with his foot to
symbolize the sounds of war); and there are the slapstick comic scenes,
in which the clowns mock the nobles, each other, and, if the dalang is
clever, members of the audience or the local powers-that-be. Generally,
the three sorts of episodes are differentially distributed over the
course of the evening. The declamatory scenes are mostly toward the
beginning, the comic ones toward the middle, and the war toward the end.
From nine until midnight, the political leaders of the various kingdoms
confront one another and state the framework of the story—a wajang hero
wishes to marry the daughter of a neighboring king, a subjugated country
wants its freedom, or whatever. From midnight until three o’clock or so
difficulties of some sort set in—someone else is bidding for the
daughter’s hand, the imperialist country refuses freedom to its colony.
And, finally, these difficulties are resolved in the last section,
ending at dawn, inevitably, by a war in which the heroes triumph—an
action followed by a brief celebration of the accomplished marriage or
the achieved freedom. Western-educated Javanese intellectuals often
compare the wajang to a sonata; it opens with an exposition of a theme,
follows with a development and complication of it, and ends with its
resolution and recapitulation.

Another comparison which, offhand, strikes the Western observer is with
Shakespeare’s chronicle plays. The long formal scenes in the courts with
the messengers coming and going, interspersed with short, breathless
transitional scenes in the woods or along the road, the double plot, the
clowns speaking a rough common language full of worldly-wise ethics,
caricaturing the forms of action of the great nobles, who speak an
elevated language full of apostrophes to honor, justice, and duty, the
final war, which, like those at Shrewsbury and Agincourt, leaves the
vanquished beaten but still noble—all these suggest Shakespeare’s
historical dramas. But the world view the wajang expresses, despite the
surface similarities in the two feudal codes, is hardly Elizabethan at
base. It is not the external world of principalities and powers which
provides the main setting for human action, but the internal one of
sentiments and desires. Reality is looked for not outside the self, but
within it; consequently what the wajang dramatizes is not a
philosophical politics but a metaphysical psychology.

For the Javanese (or at least for those of them in whose thought the
influence of Java’s Hindu-Buddhist period from the second to the
fifteenth centuries still is dominant), the flow of subjective
experience, taken in all its phenomenological immediacy, presents a
microcosm of the universe generally; in the depths of the fluid interior
world of thought-and-emotion they see reflected ultimate reality itself.
This inward-looking sort of world view is best expressed in a concept
the Javanese have also borrowed from India and also peculiarly
reinterpreted: rasa. Rasa has two primary meanings: “feeling” and
“meaning.” As “feeling” it is one of the traditional Javanese five
senses—seeing, hearing, talking, smelling, and feeling, and it includes
within itself three aspects of “feeling” that our view of the five
senses separates: taste on the tongue, touch on the body, and emotional
“feeling” within the “heart” like sadness and happiness. The taste of a
banana is its rasa; a hunch is a rasa; a pain is a rasa; and so is a
passion. As “meaning,” rasa is applied to the words in a letter, in a
poem, or even in common speech to indicate the between-the-lines type of
indirection and allusive suggestion that is so important in Javanese
communication and social intercourse. And it is given the same
application to behavioral acts generally: to indicate the implicit
import, the connotative “feeling” of dance movements, polite gestures,
and so forth. But in this second, semantic sense, it also means
“ultimate significance”—the deepest meaning at which one arrives by dint
of mystical effort and whose clarification resolves all the ambiguities
of mundane existence. Rasa, said one of my most articulate informants,
is the same as life; whatever lives has rasa and whatever has rasa
lives. To translate such a sentence one could only render it twice:
whatever lives feels and whatever feels lives; or: whatever lives has
meaning and whatever has meaning lives.

By taking rasa to mean both “feeling” and “meaning,” the more
speculatively inclined among the Javanese have been able to develop a
highly sophisticated phenomenological analysis of subjective experience
to which everything else can be tied. Because fundamentally “feeling”
and “meaning” are one, and therefore the ultimate religious experience
taken subjectively is also the ultimate religious truth taken
objectively, an empirical analysis of inward perception yields at the
same time a metaphysical analysis of outward reality. This being
granted—and the actual discriminations, categorizations, and connections
made are often both subtle and detailed—then the characteristic way in
which human action comes to be considered, from either a moral or an
aesthetic point of view, is in terms of the emotional life of the
individual who experiences it. This is true whether this action is seen
from within as one’s own behavior or from without as that of someone
else: the more refined one’s feelings, then the more profound one’s
understanding, the more elevated one’s moral character, and the more
beautiful one’s external aspect, in clothes, movements, speech, and so
on. The management of the individual’s emotional economy becomes,
therefore, his primary concern, in terms of which all else is ultimately
rationalized. The spiritually enlightened man guards well his
psychological equilibrium and makes a constant effort to maintain its
placid stability. His inner life must be, in a simile repeatedly
employed, like a still pool of clear water to the bottom of which one
can easily see. The individual’s proximate aim is, thus, emotional
quiescence, for passion is crude feeling, fit for children, animals,
madmen, primitives, and foreigners. But his ultimate aim, which this
quiescence makes possible, is gnosis—the direct comprehension of the
ultimate rasa.

Javanese religion (or at least this variant of it) is consequently
mystical: God is found by means of spiritual discipline, in the depths
of the self as pure rasa. And Javanese ethics (and aesthetics) are,
correspondingly, affect-centered without being hedonistic: emotional
equanimity, a certain flatness of affect, a strange inner stillness, is
the prized psychological state, the mark of a truly noble character. One
must attempt to get beyond the emotions of everyday life to the genuine
feeling-meaning which lies within us all. Happiness and unhappiness are,
after all, just the same. You shed tears when you laugh and also when
you cry. And, besides, they imply one another: happy now, unhappy later;
unhappy now, happy later. The reasonable, prudent, “wise” man strives
not for happiness, but for a tranquil detachment which frees him from
his endless oscillation between gratification and frustration.
Similarly, Javanese etiquette, which comprises almost the whole of this
morality, focuses around the injunction not to disturb the equilibrium
of another by sudden gestures, loud speech, or startling, erratic
actions of any sort, mainly because so doing will cause the other in
turn to act erratically and so upset one’s own balance. On the
world-view side, there are yogalike mystical techniques (meditation,
staring at candles, repeating set words or phrases) and highly involved
speculative theories of the emotions and their relations to sickness,
natural objects, social institutions, and so on. On the ethos side,
there is a moral stress on subdued dress, speech, and gesture, on
refined sensitivity to small changes in the emotional state both of
oneself and of others, and on a stable, highly regularized
predictability of behavior. “If you start off north, go north,” a
Javanese proverb says, “don’t turn east, west, or south.” Both religion
and ethics, both mysticism and politesse, thus point to the same end: a
detached tranquility which is proof against disturbance from either
within or without.

But, unlike India, this tranquillity is not to be gained by a retreat
from the world and from society, but must be achieved while in it. It is
a this-worldly, even practical, mysticism, as expressed in the following
composite quotation from two Javanese petty traders who are members of a
mystical society:

He said that the society was concerned with teaching you not to pay too
much attention to worldly things, not to care too much about the things
of everyday life. He said this is very difficult to do. His wife, he
said, was not yet able to do it much, and she agreed with him, e.g., she
still likes to ride in motorcars while he doesn’t care; he can take them
or leave them alone. It takes much long study and meditation. For
example, you have to get so that if someone comes to buy cloth you don’t
care if he buys it or not . . . and you don’t get your emotions really
involved in the problems of commerce, but just think of God. The society
wants to turn people toward God and avoids any strong attachments to
everyday life.

. . . Why did he meditate? He said it was only to make the heart
peaceful, to make you calm inside, so you will not be easily upset. For
example, if you’re selling cloth and are upset you may sell a piece of
cloth for forty rupiah when it cost you sixty. If a person comes here
and my mind is not calm, well then I can’t sell him anything. . . . I
said, well, why do you have a meeting, why not meditate at home? And he
said, well, in the first place you are not supposed to achieve peace by
withdrawing from society; you are supposed to stay in society and mix
with people, only with peace in your heart.

This fusion between a mystical-phenomenological world view and an
etiquette-centered ethos is expressed in the wajang in various ways.
First, it appears most directly in terms of an explicit iconography. The
five Pendawas are commonly interpreted as standing for the five senses
which the individual must unite into one undivided psychological force
in order to achieve gnosis. Meditation demands a “cooperation” among the
senses as close as that among the hero brothers, who act as one in all
they do. Or the shadows of the puppets are identified with the outward
behavior of man, the puppets themselves with his inward self, so that in
him as in them the visible pattern of conduct is a direct outcome of an
underlying psychological reality. The very design of the puppets has
explicit symbolic significance: in Bima’s red, white, and black sarong,
the red is usually taken to indicate courage, the white purity, the
black fixity of will. The various tunes played on the accompanying
gamelan orchestra each symbolize a certain emotion; similarly with the
poems the dalang sings at various points in the play, and so on. Second,
the fusion often appears as parable, as in the story of Bima’s quest for
the “clear water.” After slaying many monsters in his wanderings in
search of this water which he has been told will make him invulnerable,
he meets a god as big as his little finger who is an exact replica of
himself. Entering through the mouth of this mirror-image midget, he sees
inside the god’s body the whole world, complete in every detail, and
upon emerging he is told by the god that there is no “clear water” as
such, that the source of his own strength is within himself, after which
he goes off to meditate. And third, the moral content of the play is
sometimes interpreted analogically: the dalang’s absolute control over
the puppets is said to parallel God’s over men; or the alternation of
polite speeches and violent wars is said to parallel modern
international relationships, where so long as diplomats continue
talking, peace prevails, but when talks break down, war follows.

But neither icons, parables, nor moral analogies are the main means by
which the Javanese synthesis is expressed in the wajang; for the play as
a whole is commonly perceived to be but a dramatization of individual
subjective experience in terms at once moral and factual:

He [an elementary schoolteacher] said that the main purpose of the
wajang was to draw a picture of inner thought and feeling, to give an
external form to internal feeling. He said that more specifically it
pictured the eternal conflict in the individual between what he wanted
to do and what he felt he ought to do. Suppose you want to steal
something. Well, at the same time something inside you tells you not to
do it, restrains you, controls you. That which wants to do it is called
the will; that which restrains is called the ego. All such tendencies
threaten every day to ruin the individual, to destroy his thought and
upset his behavior. These tendencies are called goda, which means
something which plagues or teases someone or something. For example, you
go to a coffee-shop where people are eating. They invite you to join
them, and so you have a struggle within—should I eat with them . . . no,
I’ve already eaten and I will be over full . . . but the food looks good
. . . etc. . . . etc.

Well, in the wajang the various plagues, wishes, etc.—the godas—are
represented by the hundred Korawas, and the ability to control oneself
is represented by their cousins, the five Pendawas and by Krisna. The
stories are ostensibly about a struggle over land. The reason for this
is so the stories will seem real to the onlookers, so the abstract
elements in the rasa can be represented in concrete external elements
which will attract the audience and seem real to them and still
communicate its inner message. For example, the wajang is full of war
and this war, which occurs and reoccurs, is really supposed to represent
the inner war which goes on continually in every person’s subjective
life between his base and his refined impulses.

Once again, this formulation is more self-conscious than most; the
average man “enjoys” the wajang without explicitly interpreting its
meaning. Yet, in the same way as the circle organizes Oglala experience,
whether the individual Sioux is able to explicate its significance, or
indeed has any interest in doing so, so the sacred symbols of the
wajang—the music, characters, the action itself—give form to the
ordinary Javanese experience.

For example, each of the three older Pendawas are commonly held to
display a different sort of emotional-moral dilemma, centering around
one or another of the central Javanese virtues. Yudistira, the eldest,
is too compassionate. He is unable to rule his country effectively
because when someone asks him for his land, his wealth, his food, he
simply gives it out of pity, leaving himself powerless, poor, or
starving. His enemies continually take advantage of his mercifulness to
deceive him and to escape his justice. Bima, on the other hand, is
single-minded, steadfast. Once he forms an intention, he follows it out
straight to its conclusion; he doesn’t look aside, doesn’t turn off or
idle along the way—he “goes north.” As a result, he is often rash, and
blunders into difficulties he could as well have avoided. Arjuna, the
third brother, is perfectly just. His goodness comes from the fact that
he opposes evil, that he shelters people from injustice, that he is
coolly courageous in fighting for the right. But he lacks a sense of
mercy, of sympathy for wrongdoers. He applies a divine moral code to
human activity, and so he is often cold, cruel, or brutal in the name of
justice. The resolution of these three dilemmas of virtue is the same:
mystical insight. With a genuine comprehension of the realities of the
human situation, a true perception of the ultimate rasa, comes the
ability to combine Yudistira’s compassion, Bima’s will to action, and
Arjuna’s sense of justice into a truly moral outlook, an outlook which
brings an emotional detachment and an inner peace in the midst of the
world of flux, yet permits and demands a struggle for order and justice
within such a world. And it is such a unification that the unshakable
solidarity among the Pendawas in the play, continually rescuing one
another from the defects of their virtues, clearly demonstrates.

But what, finally, of Semar, in whom so many oppositions seem to
meet—the figure who is both god and clown, man’s guardian spirit and his
servant, the most spiritually refined inwardly and the most
rough-looking outwardly? Again one thinks of the chronicle plays and of,
in this case, Falstaff. Like Falstaff, Semar is a symbolic father to the
play’s heroes. Like Falstaff, he is fat, funny, and worldly-wise; and,
like Falstaff, he seems to provide in his vigorous amoralism a general
criticism of the very values the drama affirms. Both figures, perhaps,
provide a reminder that, despite overproud assertions to the contrary by
religious fanatics and moral absolutists, no completely adequate and
comprehensive human world view is possible, and behind all the pretense
to absolute and ultimate knowledge, the sense for the irrationality of
human life, for the fact that it is unlimitable, remains. Semar reminds
the noble and refined Pendawas of their own humble, animal origins. He
resists any attempt to turn human beings into gods and to end the world
of natural contingency by a flight to the divine world of absolute
order, a final stilling of the eternal psychological-metaphysical
struggle.

In one wajang story, Siva comes down to earth incarnated as a mystical
teacher in an attempt to bring the Pendawas and Korawas together, to
arrange a negotiated peace between them. He is succeeding quite well,
opposed only by Semar. Arjuna is therefore instructed by Siva to kill
Semar so that the Pendawas and Korawas will be able to get together and
end their eternal struggle. Arjuna does not want to kill Semar, whom he
loves, but he wishes a just solution to the differences between the two
groups of cousins and so goes to Semar to murder him. Semar says: so
this is how you treat me after I have followed you everywhere, served
you loyally, and loved you. This is the most poignant point in the play
and Arjuna is deeply ashamed; but true to his idea of justice, he
persists in his duty. Semar says: all right, I will burn myself. He
builds a bonfire and stands in it. But instead of dying, he is
transformed into his godly form and defeats Siva in combat. Then the war
between the Korawas and the Pendawas begins again.

Not all people have, perhaps, so well developed a sense for the
necessary note of irrationality in any world view, and thus for the
essential insolubility of the problem of evil. But whether in the form
of a trickster, a clown, a belief in witchcraft, or a concept of
original sin, the presence of such a symbolic reminder of the hollowness
of human pretensions to religious or moral infallibility is perhaps the
surest sign of spiritual maturity.

IV

The view of man as a symbolizing, conceptualizing, meaning-seeking
animal, which has become increasingly popular both in the social
sciences and in philosophy over the past several years, opens up a whole
new approach not only to the analysis of religion as such, but to the
understanding of the relations between religion and values. The drive to
make sense out of experience, to give it form and order, is evidently as
real and as pressing as the more familiar biological needs. And, this
being so, it seems unnecessary to continue to interpret symbolic
activities—religion, art, ideology—as nothing but thinly disguised
expressions of something other than what they seem to be: attempts to
provide orientation for an organism which cannot live in a world it is
unable to understand. If symbols, to adapt a phrase of Kenneth Burke’s,
are strategies for encompassing situations, then we need to give more
attention to how people define situations and how they go about coming
to terms with them. Such a stress does not imply a removal of beliefs
and values from their psychobiological and social contexts into a realm
of “pure meaning,” but it does imply a greater emphasis on the analysis
of such beliefs and values in terms of concepts explicitly designed to
deal with symbolic material.

The concepts used here, ethos and world view, are vague and imprecise;
they are a kind of prototheory, forerunners, it is to be hoped, of a
more adequate analytical framework. But even with them, anthropologists
are beginning to develop an approach to the study of values which can
clarify rather than obscure the essential processes involved in the
normative regulation of behavior. One almost certain result of such an
empirically oriented, theoretically sophisticated, symbol-stressing
approach to the study of values is the decline of analyses which attempt
to describe moral, aesthetic, and other normative activities in terms of
theories based not on the observation of such activities but on logical
considerations alone. Like bees who fly despite theories of aeronautics
which deny them the right to do so, probably the overwhelming majority
of mankind are continually drawing normative conclusions from factual
premises (and factual conclusions from normative premises, for the
relation between ethos and world view is circular) despite refined, and
in their own terms impeccable, reflections by professional philosophers
on the “naturalistic fallacy.” An approach to a theory of value which
looks toward the behavior of actual people in actual societies living in
terms of actual cultures for both its stimulus and its validation will
turn us away from abstract and rather scholastic arguments in which a
limited number of classical positions are stated again and again with
little that is new to recommend them, to a process of ever-increasing
insight into both what values are and how they work. Once this
enterprise in the scientific analysis of values is well launched, the
philosophical discussions of ethics are likely to take on more point.
The process is not that of replacing moral philosophy by descriptive
ethics, but of providing moral philosophy with an empirical base and a
conceptual framework which is somewhat advanced over that available to
Aristotle, Spinoza, or G. E. Moore. The role of such a special science
as anthropology in the analysis of values is not to replace
philosophical investigation, but to make it relevant.

[]

1 P. Radin, Primitive Man as a Philosopher (New York, 1957), p. 227.

