Chapter 6/ Ritual and Social Change: A Javanese Example

[]

As in so many areas of anthropological concern, functionalism, either of
the sociological sort associated with the name of Radcliffe-Brown or of
the social-psychological sort associated with Malinowski, has tended to
dominate recent theoretical discussions of the role of religion in
society. Stemming originally from Durkheim’s The Elementary Forms of the
Religious Life and Robertson-Smith’s Lectures on the Religion of the
Semites, the sociological approach (or, as the British anthropologists
prefer to call it, the social anthropological approach) emphasizes the
manner in which belief and particularly ritual reinforce the traditional
social ties between individuals; it stresses the way in which the social
structure of a group is strengthened and perpetuated through the
ritualistic or mythic symbolization of the underlying social values upon
which it rests.¹¹ The social-psychological approach, of which Frazer and
Tylor were perhaps the pioneers but which found its clearest statement
in Malinowski’s classic Magic, Science and Religion, emphasizes what
religion does for the individual—how it satisfies both his cognitive and
affective demands for a stable, comprehensible, and coercible world, and
how it enables him to maintain an inner security in the face of natural
contingency.²² Together, the two approaches have given us an
increasingly detailed understanding of the social and psychological
“functions” of religion in a wide range of societies.

Where the functional approach has been least impressive, however, is in
dealing with social change. As has been noted by several writers, the
emphasis on systems in balance, on social homeostasis, and on timeless
structural pictures, leads to a bias in favor of “well-integrated”
societies in a stable equilibrium and to a tendency to emphasize the
functional aspects of a people’s social usages and customs rather than
their dysfunctional implications.³³ In analyses of religion this static,
ahistorical approach has led to a somewhat overconservative view of the
role of ritual and belief in social life. Despite cautionary comments by
Kluckhohn⁴⁴ and others on the “gain and cost” of various religious
practices such as witchcraft, the tendency has been consistently to
stress the harmonizing, integrating, and psychologically supportive
aspects of religious patterns rather than the disruptive,
disintegrative, and psychologically disturbing aspects; to demonstrate
the manner in which religion preserves social and psychological
structure rather than the manner in which it destroys or transforms it.
Where change has been treated, as in Redfield’s work on Yucatan, it has
largely been in terms of progressive disintegration: “The changes in
culture that in Yucatan appear to ‘go along with’ lessening isolation
and homogeneity are seen to be chiefly three: disorganization of the
culture, secularization and individualization.”⁵⁵ Yet even a passing
knowledge of our own religious history makes us hesitate to affirm such
a simply “positive” role for religion generally.

It is the thesis of this chapter that one of the major reasons for the
inability of functional theory to cope with change lies in its failure
to treat sociological and cultural processes on equal terms; almost
inevitably one of the two either is ignored or is sacrificed to become
but a simple reflex, a “mirror image,” of the other. Either culture is
regarded as wholly derivative from the forms of social organization—the
approach characteristic of the British structuralists as well as many
American sociologists; or the forms of social organization are regarded
as behavioral embodiments of cultural patterns—the approach of
Malinowski and many American anthropologists. In either case, the lesser
term tends to drop out as a dynamic factor, and we are left either with
an omnibus concept of culture (“that complex whole . . .”) or else with
a completely comprehensive concept of social structure (“social
structure is not an aspect of culture but the entire culture of a given
people handled in a special frame of theory”).⁶⁶ In such a situation,
the dynamic elements in social change that arise from the failure of
cultural patterns to be perfectly congruent with the forms of social
organization are largely incapable of formulation. “We functionalists,”
E. R. Leach has recently remarked, “are not really ‘antihistorical’ by
principle; it is simply that we do not know how to fit historical
materials into our framework of concepts.”⁷⁷

A revision of the concepts of functional theory so as to make them
capable of dealing more effectively with “historical materials” might
well begin with an attempt to distinguish analytically between the
cultural and social aspects of human life, and to treat them as
independently variable yet mutually interdependent factors. Though
separable only conceptually, culture and social structure will then be
seen to be capable of a wide range of modes of integration with one
another, of which the simple isomorphic mode is but a limiting case—a
case common only in societies which have been stable over such an
extended time as to make possible a close adjustment between social and
cultural aspects. In most societies, where change is a characteristic
rather than an abnormal occurrence, we shall expect to find more or less
radical discontinuities between the two. I would argue that it is in
these very discontinuities that we shall find some of the primary
driving forces in change.

One of the more useful ways—but far from the only one—of distinguishing
between culture and social system is to see the former as an ordered
system of meaning and of symbols, in terms of which social interaction
takes place; and to see the latter as the pattern of social interaction
itself.⁸⁸ On the one level there is the framework of beliefs, expressive
symbols, and values in terms of which individuals define their world,
express their feelings, and make their judgments; on the other level
there is the ongoing process of interactive behavior, whose persistent
form we call social structure. Culture is the fabric of meaning in terms
of which human beings interpret their experience and guide their action;
social structure is the form that action takes, the actually existing
network of social relations. Culture and social structure are then but
different abstractions from the same phenomena. The one considers social
action in respect to its meaning for those who carry it out, the other
considers it in terms of its contribution to the functioning of some
social system.

The nature of the distinction between culture and social system is
brought out more clearly when one considers the contrasting sorts of
integration characteristic of each of them. This contrast is between
what Sorokin has called “logico-meaningful integration” and what he has
called “causal-functional integration.”⁹⁹ By logico-meaningful
integration, characteristic of culture, is meant the sort of integration
one finds in a Bach fugue, in Catholic dogma, or in the general theory
of relativity; it is a unity of style, of logical implication, of
meaning and value. By causal-functional integration, characteristic of
the social system, is meant the kind of integration one finds in an
organism, where all the parts are united in a single causal web; each
part is an element in a reverberating causal ring which “keeps the
system going.” And because these two types of integration are not
identical, because the particular form one of them takes does not
directly imply the form the other will take, there is an inherent
incongruity and tension between the two and between both of them and a
third element, the pattern of motivational integration within the
individual which we usually call personality structure:

Thus conceived, a social system is only one of three aspects of the
structuring of a completely concrete system of social action. The other
two are the personality systems of the individual actors and the
cultural system which is built into their action. Each of the three must
be considered to be an independent focus of the organization of the
elements of the action system in the sense that no one of them is
theoretically reducible to terms of one or a combination of the other
two. Each is indispensable to the other two in the sense that without
personalities and culture there would be no social system and so on
around the roster of logical possibilities. But this interdependence and
interpenetration is a very different matter from reducibility, which
would mean that the important properties and processes of one class of
system could be theoretically derived from our theoretical knowledge of
one or both of the other two. The action frame of reference is common to
all three and this fact makes certain “transformations” between them
possible. But on the level of theory here attempted they do not
constitute a single system, however this might turn out to be on some
other theoretical level.¹⁰¹⁰

I shall attempt to demonstrate the utility of this more dynamic
functionalist approach by applying it to a particular case of a ritual
which failed to function properly. I shall try to show how an approach
which does not distinguish the “logico-meaningful” cultural aspects of
the ritual pattern from the “causal-functional” social structural
aspects is unable to account adequately for this ritual failure, and how
an approach which does so distinguish them is able to analyze more
explicitly the cause of the trouble. It will further be argued that such
an approach is able to avoid the simplistic view of the functional role
of religion in society which sees that role merely as
structure-conserving, and to substitute for it a more complex conception
of the relations between religious belief and practice and secular
social life. Historical materials can be fitted into such a conception,
and the functional analysis of religion can therefore be widened to deal
more adequately with processes of change.

The Setting

The case to be described is that of a funeral held in Modjokuto, a small
town in eastern Central Java. A young boy, about ten years of age, who
was living with his uncle and aunt, died very suddenly. His death,
instead of being followed by the usual hurried, subdued, yet
methodically efficient Javanese funeral ceremony and burial routine,
brought on an extended period of pronounced social strain and severe
psychological tension. The complex of beliefs and rituals which had for
generations brought countless Javanese safely through the difficult
postmortem period suddenly failed to work with its accustomed
effectiveness. To understand why it failed demands knowledge and
understanding of a whole range of social and cultural changes which have
taken place in Java since the first decades of this century. This
disrupted funeral was in fact but a microscopic example of the broader
conflicts, structural dissolutions, and attempted reintegrations which,
in one form or another, are characteristic of contemporary Indonesian
society.

The religious tradition of Java, particularly of the peasantry, is a
composite of Indian, Islamic, and indigenous Southeast Asian elements.
The rise of large, militaristic kingdoms in the inland rice basins in
the early centuries of the Christian era was associated with the
diffusion of Hinduist and Buddhist culture patterns to the island; the
expansion of international maritime trade in the port cities of the
northern coast in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries was associated
with the diffusion of Islamic patterns. Working their way into the
peasant mass, these two world religions became fused with the underlying
animistic traditions characteristic of the whole Malaysian culture area.
The result was a balanced syncretism of myth and ritual in which Hindu
gods and goddesses, Moslem prophets and saints, and local spirits and
demons all found a proper place.

The central ritual form in this syncretism is a communal feast, called
the slametan. Slametans, which are given with only slight variations in
form and content on almost all occasions of religious significance—at
passage points in the life cycle, on calendrical holidays, at certain
stages of the crop cycle, on changing one’s residence, and so on—are
intended to be both offerings to the spirits and commensal mechanisms of
social integration for the living. The meal, which consists of specially
prepared dishes, each symbolic of a particular religious concept, is
cooked by the female members of one nuclear family household and set out
on mats in the middle of the living room. The male head of the household
invites the male heads of the eight or ten contiguous households to
attend; no closer neighbor is ignored in favor of one farther away.
After a speech by the host explaining the spiritual purpose of the feast
and a short Arabic chant, each man takes a few hurried, almost furtive,
gulps of food, wraps the remainder of the meal in a banana-leaf basket,
and returns home to share it with his family. It is said that the
spirits draw their sustenance from the odor of the food, the incense
which is burned, and the Moslem prayer; the human participants draw
theirs from the material substance of the food and from their social
interaction. The result of this quiet, undramatic little ritual is
twofold: the spirits are appeased and neighborhood solidarity is
strengthened.

The ordinary canons of functional theory are quite adequate for the
analysis of such a pattern. It can rather easily be shown that the
slametan is well designed both to “tune up the ultimate value attitudes”
necessary to the effective integration of a territorially based social
structure, and to fulfill the psychological needs for intellectual
coherence and emotional stability characteristic of a peasant
population. The Javanese village (once or twice a year, villagewide
slametans are held) is essentially a set of geographically contiguous,
but rather self-consciously autonomous, nuclear-family households whose
economic and political interdependence is of roughly the same
circumscribed and explicitly defined sort as that demonstrated in the
slametan. The demands of the labor-intensive rice and dry-crop
agricultural process require the perpetuation of specific modes of
technical cooperation and enforce a sense of community on the otherwise
rather self-contained families—a sense of community which the slametan
clearly reinforces. And when we consider the manner in which various
conceptual and behavioral elements from Hindu-Buddhism, Islam, and
“animism” are reinterpreted and balanced to form a distinctive and
nearly homogeneous religious style, the close functional adjustment
between the communal feast pattern and the conditions of Javanese rural
life is even more readily apparent.

But the fact is that in all but the most isolated parts of Java, both
the simple territorial basis of village social integration and the
syncretic basis of its cultural homogeneity have been progressively
undermined over the past fifty years. Population growth, urbanization,
monetization, occupational differentiation, and the like, have combined
to weaken the traditional ties of peasant social structure; and the
winds of doctrine which have accompanied the appearance of these
structural changes have disturbed the simple uniformity of religious
belief and practice characteristic of an earlier period. The rise of
nationalism, Marxism, and Islamic reform as ideologies, which resulted
in part from the increasing complexity of Javanese society, has affected
not only the large cities where these creeds first appeared and have
always had their greatest strength, but has had a heavy impact on the
smaller towns and villages as well. In fact, much of recent Javanese
social change is perhaps most aptly characterized as a shift from a
situation in which the primary integrative ties between individuals (or
between families) are phrased in terms of geographical proximity to one
in which they are phrased in terms of ideological like-mindedness.

In the villages and small towns these major ideological changes appeared
largely in the guise of a widening split between those who emphasized
the Islamic aspects of the indigenous religious syncretism and those who
emphasized the Hinduist and animistic elements. It is true that some
difference between these variant subtraditions has been present since
the arrival of Islam; some individuals have always been particularly
skilled in Arabic chanting or particularly learned in Moslem law, while
others have been adept at more Hinduistic mystical practices or
specialists in local curing techniques. But these contrasts were
softened by the easy tolerance of the Javanese for a wide range of
religious concepts, so long as basic ritual patterns—that is,
slametans—were faithfully supported; whatever social divisiveness they
stimulated was largely obscured by the overriding commonalities of rural
and smalltown life.

However, the appearance after 1910 of Islamic modernism (as well as
vigorous conservative reactions against it) and religious nationalism
among the economically and politically sophisticated trading classes of
the larger cities strengthened the feeling for Islam as an exclusivist,
antisyncretic creed among the more orthodox element of the mass of the
population. Similarly, secular nationalism and Marxism, appearing among
the civil servants and the expanding proletariat of these cities,
strengthened the pre-Islamic (that is, Hinduist-animist) elements of the
syncretic pattern, which these groups tended to prize as a counterweight
to puristic Islam and which some of them adopted as a general religious
framework in which to set their more specifically political ideas. On
the one hand, there arose a more self-conscious Moslem, basing his
religious beliefs and practices more explicitly on the international and
universalistic doctrines of Mohammed; on the other hand there arose a
more self-conscious “nativist,” attempting to evolve a generalized
religious system out of the material—muting the more Islamic elements—of
his inherited religious tradition. And the contrast between the first
kind of man, called a santri, and the second, called an abangan, grew
steadily more acute, until today it forms the major cultural distinction
in the whole of the Modjokuto area.

It is especially in the town that this contrast has come to play a
crucial role. The absence of pressures toward interfamilial cooperation
exerted by the technical requirements of wet-rice growing, as well as
lessened effectiveness of the traditional forms of village government in
the face of the complexities of urban living, severely weaken the social
supports of the syncretic village pattern. When each man makes his
living—as chauffeur, trader, clerk, or laborer—more or less
independently of how his neighbors make theirs, his sense of the
importance of the neighborhood community naturally diminishes. A more
differentiated class system, more bureaucratic and impersonal forms of
government, greater heterogeneity of social background, all tend to lead
to the same result: the de-emphasis of strictly geographical ties in
favor of diffusely ideological ones. For the townsman, the distinction
between santri and abangan becomes even sharper, for it emerges as his
primary point of social reference; it becomes a symbol of his social
identity, rather than a mere contrast in belief. The sort of friends he
will have, the sort of organizations he will join, the sort of political
leadership he will follow, the sort of person he or his son will marry,
will all be strongly influenced by the side of this ideological
bifurcation which he adopts as his own.

There is thus emerging in the town—though not only in the town—a new
pattern of social living organized in terms of an altered framework of
cultural classification. Among the elite this new pattern has already
become rather highly developed, but among the mass of the townspeople it
is still in the process of formation. Particularly in the kampongs, the
off-the-street neighborhoods in which the common Javanese townsmen live
crowded together in a helter-skelter profusion of little bamboo houses,
one finds a transitional society in which the traditional forms of rural
living are being steadily dissolved and new forms steadily
reconstructed. In these enclaves of peasants-come-to-town (or of sons
and grandsons of peasants-come-to-town), Redfield’s folk culture is
being constantly converted into his urban culture, though this latter is
not accurately characterized by such negative and residual terms as
“secular,” “individualized,” and “culturally disorganized.” What is
occurring in the kampongs is not so much a destruction of traditional
ways of life, as a construction of a new one; the sharp social conflict
characteristic of these lower-class neighborhoods is not simply
indicative of a loss of cultural consensus, but rather is indicative of
a search, not yet entirely successful, for new, more generalized, and
flexible patterns of belief and value.

In Modjokuto, as in most of Indonesia, this search is taking place
largely within the social context of the mass political parties, as well
as in the women’s clubs, youth organizations, labor unions, and other
sodalities formally or informally linked with them. There are several of
these parties (though the recent [1955] general election severely
reduced their number), each led by educated urban elites—civil servants,
teachers, traders, students, and the like—and each competing with the
others for the political allegiance of both the half-rural, half-urban
kampong dwellers and of the mass of the peasantry. And almost without
exception, they appeal to one or another side of the santri-abangan
split. Of this complex of political parties and sodalities, only two are
of immediate concern to us here: Masjumi, a huge, Islam-based political
party; and Permai, a vigorously anti-Moslem politico-religious cult.

Masjumi is the more or less direct descendant of the prewar Islamic
reform movement. Led, at least in Modjokuto, by modernist santri
intellectuals, it stands for a socially conscious, antischolastic, and
somewhat puritanical version of back-to-the-Koran Islam. In company with
the other Moslem parties, it also supports the institution of an
“Islamic State” in Indonesia in place of the present secular republic.
However, the meaning of this ideal is not entirely clear. Masjumi’s
enemies accuse it of pressing for an intolerant, medievalist theocracy
in which abangans and non-Moslems will be persecuted and forced to
follow exactly the prescripts of the Moslem law, while Masjumi’s leaders
claim that Islam is intrinsically tolerant and that they only desire a
government explicitly based on the Moslem creed, one whose laws will be
in consonance with the teachings of the Koran and Hadith. In any case,
Masjumi, the country’s largest Moslem party, is one of the major
spokesmen on both the national and the local levels for the values and
aspirations of the santri community.

Permai is not so impressive on a national scale. Though it is a
nationwide party, it is a fairly small one, having strength only in a
few fairly circumscribed regions. In the Modjokuto area, however, it
happened to be of some importance, and what it lacked in national scope
it made up in local intensity. Essentially, Permai is a fusion of
Marxist politics with abangan religious patterns. It combines a fairly
explicit anti-Westernism, anticapitalism, and anti-imperialism with an
attempt to formalize and generalize some of the more characteristic
diffuse themes of the peasant religious syncretism. Permai meetings
follow both the slametan pattern, complete with incense and symbolic
food (but without Islamic chants), and modern parliamentary procedure;
Permai pamphlets contain calendrical and numerological divinatory
systems and mystical teachings as well as analyses of class conflict;
and Permai speeches are concerned with elaborating both religious and
political concepts. In Modjokuto, Permai is also a curing cult, with its
own special medical practices and spells, a secret password, and
cabalistic interpretations of passages in the leaders’ social and
political writings.

But Permai’s most notable characteristic is its strong anti-Moslem
stand. Charging that Islam is a foreign import, unsuited to the needs
and values of the Javanese, the cult urges a return to “pure” and
“original” Javanese beliefs, by which they seem to mean to the
indigenous syncretism with the more Islamic elements removed. In line
with this, the cult-party has initiated a drive, on both national and
local levels, for secular (that is, non-Islamic) marriage and funeral
rites. As the situation stands now, all but Christians and Balinese
Hindus must have their marriages legitimatized by means of the Moslem
ritual.¹¹¹¹ Funeral rites are an individual concern but, because of the
long history of syncretism, they are so deeply involved with Islamic
customs that a genuinely non-Islamic funeral tends to be a practical
impossibility.

Permai’s action on the local level in pursuit of non-Islamic marriage
and funeral ceremonies took two forms. One was heavy pressure on local
government officials to permit such practices, and the other was heavy
pressure on its own members to follow, voluntarily, rituals purified of
Islamic elements. In the case of marriage, success was more or less
precluded because the local officials’ hands were tied by Central
Government ordinances, and even highly ideologized members of the cult
would not dare an openly “illegitimate” marriage. Without a change in
the law, Permai had little chance to alter marriage forms, though a few
abortive attempts were made to conduct civil ceremonies under the aegis
of abangan-minded village chiefs.

The case of funerals was somewhat different, for a matter of custom
rather than law was involved. During the period I was in the field
(1952–1954), the tension between Permai and Masjumi increased very
sharply. This was due in part to the imminence of Indonesia’s first
general elections, and in part to the effects of the cold war. It was
also influenced by various special occurrences—such as a report that the
national head of Permai had publicly called Mohammed a false prophet; a
speech in the nearby regional capital by a Masjumi leader in which he
accused Permai of intending to raise a generation of bastards in
Indonesia; and a bitter village-chief election largely fought out on
santri vs. abangan grounds. As a result, the local subdistrict officer,
a worried bureaucrat trapped in the middle, called a meeting of all the
village religious officials, or Modins. Among many other duties, a Modin
is traditionally responsible for conducting funerals. He directs the
whole ritual, instructs the mourners in the technical details of burial,
leads the Koran chanting, and reads a set speech to the deceased at the
graveside. The subdistrict officer instructed the Modins—the majority of
whom were village Masjumi leaders—that in the case of the death of a
member of Permai, they were merely to note the name and age of the
deceased and return home; they were not to participate in the ritual. He
warned that if they did not do as he advised, they would be responsible
if trouble started and he would not come to their support.

This was the situation on July 17, 1954, when Paidjan, nephew of Karman,
an active and ardent member of Permai, died suddenly in the Modjokuto
kampong in which I was living.

The Funeral

The mood of a Javanese funeral is not one of hysterical bereavement,
unrestrained sobbing, or even of formalized cries of grief for the
deceased’s departure. Rather, it is a calm, undemonstrative, almost
languid letting go, a brief ritualized relinquishment of a relationship
no longer possible. Tears are not approved of and certainly not
encouraged; the effort is to get the job done, not to linger over the
pleasures of grief. The detailed busy-work of the funeral, the politely
formal social intercourse with the neighbors pressing in from all sides,
the series of commemorative slametans stretched out at intervals for
almost three years—the whole momentum of the Javanese ritual system is
supposed to carry one through grief without severe emotional
disturbance. For the mourner, the funeral and postfuneral ritual is said
to produce a feeling of iklas, a kind of willed affectlessness, a
detached and static state of “not caring”; for the neighborhood group it
is said to produce rukun, “communal harmony.”

The actual service is in essence simply another version of the slametan,
adapted to the special requirements of interment. When the news of a
death is broadcast through the area, everyone in the neighborhood must
drop what he is doing and go immediately to the home of the survivors.
The women bring bowls of rice, which is cooked up into a slametan; the
men begin to cut wooden grave markers and to dig a grave. Soon the Modin
arrives and begins to direct activities. The corpse is washed in
ceremonially prepared water by the relatives (who unflinchingly hold the
body on their laps to demonstrate their affection for the deceased as
well as their self-control); then it is wrapped in muslin. About a dozen
santris, under the leadership of the Modin, chant Arabic prayers over
the body for five or ten minutes; after this it is carried, amid various
ritual acts, in a ceremonial procession to the graveyard, where it is
interred in prescribed ways. The Modin reads a graveside speech to the
deceased, reminding him of his duties as a believing Moslem; and the
funeral is over, usually only two or three hours after death. The
funeral proper is followed by commemorative slametans in the home of the
survivors at three, seven, forty, and one hundred days after death; on
the first and second anniversary of death; and, finally, on the
thousandth day, when the corpse is considered to have turned to dust and
the gap between the living and the dead to have become absolute.

This was the ritual pattern which was called into play when Paidjan
died. As soon as dawn broke (death occurred in the early hours of the
morning), Karman, the uncle, dispatched a telegram to the boy’s parents
in a nearby city, telling them in characteristic Javanese fashion that
their son was ill. This evasion was intended to soften the impact of
death by allowing them to become aware of it more gradually. Javanese
feel that emotional damage results not from the severity of a
frustration but from the suddenness with which it comes, the degree to
which it “surprises” one unprepared for it. It is “shock,” not suffering
itself, which is feared. Next, in the expectation that the parents would
arrive within a few hours, Karman sent for the Modin to begin the
ceremony. This was done on the theory that by the time the parents had
come little would be left to do but inter the body, and they would thus
once more be spared unnecessary stress. By ten o’clock at the very
latest it should all be over; a saddening incident, but a ritually muted
one.

But when the Modin, as he later told me, arrived at Karman’s house and
saw the poster displaying Permai’s political symbol, he told Karman that
he could not perform the ritual. After all, Karman belonged to “another
religion,” and he, the Modin, did not know the correct burial rituals
for it; all he knew was Islam. “I don’t want to insult your religion,”
he said piously. “On the contrary, I hold it in the utmost regard, for
there is no intolerance in Islam. But I don’t know your ritual. The
Christians have their own ritual and their own specialist (the local
preacher), but what does Permai do? Do they burn the corpse or what?”
(This is a sly allusion to Hindu burial practices; evidently the Modin
enjoyed himself hugely in this interchange.) Karman was, the Modin told
me, rather upset at all this and evidently surprised, for although he
was an active member of Permai, he was a fairly unsophisticated one. It
had evidently never occurred to him that the anti-Moslem-funeral
agitation of the party would ever appear as a concrete problem, or that
the Modin would actually refuse to officiate. Karman was actually not a
bad fellow, the Modin concluded; he was but a dupe of his leaders.

After leaving the now highly agitated Karman, the Modin went directly to
the subdistrict officer to ask if he had acted properly. The officer was
morally bound to say that he had, and thus fortified the Modin returned
home to find Karman and the village policeman, to whom Karman had gone
in desperation, waiting for him. The policeman, a personal friend of
Karman’s, told the Modin that according to time-honored custom he was
supposed to bury everyone with impartiality, never mind whether he
happened to agree with their politics. But the Modin, having now been
personally supported by the subdistrict officer, insisted that it was no
longer his responsibility. However, he suggested, if Karman wished, he
could go to the village chief’s office and sign a public statement,
sealed with the Government stamp and countersigned by the village chief
in the presence of two witnesses, declaring that he, Karman, was a true
believing Moslem and that he wished the Modin to bury the boy according
to Islamic custom. At this suggestion that he officially abandon his
religious beliefs, Karman exploded into a rage and stormed from the
house, rather uncharacteristic behavior for a Javanese. By the time he
arrived home again, at his wit’s end about what to do next, he found to
his dismay that the news of the boy’s death had been broadcast and the
entire neighborhood was already gathering for the ceremony.

Like most of the kampongs in the town of Modjokuto, the one in which I
lived consisted both of pious santris and ardent abangans (as well as a
number of less intense adherents of either side), mixed together in a
more or less random manner. In the town, people are forced to live where
they can and take whomever they find for neighbors, in contrast to the
rural areas where whole neighborhoods, even whole villages, still tend
to be made up almost entirely of either abangans or santris. The
majority of the santris in the kampong were members of Masjumi, and most
of the abangans were followers of Permai, and in daily life, social
interaction between the two groups was minimal. The abangans, most of
whom were either petty artisans or manual laborers, gathered each late
afternoon at Karman’s roadside coffee shop for the idle twilight
conversations which are typical of small-town and village life in Java;
the santris—tailors, traders, and storekeepers for the most part—usually
gathered in one or another of the santri-run shops for the same purpose.
But despite this lack of close social ties, the demonstration of
territorial unity at a funeral was still felt by both groups to be an
unavoidable duty; of all the Javanese rituals, the funeral probably
carries the greatest obligation on attendance. Everyone who lives within
a certain roughly defined radius of the survivors’ home is expected to
come to the ceremony; and on this occasion everyone did.

With this as background, it is not surprising that when I arrived at
Karman’s house about eight o’clock, I found two separate clusters of
sullen men squatting disconsolately on either side of the yard, a
nervous group of whispering women sitting idly inside the house near the
still-clothed body, and a general air of doubt and uneasiness in place
of the usual quiet busyness of slametan preparing, body washing, and
guest greeting. The abangans were grouped near the house, where Karman
was crouched, staring blankly off into space, and where Sudjoko and
Sastro, the town Chairman and Secretary of Permai (the only nonresidents
of the kampong present) sat on chairs, looking vaguely out of place. The
santris were crowded together under the narrow shadow of a coconut palm
about thirty yards away, chatting quietly to one another about
everything but the problem at hand. The almost motionless scene
suggested an unlooked-for intermission in a familiar drama, as when a
motion picture stops in mid-action.

After a half hour or so, a few of the abangans began to chip
halfheartedly away at pieces of wood to make grave markers and a few
women began to construct small flower offerings for want of anything
better to do; but it was clear that the ritual was arrested and that no
one quite knew what to do next. Tension slowly rose. People nervously
watched the sun rise higher and higher in the sky, or glanced at the
impassive Karman. Mutterings about the sorry state of affairs began to
appear (“everything these days is a political problem,” an old,
traditionalistic man of about eighty grumbled to me, “you can’t even die
any more but what it becomes a political problem”). Finally, about 9:30,
a young santri tailor named Abu decided to try to do something about the
situation before it deteriorated entirely: he stood up and gestured to
Karman, the first serious instrumental act which had occurred all
morning. And Karman, roused from his meditation, crossed the no man’s
land to talk to him.

As a matter of fact, Abu occupied a rather special position in the
kampong. Although he was a pious santri and a loyal Masjumi member, he
had more contact with the Permai group because his tailor shop was
located directly behind Karman’s coffee shop. Though Abu, who stuck to
his sewing machine night and day, was not properly a member of this
group, he would often exchange comments with them from his work bench
about twenty feet away. True, a certain amount of tension existed
between him and the Permai people over religious issues. Once, when I
was inquiring about their eschatological beliefs, they referred me
sarcastically to Abu, saying he was an expert, and they teased him quite
openly about what they considered the wholly ridiculous Islamic theories
of the afterlife. Nevertheless, he had something of a social bond with
them, and it was perhaps reasonable that he should be the one to try to
break the deadlock.

“It is already nearly noon,” Abu said. “Things can’t go straight on like
this.” He suggested that he send Umar, another of the santris, to see if
the Modin could now be induced to come; perhaps things were cooler with
him now. Meanwhile, he could get the washing and wrapping of the corpse
started himself. Karman replied that he would think about it, and
returned to the other side of the yard for a discussion with the two
Permai leaders. After a few minutes of vigorous gesturing and nodding,
Karman returned and said simply, “All right, that way.” “I know how you
feel,” Abu said; “I’ll just do what is absolutely necessary and keep the
Islam out as much as possible.” He gathered the santris together and
they entered the house.

The first requisite was stripping the corpse (which was still lying on
the floor, because no one could bring himself to move it). But by now
the body was rigid, making it necessary to cut the clothes off with a
knife, an unusual procedure which deeply disturbed everyone, especially
the women clustered around. The santris finally managed to get the body
outside and set up the bathing enclosure. Abu asked for volunteers for
the washing; he reminded them that God would consider such an act a good
work. But the relatives, who normally would be expected to undertake
this task, were by now so deeply shaken and confused that they were
unable to bring themselves to hold the boy on their laps in the
customary fashion. There was another wait while people looked hopelessly
at each other. Finally, Pak Sura, a member of Karman’s group but no
relative, took the boy on his lap, although he was clearly frightened
and kept whispering a protective spell. One reason the Javanese give for
their custom of rapid burial is that it is dangerous to have the spirit
of the deceased hovering around the house.

Before the washing could begin, however, someone raised the question as
to whether one person was enough—wasn’t it usually three? No one was
quite sure, including Abu; some thought that although it was customary
to have three people it was not obligatory, and some thought three a
necessary number. After about ten minutes of anxious discussion, a male
cousin of the boy and a carpenter, unrelated to him, managed to work up
the courage to join Pak Sura. Abu, attempting to act the Modin’s role as
best he could, sprinkled a few drops of water on the corpse and then it
was washed, rather haphazardly and in unsacralized water. When this was
finished, however, the procedure was again stalled, for no one knew
exactly how to arrange the small cotton pads which, under Moslem law,
should plug the body orifices. Karman’s wife, sister of the deceased’s
mother, could evidently take no more, for she broke into a loud,
unrestrained wailing, the only demonstration of this sort I witnessed
among the dozen or so Javanese funerals I attended. Everyone was further
upset by this development, and most of the kampong women made a frantic
but unavailing effort to comfort her. Most of the men remained seated in
the yard, outwardly calm and inexpressive, but the embarrassed
uneasiness which had been present since the beginning seemed to be
turning toward fearful desperation. “It is not nice for her to cry that
way,” several men said to me, “it isn’t proper.” At this point, the
Modin arrived.

However, he was still adamant. Further, he warned Abu that he was
courting eternal damnation by his actions. “You will have to answer to
God on Judgment Day,” he said, “if you make mistakes in the ritual. It
will be your responsibility. For a Moslem, burial is a serious matter
and must be carried out according to the Law by someone who knows what
the Law is, not according to the will of the individual.” He then
suggested to Sudjoko and Sastro, the Permai leaders, that they take
charge of the funeral, for as party “intellectuals” they must certainly
know what kind of funeral customs Permai followed. The two leaders, who
had not moved from their chairs, considered this as everyone watched
expectantly, but they finally refused, with some chagrin, saying they
really did not know how to go about it. The Modin shrugged and turned
away. One of the bystanders, a friend of Karman’s, then suggested that
they just take the body out and bury it and forget about the whole
ritual; it was extremely dangerous to leave things as they were much
longer. I don’t know whether this remarkable suggestion would have been
followed, for at this juncture the mother and father of the dead child
entered the kampong.

They seemed quite composed. They were not unaware of the death, for the
father later told me he had suspected as much when he got the telegram;
he and his wife had prepared themselves for the worst and were more or
less resigned by the time they arrived. When they approached the kampong
and saw the whole neighborhood gathered, they knew that their fears were
well founded. When Karman’s wife, whose weeping had subsided slightly,
saw the dead boy’s mother come into the yard, she burst free of those
who were comforting her and with a shriek rushed to embrace her sister.
In what seemed a split second, both women had dissolved into wild
hysterics and the crowd had rushed in and pulled them apart, dragging
them to houses at opposite sides of the kampong. Their wailing continued
in undiminished volume, and nervous comments arose to the effect that
they ought to get on with the burial in one fashion or another, before
the boy’s spirit possessed someone.

But the mother now insisted on seeing the body of her child before it
was wrapped. The father at first forbade it, angrily ordering her to
stop crying—didn’t she know that such behavior would darken the boy’s
pathway to the other world? But she persisted and so they brought her,
stumbling, to where he lay in Karman’s house. The women tried to keep
her from drawing too close, but she broke loose and began to kiss the
boy about the genitals. She was snatched away almost immediately by her
husband and the women, though she screamed that she had not yet
finished; and they pulled her into the back room where she subsided into
a daze. After a while—the body was finally being wrapped, the Modin
having unbent enough to point out where the cotton pads went—she seemed
to lose her bearings entirely and began to move about the yard shaking
hands with everyone, all strangers to her, and saying, “Forgive me my
faults, forgive me my faults.” Again she was forcibly restrained; people
said, “Calm yourself; think of your other children—do you want to follow
your son to the grave?”

The corpse was now wrapped, and new suggestions were made that it be
taken off immediately to the graveyard. At this point, Abu approached
the father, who, he evidently felt, had now displaced Karman as the man
legally responsible for the proceedings. Abu explained that the Modin,
being a Government official, did not feel free to approach the father
himself, but he would like to know: how did he wish the boy to be
buried—the Islamic way or what? The father, somewhat bewildered, said,
“Of course, the Islamic way. I don’t have much of any religion, but I’m
not a Christian, and when it comes to death the burial should be the
Islamic way. Completely Islamic.” Abu explained again that the Modin
could not approach the father directly, but that he, being “free,” could
do as he pleased. He said that he had tried to help as best he could but
that he had been careful to do nothing Islamic before the father came.
It was too bad, he apologized, about all the tension that was in the
air, that political differences had to make so much trouble. But after
all, everything had to be “clear” and “legal” about the funeral. It was
important for the boy’s soul. The santris, somewhat gleefully, now
chanted their prayers over the corpse, and it was carried to the grave
and buried in the usual manner. The Modin gave the usual graveyard
speech, as amended for children, and the funeral was finally completed.
None of the relatives or the women went to the graveyard; but when we
returned to the house—it was now well after noon—the slametan was
finally served, and Paidjan’s spirit presumably left the kampong to
begin its journey to the other world.

Three days later, in the evening, the first of the commemorative
slametans was held, but it turned out that not only were no santris
present but that it was as much a Permai political and religious cult
meeting as a mourning ritual. Karman started off in the traditional
fashion by announcing in high Javanese that this was a slametan in
remembrance of the death of Paidjan. Sudjoko, the Permai leader,
immediately burst in saying, “No, no, that is wrong. At a third day
slametan you just eat and give a long Islamic chant for the dead, and we
are certainly not going to do that.” He then launched into a long,
rambling speech. Everyone, he said, must know the
philosophical-religious basis of the country. “Suppose this American [he
pointed to me; he was not at all pleased by my presence] came up and
asked you: what is the spiritual basis of the country? and you didn’t
know—wouldn’t you be ashamed?”

He went on in this vein, building up a whole rationale for the present
national political structure on the basis of a mystical interpretation
of President Sukarno’s “Five Points” (Monotheism, Social Justice,
Humanitarianism, Democracy, and Nationalism) which are the official
ideological foundation of the new republic. Aided by Karman and others,
he worked out a micro-macrocosm correspondence theory in which the
individual is seen to be but a small replica of the state, and the state
but an enlarged image of the individual. If the state is to be ordered,
then the individual must also be ordered; each implies the other. As the
President’s Five Points are at the basis of the state, so the five
senses are at the basis of an individual. The process of harmonizing
both are the same, and it is this we must be sure we know. The
discussion continued for nearly half an hour, ranging widely through
religious, philosophical, and political issues (including, evidently for
my benefit, a discussion of the Rosenbergs’ execution).

We paused for coffee and as Sudjoko was about to begin again, Paidjan’s
father, who had been sitting quietly and expressionless, began suddenly
to talk, softly and with a curiously mechanical tonelessness, almost as
if he were reasoning with himself, but without much hope of success. “I
am sorry for my rough city accent,” he said, “but I very much want to
say something.” He hoped they would forgive him; they could continue
their discussion in a moment. “I have been trying to be iklas
[‘detached,’ ‘resigned’] about Paidjan’s death. I’m convinced that
everything that could have been done for him was done and that his death
was just an event which simply happened.” He said he was still in
Modjokuto because he could not yet face the people where he lived,
couldn’t face having to tell each one of them what had occurred. His
wife, he said, was a little more iklas now too. It was hard, though. He
kept telling himself it was just the will of God, but it was so hard,
for nowadays people didn’t agree on things any more; one person tells
you one thing and others tell you another. It’s hard to know which is
right, to know what to believe. He said he appreciated all the Modjokuto
people coming to the funeral, and he was sorry it had been all mixed up.
“I’m not very religious myself. I’m not Masjumi and I’m not Permai. But
I wanted the boy to be buried in the old way. I hope no one’s feelings
were hurt.” He said again he was trying to be iklas, to tell himself it
was just the will of God, but it was hard, for things were so confused
these days. It was hard to see why the boy should have died.

This sort of public expression of one’s feelings is extremely unusual—in
my experience unique—among Javanese, and in the formalized traditional
slametan pattern there is simply no place for it (nor for philosophical
or political discussion). Everyone present was rather shaken by the
father’s talk, and there was a painful silence. Sudjoko finally began to
talk again, but this time he described in detail the boy’s death. How
Paidjan had first gotten a fever and Karman had called him, Sudjoko, to
come and say a Permai spell. But the boy did not respond. They finally
took him to a male nurse in the hospital, where he was given an
injection. But still he worsened. He vomited blood and went into
convulsions, which Sudjoko described rather graphically, and then he
died. “I don’t know why the Permai spell didn’t work,” he said; “it has
worked before. This time it didn’t. I don’t know why; that sort of thing
can’t be explained no matter how much you think about it. Sometimes it
just works and sometimes it just doesn’t.” There was another silence and
then, after about ten minutes more of political discussion, we
disbanded. The father returned the next day to his home and I was not
invited to any of the later slametans. When I left the field about four
months later, Karman’s wife had still not entirely recovered from the
experience, the tension between the santris and the abangans in the
kampong had increased, and everyone wondered what would happen the next
time a death occurred in a Permai family.

Analysis

“Of all the sources of religion,” wrote Malinowski, “the supreme and
final crisis of life—death—is of the greatest importance.”¹²¹² Death, he
argued, provokes in the survivors a dual response of love and loathing,
a deep-going emotional ambivalence of fascination and fear which
threatens both the psychological and social foundations of human
existence. The survivors are drawn toward the deceased by their
affection for him, repelled from him by the dreadful transformation
wrought by death. Funeral rites, and the mourning practices which follow
them, focus around this paradoxical desire both to maintain the tie in
the face of death and to break the bond immediately and utterly, and to
insure the domination of the will to live over the tendency to despair.
Mortuary rituals maintain the continuity of human life by preventing the
survivors from yielding either to the impulse to flee panic-stricken
from the scene or to the contrary impulse to follow the deceased into
the grave:

And here into this play of emotional forces, into this supreme dilemma
of life and final death, religion steps in, selecting the positive
creed, the comforting view, the culturally valuable belief in
immortality, in the spirit independent of the body, and in the
continuance of life after death. In the various ceremonies at death, in
commemoration and communion with the departed, and worship of ancestral
ghosts, religion gives body and form to the saving beliefs. . . .
Exactly the same function it fulfills also with regard to the whole
group. The ceremonial of death, which ties the survivors to the body and
rivets them to the place of death, the beliefs in the existence of the
spirit, in its beneficent influences or malevolent intentions, in the
duties of a series of commemorative or sacrificial ceremonies—in all
this religion counteracts the centrifugal forces of fear, dismay,
demoralization, and provides the most powerful means of reintegration of
the group’s shaken solidarity and of the re-establishment of its morale.
In short, religion here assures the victory of tradition over the mere
negative response of thwarted instinct.¹³¹³

To this sort of theory, a case such as that described above clearly
poses some difficult problems. Not only was the victory of tradition and
culture over “thwarted instinct” a narrow one at best, but it seemed as
if the ritual were tearing the society apart rather than integrating it,
were disorganizing personalities rather than healing them. To this the
functionalist has a ready answer, which takes one of two forms depending
upon whether he follows the Durkheim or the Malinowski tradition: social
disintegration or cultural demoralization. Rapid social change has
disrupted Javanese society and this is reflected in a disintegrated
culture; as the unified state of traditional village society was
mirrored in the unified slametan, so the broken society of the kampong
is mirrored in the broken slametan of the funeral ritual we have just
witnessed. Or, in the alternate phraseology, cultural decay has led to
social fragmentation; loss of a vigorous folk tradition has weakened the
moral ties between individuals.

It seems to me that there are two things wrong with this argument, no
matter in which of the two vocabularies it is stated: it identifies
social (or cultural) conflict with social (or cultural) disintegration;
it denies independent roles to both culture and social structure,
regarding one of the two as a mere epiphenomenon of the other.

In the first place, kampong life is not simply anomic. Though it is
marked by vigorous social conflicts, as is our own society, it
nevertheless proceeds fairly effectively in most areas. If governmental,
economic, familial, stratificatory, and social control institutions
functioned as poorly as did Paidjan’s funeral, a kampong would indeed be
an uncomfortable place in which to live. But though some of the typical
symptoms of urban upheaval—such as increased gambling, petty thievery,
and prostitution—are to some degree present, kampong social life is
clearly not on the verge of collapse; everyday social interaction does
not limp along with the suppressed bitterness and deep uncertainty we
have seen focused around burial. For most of its members most of the
time, a semiurban neighborhood in Modjokuto offers a viable way of life,
despite its material disadvantages and its transitional character; and
for all the sentimentality which has been lavished on descriptions of
rural life in Java, this is probably as much as one could say for the
village. As a matter of fact, it is around religious beliefs and
practices—slametans, holidays, curing, sorcery, cult groups, and so
on—that the most seriously disruptive events seem to cluster. Religion
here is somehow the center and source of stress, not merely the
reflection of stress elsewhere in the society.

Yet it is not a source of stress because commitment to the inherited
patterns of belief and ritual has been weakened. The conflict around
Paidjan’s death took place simply because all the kampong residents did
share a common, highly integrated, cultural tradition concerning
funerals. There was no argument over whether the slametan pattern was
the correct ritual, whether the neighbors were obligated to attend, or
whether the supernatural concepts upon which the ritual is based were
valid ones. For both santris and abangans in the kampongs, the slametan
maintains its force as a genuine sacred symbol; it still provides a
meaningful framework for facing death—for most people the only
meaningful framework. We cannot attribute the failure of the ritual to
secularization, to a growth in skepticism, or to a disinterest in the
traditional “saving beliefs,” any more than we can attribute it to
anomie.

We must rather, I think, ascribe it to a discontinuity between the form
of integration existing in the social structural (“causal-functional”)
dimension and the form of integration existing in the cultural
(“logico-meaningful”) dimension—a discontinuity which leads not to
social and cultural disintegration, but to social and cultural conflict.
In more concrete, if somewhat aphoristic terms, the difficulty lies in
the fact that socially kampong people are urbanites, while culturally
they are still folk.

I have already pointed out that the Javanese kampong represents a
transitional sort of society, that its members stand “in between” the
more or less fully urbanized elite and the more or less traditionally
organized peasantry. The social structural forms in which they
participate are for the most part urban ones. The emergence of a highly
differentiated occupational structure in place of the almost entirely
agricultural one of the countryside; the virtual disappearance of the
semihereditary, traditional village government as a personalistic buffer
between the individual and the rationalized central government
bureaucracy, and its replacement by the more flexible forms of modern
parliamentary democracy; the evolution of a multiclass society in which
the kampong, unlike the village, is not even a potentially
self-sufficient entity, but is only one dependent subpart—all this means
that the kampong man lives in a very urban world. Socially, his is a
Gesellschaft existence.

But on the cultural level—the level of meaning—there is much less of a
contrast between the kampong dweller and the villager; much more between
him and a member of the urban elite. The patterns of belief, expression,
and value to which the kampong man is committed—his world view, ethos,
ethic, or whatever—differ only slightly from those followed by the
villager. Amid a radically more complex social environment, he clings
noticeably to the symbols which guided him or his parents through life
in rural society. And it is this fact which gave rise to the
psychological and social tension surrounding Paidjan’s funeral.

The disorganization of the ritual resulted from a basic ambiguity in the
meaning of the rite for those who participated in it. Most simply
stated, this ambiguity lay in the fact that the symbols which compose
the slametan had both religious and political significance, were charged
with both sacred and profane import. The people who came into Karman’s
yard, including Karman himself, were not sure whether they were engaged
in a sacralized consideration of first and last things or in a secular
struggle for power. This is why the old man (he was a graveyard keeper,
as a matter of fact) complained to me that dying was nowadays a
political problem; why the village policeman accused the Modin not of
religious but of political bias for refusing to bury Paidjan; why the
unsophisticated Karman was astonished when his ideological commitments
suddenly loomed as obstacles to his religious practices; why Abu was
torn between his willingness to submerge political differences in the
interest of a harmonious funeral and his unwillingness to trifle with
his religious beliefs in the interest of his own salvation; why the
commemorative rite oscillated between political diatribe and a poignant
search for an adequate explanation of what had happened—why, in sum, the
slametan religious pattern stumbled when it attempted to “step in” with
the “positive creed” and “the culturally valuable belief.”

As emphasized earlier, the present severity of the contrast between
santri and abangan is in great part due to the rise of nationalist
social movements in twentieth century Indonesia. In the larger cities
where these movements were born, they were originally of various sorts:
tradesmen’s societies to fight Chinese competition; unions of workers to
resist plantation exploitation; religious groups trying to redefine
ultimate concepts; philosophical discussion clubs attempting to clarify
Indonesian metaphysical and moral notions; school associations striving
to revivify Indonesian education; cooperative societies trying to work
out new forms of economic organization; cultural groups moving toward a
renaissance of Indonesian artistic life; and, of course, political
parties working to build up effective opposition to Dutch rule. As time
wore on, however, the struggle for independence absorbed more and more
the energies of all these essentially elite groups. Whatever the
distinctive aim of each of them—economic reconstruction, religious
reform, artistic renaissance—it became submerged in a diffuse political
ideology; all the groups were increasingly concerned with one end as the
prerequisite of all further social and cultural progress—freedom. By the
time the revolution began in 1945, reformulation of ideas outside the
political sphere had noticeably slackened and most aspects of life had
become intensely ideologized, a tendency which has continued into the
postwar period.

In the villages and small-town kampongs, the early, specific phase of
nationalism had only a minor effect. But as the movement unified and
moved toward eventual triumph, the masses too began to be affected and,
as I have pointed out, mainly through the medium of religious symbols.
The highly urbanized elite forged their bonds to the peasantry not in
terms of complex political and economic theory, which would have had
little meaning in a rural context, but in terms of concepts and values
already present there. As the major line of demarcation among the elite
was between those who took Islamic doctrine as the overall basis of
their mass appeal and those who took a generalized philosophical
refinement of the indigenous syncretic tradition as such a basis, so in
the countryside santri and abangan soon became not simply religious but
political categories, denoting the followers of these two diffuse
approaches to the organization of the emerging independent society. When
the achievement of political freedom strengthened the importance of
factional politics in parliamentary government, the santri-abangan
distinction became, on the local level at least, one of the primary
ideological axes around which the process of party maneuvering took
place.

The effect of this development has been to cause political debate and
religious propitiation to be carried out in the same vocabulary. A
koranic chant becomes an affirmation of political allegiance as well as
a paean to God; a burning of incense expresses one’s secular ideology as
well as one’s sacred beliefs. Slametans now tend to be marked by anxious
discussions of the various elements in the ritual, of what their “real”
significance is; by arguments as to whether a particular practice is
essential or optional; by abangan uneasiness when santris lift their
eyes to pray and santri uneasiness when abangans recite a protective
spell. At death, as we have seen, the traditional symbols tend both to
solidify individuals in the face of social loss and to remind them of
their differences; to emphasize the broadly human themes of mortality
and undeserved suffering and the narrowly social ones of factional
opposition and party struggle; to strengthen the values the participants
hold in common and to “tune up” their animosities and suspicions. The
rituals themselves become matters of political conflict; forms for the
sacralization of marriage and death are transformed into important party
issues. In such an equivocal cultural setting, the average kampong
Javanese finds it increasingly difficult to determine the proper
attitude toward a particular event, to choose the meaning of a given
symbol appropriate to a given social context.

The corollary of this interference of political meanings with religious
meanings also occurs: the interference of religious meanings with
political ones. Because the same symbols are used in both political and
religious contexts, people often regard party struggle as involving not
merely the usual ebb and flow of parliamentary maneuver, the necessary
factional give-and-take of democratic government, but involving as well
decisions on basic values and ultimates. Kampong people in particular
tend to see the open struggle for power explicitly institutionalized in
the new republican forms of government as a struggle for the right to
establish different brands of essentially religious principles as
official: “If the abangans get in, the koranic teachers will be
forbidden to hold classes”; “If the santris get in, we shall all have to
pray five times a day.” The normal conflict involved in electoral
striving for office is heightened by the idea that literally everything
is at stake: the “If we win, it is our country” idea that the group
which gains power has a right, as one man said, “to put his own
foundation under the state.” Politics thus takes on a kind of sacralized
bitterness; and one village election in a suburban Modjokuto village
actually had to be held twice because of the intense pressures generated
in this way.

The kampong man is, so to speak, caught between his ultimate and his
proximate concepts. Because he is forced to formulate his essentially
metaphysical ideas, his response to such basic “problems” as fate,
suffering, and evil, in the same terms as when he states his claims to
secular power, his political rights and aspirations, he experiences
difficulty in enacting either a socially and psychologically efficient
funeral or a smoothly running election.

But a ritual is not just a pattern of meaning; it is also a form of
social interaction. Thus, in addition to creating cultural ambiguity,
the attempt to bring a religious pattern from a relatively less
differentiated rural background into an urban context also gives rise to
social conflict, simply because the kind of social integration
demonstrated by the pattern is not congruent with the major patterns of
integration in the society generally. The way kampong people go about
maintaining solidarity in everyday life is quite different from the way
the slametan insists that they should go about maintaining it.

As emphasized earlier, the slametan is essentially a territorially based
ritual; it assumes the primary tie between families to be that of
residential propinquity. One set of neighbors is considered a
significant social unit (politically, religiously, economically) as
against another set of neighbors; one village as against another
village; one village-cluster as against another village-cluster. In the
town, this pattern has in large part changed. Significant social groups
are defined by a plurality of factors—class, political commitment,
occupation, ethnicity, regional origins, religious preference, age, and
sex, as well as residence. The new urban form of organization consists
of a careful balance of conflicting forces arising out of diverse
contexts: class differences are softened by ideological similarities;
ethic conflicts by common economic interests; political opposition, as
we have been, by residential intimacy. But in the midst of all this
pluralistic checking and balancing, the slametan remains unchanged,
blind to the major lines of social and cultural demarcation in urban
life. For it, the primary classifying characteristic of an individual is
where he lives.

Thus when an occasion arises demanding sacralization—a life-cycle
transition, a holiday, a serious illness—the religious form which must
be employed acts not with but against the grain of social equilibrium.
The slametan ignores those recently devised mechanisms of social
insulation which in daily life keep group conflict within fixed bounds,
as it also ignores the newly evolved patterns of social integration
among opposed groups which balance contradictory tensions in a
reasonably effective fashion. People are pressed into an intimacy they
would as soon avoid; where the incongruity between the social
assumptions of the ritual (“we are all culturally homogeneous peasants
together”) and what is in fact the case (“we are several different kinds
of people who must perforce live together despite our serious value
disagreements”) leads to a deep uneasiness of which Paidjan’s funeral
was but an extreme example. In the kampong, the holding of a slametan
increasingly serves to remind people that the neighborhood bonds they
are strengthening through a dramatic enactment are no longer the bonds
which most emphatically hold them together. These latter are
ideological, class, occupation, and political bonds, divergent ties
which are no longer adequately summed up in territorial relationships.

In sum, the disruption of Paidjan’s funeral may be traced to a single
source: an incongruity between the cultural framework of meaning and the
patterning of social interaction, an incongruity due to the persistence
in an urban environment of a religious symbol system adjusted to peasant
social structure. Static functionalism, of either the sociological or
social psychological sort, is unable to isolate this kind of incongruity
because it fails to discriminate between logico-meaningful integration
and causal-functional integration; because it fails to realize that
cultural structure and social structure are not mere reflexes of one
another but independent, yet interdependent, variables. The driving
forces in social change can be clearly formulated only by a more dynamic
form of functionalist theory, one which takes into account the fact that
man’s need to live in a world to which he can attribute some
significance, whose essential import he feels he can grasp, often
diverges from his concurrent need to maintain a functioning social
organism. A diffuse concept of culture as “learned behavior,” a static
view of social structure as an equilibrated pattern of interaction, and
a stated or unstated assumption that the two must somehow (save in
“disorganized” situations) be simple mirror images of one another, is
rather too primitive a conceptual apparatus with which to attack such
problems as those raised by Paidjan’s unfortunate but instructive
funeral.

[]

1 E. Durkheim, The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life (Glencoe,
III., 1947); W. Robertson-Smith, Lectures on the Religion of the Semites
(Edinburgh, 1894).

2 B. Malinowski, Magic, Science and Religion (Boston, 1948).

3 See, for example, E. R. Leach, Political Systems of Highland Burma
(Cambridge, Mass., 1954); and R. Merton, Social Theory and Social
Structure (Glencoe, III., 1949).

4 See C. Kluckhohn, Navaho Witchcraft, Peabody Museum Papers, No. 22
(Cambridge, Mass., 1944).

5 R. Redfield, The Folk Culture of Yucatan (Chicago, 1941), p. 339.

6 M. Fortes, “The Structure of Unilineal Descent Groups,” American
Anthropologist, 55 (1953): 17–41.

7 Leach, Political Systems of Highland Burma, p. 282.

8 T. Parsons and E. Shils, Toward a General Theory of Action (Cambridge,
Mass., 1951).

9 P. Sorokin, Social and Cultural Dynamics, 3 vols. (New York, 1937).

10 T. Parsons, The Social System (Glencoe, III., 1951), p. 6.

11 Actually, there are two parts to Javanese marriage rites. One, which
is part of the general syncretism, is held at the bride’s home and
involves a slametan and an elaborate ceremonial “meeting” between bride
and groom. The other, which is the official ceremony in the eyes of the
Government, follows the Moslem law and takes place at the office of the
subdistrict religious officer, or Naib. See C. Geertz, The Religion of
Java (Glencoe, III., 1960), pp. 51–61, 203.

12 Malinowski, Magic, Science and Religion, p. 29.

13 Ibid., pp. 33–35.

Chapter 7/ “Internal Conversion” in Contemporary Bali

[]

            Every race has its lumber-room of magical beliefs and
practices, and many such survivals are gracious and beautiful and
maintain the continuity of a civilization. It is to be hoped that modern
materialist ideas will not obliterate them entirely and leave Malay
culture jejune.

RICHARD WINSTEDT, The Malay Magician

We hear much these days about political and economic modernization in
the new states of Asia and Africa, but little about religious
modernization. When not ignored entirely, religion tends to be viewed
either as a rigidly archaic obstacle to needed progress or a beleaguered
conservator of precious cultural values threatened by the corrosive
powers of rapid change. Little attention is paid to religious
development in and of itself, to regularities of transformation which
occur in the ritual and belief systems of societies undergoing
comprehensive social revolutions. At best, we get studies of the role
that established religious commitments and identifications play in
political or economic processes. But our view of Asian and African
religions as such is oddly static. We expect them to prosper or decline;
we do not expect them to change.

With respect to Bali, perhaps the most richly stocked lumber-room of
gracious and beautiful magical beliefs and practices in Southeast Asia,
such an approach is virtually universal, and the dilemma of choosing
between a quixotic cultural antiquarianism and a barren cultural
materialism seems, therefore, to be an especially cruel one. In this
essay, I want to suggest that this dilemma is, in all likelihood, a
false one, that the continuity of Balinese civilization can be
maintained though the fundamental nature of its religious life be
totally transformed. And further, I want to point to a few faint,
uncertain signs that such a transformation is in fact already under way.

The Concept of Religious Rationalization

In his great work on comparative religion, the German sociologist Max
Weber set forth a distinction between two idealized polar types of
religions in world history, the “traditional” and the “rationalized,”
which, if it is overgeneralized and incompletely formulated, is yet a
useful starting point for a discussion of the process of genuinely
religious change.¹¹

The axis of this contrast turns upon a difference in the relationship
between religious concepts and social forms. Traditional religious
concepts (Weber also calls them magical) rigidly stereotype established
social practices. Inextricably bound up with secular custom in an almost
point-for-point manner, they draw “all branches of human activity . . .
into the circle of symbolic magic” and so insure that the stream of
everyday existence continues to flow steadily within a fixed and firmly
outlined course.²² Rationalized concepts, however, are not so thoroughly
intertwined with the concrete details of ordinary life. They are
“apart,” “above,” or “outside” of them, and the relations of the systems
of ritual and belief in which they are embodied to secular society are
not intimate and unexamined but distant and problematic. A rationalized
religion is, to the degree that it is rationalized, self-conscious and
worldly-wise. Its attitude to secular life may be various, from the
resigned acceptance of genteel Confucianism to the active mastery of
ascetic Protestantism; but it is never naive.³³

With this difference in relationship between the religious realm and the
secular goes a difference also in the structure of the religious realm
itself. Traditional religions consist of a multitude of very concretely
defined and only loosely ordered sacred entities, an untidy collection
of fussy ritual acts and vivid animistic images which are able to
involve themselves in an independent, segmental, and immediate manner
with almost any sort of actual event. Such systems (for, despite their
lack of formal regularity, they are systems) meet the perennial concerns
of religion, what Weber called the “problems of meaning”—evil,
suffering, frustration, bafflement, and so on—piecemeal. They attack
them opportunistically as they arise in each particular instance—each
death, each crop failure, each untoward natural or social
occurrence—employing one or another weapon chosen, on grounds of
symbolic appropriateness, from their cluttered arsenal of myth and
magic. (With respect to the less defensive activities of religion—the
celebration of human continuity, prosperity, and solidarity—the same
strategy is employed.) As the approach to fundamental spiritual issues
which traditional religions take is discrete and irregular, so also is
their characteristic form.

Rationalized religions, on the other hand, are more abstract, more
logically coherent, and more generally phrased. The problems of meaning,
which in traditional systems are expressed only implicitly and
fragmentarily, here get inclusive formulations and evoke comprehensive
attitudes. They become conceptualized as universal and inherent
qualities of human existence as such, rather than being seen as
inseparable aspects of this or that specific event. The question is no
longer put merely in such terms as, to use a classic example from the
British anthropologist Evans-Pritchard, “Why has the granary fallen on
my brother and not on someone else’s brother?” but rather, “Why do the
good die young and the evil flourish as the green bay tree?”⁴⁴ Or, to
escape from the conventions of Christian theodicy, not, “By what means
can I discover who practiced witchcraft against my brother, thereby
causing the granary to fall on him?” but, “How can one know the truth?”
Not, “What specific actions must I perform in order to wreak vengeance
upon the witch?” but, “What are the bases upon which punishment of
evildoers can be justified?” The narrower, concrete questions, of
course, remain; but they are subsumed under the broader ones, whose more
radically disquieting suggestions they therefore bring forward. And with
this raising of the broader ones in a stark and general form arises also
the need to answer them in an equally sweeping, universal, and
conclusive manner.

The so-called world religions developed, Weber argued, as responses to
the appearance in an acute form of just this sort of need. Judaism,
Confucianism, Philosophical Brahmanism, and, though on the surface it
might not seem to be a religion at all, Greek Rationalism, each emerged
out of a myriad of parochial cults, folk mythologies, and ad hoc
by-beliefs whose power had begun to fail for certain crucial groups in
the societies concerned.⁵⁵ This sense, on the part, largely, of
religious intellectuals, that the traditional conglomerate of rituals
and beliefs was no longer adequate, and the rise to consciousness of the
problems of meaning in an explicit form, seems to have been part, in
each case, of a much wider dislocation in the pattern of traditional
life. The details of such dislocations (or of those amidst which later
world religions, descended from these first four, appeared) need not
detain us. What is important is that the process of religious
rationalization seems everywhere to have been provoked by a thorough
shaking of the foundations of social order.

Provoked, but not determined. For, aside from the fact that profound
social crisis has not always produced profound religious creativity (or
any creativity at all), the lines along which such creativity has moved
when it has appeared have been most varied. Weber’s whole grand
comparison of the religions of China, India, Israel, and the West rested
on the notion that they represented variant directions of
rationalization, contrastive choices among a finite set of possible
developments away from magical realism. What these diverse systems had
in common was not the specific content of their message, which deepened
in its particularity as it expanded in its scope, but the formal
pattern, the generic mode, in which it was cast. In all of them, the
sense of sacredness was gathered up, like so many scattered rays of
light brought to focus in a lens, from the countless tree spirits and
garden spells through which it was vaguely diffused, and was
concentrated in a nucleate (though not necessarily monotheistic) concept
of the divine. The world was, in Weber’s famous phrase, disenchanted:
the locus of sacredness was removed from the rooftrees, graveyards, and
road-crossings of everyday life and put, in some sense, into another
realm where dwelt Jahweh, Logos, Tao, or Brahman.⁶⁶

With this tremendous increase in “distance,” so to speak, between man
and the sacred goes the necessity of sustaining the ties between them in
a much more deliberate and critical manner. As the divine can no longer
be apprehended en passant through numberless concrete, almost reflexive
ritual gestures strategically interspersed throughout the general round
of life, the establishment of a more general and comprehensive
relationship to it becomes, unless one is to abandon concern with it
altogether, imperative. Weber saw two main ways in which this can be
brought about. One is through the construction of a consciously
systematized, formal, legal-moral code consisting of ethical commands
conceived to have been given to man by the divine, through prophets,
holy writings, miraculous indications, and so on. The other is through
direct, individual experiential contact with the divine via mysticism,
insight, aesthetic intuition, etc., often with the assistance of various
sorts of highly organized spiritual and intellectual disciplines, such
as yoga. The first approach is, of course, typically, though not
exclusively, mid-Eastern; the second typically, though also not
exclusively, East Asian. But whether, as seems unlikely, these are the
only two possibilities, or not, they both do bridge the enormously
widened gap, or attempt to bridge it, between the profane and the sacred
in a self-conscious, methodical, explicitly coherent manner. They
maintain, for those who are committed to them, a sense of a meaningful
tie between man and the removed divine.

As with all Weber’s polar contrasts, however, that between traditional
and rational (the opposite of which is not irrational, but
unrationalized) is as thoroughly blurred in fact as it is sharply drawn
in theory. In particular, it must not be assumed that the religions of
nonliterate peoples are wholly lacking in rationalized elements and
those of literate ones rationalized through and through. Not only do
many so-called primitive religions show the results of significant
amounts of self-conscious criticism, but a popular religiosity of a
traditional sort persists with great strength in societies where
religious thought has attained its highest reaches of philosophical
sophistication.⁷⁷ Yet, in relative terms, it is hardly to be doubted
that the world religions show greater conceptual generalization, tighter
formal integration, and a more explicit sense of doctrine than do the
“little” ones of clan, tribe, village, or folk. Religious
rationalization is not an all-or-none, an irreversible, or an inevitable
process. But, empirically, it is a real one.

Traditional Balinese Religion

As the Balinese are, in a broad sense, Hindus, one might expect that a
significant part, at least, of their religious life would be relatively
well rationalized, that over and above the usual torrent of popular
religiosity there would exist a developed system of either ethical or
mystical theology. Yet this is not the case. A number of
overintellectualized descriptions of it to the contrary notwithstanding,
Balinese religion, even among the priests, is concrete, action-centered,
thoroughly interwoven with the details of everyday life, and touched
with little, if any, of the philosophical sophistication or generalized
concern of classical Brahmanism or its Buddhist offshoot.⁸⁸ Its approach
to the problems of meaning remains implicit, circumscribed and
segmental. The world is still enchanted and (some recent stirrings aside
for the moment) the tangled net of magical realism is almost completely
intact, broken only here and there by individual qualms and reflections.

How far this absence of a developed body of doctrine is a result of the
persistence of the indigenous (that is, pre-Hindu) element, of the
relative isolation of Bali from the outside world after the fifteenth
century or so and the consequent parochialization of its culture, or of
the rather unusual degree to which Balinese social structure has been
able to maintain a solidly traditional form, is a moot question. In
Java, where the pressure of external influences has been relentless, and
where traditional social structure has lost much of its resilience, not
just one but several relatively well-rationalized systems of belief and
worship have developed, giving a conscious sense of religious diversity,
conflict, and perplexity still quite foreign to Bali.⁹⁹ Thus, if one
comes, as I did, to Bali after having worked in Java, it is the near
total absence of either doubt or dogmatism, the metaphysical
nonchalance, that almost immediately strikes one. That, and the
astounding proliferation of ceremonial activity. The Balinese,
perpetually weaving intricate palm-leaf offerings, preparing elaborate
ritual meals, decorating all sorts of temples, marching in massive
processions, and falling into sudden trances, seem much too busy
practicing their religion to think (or worry) very much about it.

Yet, again, to say that Balinese religion is not methodically ordered is
not to say that it is not ordered at all. Not only is it pervaded with a
consistent, highly distinctive tone (a kind of sedulous theatricalism
which only extended description could evoke), but the elements which
comprise it cluster into a number of relatively well-defined ritual
complexes which exhibit, in turn, a definite approach to properly
religious issues no less reasonable for being implicit. Of these, three
are of perhaps greatest importance: (1) the temple system; (2) the
sanctification of social inequality; and (3) the cult of death and
witches. As the relevant ethnographic details are readily available in
the literature, my description of these complexes can be cursory.¹⁰¹⁰

1. The temple system is a type example of the wholesale fashion in which
the diverse strands of a traditional religion twine themselves through
the social structure within which they are set. Though all the temples,
of which there are literally thousands, are built on a generally similar
open-court plan, each is entirely focused on one or another of a number
of quite specifically defined concerns: death, neighborhood patriotism,
kin-group solidarity, agricultural fertility, caste pride, political
loyalty, and so on. Every Balinese belongs to from two or three to a
dozen such temples; and, as the congregation of each is composed of
those families who happen to use the same graveyard, live in the same
neighborhood, farm the same fields, or have other links, such
memberships and the heavy ritual obligations they involve buttress
rather directly the sort of social relationships out of which Balinese
daily life is built.

The religious forms associated with the various temples, like the
architecture broadly similar from temple to temple, are almost wholly
ceremonial in nature. Beyond a minimal level, there is almost no
interest in doctrine, or generalized interpretation of what is going on,
at all. The stress is on orthopraxy, not orthodoxy—what is crucial is
that each ritual detail should be correct and in place. If one is not, a
member of the congregation will fall, involuntarily, into a trance,
becoming thereby the chosen messenger of the gods, and will refuse to
revive until the error, announced in his ravings, has been corrected.
But the conceptual side is of much less moment: the worshippers usually
don’t even know who the gods in the temples are, are uninterested in the
meaning of the rich symbolism, and are indifferent to what others may or
may not believe. You can believe virtually anything you want to
actually, including that the whole thing is rather a bore, and even say
so. But if you do not perform the ritual duties for which you are
responsible you will be totally ostracized, not just from the temple
congregation, but from the community as a whole.

Even the execution of ceremonies has an oddly externalized air about it.
The main such ceremony occurs on each temple’s “birthday,” every 210
days, at which time the gods descend from their homes atop the great
volcano in the center of the island, enter iconic figurines placed on an
altar in the temple, remain three days, and then return. On the day of
their arrival the congregation forms a gay parade, advancing to meet
them at the edge of the village, welcoming them with music and dance,
and escorting them to the temple where they are further entertained; on
the day of their departure they are sent off with a similar, though
sadder, more restrained procession. But most of the ritual between the
first and the last day is performed by the temple priest alone, the
congregation’s main obligation being to construct tremendously complex
offerings and bring them to the temple. There is, on the first day, an
important collective ritual at which holy water is sprinkled on members
of the congregation as, palms to forehead, they make the classic Hindu
obeisance gesture to the gods. But even in this seemingly sacramental
ceremony only one member of the household need participate, and it is
usually a woman or an adolescent who is so delegated, the men being
generally unconcerned so long as a few drops of the charmed water falls
protectively upon some representative of their family.

2. The sanctification of social inequality centers on the one hand
around the Brahmana priesthood and on the other around the enormous
ceremonies which the dozens of kings, princes, and lordlings of Bali
give to express and reinforce their ascendency. In Bali, the
symbolization of social inequality, of rank, has always been the
linchpin of supravillage political organization. From the very earliest
stages, the primary moving forces in the process of state formation have
been more stratificatory than political, have been concerned more with
status than with statecraft. It was not a drive toward higher levels of
administrative, fiscal, or even military efficiency that acted as the
fundamental dynamic element in the shaping of the Balinese polity, but
rather an intense emphasis on the ceremonial expression of delicately
graduated distinctions in social standing. Governmental authority was
made to rest, secondarily and quite precariously, on more highly valued
prestige differences between social strata; and the actual mechanisms of
political control through which an authoritarian oligarchy exercises its
power were much less elaborately developed than were those through which
a traditional cultural elite demonstrates its spiritual superiority—that
is, state ritual, court art, and patrician etiquette.

Thus, where the temples are primarily associated with egalitarian
village groups—perhaps the fundamental structural principle around which
they are organized is that within the temple context all differences in
social rank between members of the congregation are irrelevant—the
priesthood and the spectacular ceremonies of the upper caste tie gentry
and peasantry together into relationships that are frankly asymmetrical.

While any male member of the Brahmana caste is eligible to become a
priest, only a minority undertake the extended period of training and
purification that is prerequisite to actual practice in the role.¹¹¹¹
Though it has no organization as such, each priest operating
independently, the priesthood as a whole is very closely identified with
the nobility. The ruler and the priest are said to stand side by side as
“full brothers.” Each without the other would fall, the first for lack
of charismatic potency, the second for lack of armed protection. Even
today, each noble house has a symbiotic tie with a particular priestly
house which is considered to be its spiritual counterpart, and in the
precolonial period not only were the royal courts largely manned by
priests, but no priest could be consecrated without permission of the
local ruler and no ruler legitimately installed except by a priest.

On the commoner or lower-caste side each priest “owns” a number of
followers, allotted to his house at one point or another by this or that
noble house and subsequently inherited from generation to generation.
These followers are scattered, if not altogether randomly, at least very
widely—say three in one village, four in the next, several more in a
third, and so on—the reason for this practice evidently being a wish on
the part of the nobility to keep the priesthood politically weak. Thus,
in any one village a man and his neighbor will ordinarily be dependent
upon different priests for their religious needs, the most important of
which is the obtaining of holy water, an element essential not just for
temple ceremonies but for virtually all important rituals. Only a
Brahmana priest can address the gods directly in order to sanctify
water, as only he has, as the result of his ascetic regimen and his
caste purity, the spiritual strength to traffic safely with the
tremendous magical power involved. The priests are thus more
professional magicians than true priests: they do not serve the divine
nor elucidate it, but, through the agency of ill-understood sanskritic
chants and beautifully stylized sacred gestures, they utilize it.

A priest’s followers refer to him as their siwa, after the god by whom
he is possessed during the entranced portions of his rite, and he refers
to them as his sisija, roughly “clients”; and in such a way the
hierarchical social differentiation into upper and lower castes is
symbolically assimilated to the spiritual contrast between priests and
ordinary men. The other means through which rank is given religious
expression and support, the prodigious ceremonies of the nobility,
employs an institution of political rather than ritual
clientage—corvée—to underscore the legitimacy of radical social
inequality. Here, it is not the content of the ceremonial activity which
is important, but the fact that one is in a position to mobilize the
human resources to produce such an extravaganza at all.

Usually focused around life-cycle events (tooth-filing, cremation),
these ceremonies involve the collective efforts of great masses of
subjects, dependents, etc., over a considerable stretch of time, and
form, therefore, not just the symbol but the very substance of political
loyalty and integration. In precolonial times the preparation and
performance of such grand spectacles seem to have consumed more time and
energy than all other state activities, including warfare, put together,
and so, in a sense, the political system can be said to have existed to
support the ritual system, rather than the other way round. And, despite
colonialism, occupation, war, and independence, the pattern in great
part persists—the gentry is still, in Cora Du Bois’s fine phrase, “the
symbolic expression of the peasantry’s greatness,” and the peasantry,
still the lifeblood of the gentry’s pretensions.¹²¹²

3. The cult of death and witches is the “dark” side of Balinese
religion, and, though it penetrates into virtually every corner of daily
life, adding an anxious note to the otherwise equable tenor of
existence, it finds its most direct and vivid expression in the ecstatic
ritual combat of those two strange mythological figures: Rangda and
Barong. In Rangda, monstrous queen of the witches, ancient widow,
used-up prostitute, child-murdering incarnation of the goddess of death,
and, if Margaret Mead is correct, symbolic projection of the rejecting
mother, the Balinese have fashioned a powerful image of unqualified
evil.¹³¹³ In Barong, a vaguely benign and slightly ludicrous deity, who
looks and acts like a cross between a clumsy bear, a foolish puppy, and
a strutting Chinese dragon, they have constructed an almost parodic
representation of human strength and weakness. That in their headlong
encounters these two demons, each saturated with that mana-like power
the Balinese call sakti, arrive inevitably at an exact stand-off is
therefore not without a certain ultimate significance for all its
magical concreteness.

The actual enactments of the battle between Rangda and Barong usually,
though not inevitably, take place during a death temple’s “birthday”
ceremony. One villager (a man) dances Rangda, donning the fierce mask
and repulsive costume; two others, arranged fore and aft as in a
vaudeville horse, dance the elegant Barong. Both entranced, the hag and
dragon advance warily from opposite sides of the temple yard amid
curses, threats, and growing tension. At first Barong fights alone, but
soon members of the audience begin falling involuntarily into trance,
seizing krisses, and rushing to his aid. Rangda advances toward Barong
and his helpers, waving her magical cloth. She is hideous and
terrifying, and, although they hate her with a terrible rage and want to
destroy her, they fall back. When she, held at bay by Barong’s sakti,
then turns away, she suddenly becomes irresistibly attractive (at least
so my informants reported) and they advance on her eagerly from the
rear, sometimes even trying to mount her from behind; but, with a turn
of her head and a touch of her cloth, they fall helpless into a coma.
Finally she withdraws from the scene, undefeated, but at least checked,
and Barong’s desperately frustrated assistants burst into wild
self-destructive rages, turning their krisses (ineffectively, because
they are in trance) against their chests, desperately hurling themselves
about, devouring live chicks, and so on. From the long moment of
tremulous expectancy which precedes the initial appearance of Rangda to
this final dissolution into an orgy of futile violence and degradation,
the whole performance has a most uncomfortable air of being about to
descend at any moment into sheer panic and wild destruction. Evidently
it never does, but the alarming sense of touch-and-go, with the
diminishing band of the entranced desperately attempting to keep the
situation minimally in hand, is altogether overwhelming, even for a mere
observer. The razor-thin dimensions of the line dividing reason from
unreason, eros from thanatos, or the divine from the demonic, could
hardly be more effectively dramatized.

The Rationalization of Balinese Religion

Except for a few odd sports of limited consequence such as Bahai or
Mormonism (and leaving aside, as equivocal cases, the so-called
political religions such as Communism and Fascism), no new rationalized
world religions have arisen since Mohammed. Consequently, almost all of
the tribal and peasant peoples of the world who have shed, to whatever
degree, the husk of their traditional faiths since that time, have done
so through conversion to one or another of the great missionary
religions—Christianity, Islam, or Buddhism. For Bali, however, such a
course seems precluded. Christian missionaries have never made much
progress on the island and, connected as they are with the discredited
colonial regime, their chances would now seem poorer than ever. Nor are
the Balinese likely to become Muslims in large numbers, despite the
general Islamism of Indonesia. They are, as a people, intensely
conscious and painfully proud of being a Hindu island in a Muslim sea,
and their attitude toward Islam is that of the duchess to the bug. To
become either Christian or Muslim would be tantamount, in their eyes, to
ceasing to be Balinese, and, indeed, an occasional individual who is
converted is still considered, even by the most tolerant and
sophisticated, to have abandoned not just Balinese religion but Bali,
and perhaps reason, itself. Both Christianity and Islam may influence
further religious developments on the island; but they have virtually no
chance of controlling them.¹⁴¹⁴

Yet, that a comprehensive shaking of the foundations of the Balinese
social order is, if not already begun, in the very immediate offing, is
apparent on all sides. The emergence of the unitary Republic and the
enclosure of Bali as a component within it has brought modern education,
modern governmental forms, and modern political consciousness to the
island. Radically improved communications have brought increased
awareness of, and contact with, the outside world, and provided novel
criteria against which to measure the worth both of their own culture
and that of others. And inexorable internal changes—increased
urbanization, growing population pressure, and so on—have made
maintenance of traditional systems of social organization in unchanged
form progressively more difficult. What happened in Greece or China
after the fifth century B.C.—the disenchantment of the world—seems about
to happen, in an altogether different historical context and with an
altogether different historical meaning, in mid-twentieth century Bali.

Unless, as is of course a real possibility, events move too fast for
them to maintain their cultural heritage at all, the Balinese seem
likely to rationalize their religious system through a process of
“internal conversion.” Following, generally and not uncritically, the
guidelines of the Indian religions to which they have been so long
nominally affiliated, but from whose doctrinal spirit they have been
almost wholly cut off, they seem on the verge of producing a
self-conscious “Bali-ism” which, in its philosophical dimensions, will
approach the world religions both in the generality of the questions it
asks and in the comprehensiveness of the answers it gives.

The questions, at least, are already being asked; particularly by the
youth. Among the educated or semieducated young men of eighteen to
thirty who formed the ideological vanguard of the Revolution, there have
appeared scattered but distinct signs of a conscious interest in
spiritual issues of a sort which still seem largely meaningless to their
elders or their less engagés contemporaries.

For example, one night, at a funeral in the village where I was living,
a full-scale philosophical discussion of such issues broke out among
eight or ten young men squatted around the courtyard “guarding” the
corpse. As the other aspects of traditional Balinese religion which I
have described, funeral ceremonies consist largely of a host of detailed
little busy-work routines, and whatever concern with first and last
things death may stimulate is well submerged in a bustling ritualism.
But these young men, who involved themselves but minimally in all this,
the necessary observances being mostly performed by their elders, fell
spontaneously into a searching discussion of the nature of religion as
such.

At first they addressed themselves to a problem which has haunted the
religious and the students of religion alike: how can you tell where
secular custom leaves off and religion, the truly sacred, begins? Are
all the items in the detailed funeral rite really necessary homage to
the gods, genuinely sacred matters? Or are many simply human customs
performed out of blind habit and tradition? And, if so, how can you
differentiate the one from the other?

One man offered the notion that practices which were clearly connected
with grouping people together, strengthening their bonds with one
another—for example, the communal construction of the corpse litter by
the village as a whole, or the kin-group’s preparation of the body—were
custom, and so not sacred, while those connected directly with the
gods—the family obeisance to the spirit of the deceased, the
purification of the body with holy water, and so on—were properly
religious. Another argued that those elements which appeared generally
in ritual observances, which you find virtually everywhere, from birth
to death, in the temples and at the Rangda plays (again, holy water is a
good example), were religious, but those which occurred only here and
there, or were limited to one or two rites, were not.

Then the discussion veered, as such discussions will, to the grounds of
validity for religion as such. One man, somewhat Marxist-influenced,
propounded social relativism: when in Rome do as the Romans do, a phrase
he quoted in its Indonesian form. Religion is a human product. Man
thought up God and then named him. Religion is useful and valuable, but
it has no supernatural validity. One man’s faith is another man’s
superstition. At bottom, everything comes down to mere custom.

This was greeted with universal disagreement, disapproval, and dismay.
In response, the son of the village head offered a simple, nonrational
belief position. Intellectual arguments are totally irrelevant. He knows
in his heart that the gods exist. Faith is first, thought secondary. The
truly religious person, such as himself, just knows that the gods truly
come into the temples—he can feel their presence. Another man, more
intellectually inclined, erected, more or less on the spot, a complex
allegorical symbology to solve the problem. Tooth-filing symbolizes man
becoming more like the gods and less like the animals, who have fangs.
This rite means this, that that; this color stands for justice, that for
courage, etc. What seems meaningless is full of hidden meaning, if only
you have the key. A Balinese cabalist. Yet another man, more agnostic,
though not a disbeliever, produced the golden mean for us. You can’t
really think about these things because they don’t lie within human
comprehension. We just don’t know. The best policy is a conservative
one—believe just about half of everything you hear. That way you won’t
go overboard.

And so it went through a good part of the night. Clearly these young
men, all of whom (save the village chiefs son who was a government clerk
in a nearby town) were peasants and smiths, were better Weberians than
they knew. They were concerned on the one hand with segregating religion
from social life in general, and on the other with trying to close the
gap between this world and the other, between secular and sacred, which
was thus opened up, by means of some sort of deliberately systematic
attitude, some general commitment. Here is the crisis of faith, the
breaking of the myths, the shaking of the foundations in a pretty
unvarnished form.

The same sort of new seriousness is beginning to appear, here and there,
in liturgical contexts as well. In a number of the temple
ceremonies—particularly those at which, as is increasingly the case, a
Brahmana priest officiates directly rather than, as has been customary,
merely providing holy water for the use of the low-caste temple
priest—there is appearing an almost pietistic fervor on the part of some
of the young male (and a few of the young female) members of the
congregation. Rather than permitting but one member of their family to
participate for all in the genuflexion to the gods, they all join in,
crowding toward the priest so as to have more holy water sprinkled on
them. Rather than the context of screaming children and idly chatting
adults within which this sacrament usually takes place, they demand, and
get, a hushed and reverent atmosphere. They talk, afterward, about the
holy water not in magical but emotionalist terms, saying that their
inward unease and uncertainty is “cooled” by the water as it falls upon
them, and they too speak of feeling the gods’ presence directly and
immediately. Of all this, the older and the more traditional can make
little; they look on it, as they themselves say, like a cow looking at a
gamelan orchestra—with an uncomprehending, bemused (but in no way
hostile) astonishment.

Such rationalizing developments on the more personal level demand,
however, a comparable sort of rationalization at the level of dogma and
creed if they are to be sustained. And this is in fact occurring, to a
limited extent, through the agency of several recently established
publishing firms which are attempting to put scholarly order into the
classical palm-leaf literature upon which the Brahmana priesthoods’
claim to learning rests, to translate it into modern Balinese or
Indonesian, to interpret it in moral-symbolic terms, and to issue it in
cheap editions for the increasingly literate masses. These firms are
also publishing translations of Indian works, both Hindu and Buddhist,
are importing theosophical books from Java, and have even issued several
original works by Balinese writers on the history and significance of
their religion.¹⁵¹⁵

It is, again, the young educated men who for the most part buy these
books, but they often read them aloud at home to their families. The
interest in them, especially in the old Balinese manuscripts, is very
great, even on the part of quite traditional people. When I bought some
books of this sort and left them around our house in the village, our
front porch became a literary center where groups of villagers would
come and sit for hours on end and read them to one another, commenting
now and then on their meaning, and almost invariably remarking that it
was only since the Revolution that they had been permitted to see such
writings, that in the colonial period the upper castes prevented their
dissemination altogether. This whole process represents, thus, a
spreading of religious literacy beyond the traditional priestly
castes—for whom the writings were in any case more magical esoterica
than canonical scriptures—to the masses, a vulgarization, in the root
sense, of religious knowledge and theory. For the first time, at least a
few ordinary Balinese are coming to feel that they can get some
understanding of what their religion is all about; and more important,
that they have a need for and a right to such understanding.

Against such a background, it might seem paradoxical that the main force
behind this religious literacy and philosophical-moral interpretation
movement is the nobility, or part of it, that it is certain, again
generally younger, members of the aristocracy who are collating and
translating the manuscripts and founding the firms to publish and
distribute them.

But the paradox is only an apparent one. As I have noted, much of the
nobility’s traditional status rested on ceremonial grounds; a great part
of the traditional ceremonial activity was designed so as to produce an
almost reflexive acceptance of their eminence and right to rule. But
today this simple assumption of eminence is becoming increasingly
difficult. It is being undermined by the economic and political changes
of Republican Indonesia and by the radically populist ideology which has
accompanied these changes. Though a good deal of large-scale
ceremonialism still persists on Bali, and though the ruling class
continues to express its claim to superiority, in terms of ritual
extravagance, the day of the colossal cremation and the titanic
tooth-filing seems to be drawing to a close.

To the more perceptive of the aristocracy the handwriting on the wall is
thus quite clear: if they persist in basing their right to rule on
wholly traditional grounds they will soon lose it. Authority now demands
more than court ceremonialism to justify it; it demands “reasons”—that
is, doctrine. And it is doctrine that they are attempting to provide
through reinterpreting classical Balinese literature and re-establishing
intellectual contact with India. What used to rest on ritual habit is
now to rest on rationalized dogmatic belief. The main concerns upon
which the content of the “new” literature focuses—the reconciliation of
polytheism and monotheism, the weighing of the relative importance of
“Hindu” and “Balinese” elements in “Hindu-Balinese” religion, the
relation of outward form to inward content in worship, the tracing of
the historico-mythological origins of caste rankings, and so on—all
serve to set the traditional hierarchical social system in an explicitly
intellectual context. The aristocracy (or part of it) have cast
themselves in the role of the leaders of the new Bali-ism so as to
maintain their more general position of social dominance.

To see in all this a mere Machiavellianism, however, would be to give
the young nobles both too much credit and too little. Not only are they
at best partially conscious of what they are doing, but, like my village
theologians, they too are at least in part religiously rather than
politically motivated. The transformations which the “new Indonesia” has
brought have hit the old élite as hard as any other group in Balinese
society by questioning the foundations of their belief in their own
vocation and thus their view of the very nature of reality in which they
conceive that vocation to be rooted. Their threatened displacement from
power appears to them as not just a social but a spiritual issue. Their
sudden concern with dogma is, therefore, in part a concern to justify
themselves morally and metaphysically, not only in the eyes of the mass
of the population but in their own, and to maintain at least the
essentials of the established Balinese world view and value system in a
radically changed social setting. Like so many other religious
innovators, they are simultaneously reformists and restorationists.

Aside from the intensification of religious concern and the
systematization of doctrine, there is a third side to this process of
rationalization—the social-organizational. If a new “Bali-ism” is to
flourish, it needs not only a popular change of heart and an explicit
codification, but a more formally organized institutional structure in
which it can be socially embodied. This need, essentially an
ecclesiastical one, is coming to revolve around the problem of the
relation of Balinese religion to the national state, in particular
around its place—or lack thereof—in the Republican Ministry of Religion.

The Ministry, which is headed by a full cabinet member, is centered in
Djakarta, but has offices scattered over much of the country. It is
entirely dominated by Muslims, and its main activities are building
mosques, publishing Indonesian translations of the Koran and
commentaries, appointing Muslim marriage-closers, supporting Koranic
schools, disseminating information about Islam, and so on. It has an
elaborate bureaucracy, in which there are special sections for
Protestants and Catholics (who largely boycott it anyway on separatist
grounds) as distinct religions. But Balinese religion is thrown into the
general residual category perhaps best translated as “wild”—that is,
pagan, heathen, primitive, etc.—the members of which have no genuine
rights in, or aid from, the Ministry. These “wild” religions are
considered, in the classical Muslim distinction between “peoples of the
Book” and “religions of ignorance,” as threats to true piety and fair
game for conversion.”¹⁶¹⁶

The Balinese naturally take a dim view of this and have constantly
petitioned Djakarta for equal recognition with Protestantism,
Catholicism, and Islam as a fourth major religion. President Sukarno,
himself half-Balinese, and many other national leaders sympathize, but
they cannot, as yet, afford to alienate the politically powerful
orthodox Muslims and so have vacillated, giving little effective
support. The Muslims say that the adherents of Balinese Hinduism are all
in one place, unlike the Christians who are scattered all over
Indonesia; the Balinese point out that there are Balinese communities in
Djakarta and elsewhere in Java, as well as in south Sumatra
(transmigrants), and instance the recent erection of Balinese temples in
east Java. The Muslims say, you have no Book, how can you be a world
religion? The Balinese reply, we have manuscripts and inscriptions
dating from before Mohammed. The Muslims say, you believe in many gods
and worship stones; the Balinese say, God is One but has many names and
the “stone” is the vehicle of God, not God himself. A few of the more
sophisticated Balinese even claim that the real reason why the Muslims
are unwilling to admit them to the Ministry is the fear that if
“Bali-ism” were to become an officially recognized religion, many
Javanese, who are Islamic in name only and still very Hindu-Buddhist in
spirit, would convert, and “Bali-ism” would grow rapidly at the expense
of Islam.

In any case, there is an impasse. And, as a result, the Balinese have
set up their own independent, locally financed “Ministry of Religion,”
and are attempting through it to reorganize some of their most central
religious institutions. The main effort, so far, has been concentrated
(with largely indifferent results) upon regularizing the qualifications
for Brahmana priests. Instead of resting the priestly role mainly on its
hereditary aspect, which in itself they, of course, do not question, or
on the ritual virtuosity involved, the “Ministry” wishes to rest it on
religious knowledge and wisdom. It wants to insure that the priests know
what the scriptures mean and can relate them to contemporary life, are
of good moral character, have attained at least some degree of genuine
scholarship, and so on. Our young men will no longer follow a man just
because he is a Brahmana, the officials say; we must make him a figure
of moral and intellectual respect, a true spiritual guide. And to this
end they are attempting to exercise some control over ordination, even
to the point of setting qualifying examinations, and to make the
priesthood a more corporate body by holding meetings of all the priests
in an area. The representatives of the “Ministry” also tour the villages
giving educational speeches on the moral significance of Balinese
religion, on the virtues of monotheism and the dangers of idol worship,
and so on. They are even attempting to put some order into the temple
system, to establish a systematic classification of temples, and perhaps
eventually to elevate one kind, most likely the village origin-temple,
to pre-eminence in a universalistic pattern comparable to that of a
mosque or a church.

All this is, however, still largely in the paper-planning stage, and it
cannot be claimed that very much actual reorganization of the
institutional structure of Balinese religion has in fact taken place.
But there is an office of the “Ministry” in each Balinese regency now,
headed by a salaried Brahmana priest (a regularly paid “official”
priesthood being in itself something of a revolution), assisted by three
or four clerks, most of them also members of the Brahmana caste. A
religious school, independent of the “Ministry” but encouraged by it,
has been established, and even a small religious political party
centered around a ranking noble and dedicated to forwarding these
changes has been founded, so that at least the faint beginnings of
religious bureaucratization are manifest.

What will come of all this—the intensified religious questioning, the
spread of religious literacy, and the attempt to reorganize religious
institutions—remains simply to be seen. In many ways, the whole drift of
the modern world would seem to be against the sort of movement toward
religious rationalization which these developments portend, and perhaps
Balinese culture will, in the end, be swamped and left jejune by just
the sort of “modern materialist ideas” which Sir Richard Winstedt fears.
But not only do such overall drifts—when they do not turn out to be
mirages altogether—often pass over deeply rooted cultural configurations
with rather less effect upon them than we would have thought possible,
but, for all its present weakness, the regenerative potential of a
triangular alliance of troubled youth, threatened aristocrats, and
aroused priests should not be underestimated. Today in Bali some of the
same social and intellectual processes which gave rise to the
fundamental religious transformations of world history seem to be at
least well begun, and whatever their vicissitudes or eventual outcome,
their career can hardly help but be an instructive one. By looking
closely at what happens on this peculiar little island over the next
several decades we may gain insights into the dynamics of religious
change of a specificity and an immediacy that history, having already
happened, can never give us.¹⁷¹⁷

[]

1 Weber’s main theoretical discussion of religion is contained in a
still untranslated section of his Wirtschaft and Gesellschaft (Tübingen,
1925), pp. 225–356, but application of his approach can be found in the
translations of his Religionssoziologie issued as The Religion of China
(Glencoe, III., 1958), Ancient Judaism (Glencoe, III., 1952), The
Religion of India (Glencoe, III., 1958), and The Protestant Ethic and
the Spirit of Capitalism (New York, 1958). The best discussions of
Weber’s work in English are T. Parsons, The Structure of Social Action
(Glencoe, III., 1949), and R. Bendix, Max Weber: An Intellectual
Portrait (New York, 1960).

2 Quoted in Parsons, Social Action, p. 566.

3 Weber, Religion of China, pp. 226–249.

4 E. E. Evans-Pritchard, Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic Among the Azande
(Oxford, 1932).

5 For a discussion of Weber’s analysis of the role of status groups in
religious change, see Bendix, Max Weber, 103–111. My formulation here
and elsewhere in this discussion owes much to an unpublished paper by
Robert Bellah, “Religion in the Process of Cultural Differentiation”;
see also his Tokugawa Religion (Glencoe, III., 1957).

6 Bellah, “Differentiation.”

7 On rationalized elements in “primitive” religions see P. Radin,
Primitive Man as a Philosopher (New York, 1957). On popular religion in
developed civilizations, Bendix, Weber, 112–116.

8 The very partial nature of the one slight exception to this can be
seen from the brief description of a priest’s intellectual training in
V. E. Korn, “The Consecration of a Priest,” in J. L. Swellengrebel et
al., Bali: Studies in Life, Thought and Ritual (The Hague and Bandung,
1960), pp. 133–153.

9 On Java, see C. Geertz, The Religion of Java (Glencoe, III., 1960).

10 For a general survey, see M. Covarrubias, Island of Bali (New York,
1956).

11 A priest usually must have a Brahmana wife in order to be
consecrated, and his wife may fill his role after his death as a
full-fledged priest.

12 C. Du Bois, Social Forces in Southeast Asia (Cambridge, Mass., 1959),
p.

13 G. Bateson and M Mead, Balinese Character: A Photographic Analysis
(New York, 1942).

14 For a similar judgment by a missionary linguist, see J. L.
Swellengrebel, Introduction, in Swellengrebel et al., Bali, pp. 68–76.
As the present paper was drafted in the field before Swellengrebel’s
appeared, the convergence of some of the material he presents with mine
serves as something of an independent support for the reality of the
process outlined here.

15 See Swellengrebel, Bali, Introduction, pp. 70–71, for descriptions of
some of this literature.

16 See Swellengrebel, Bali, Introduction, pp. 72–73, for some
parliamentary exchanges on this issue.

17 In 1962, “Balinese Religion” was finally admitted as an official
“Great Religion” in Indonesia. Since that time, and particularly since
the 1965 massacres, conversions from Islam to “Bali-ism” have indeed
markedly increased in Java. And on Bali itself, the Hindu reform
movement has grown into a major force. On all this, see C. Geertz,
“Religious Change and Social Order in Soeharto’s Indonesia,” Asia 27
(Autumn 1972):62–84.

PART IV

Chapter 8/ Ideology As a Cultural System

[]

I

It is one of the minor ironies of modern intellectual history that the
term “ideology” has itself become thoroughly ideologized. A concept that
once meant but a collection of political proposals, perhaps somewhat
intellectualistic and impractical but at any rate idealistic—“social
romances” as someone, perhaps Napoleon, called them—has now become, to
quote Webster’s, “the integrated assertions, theories, and aims
constituting a politico-social program, often with an implication of
factitious propagandizing; as, Fascism was altered in Germany to fit the
Nazi ideology”—a much more formidable proposition. Even in works that,
in the name of science, profess to be using a neutral sense of the term,
the effect of its employment tends nonetheless to be distinctly
polemical: in Sutton, Harris, Kaysen, and Tobin’s in many ways excellent
The American Business Creed, for example, an assurance that “one has no
more cause to feel dismayed or aggrieved by having his own views
described as ‘ideology’ than had Molière’s famous character by the
discovery that all his life he had been talking prose,” is followed
immediately by the listing of the main characteristics of ideology as
bias, over-simplification, emotive language, and adaption to public
prejudice.¹¹ No one, at least outside the Communist bloc, where a
somewhat distinctive conception of the role of thought in society is
institutionalized, would call himself an ideologue or consent
unprotestingly to be called one by others. Almost universally now the
familiar parodic paradigm applies: “I have a social philosophy; you have
political opinions; he has an ideology.”

The historical process by which the concept of ideology came to be
itself a part of the very subject matter to which it referred has been
traced by Mannheim; the realization (or perhaps it was only an
admission) that sociopolitical thought does not grow out of disembodied
reflection but “is always bound up with the existing life situation of
the thinker” seemed to taint such thought with the vulgar struggle for
advantage it had professed to rise above.²² But what is of even more
immediate importance is the question of whether or not this absorption
into its own referent has destroyed its scientific utility altogether,
whether or not having become an accusation, it can remain an analytic
concept. In Mannheim’s case, this problem was the animus of his entire
work—the construction, as he put it, of a “nonevaluative conception of
ideology.” But the more he grappled with it the more deeply he became
engulfed in its ambiguities until, driven by the logic of his initial
assumptions to submit even his own point of view to sociological
analysis, he ended, as is well known, in an ethical and epistemological
relativism that he himself found uncomfortable. And so far as later work
in this area has been more than tendentious or mindlessly empirical, it
has involved the employment of a series of more or less ingenious
methodological devices to escape from what may be called (because, like
the puzzle of Achilles and the tortoise, it struck at the very
foundations of rational knowledge) Mannheim’s Paradox.

As Zeno’s Paradox raised (or, at least, articulated) unsettling
questions about the validity of mathematical reasoning, so Mannheim’s
Paradox raised them with respect to the objectivity of sociological
analysis. Where, if anywhere, ideology leaves off and science begins has
been the Sphinx’s Riddle of much of modern sociological thought and the
rustless weapon of its enemies. Claims to impartiality have been
advanced in the name of disciplined adherence to impersonal research
procedures, of the academic man’s institutional insulation from the
immediate concerns of the day and his vocational commitment to
neutrality, and of deliberately cultivated awareness of and correction
for one’s own biases and interests. They have been met with denial of
the impersonality (and the effectiveness) of the procedures, of the
solidity of the insulation, and of the depth and genuineness of the
self-awareness. “I am aware,” a recent analyst of ideological
preoccupations among American intellectuals concludes, somewhat
nervously, “that many readers will claim that my position is itself
ideological.”³³ Whatever the fate of his other predictions, the validity
of this one is certain. Although the arrival of a scientific sociology
has been repeatedly proclaimed, the acknowledgment of its existence is
far from universal, even among social scientists themselves; and nowhere
is resistance to claims to objectivity greater than in the study of
ideology.

A number of sources for this resistance have been cited repeatedly in
the apologetic literature of the social sciences. The value-laden nature
of the subject matter is perhaps most frequently invoked: men do not
care to have beliefs to which they attach great moral significance
examined dispassionately, no matter for how pure a purpose; and if they
are themselves highly ideologized, they may find it simply impossible to
believe that a disinterested approach to critical matters of social and
political conviction can be other than a scholastic sham. The inherent
elusiveness of ideological thought, expressed as it is in intricate
symbolic webs as vaguely defined as they are emotionally charged; the
admitted fact that ideological special pleading has, from Marx forward,
so often been clothed in the guise of “scientific sociology”; and the
defensiveness of established intellectual classes who see scientific
probing into the social roots of ideas as threatening to their status,
are also often mentioned. And, when all else fails, it is always
possible to point out once more that sociology is a young science, that
it has been so recently founded that it has not had time to reach the
levels of institutional solidity necessary to sustain its claims to
investigatory freedom in sensitive areas. All these arguments have,
doubtless, a certain validity. But what—by a curious selective omission
the unkind might well indict as ideological—is not so often considered
is the possibility that a great part of the problem lies in the lack of
conceptual sophistication within social science itself, that the
resistance of ideology to sociological analysis is so great because such
analyses are in fact fundamentally inadequate; the theoretical framework
they employ is conspicuously incomplete.

I shall try in this essay to show that such is indeed the case: that the
social sciences have not yet developed a genuinely nonevaluative
conception of ideology; that this failure stems less from methodological
indiscipline than from theoretical clumsiness; that this clumsiness
manifests itself mainly in the handling of ideology as an entity in
itself—as an ordered system of cultural symbols rather than in the
discrimination of its social and psychological contexts (with respect to
which our analytical machinery is very much more refined); and that the
escape from Mannheim’s Paradox lies, therefore, in the perfection of a
conceptual apparatus capable of dealing more adroitly with meaning.
Bluntly, we need a more exact apprehension of our object of study, lest
we find ourselves in the position of the Javanese folk-tale figure,
“Stupid Boy,” who, having been counseled by his mother to seek a quiet
wife, returned with a corpse.

II

That the conception of ideology now regnant in the social sciences is a
thoroughly evaluative (that is, pejorative) one is readily enough
demonstrated. “[The study of ideology] deals with a mode of thinking
which is thrown off its proper course,” Werner Stark informs us;
“ideological thought is . . . something shady, something that ought to
be overcome and banished from our mind.” It is not (quite) the same as
lying, for, where the liar at least attains to cynicism, the ideologue
remains merely a fool: “Both are concerned with untruth, but whereas the
liar tries to falsify the thought of others while his own private
thought is correct, while he himself knows well what the truth is, a
person who falls for an ideology is himself deluded in his private
thought, and if he misleads others, does so unwillingly and
unwittingly.”⁴⁴ A follower of Mannheim, Stark holds that all forms of
thought are socially conditioned in the very nature of things, but that
ideology has in addition the unfortunate quality of being
psychologically “deformed” (“warped,” “contaminated,” “falsified,”
“distorted,” “clouded”) by the pressure of personal emotions like hate,
desire, anxiety, or fear. The sociology of knowledge deals with the
social element in the pursuit and perception of truth, its inevitable
confinement to one or another existential perspective. But the study of
ideology—an entirely different enterprise—deals with the causes of
intellectual error:

Ideas and beliefs, we have tried to explain, can be related to reality
in a double way: either to the facts of reality, or to the strivings to
which this reality, or rather the reaction to this reality, gives rise.
Where the former connection exists, we find thought which is, in
principle, truthful; where the latter relation obtains, we are faced
with ideas which can be true only by accident, and which are likely to
be vitiated by bias, the word taken in the widest possible sense. The
former type of thought deserves to be called theoretical; the latter
must be characterized as paratheoretical. Perhaps one might also
describe the former as rational, the latter as emotionally tinged—the
former as purely cognitive, the latter as evaluative. To borrow Theodor
Geiger’s simile . . . thought determined by social fact is like a pure
stream, crystal-clear, transparent; ideological ideas like a dirty
river, muddied and polluted by the impurities that have flooded into it.
From the one it is healthy to drink; the other is poison to be
avoided.⁵⁵

This is primitive, but the same confinement of the referent of the term
“ideology” to a form of radical intellectual depravity also appears in
contexts where the political and scientific arguments are both far more
sophisticated and infinitely more penetrating. In his seminal essay on
“Ideology and Civility,” for example, Edward Shils sketches a portrait
of “the ideological outlook,” which is, if anything, even grimmer than
Stark’s.⁶⁶ Appearing “in a variety of forms, each alleging itself to be
unique”—Italian Fascism, German National Socialism, Russian Bolshevism,
French and Italian Communism, the Action Française, the British Union of
Fascists, “and their fledgling American kinsman, ‘McCarthyism,’ which
died in infancy”—this outlook “encircled and invaded public life in the
Western countries during the 19th century and in the 20th century . . .
threatened to achieve universal domination.” It consists, most
centrally, of “the assumption that politics should be conducted from the
standpoint of a coherent, comprehensive set of beliefs which must
override every other consideration.” Like the politics it supports, it
is dualistic, opposing the pure “we” to the evil “they,” proclaiming
that he who is not with me is against me. It is alienative in that it
distrusts, attacks, and works to undermine established political
institutions. It is doctrinaire in that it claims complete and exclusive
possession of political truth and abhors compromise. It is totalistic in
that it aims to order the whole of social and cultural life in the image
of its ideals, futuristic in that it works toward a utopian culmination
of history in which such an ordering will be realized. It is, in short,
not the sort of prose any good bourgeois gentleman (or even any good
democrat) is likely to admit to speaking.

Even on more abstract and theoretical levels, where the concern is more
purely conceptual, the notion that the term “ideology” properly applies
to the views of those “stiff in opinions, and always in the wrong” does
not disappear. In Talcott Parsons’s most recent contemplation of
Mannheim’s Paradox, for example, “deviations from [social] scientific
objectivity” emerge as the “essential criteria of an ideology”: “The
problem of ideology arises where there is a discrepancy between what is
believed and what can be [established as] scientifically correct.”⁷⁷ The
“deviations” and “discrepancies” involved are of two general sorts.
First, where social science, shaped as is all thought by the overall
values of the society within which it is contained, is selective in the
sort of questions it asks, the particular problems it chooses to tackle,
and so forth, ideologies are subject to a further, cognitively more
pernicious “secondary” selectivity, in that they emphasize some aspects
of social reality—that reality, for example, as revealed by current
social scientific knowledge—and neglect or even suppress other aspects.
“Thus the business ideology, for instance, substantially exaggerates the
contribution of businessmen to the national welfare and underplays the
contribution of scientists and professional men. And in the current
ideology of the ‘intellectual,’ the importance of social ‘pressures to
conformity’ is exaggerated and institutional factors in the freedom of
the individual are ignored or played down.” Second, ideological thought,
not content with mere overselectivity, positively distorts even those
aspects of social reality it recognizes, distortion that becomes
apparent only when the assertions involved are placed against the
background of the authoritative findings of social science. “The
criterion of distortion is that statements are made about society which
by social-scientific methods can be shown to be positively in error,
whereas selectivity is involved where the statements are, at the proper
level, ‘true,’ but do not constitute a balanced account of the available
truth.” That in the eyes of the world there is much to choose between
being positively in error and rendering an unbalanced account of the
available truth seems, however, rather unlikely. Here, too, ideology is
a pretty dirty river.

Examples need not be multiplied, although they easily could be. More
important is the question of what such an egregiously loaded concept is
doing among the analytic tools of a social science that, on the basis of
a claim to cold-blooded objectivity, advances its theoretical
interpretations as “undistorted” and therefore normative visions of
social reality. If the critical power of the social sciences stems from
their disinterestedness, is not this power compromised when the analysis
of political thought is governed by such a concept, much as the analysis
of religious thought would be (and, on occasion, has been) compromised
when cast in terms of the study of “superstition”?

The analogy is not farfetched. In Raymond Aron’s The Opium of the
Intellectuals, for example, not only the title—ironically echoic of
Marx’s bitter iconoclasm—but the entire rhetoric of the argument
(“political myths,” “the idolatry of history,” “churchmen and faithful,”
“secular clericalism,” and so forth) reminds one of nothing so much as
the literature of militant atheism.⁸⁸ Shils’s tack of invoking the
extreme pathologies of ideological thought—Nazism, Bolshevism, or
whatever—as its paradigmatic forms is reminiscent of the tradition in
which the Inquisition, the personal depravity of Renaissance popes, the
savagery of Reformation wars, or the primitiveness of Bible-belt
fundamentalism is offered as an archetype of religious belief and
behavior. And Parsons’s view that ideology is defined by its cognitive
insufficiencies vis-à-vis science is perhaps not so distant as it might
appear from the Comtean view that religion is characterized by an
uncritically figurative conception of reality, which a sober sociology,
purged of metaphor, will soon render obsolete: We may wait as long for
the “end of ideology” as the positivists have waited for the end of
religion. Perhaps it is even not too much to suggest that, as the
militant atheism of the Enlightenment and after was a response to the
quite genuine horrors of a spectacular outburst of religious bigotry,
persecution, and strife (and to a broadened knowledge of the natural
world), so the militantly hostile approach to ideology is a similar
response to the political holocausts of the past half-century (and to a
broadened knowledge of the social world). And, if this suggestion is
valid, the fate of ideology may also turn out to be similar—isolation
from the mainstream of social thought.⁹⁹

Nor can the issue be dismissed as merely a semantic one. One is,
naturally, free to confine the referent of the term “ideology” to
“something shady” if one wishes; and some sort of historical case for
doing so can perhaps be made. But if one does so limit it, one cannot
then write works on the ideologies of American businessmen, New York
“literary” intellectuals, members of the British Medical Association,
industrial labor-union leaders, or famous economists and expect either
the subjects or interested bystanders to credit them as neutral.¹⁰¹⁰
Discussions of sociopolitical ideas that indict them ab initio, in terms
of the very words used to name them, as deformed or worse, merely beg
the questions they pretend to raise. It is also possible, of course,
that the term “ideology” should simply be dropped from scientific
discourse altogether and left to its polemical fate—as “superstition” in
fact has been. But, as there seems to be nothing at the moment with
which to replace it and as it is at least partially established in the
technical lexicon of the social sciences, it seems more advisable to
proceed with the effort to defuse it.¹¹¹¹

III

As the flaws hidden in a tool show up when it is used, so the intrinsic
weaknesses of the evaluative concept of ideology reveal themselves when
it is used. In particular, they are exposed in the studies of the social
sources and consequences of ideology, for in such studies this concept
is coupled to a highly developed engine of social- and
personality-system analysis whose very power only serves to emphasize
the lack of a similar power on the cultural (that is, the symbol-system)
side. In investigations of the social and psychological contexts of
ideological thought (or at least the “good” ones), the subtlety with
which the contexts are handled points up the awkwardness with which the
thought is handled, and a shadow of imprecision is cast over the whole
discussion, a shadow that even the most rigorous methodological
austerity cannot dispel.

There are currently two main approaches to the study of the social
determinants of ideology: the interest theory and the strain theory.¹²¹²
For the first, ideology is a mask and a weapon; for the second, a
symptom and a remedy. In the interest theory, ideological pronouncements
are seen against the background of a universal struggle for advantage;
in the strain theory, against the background of a chronic effort to
correct sociopsychological disequilibrium. In the one, men pursue power;
in the other, they flee anxiety. As they may, of course, do both at the
same time—and even one by means of the other—the two theories are not
necessarily contradictory; but the strain theory (which arose in
response to the empirical difficulties encountered by the interest
theory), being less simplistic, is more penetrating, less concrete, more
comprehensive.

The fundamentals of the interest theory are too well known to need
review; developed to perfection of a sort by the Marxist tradition, they
are now standard intellectual equipment of the man-in-the-street, who is
only too aware that in political argumentation it all comes down to
whose ox is gored. The great advantage of the interest theory was and is
its rooting of cultural idea-systems in the solid ground of social
structure, through emphasis on the motivations of those who profess such
systems and on the dependence of those motivations in turn upon social
position, most especially social class. Further, the interest theory
welded political speculation to political combat by pointing out that
ideas are weapons and that an excellent way to institutionalize a
particular view of reality—that of one’s group, class, or party—is to
capture political power and enforce it. These contributions are
permanent; and if interest theory has not now the hegemony it once had,
it is not so much because it has been proved wrong as because its
theoretical apparatus turned out to be too rudimentary to cope with the
complexity of the interaction among social, psychological, and cultural
factors it itself uncovered. Rather like Newtonian mechanics, it has not
been so much displaced by subsequent developments as absorbed into them.

The main defects of the interest theory are that its psychology is too
anemic and its sociology too muscular. Lacking a developed analysis of
motivation, it has been constantly forced to oscillate between a narrow
and superficial utilitarianism that sees men as impelled by rational
calculation of their consciously recognized personal advantage and a
broader, but no less superficial, historicism that speaks with a studied
vagueness of men’s ideas as somehow “reflecting,” “expressing,”
“corresponding to,” “emerging from,” or “conditioned by” their social
commitments. Within such a framework, the analyst is faced with the
choice of either revealing the thinness of his psychology by being so
specific as to be thoroughly implausible or concealing the fact that he
does not have any psychological theory at all by being so general as to
be truistic. An argument that for professional soldiers “domestic
[governmental) policies are important mainly as ways of retaining and
enlarging the military establishment [because] that is their business;
that is what they are trained for” seems to do scant justice to even so
uncomplicated a mind as the military mind is reputed to be; while an
argument that American oil men “cannot very well be pure-and-simple oil
men” because “their interests are such” that “they are also political
men” is as enlightening as the theory (also from the fertile mind of M.
Jourdain) that the reason opium puts you to sleep is that it has
dormitive powers.¹³¹³

On the other hand, the view that social action is fundamentally an
unending struggle for power leads to an unduly Machiavellian view of
ideology as a form of higher cunning and, consequently, to a neglect of
its broader, less dramatic social functions. The battlefield image of
society as a clash of interests thinly disguised as a clash of
principles turns attention away from the role that ideologies play in
defining (or obscuring) social categories, stabilizing (or upsetting)
social expectations, maintaining (or undermining) social norms,
strengthening (or weakening) social consensus, relieving (or
exacerbating) social tensions. Reducing ideology to a weapon in a guerre
de plume gives to its analysis a warming air of militancy, but it also
means reducing the intellectual compass within which such analysis may
be conducted to the constricted realism of tactics and strategy. The
intensity of interest theory is—to adapt a figure from Whitehead—but the
reward of its narrowness.

As “interest,” whatever its ambiguities, is at one and the same time a
psychological and sociological concept—referring both to a felt
advantage of an individual or group of individuals and to the objective
structure of opportunity within which an individual or group moves—so
also is “strain,” for it refers both to a state of personal tension and
to a condition of societal dislocation. The difference is that with
“strain” both the motivational background and the social structural
context are more systematically portrayed, as are their relations with
one another. It is, in fact, the addition of a developed conception of
personality systems (basically Freudian), on the one hand, and of social
systems (basically Durkheimian) on the other, and of their modes of
interpenetration—the Parsonian addition—that transforms interest theory
into strain theory.¹⁴¹⁴

The clear and distinct idea from which strain theory departs is the
chronic malintegration of society. No social arrangement is or can be
completely successful in coping with the functional problems it
inevitably faces. All are riddled with insoluble antinomies: between
liberty and political order, stability and change, efficiency and
humanity, precision and flexibility, and so forth. There are
discontinuities between norms in different sectors of the society—the
economy, the polity, the family, and so on. There are discrepancies
between goals within the different sectors—between the emphases on
profit and productivity in business firms or between extending knowledge
and disseminating it in universities, for example. And there are the
contradictory role expectations of which so much has been made in recent
American sociological literature on the foreman, the working wife, the
artist, and the politician. Social friction is as pervasive as is
mechanical friction—and as irremovable.

Further, this friction or social strain appears on the level of the
individual personality—itself an inevitably malintegrated system of
conflicting desires, archaic sentiments, and improvised defenses—as
psychological strain. What is viewed collectively as structural
inconsistency is felt individually as personal insecurity, for it is in
the experience of the social actor that the imperfections of society and
contradictions of character meet and exacerbate one another. But at the
same time, the fact that both society and personality are, whatever
their shortcomings, organized systems, rather than mere congeries of
institutions or clusters of motives, means that the sociopsychological
tensions they induce are also systematic, that the anxieties derived
from social interaction have a form and order of their own. In the
modern world at least, most men live lives of patterned desperation.

Ideological thought is, then, regarded as (one sort of) response to this
desperation: “Ideology is a patterned reaction to the patterned strains
of a social role.”¹⁵¹⁵ It provides a “symbolic outlet” for emotional
disturbances generated by social disequilibrium. And as one can assume
that such disturbances are, at least in a general way, common to all or
most occupants of a given role or social position, so ideological
reactions to the disturbances will tend to be similar, a similarity only
reinforced by the presumed commonalities in “basic personality
structure” among members of a particular culture, class, or occupational
category. The model here is not military but medical: An ideology is a
malady (Sutton, et al., mention nail-chewing, alcoholism, psychosomatic
disorders, and “crotchets” among the alternatives to it) and demands a
diagnosis. “The concept of strain is not in itself an explanation of
ideological patterns but a generalized label for the kinds of factors to
look for in working out an explanation.”¹⁶¹⁶

But there is more to diagnosis, either medical or sociological, than the
identification of pertinent strains; one understands symptoms not merely
etiologically but teleologically—in terms of the ways in which they act
as mechanisms, however unavailing, for dealing with the disturbances
that have generated them. Four main classes of explanation have been
most frequently employed: the cathartic, the morale, the solidarity, and
the advocatory. By the “cathartic explanation” is meant the venerable
safety-valve or scapegoat theory. Emotional tension is drained off by
being displaced onto symbolic enemies (“The Jews,” “Big Business,” “The
Reds,” and so forth). The explanation is as simple-minded as the device;
but that, by providing legitimate objects of hostility (or, for that
matter, of love), ideology may ease somewhat the pain of being a petty
bureaucrat, a day laborer, or a small-town storekeeper is undeniable. By
the “morale explanation” is meant the ability of an ideology to sustain
individuals (or groups) in the face of chronic strain, either by denying
it outright or by legitimizing it in terms of higher values. Both the
struggling small businessman rehearsing his boundless confidence in the
inevitable justness of the American system and the neglected artist
attributing his failure to his maintenance of decent standards in a
Philistine world are able, by such means, to get on with their work.
Ideology bridges the emotional gap between things as they are and as one
would have them be, thus insuring the performance of roles that might
otherwise be abandoned in despair or apathy. By the “solidarity
explanation” is meant the power of ideology to knit a social group or
class together. To the extent that it exists, the unity of the labor
movement, the business community, or the medical profession obviously
rests to a significant degree on common ideological orientation; and the
South would not be The South without the existence of popular symbols
charged with the emotions of a pervasive social predicament. Finally, by
the “advocatory explanation” is meant the action of ideologies (and
ideologists) in articulating, however partially and indistinctly, the
strains that impel them, thus forcing them into the public notice.
“Ideologists state the problems for the larger society, take sides on
the issues involved and ‘present them in the court’ of the ideological
market place.”¹⁷¹⁷ Although ideological advocates (not altogether unlike
their legal counterparts) tend as much to obscure as to clarify the true
nature of the problems involved, they at least call attention to their
existence and, by polarizing issues, make continued neglect more
difficult. Without Marxist attack, there would have been no labor
reform; without Black Nationalists, no deliberate speed.

It is here, however, in the investigation of the social and
psychological roles of ideology, as distinct from its determinants, that
strain theory itself begins to creak and its superior incisiveness, in
comparison with interest theory, to evaporate. The increased precision
in the location of the springs of ideological concern does not, somehow,
carry over into the discrimination of its consequences, where the
analysis becomes, on the contrary, slack and ambiguous. The consequences
envisaged, no doubt genuine enough in themselves, seem almost
adventitious, the accidental by-products of an essentially nonrational,
nearly automatic expressive process initially pointed in another
direction—as when a man stubbing his toe cries an involuntary “ouch!”
and incidentally vents his anger, signals his distress, and consoles
himself with the sound of his own voice; or as when, caught in a subway
crush, he issues a spontaneous “damn!” of frustration and, hearing
similar oaths from others, gains a certain perverse sense of kinship
with fellow sufferers.

This defect, of course, can be found in much of the functional analysis
in the social sciences: a pattern of behavior shaped by a certain set of
forces turns out, by a plausible but nevertheless mysterious
coincidence, to serve ends but tenuously related to those forces. A
group of primitives sets out, in all honesty, to pray for rain and ends
by strengthening its social solidarity; a ward politician sets out to
get or remain near the trough and ends by mediating between
unassimilated immigrant groups and an impersonal governmental
bureaucracy; an ideologist sets out to air his grievances and finds
himself contributing, through the diversionary power of his illusions,
to the continued viability of the very system that grieves him.

The concept of latent function is usually invoked to paper over this
anomalous state of affairs, but it rather names the phenomenon (whose
reality is not in question) than explains it; and the net result is that
functional analyses—and not only those of ideology—remain hopelessly
equivocal. The petty bureaucrat’s anti-Semitism may indeed give him
something to do with the bottled anger generated in him by constant
toadying to those he considers his intellectual inferiors and so drain
some of it away; but it may also simply increase his anger by providing
him with something else about which to be impotently bitter. The
neglected artist may better bear his popular failure by invoking the
classical canons of his art; but such an invocation may so dramatize for
him the gap between the possibilities of his environment and the demands
of his vision as to make the game seem unworth the candle. Commonality
of ideological perception may link men together, but it may also provide
them, as the history of Marxian sectarianism demonstrates, with a
vocabulary by means of which to explore more exquisitely the differences
among them. The clash of ideologists may bring a social problem to
public attention, but it may also charge it with such passion that any
possibility of dealing with it rationally is precluded. Of all these
possibilities, strain theorists are, of course, very well aware. Indeed
they tend to stress negative outcomes and possibilities rather more than
the positive, and they but rarely think of ideology as more than a faute
de mieux stopgap—like nail-chewing. But the main point is that, for all
its subtlety in ferreting out the motives of ideological concern, strain
theory’s analysis of the consequences of such concern remains crude,
vacillatory, and evasive. Diagnostically it is convincing; functionally
it is not.

The reason for this weakness is the virtual absence in strain theory (or
in interest theory either) of anything more than the most rudimentary
conception of the processes of symbolic formulation. There is a good
deal of talk about emotions “finding a symbolic outlet” or “becoming
attached to appropriate symbols”—but very little idea of how the trick
is really done. The link between the causes of ideology and its effects
seems adventitious because the connecting element—the autonomous process
of symbolic formulation—is passed over in virtual silence. Both interest
theory and strain theory go directly from source analysis to consequence
analysis without ever seriously examining ideologies as systems of
interacting symbols, as patterns of interworking meanings. Themes are
outlined, of course; among the content analysts, they are even counted.
But they are referred for elucidation, not to other themes nor to any
sort of semantic theory, but either backward to the effect they
presumably mirror or forward to the social reality they presumably
distort. The problem of how, after all, ideologies transform sentiment
into significance and so make it socially available is short-circuited
by the crude device of placing particular symbols and particular strains
(or interests) side by side in such a way that the fact that the first
are derivatives of the second seems mere common sense—or at least
post-Freudian, post-Marxian common sense. And so, if the analyst be deft
enough, it does.¹⁸¹⁸ The connection is not thereby explained but merely
educed. The nature of the relationship between the sociopsychological
stresses that incite ideological attitudes and the elaborate symbolic
structures through which those attitudes are given a public existence is
much too complicated to be comprehended in terms of a vague and
unexamined notion of emotive resonance.

IV

It is of singular interest in this connection that, although the general
stream of social scientific theory has been deeply influenced by almost
every major intellectual movement of the last century and a
half—Marxism, Darwinism, Utilitarianism, Idealism, Freudianism,
Behaviorism, Positivism, Operationalism—and has attempted to capitalize
on virtually every important field of methodological innovation from
ecology, ethology, and comparative psychology to game theory,
cybernetics, and statistics, it has, with very few exceptions, been
virtually untouched by one of the most important trends in recent
thought: the effort to construct an independent science of what Kenneth
Burke has called “symbolic action.”¹⁹¹⁹ Neither the work of such
philosophers as Peirce, Wittgenstein, Cassirer, Langer, Ryle, or Morris
nor of such literary critics as Coleridge, Eliot, Burke. Empson,
Blackmur, Brooks, or Auerbach seems to have had any appreciable impact
on the general pattern of social scientific analysis.²⁰²⁰ Aside from a
few more venturesome (and largely programmatic) linguists—a Whorf or a
Sapir—the question of how symbols symbolize, how they function to
mediate meanings has simply been bypassed. “The embarrassing fact,” the
physician cum novelist Walker Percy has written, “is that there does not
exist today—a natural empirical science of symbolic behavior as such. .
. . Sapir’s gentle chiding about the lack of a science of symbolic
behavior and the need of such a science is more conspicuously true today
than it was thirty-five years ago.”²¹²¹

It is the absence of such a theory and in particular the absence of any
analytical framework within which to deal with figurative language that
have reduced sociologists to viewing ideologies as elaborate cries of
pain. With no notion of how metaphor, analogy, irony, ambiguity, pun,
paradox, hyperbole, rhythm, and all the other elements of what we lamely
call “style” operate—even, in a majority of cases, with no recognition
that these devices are of any importance in casting personal attitudes
into public form, sociologists lack the symbolic resources out of which
to construct a more incisive formulation. At the same time that the arts
have been establishing the cognitive power of “distortion” and
philosophy has been undermining the adequacy of an emotivist theory of
meaning, social scientists have been rejecting the first and embracing
the second. It is not therefore surprising that they evade the problem
of construing the import of ideological assertions by simply failing to
recognize it as a problem.²²²²

In order to make explicit what I mean, let me take an example that is, I
hope, so thoroughly trivial in itself as both to still any suspicions
that I have a hidden concern with the substance of the political issue
involved and, more important, to bring home the point that concepts
developed for the analysis of the more elevated aspects of
culture—poetry, for example—are applicable to the more lowly ones
without in any way blurring the enormous qualitative distinctions
between the two. In discussing the cognitive inadequacies by which
ideology is defined for them, Sutton et al. use as an example of the
ideologist’s tendency to “oversimplify” the denomination by organized
labor of the Taft-Hartley Act as a “slave labor law”:

Ideology tends to be simple and clear-cut, even where its simplicity and
clarity do less than justice to the subject under discussion. The
ideological picture uses sharp lines and contrasting blacks and whites.
The ideologist exaggerates and caricatures in the fashion of the
cartoonist. In contrast, a scientific description of social phenomena is
likely to be fuzzy and indistinct. In recent labor ideology the
Taft-Hartley Act has been a “slave labor act.” By no dispassionate
examination does the Act merit this label. Any detached assessment of
the Act would have to consider its many provisions individually. On any
set of values, even those of trade unions themselves, such an assessment
would yield a mixed verdict. But mixed verdicts are not the stuff of
ideology. They are too complicated, too fuzzy. Ideology must categorize
the Act as a whole with a symbol to rally workers, voters and
legislators to action.²³²³

Leaving aside the merely empirical question of whether or not it is in
fact true that ideological formulations of a given set of social
phenomena are inevitably “simpler” than scientific formulations of the
same phenomena, there is in this argument a curiously depreciatory—one
might even say “oversimple”—view of the thought processes of labor-union
leaders on the one hand and “workers, voters and legislators” on the
other. It is rather hard to believe that either those who coined and
disseminated the slogan themselves believed or expected anyone else to
believe that the law would actually reduce (or was intended to reduce)
the American worker to the status of a slave or that the segment of the
public for whom the slogan had meaning perceived it in any such terms.
Yet it is precisely this flattened view of other people’s mentalities
that leaves the sociologist with only two interpretations, both
inadequate, of whatever effectiveness the symbol has: either it deceives
the uninformed (according to interest theory), or it excites the
unreflective (according to strain theory). That it might in fact draw
its power from its capacity to grasp, formulate, and communicate social
realities that elude the tempered language of science, that it may
mediate more complex meanings than its literal reading suggests, is not
even considered. “Slave labor act” may be, after all, not a label but a
trope.

More exactly, it appears to be a metaphor or at least an attempted
metaphor. Although very few social scientists seem to have read much of
it, the literature on metaphor—“the power whereby language, even with a
small vocabulary, manages to embrace a multi-million things”—is vast and
by now in reasonable agreement.²⁴²⁴ In metaphor one has, of course, a
stratification of meaning, in which an incongruity of sense on one level
produces an influx of significance on another. As Percy has pointed out,
the feature of metaphor that has most troubled philosophers (and, he
might have added, scientists) is that it is “wrong”: “It asserts of one
thing that it is something else,” And, worse yet, it tends to be most
effective when most “wrong.”²⁵²⁵ The power of a metaphor derives
precisely from the interplay between the discordant meanings it
symbolically coerces into a unitary conceptual framework and from the
degree to which that coercion is successful in overcoming the psychic
resistance such semantic tension inevitably generates in anyone in a
position to perceive it. When it works, a metaphor transforms a false
identification (for example, of the labor policies of the Republican
Party and of those of the Bolsheviks) into an apt analogy; when it
misfires, it is a mere extravagance.

That for most people the “slave labor law” figure was, in fact, pretty
much a misfire (and therefore never served with any effectiveness as “a
symbol to rally workers, voters and legislators to action”) seems
evident enough, and it is this failure, rather than its supposed
clear-cut simplicity, that makes it seem no more than a cartoon. The
semantic tension between the image of a conservative Congress outlawing
the closed shop and of the prison camps of Siberia was—apparently—too
great to be resolved into a single conception, at least by means of so
rudimentary a stylistic device as the slogan. Except (perhaps) for a few
enthusiasts, the analogy did not appear; the false identification
remained false. But failure is not inevitable, even on such an
elementary level. Although, a most unmixed verdict, Sherman’s “War is
hell” is no social-science proposition, even Sutton and his associates
would probably not regard it as either an exaggeration or a caricature.

More important, however, than any assessment of the adequacy of the two
tropes as such is the fact that, as the meanings they attempt to spark
against one another are after all socially rooted, the success or
failure of the attempt is relative not only to the power of the
stylistic mechanisms employed but also to precisely those sorts of
factors upon which strain theory concentrates its attention. The
tensions of the Cold War, the fears of a labor movement only recently
emerged from a bitter struggle for existence, and the threatened eclipse
of New Deal liberalism after two decades of dominance set the
sociopsychological stage both for the appearance of the “slave labor”
figure and—when it proved unable to work them into a cogent analogy—for
its miscarriage. The militarists of 1934 Japan who opened their pamphlet
on Basic-Theory of National Defense and Suggestions for Its
Strengthening with the resounding familial metaphor, “War is the father
of creation and the mother of culture,” would no doubt have found
Sherman’s maxim as unconvincing as he would have found theirs.²⁶²⁶ They
were energetically preparing for an imperialist war in an ancient nation
seeking its footing in the modern world; he was wearily pursuing a civil
war in an unrealized nation torn by domestic hatreds. It is thus not
truth that varies with social, psychological, and cultural contexts but
the symbols we construct in our unequally effective attempts to grasp
it. War is hell and not the mother of culture, as the Japanese
eventually discovered—although no doubt they express the fact in a
grander idiom.

The sociology of knowledge ought to be called the sociology of meaning,
for what is socially determined is not the nature of conception but the
vehicles of conception. In a community that drinks its coffee black,
Henle remarks, to praise a girl with “You’re the cream in my coffee”
would give entirely the wrong impression; and, if omnivorousness were
regarded as a more significant characteristic of bears than their clumsy
roughness, to call a man “an old bear” might mean not that he was crude,
but that he had catholic tastes.²⁷²⁷ Or, to take an example from Burke,
since in Japan people smile on mentioning the death of a close friend,
the semantic equivalent (behaviorally as well as verbally) in American
English is not “He smiled,” but “His face fell”; for, with such a
rendering, we are “translating the accepted social usage of Japan into
the corresponding accepted social usage of the West.”²⁸²⁸ And, closer to
the ideological realm, Sapir has pointed out that the chairmanship of a
committee has the figurative force we give it only because we hold that
“administrative functions somehow stamp a person as superior to those
who are being directed”; “should people come to feel that administrative
functions are little more than symbolic automatisms, the chairmanship of
a committee would be recognized as little more than a petrified symbol
and the particular value that is now felt to inhere in it would tend to
disappear.”²⁹²⁹ The case is no different for “slave labor law.” If
forced labor camps come, for whatever reasons, to play a less prominent
role in the American image of the Soviet Union, it will not be the
symbol’s veracity that has dissolved but its very meaning, its capacity
to be either true or false. One must simply frame the argument—that the
Taft-Hartley Act is a mortal threat to organized labor—in some other
way.

In short, between an ideological figure like “slave labor act” and the
social realities of American life in the midst of which it appears,
there exists a subtlety of interplay, which concepts like “distortion,”
“selectivity,” or “over-simplification” are simply incompetent to
formulate.³⁰³⁰ Not only is the semantic structure of the figure a good
deal more complex than it appears on the surface, but an analysis of
that structure forces one into tracing a multiplicity of referential
connections between it and social reality, so that the final picture is
one of a configuration of dissimilar meanings out of whose interworking
both the expressive power and the rhetorical force of the final symbol
derive. This interworking is itself a social process, an occurrence not
“in the head” but in that public world where “people talk together, name
things, make assertions, and to a degree understand each other.”³¹³¹ The
study of symbolic action is no less a sociological discipline than the
study of small groups, bureaucracies, or the changing role of the
American woman; it is only a good deal less developed.

V

Asking the question that most students of ideology fail to ask—what,
precisely, do we mean when we assert that sociopsychological strains are
“expressed” in symbolic forms?—gets one, therefore, very quickly into
quite deep water indeed; into, in fact, a somewhat untraditional and
apparently paradoxical theory of the nature of human thought as a public
and not, or at least not fundamentally, a private activity.³²³² The
details of such a theory cannot be pursued any distance here, nor can
any significant amount of evidence be marshaled to support it. But at
least its general outlines must be sketched if we are to find our way
back from the elusive world of symbols and semantic process to the
(apparently) more solid one of sentiments and institutions, if we are to
trace with some circumstantiality the modes of interpenetration of
culture, personality, and social system.

The defining proposition of this sort of approach to thought en plein
air—what, following Galanter and Gerstenhaber, we may call “the
extrinsic theory”—is that thought consists of the construction and
manipulation of symbol systems, which are employed as models of other
systems, physical, organic, social, psychological, and so forth, in such
a way that the structure of these other systems—and, in the favorable
case, how they may therefore be expected to behave—is, as we say,
“understood.”³³³³ Thinking, conceptualization, formulation,
comprehension, understanding, or what-have-you, consists not of ghostly
happenings in the head but of a matching of the states and processes of
symbolic models against the states and processes of the wider world:

Imaginal thinking is neither more nor less than constructing an image of
the environment, running the model faster than the environment, and
predicting that the environment will behave as the model does. . . . The
first step in the solution of a problem consists in the construction of
a model or image of the “relevant features” of the [environment]. These
models can be constructed from many things, including parts of the
organic tissue of the body and, by man, paper and pencil or actual
artifacts. Once a model has been constructed it can be manipulated under
various hypothetical conditions and constraints. The organism is then
able to “observe” the outcome of these manipulations, and to project
them onto the environment so that prediction is possible. According to
this view, an aeronautical engineer is thinking when he manipulates a
model of a new airplane in a wind tunnel. The motorist is thinking when
he runs his finger over a line on a map, the finger serving as a model
of the relevant aspects of the automobile, the map as a model of the
road. External models of this kind are often used in thinking about
complex [environments]. Images used in covert thinking depend upon the
availability of the physico-chemical events of the organism which must
be used to form models.³⁴³⁴

This view does not, of course, deny consciousness: it defines it. Every
conscious perception is, as Percy has argued, an act of recognition, a
pairing in which an object (or an event, an act, an emotion) is
identified by placing it against the background of an appropriate
symbol:

It is not enough to say that one is conscious of something; one is also
conscious of something being something. There is a difference between
the apprehension of a gestalt (a chicken perceived the Jastrow effect as
well as a human) and the grasping of it under its symbolic vehicle. As I
gaze about the room, I am aware of a series of almost effortless acts of
matching: seeing an object and knowing what it is. If my eye falls upon
an unfamiliar something, I am immediately aware that one term of the
match is missing, I ask what [the object] is—an exceedingly mysterious
question.³⁵³⁵

What is missing and what is being asked for are an applicable symbolic
model under which to subsume the “unfamiliar something” and so render it
familiar:

If I see an object at some distance and do not quite recognize it, I may
see it, actually see it, as a succession of different things, each
rejected by the criterion of fit as I come closer, until one is
positively certified. A patch of sunlight in a field I may actually see
as a rabbit—a seeing which goes much further than the guess that it may
be a rabbit; no, the perceptual gestalt is so construed, actually
stamped by the essence of rabbitness: I could have sworn it was a
rabbit. On coming closer, the sunlight pattern changes enough so that
the rabbit-cast is disallowed. The rabbit vanishes and I make another
cast: it is a paper bag, and so on. But most significant of all, even
the last, the “correct” recognition is quite as mediate an apprehension
as the incorrect ones; it is also a cast, a pairing, an approximation.
And let us note in passing that even though it is correct, even though
it is borne out by all indices, it may operate quite as effectively to
conceal as to discover. When I recognize a strange bird as a sparrow, I
tend to dispose of the bird under its appropriate formulation: it is
only a sparrow.³⁶³⁶

Despite the somewhat intellectualist tone of these various examples, the
extrinsic theory of thought is extendable to the affective side of human
mentality as well.³⁷³⁷ As a road map transforms mere physical locations
into “places,” connected by numbered routes and separated by measured
distances, and so enables us to find our way from where we are to where
we want to go, so a poem like, for example, Hopkins’s “Felix Randal”
provides, through the evocative power of its charged language, a
symbolic model of the emotional impact of premature death, which, if we
are as impressed with its penetration as with the road map’s, transforms
physical sensations into sentiments and attitudes and enables us to
react to such a tragedy not “blindly” but “intelligently.” The central
rituals of religion—a mass, a pilgrimage, a corroboree—are symbolic
models (here more in the form of activities than of words) of a
particular sense of the divine, a certain sort of devotional mood, which
their continual re-enactment tends to produce in their participants. Of
course, as most acts of what is usually called “cognition” are more on
the level of identifying a rabbit than operating a wind tunnel, so most
of what is usually called “expression” (the dichotomy is often overdrawn
and almost universally misconstrued) is mediated more by models drawn
from popular culture than from high art and formal religious ritual. But
the point is that the development, maintenance, and dissolution of
“moods,” “attitudes,” “sentiments,” and so forth are no more “a ghostly
process occurring in streams of consciousness we are debarred from
visiting” than is the discrimination of objects, events, structures,
processes, and so forth in our environment. Here, too, “we are
describing the ways in which . . . people conduct parts of their
predominantly public behavior.”³⁸³⁸

Whatever their other differences, both so-called cognitive and so-called
expressive symbols or symbol-systems have, then, at least one thing in
common: they are extrinsic sources of information in terms of which
human life can be patterned—extrapersonal mechanisms for the perception,
understanding, judgment, and manipulation of the world. Culture
patterns—religious, philosophical, aesthetic, scientific,
ideological—are “programs”; they provide a template or blueprint for the
organization of social and psychological processes, much as genetic
systems provide such a template for the organization of organic
processes:

These considerations define the terms in which we approach the problem
of “reductionism” in psychology and social science. The levels we have
tentatively discriminated [organism, personality, social system,
culture] . . . are . . . levels of organization and control. The lower
levels “condition,” and thus in a sense “determine” the structures into
which they enter, in the same sense that the stability of a building
depends on the properties of the materials out of which it is
constructed. But the physical properties of the materials do not
determine the plan of the building; this is a factor of another order,
one of organization. And the organization controls the relations of the
materials to each other, the ways in which they are utilized in the
building by virtue of which it constitutes an ordered system of a
particular type—looking “downward” in the series, we can always
investigate and discover sets of “conditions” in which the function of a
higher order of organization is dependent. There is, thus, an immensely
complicated set of physiological conditions on which psychological
functioning is dependent, etc. Properly understood and evaluated, these
conditions are always authentic determinants of process in the organized
systems at the next higher levels. We may, however, also look “upward”
in the series. In this direction we see “structures,” organization
patterns, patterns of meaning, “programs,” etc., which are the focus of
the organization of the system at the level on which we have
concentrated our attention.³⁹³⁹

The reason such symbolic templates are necessary is that, as has been
often remarked, human behavior is inherently extremely plastic. Not
strictly but only very broadly controlled by genetic programs or
models—intrinsic sources of information—such behavior must, if it is to
have any effective form at all, be controlled to a significant extent by
extrinsic ones. Birds learn how to fly without wind tunnels, and
whatever reactions lower animals have to death are in great part innate,
physiologically preformed.⁴⁰⁴⁰ The extreme generality, diffuseness, and
variability of man’s innate response capacities mean that the particular
pattern his behavior takes is guided predominantly by cultural rather
than genetic templates, the latter setting the overall psychophysical
context within which precise activity sequences are organized by the
former. The tool-making, laughing, or lying animal, man, is also the
incomplete—or, more accurately, self-completing—animal. The agent of his
own realization, he creates out of his general capacity for the
construction of symbolic models the specific capabilities that define
him. Or—to return at last to our subject—it is through the construction
of ideologies, schematic images of social order, that man makes himself
for better or worse a political animal.

Further, as the various sorts of cultural symbol-systems are extrinsic
sources of information, templates for the organization of social and
psychological processes, they come most crucially into play in
situations where the particular kind of information they contain is
lacking, where institutionalized guides for behavior, thought, or
feeling are weak or absent. It is in country unfamiliar emotionally or
topographically that one needs poems and road maps.

So too with ideology. In polities firmly embedded in Edmund Burke’s
golden assemblage of “ancient opinions and rules of life,” the role of
ideology, in any explicit sense, is marginal. In such truly traditional
political systems the participants act as (to use another Burkean
phrase) men of untaught feelings; they are guided both emotionally and
intellectually in their judgments and activities by unexamined
prejudices, which do not leave them “hesitating in the moment of
decision, sceptical, puzzled and unresolved.” But when, as in the
revolutionary France Burke was indicting and in fact in the shaken
England from which, as perhaps his nation’s greatest ideologue, he was
indicting it, those hallowed opinions and rules of life come into
question, the search for systematic ideological formulations, either to
reinforce them or to replace them, flourishes. The function of ideology
is to make an autonomous politics possible by providing the
authoritative concepts that render it meaningful, the suasive images by
means of which it can be sensibly grasped.⁴¹⁴¹ It is, in fact, precisely
at the point at which a political system begins to free itself from the
immediate governance of received tradition, from the direct and detailed
guidance of religious or philosophical canons on the one hand and from
the unreflective precepts of conventional moralism on the other, that
formal ideologies tend first to emerge and take hold.⁴²⁴² The
differentiation of an autonomous polity implies the differentiation,
too, of a separate and distinct cultural model of political action, for
the older, unspecialized models are either too comprehensive or too
concrete to provide the sort of guidance such a political system
demands. Either they trammel political behavior by encumbering it with
transcendental significance, or they stifle political imagination by
binding it to the blank realism of habitual judgment. It is when neither
a society’s most general cultural orientations nor its most
down-to-earth, “pragmatic” ones suffice any longer to provide an
adequate image of political process that ideologies begin to become
crucial as sources of sociopolitical meanings and attitudes.

In one sense, this statement is but another way of saying that ideology
is a response to strain. But now we are including cultural as well as
social and psychological strain. It is a loss of orientation that most
directly gives rise to ideological activity, an inability, for lack of
usable models, to comprehend the universe of civic rights and
responsibilities in which one finds oneself located. The development of
a differentiated polity (or of greater internal differentiation within
such a polity) may and commonly does bring with it severe social
dislocation and psychological tension. But it also brings with it
conceptual confusion, as the established images of political order fade
into irrelevance or are driven into disrepute. The reason why the French
Revolution was, at least up to its time, the greatest incubator of
extremist ideologies, “progressive” and “reactionary” alike, in human
history was not that either personal insecurity or social disequilibrium
were deeper and more pervasive than at many earlier periods—though they
were deep and pervasive enough—but because the central organizing
principle of political life, the divine right of kings, was
destroyed.⁴³⁴³ It is a confluence of sociopsychological strain and an
absence of cultural resources by means of which to make sense of the
strain, each exacerbating the other, that sets the stage for the rise of
systematic (political, moral, or economic) ideologies.

And it is, in turn, the attempt of ideologies to render otherwise
incomprehensible social situations meaningful, to so construe them as to
make it possible to act purposefully within them, that accounts both for
the ideologies’ highly figurative nature and for the intensity with
which, once accepted, they are held. As metaphor extends language by
broadening its semantic range, enabling it to express meanings it cannot
or at least cannot yet express literally, so the head-on clash of
literal meanings in ideology—the irony, the hyperbole, the overdrawn
antithesis—provides novel symbolic frames against which to match the
myriad “unfamiliar somethings” that, like a journey to a strange
country, are produced by a transformation in political life. Whatever
else ideologies may be—projections of unacknowledged fears, disguises
for ulterior motives, phatic expressions of group solidarity—they are,
most distinctively, maps of problematic social reality and matrices for
the creation of collective conscience. Whether, in any particular case,
the map is accurate or the conscience creditable is a separate question
to which one can hardly give the same answer for Nazism and Zionism, for
the nationalisms of McCarthy and of Churchill, for the defenders of
segregation and its opponents.

VI

Though ideological ferment is, of course, widespread in modern society,
perhaps its most prominent locus at the moment lies in the new (or
renewed) states of Asia, Africa, and some parts of Latin America; for it
is in these states, Communist or not, that the initial steps away from a
traditional politics of piety and proverb are just now being taken. The
attainment of independence, the overthrow of established ruling classes,
the popularization of legitimacy, the rationalization of public
administration, the rise of modern elites, the spread of literacy and
mass communications, and the propulsion willy-nilly of inexperienced
governments into the midst of a precarious international order that even
its older participants do not very well understand all make for a
pervasive sense of disorientation, a disorientation in whose face
received images of authority, responsibility, and civic purpose seem
radically inadequate. The search for a new symbolic framework in terms
of which to formulate, think about, and react to political problems,
whether in the form of nationalism, Marxism, liberalism, populism,
racism, Caesarism, ecclesiasticism, or some variety of reconstructed
traditionalism (or, most commonly, a confused melange of several of
these) is therefore tremendously intense.

Intense—but indeterminate. For the most part, the new states are still
groping for usable political concepts, not yet grasping them; and the
outcome in almost every case, at least in every non-Communist case, is
uncertain not merely in the sense that the outcome of any historical
process is uncertain but in the sense that even a broad and general
assessment of overall direction is extremely difficult to make.
Intellectually, everything is in motion, and the words of that
extravagant poet in politics, Lamartine, written of nineteenth century
France, apply to the new states with perhaps even greater
appropriateness than they did to the dying July Monarchy:

These times are times of chaos; opinions are a scramble; parties are a
jumble; the language of new ideas has not been created; nothing is more
difficult than to give a good definition of oneself in religion, in
philosophy, in politics. One feels, one knows, one lives, and at need,
one dies for one’s cause, but one cannot name it. It is the problem of
this time to classify things and men. . . . The world has jumbled its
catalog.⁴⁴⁴⁴

This observation is no truer anywhere in the world right now [1964] than
it is in Indonesia, where the whole political process is mired in a
slough of ideological symbols, each attempting and so far each failing
to unjumble the Republic’s catalogue, to name its cause, and to give
point and purpose to its polity. It is a country of false starts and
frantic revisions, of a desperate search for a political order whose
image, like a mirage, recedes more rapidly the more eagerly it is
approached. The salving slogan amid all this frustration is, “The
Revolution Is Unfinished!” And so, indeed, it is. But only because no
one knows, not even those who cry most loudly that they do, precisely
how to go about the job of finishing it.⁴⁵⁴⁵

The most highly developed concepts of government in traditional
Indonesia were those upon which the classic Hinduized states of the
fourth to fifteenth centuries were built, concepts that persisted in
somewhat revised and weakened form even after these states were first
Islamicized and then largely replaced or overlaid by the Dutch colonial
regime. And of these concepts the most important was what might be
called the theory of the exemplary center, the notion that the capital
city (or more accurately the king’s palace) was at once a microcosm of
the supernatural order—“an image of . . . the universe on a smaller
scale”—and the material embodiment of political order.⁴⁶⁴⁶ The capital
was not merely the nucleus, the engine, or the pivot of the state; it
was the state.

In the Hindu period, the king’s castle comprehended virtually the entire
town. A squared-off “heavenly city” constructed according to the ideas
of Indic metaphysics, it was more than a locus of power; it was a
synoptic paradigm of the ontological shape of existence. At its center
was the divine king (an incarnation of an Indian deity), his throne
symbolizing Mount Meru, seat of the gods; the buildings, roads, city
walls, and even, ceremonially, his wives and personal staff were
deployed quadrangularly around him according to the directions of the
four sacred winds. Not only the king himself but his ritual, his
regalia, his court, and his castle were shot through with charismatic
significance. The castle and the life of the castle were the quiddity of
the kingdom, and he who (often after meditating in the wilderness to
attain the appropriate spiritual status) captured the castle captured
the whole empire, grasped the charisma of office, and displaced the
no-longer-sacred king.⁴⁷⁴⁷

The early polities were thus not so much solidary territorial units as
loose congeries of villages oriented toward a common urban center, each
such center competing with others for ascendency. Whatever degree of
regional or, at moments, interregional hegemony prevailed depended, not
on the systematic administrative organization of extensive territory
under a single king, but on the varying abilities of kings to mobilize
and apply effective striking forces with which to sack rival capitals,
abilities that were believed to rest on essentially religious—that is,
mystical—grounds. So far as the pattern was territorial at all, it
consisted of a series of concentric circles of religio-military power
spreading out around the various city-state capitals, as radio waves
spread from a transmitter. The closer a village to a town, the greater
the impact, economically and culturally, of the court on that village.
And, conversely, the greater the development of the court—priests,
artisans, nobles, and king—the greater its authenticity as an epitome of
cosmic order, its military strength, and the effective range of its
circles of outward-spreading power. Spiritual excellence and political
eminence were fused. Magical power and executive influence flowed in a
single stream outward and downward from the king through the descending
ranks of his staff and whatever lesser courts were subordinate to him,
draining out finally into the spiritually and politically residual
peasant mass. Theirs was a facsimile concept of political organization,
one in which the reflection of the supernatural order microscopically
mirrored in the life of the capital was in turn further and more faintly
reflected in the countryside as a whole, producing a hierarchy of less
and less faithful copies of an eternal, transcendent realm. In such a
system, the administrative, military, and ceremonial organization of the
court orders the world around it iconically by providing it with a
tangible paragon.⁴⁸⁴⁸

When Islam came, the Hindu political tradition was to some extent
weakened, especially in the coastal trade kingdoms surrounding the Java
Sea. The court culture nevertheless persisted, although it was overlaid
and interfused with Islamic symbols and ideas and set among an
ethnically more differentiated urban mass, which looked with less awe on
the classical order. The steady growth—especially on Java—of Dutch
administrative control in the mid-nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries constricted the tradition still further. But, since the lower
levels of the bureaucracy continued to be manned almost entirely by
Indonesians of the old upper classes, the tradition remained, even then,
the matrix of supravillage political order. The Regency or the District
Office remained not merely the axis of the polity but the embodiment of
it, a polity with respect to which most villagers were not so much
actors as audience.

It was this tradition with which the new elite of republican Indonesia
was left after the revolution. That is not to say that the theory of the
exemplary center persisted unchanged, drifting like some Platonic
archetype through the eternity of Indonesian history, for (like the
society as a whole) it evolved and developed, becoming ultimately
perhaps more conventional and less religious in general temper. Nor does
it mean that foreign ideas, from European parliamentarianism, from
Marxism, from Islamic moralism, and so forth did not come to play an
essential role in Indonesian political thought, for modern Indonesian
nationalism is very far from being merely old wine in a new bottle. It
is simply that, as yet, the conceptual transition from the classic image
of a polity as a concentrated center of pomp and power, alternately
providing a cynosure for popular awe and lashing out militarily at
competing centers, to one of a polity as a systematically organized
national community has, for all these changes and influences, still not
been completed. Indeed, it has been arrested and to some extent
reversed.

This cultural failure is apparent from the growing, seemingly
unquenchable ideological din that has engulfed Indonesian politics since
the revolution. The most prominent attempt to construct, by means of a
figurative extension of the classic tradition, an essentially metaphoric
reworking of it, a new symbolic framework within which to give form and
meaning to the emerging republican polity, was President Sukarno’s
famous Pantjasila concept, first set forth in a public speech toward the
end of the Japanese occupation.⁴⁹⁴⁹ Drawing on the Indie tradition of
fixed sets of numbered precepts—the three jewels, the four sublime
moods, the eightfold path, the twenty conditions of successful rule, and
so forth—it consisted of five (pantja) principles (sila) that were
intended to form the “sacred” ideological foundations of an independent
Indonesia. Like all good constitutions, the Pantjasila was short,
ambiguous, and impeccably high-minded, the five points being
“nationalism,” “humanitarianism,” “democracy,” “social welfare,” and
(pluralistic) “monotheism.” Finally, these modern concepts, set so
nonchalantly in a medieval frame, were explicitly identified with an
indigenous peasant concept, gotong rojong (literally, “the collective
bearing of burdens”; figuratively, “the piety of all for the interests
of all”), thus drawing together the “great tradition” of the exemplary
state, the doctrines of contemporary nationalism, and the “little
traditions” of the villages into one luminous image.⁵⁰⁵⁰

The reasons why this ingenious device failed are many and complex, and
only a few of them—like the strength in certain sectors of the
population of Islamic concepts of political order, which are difficult
to reconcile with Sukarno’s secularism—are themselves cultural. The
Pantjasila, playing upon the microcosm-macrocosm conceit and upon the
traditional syncretism of Indonesian thought, was intended to contain
within it the political interests of the Islamic and Christian, gentry
and peasantry, nationalist and communist, commercial and agrarian,
Javanese and “Outer Island” groups in Indonesia—to rework the old
facsimile pattern into a modern constitutional structure in which these
various tendencies would, each emphasizing one or another aspect of the
doctrine, find a modus vivendi at each level of administration and party
struggle. The attempt was not so totally ineffective or so
intellectually fatuous as it has sometimes been painted. The cult of the
Pantjasila (for that is what it literally became, complete with rites
and commentaries) did provide for a while a flexible ideological context
within which parliamentary institutions and democratic sentiments were
being soundly, if gradually, forged at both local and national levels.
But the combination of a deteriorating economic situation, a hopelessly
pathological relationship with the former metropole, the rapid growth of
a subversive (in principle) totalitarian party, a renascence of Islamic
fundamentalism, the inability (or unwillingness) of leaders with
developed intellectual and technical skills to court mass support, and
the economic illiteracy, administrative incapacity, and personal
failings of those who were able (and only too willing) to court such
support soon brought the clash of factions to such a pitch that the
whole pattern dissolved. By the time of the Constitutional Convention of
1957, the Pantjasila had changed from a language of consensus to a
vocabulary of abuse, as each faction used it more to express its
irreconcilable opposition to other factions than its underlying
rules-of-the-game agreement with them, and the Convention, ideological
pluralism, and constitutional democracy collapsed in a single heap.⁵¹⁵¹

What has replaced them is something very much like the old exemplary
center pattern, only now on a self-consciously doctrinaire rather than
an instinctive religion-and-convention basis and cast more in the idiom
of egalitarianism and social progress than in that of hierarchy and
patrician grandeur. On the one hand, there has been, under President
Sukarno’s famous theory of “guided democracy” and his call for the
reintroduction of the revolutionary (that is, authoritarian)
constitution of 1945, both an ideological homogenization (in which
discordant streams of thought—notably those of Moslem modernism and
democratic socialism—have simply been suppressed as illegitimate) and an
accelerated pace of flamboyant symbol-mongering, as though, the effort
to make an unfamiliar form of government work having misfired, a
desperate attempt to breathe new life into a familiar one was being
launched. On the other hand, the growth of the political role of the
army, not so much as an executive or administrative body as a backstop
enforcement agency with veto power over the whole range of politically
relevant institutions, from the presidency and the civil service to the
parties and the press, has provided the other—the minatory—half of the
traditional picture.

Like the Pantjasila before it, the revised (or revivified) approach was
introduced by Sukarno in a major speech—“The Rediscovery of Our
Revolution”—given on Independence Day (August 17) in 1959, a speech that
he later decreed, along with the expository notes on it prepared by a
body of personal attendants known as The Supreme Advisory Council, to be
the “Political Manifesto of the Republic”:

There thus came into existence a catechism on the basis, aims and duties
of the Indonesian revolution; the social forces of the Indonesian
revolution, its nature, future and enemies; and its general program,
covering the political, economic, social, mental, cultural, and security
fields. Early in I960 the central message of the celebrated speech was
stated as consisting of five ideas—the 1945 constitution, Socialism a la
Indonesia, Guided Democracy, Guided Economy, and Indonesian
Personality—and the first letters of these five phrases were put
together to make the acronym USDEK. With “Political Manifesto” becoming
“Manipol,” the new creed became known as “Manipol-USDEK.”⁵²⁵²

And, as the Pantjasila before it, the Manipol-USDEK image of political
order found a ready response in a population for whom opinions have
indeed become a scramble, parties a jumble, the times a chaos:

Many were attracted by the idea that what Indonesia needed above all was
men with the right state of mind, the right spirit, the true patriotic
dedication. “Returning to our own national personality” was attractive
to many who wanted to withdraw from the challenges of modernity, and
also to those who wanted to believe in the current political leadership
but were aware of its failures to modernize as fast as such countries as
India and Malaya. And for members of some Indonesian communities,
notably for many [Indic-minded] Javanese, there was real meaning in the
various complex schemes which the President presented in elaboration of
Manipol-USDEK, explaining the peculiar significance and tasks of the
current stage of history. [But] perhaps the most important appeal of
Manipol-USDEK, however, lay in the simple fact that it promised to give
men a pegangan—something to which to hold fast. They were attracted not
so much by the content of this pegangan as by the fact that the
President had offered one at a time when the lack of a sense of purpose
was sorely felt. Values and cognitive patterns being in flux and in
conflict, men looked eagerly for dogmatic and schematic formulations of
the political good.⁵³⁵³

While the President and his entourage concern themselves almost entirely
with the “creation and recreation of mystique,” the army concerns itself
mainly with combating the numerous protests, plots, mutinies, and
rebellions that occur when that mystique fails to achieve its hoped-for
effect and when rival claims to leadership arise.⁵⁴⁵⁴ Although involved
in some aspects of the civil service, in the managing of the confiscated
Dutch enterprises, and even in the (nonparliamentary) cabinet, the army
has not been able to take up, for lack of training, internal unity, or
sense of direction, the administrative, planning, and organizational
tasks of the government in any detail or with any effectiveness. The
result is that these tasks are either not performed or very inadequately
performed, and the supralocal polity, the national state, shrinks more
and more to the limits of its traditional domain, the capital
city—Djakarta—plus a number of semi-independent tributary cities and
towns held to a minimal loyalty by the threat of centrally applied
force.

That this attempt to revive the politics of the exemplary court will
long survive is rather doubtful. It is already being severely strained
by its incapacity to cope with the technical and administrative problems
involved in the government of a modern state. Far from arresting
Indonesia’s decline into what Sukarno has called “the abyss of
annihilation,” the retreat from the hesitant, admittedly hectic and
awkwardly functioning parliamentarianism of the Pantjasila period to the
Manipol-USDEK alliance between a charismatic president and a watchdog
army has probably accelerated it. But what will succeed this ideological
framework when, as seems certain, it too dissolves, or from where a
conception of political order more adequate to Indonesia’s contemporary
needs and ambitions will come, if it does come, is impossible to say.

Not that Indonesia’s problems are purely or even primarily ideological
and that they will—as all too many Indonesians already think—melt away
before a political change of heart. The disorder is more general, and
the failure to create a conceptual framework in terms of which to shape
a modern polity is in great part itself a reflection of the tremendous
social and psychological strains that the country and its population are
undergoing. Things do not merely seem jumbled—they are jumbled, and it
will take more than theory to unjumble them. It will take administrative
skill, technical knowledge, personal courage and resolution, endless
patience and tolerance, enormous self-sacrifice, a virtually
incorruptible public conscience, and a very great deal of sheer (and
unlikely) good luck in the most material sense of the word. Ideological
formulation, no matter how elegant, can substitute for none of these
elements; and, in fact, in their absence, it degenerates, as it has in
Indonesia, into a smokescreen for failure, a diversion to stave off
despair, a mask to conceal reality rather than a portrait to reveal it.
With a tremendous population problem; extraordinary ethnic,
geographical, and regional diversity; a moribund economy; a severe lack
of trained personnel; popular poverty of the bitterest sort; and
pervasive, implacable social discontent, Indonesia’s social problems
seem virtually insoluble even without the ideological pandemonium. The
abyss into which Ir. Sukarno claims to have looked is a real one.

Yet, at the same time, that Indonesia (or, I should imagine, any new
nation) can find her way through this forest of problems without any
ideological guidance at all seems impossible.⁵⁵⁵⁵ The motivation to seek
(and, even more important, to use) technical skill and knowledge, the
emotional resilience to support the necessary patience and resolution,
and the moral strength to sustain self-sacrifice and incorruptibility
must come from somewhere, from some vision of public purpose anchored in
a compelling image of social reality. That all these qualities may not
be present; that the present drift to revivalistic irrationalism and
unbridled fantasy may continue; that the next ideological phase may be
even further from the ideals for which the revolution was ostensibly
fought than is the present one; that Indonesia may continue to be, as
Bagehot called France, the scene of political experiments from which
others profit much but she herself very little; or that the ultimate
outcome may be viciously totalitarian and wildly zealotic is all very
true. But whichever way events move, the determining forces will not be
wholly sociological or psychological but partly cultural—that is,
conceptual. To forge a theoretical framework adequate to the analysis of
such three-dimensional processes is the task of the scientific study of
ideology—a task but barely begun.

VII

             Critical and imaginative works are answers to questions
posed by the situation in which they arose. They are not merely answers,
they are strategic answers, stylized answers. For there is a difference
in style or strategy, if one says “yes” in tonalities that imply “thank
God!” or in tonalities that imply “alas!” So I should propose an initial
working distinction between “strategies” and “situations” whereby we
think of . . . any work of critical or imaginative cast . . . as the
adopting of various strategies for the encompassing of situations. These
strategies size up the situations, name their structure and outstanding
ingredients, and name them in a way that contains an attitude toward
them.

                  This point of view does not, by any means, vow us to
personal or historical subjectivism. The situations are real; the
strategies for handling them have public content; in so far as
situations overlap from individual to individual, or from one historical
period to another, the strategies possess universal relevance.

KENNETH BURKE, The Philosophy of Literary Form

As both science and ideology are critical and imaginative “works” (that
is symbolic structures), an objective formulation both of the marked
differences between them and of the nature of their relationship to one
another seems more likely to be achieved by proceeding from such a
concept of stylistic strategies than from a nervous concern with
comparative epistemological or axiological status of the two forms of
thought. No more than scientific studies of religion ought to begin with
unnecessary questions about the legitimacy of the substantive claims of
their subject matter ought scientific studies of ideology to begin with
such questions. The best way to deal with Mannheim’s, as with any true
paradox, is to circumvent it by reformulating one’s theoretical approach
so as to avoid setting off yet once more down the well-worn path of
argument that led to it in the first place.

The differentiae of science and ideology as cultural systems are to be
sought in the sorts of symbolic strategy for encompassing situations
that they respectively represent. Science names the structure of
situations in such a way that the attitude contained toward them is one
of disinterestedness. Its style is restrained, spare, resolutely
analytic: by shunning the semantic devices that most effectively
formulate moral sentiment, it seeks to maximize intellectual clarity.
But ideology names the structure of situations in such a way that the
attitude contained toward them is one of commitment. Its style is
ornate, vivid, deliberately suggestive: by objectifying moral sentiment
through the same devices that science shuns, it seeks to motivate
action. Both are concerned with the definition of a problematic
situation and are responses to a felt lack of needed information. But
the information needed is quite different, even in cases where the
situation is the same. An ideologist is no more a poor social scientist
than a social scientist is a poor ideologist. The two are—or at least
they ought to be—in quite different lines of work, lines so different
that little is gained and much obscured by measuring the activities of
the one against the aims of the other.⁵⁶⁵⁶

Where science is the diagnostic, the critical, dimension of culture,
ideology is the justificatory, the apologetic one—it refers “to that
part of culture which is actively concerned with the establishment and
defense of patterns of belief and value.”⁵⁷⁵⁷ That there is natural
tendency for the two to clash, particularly when they are directed to
the interpretation of the same range of situations, is thus clear; but
that the clash is inevitable and that the findings of (social) science
necessarily will undermine the validity of the beliefs and values that
ideology has chosen to defend and propagate seem most dubious
assumptions. An attitude at once critical and apologetic toward the same
situation is no intrinsic contradiction in terms (however often it may
in fact turn out to be an empirical one) but a sign of a certain level
of intellectual sophistication. One remembers the story, probably ben
trovato, to the effect that when Churchill had finished his famous rally
of isolated England, “We shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight on
the landing grounds, we shall fight in the fields and in the streets, we
shall fight in the hills . . . ,” he turned to an aide and whispered,
“and we shall hit them over the head with soda-water bottles, because we
haven’t any guns.”

The quality of social rhetoric in ideology is thus not proof that the
vision of sociopsychological reality upon which it is based is false and
that it draws its persuasive power from any discrepancy between what is
believed and what can, now or someday, be established as scientifically
correct. That it may indeed lose touch with reality in an orgy of
autistic fantasy—even that, in situations where it is left uncriticized
by either a free science or competing ideologies well-rooted in the
general social structure, it has a very strong tendency to do so—is all
too apparent. But however interesting pathologies are for clarifying
normal functioning (and however common they may be empirically), they
are misleading as prototypes of it. Although fortunately it never had to
be tested, it seems most likely that the British would have indeed
fought on the beaches, landing grounds, streets, and hills—with
soda-water bottles too, if it came to that—for Churchill formulated
accurately the mood of his countrymen and, formulating it, mobilized it
by making it a public possession, a social fact, rather than a set of
disconnected, unrealized private emotions. Even morally loathsome
ideological expressions may still catch most acutely the mood of a
people or a group. Hitler was not distorting the German conscience when
he rendered his countrymen’s demonic self-hatred in the tropological
figure of the magically corrupting Jew; he was merely objectifying
it—transforming a prevalent personal neurosis into a powerful social
force.

But though science and ideology are different enterprises, they are not
unrelated ones. Ideologies do make empirical claims about the condition
and direction of society, which it is the business of science (and,
where scientific knowledge is lacking, common sense) to assess. The
social function of science vis-à-vis ideologies is first to understand
them—what they are, how they work, what gives rise to them—and second to
criticize them, to force them to come to terms with (but not necessarily
to surrender to) reality. The existence of a vital tradition of
scientific analysis of social issues is one of the most effective
guarantees against ideological extremism, for it provides an
incomparably reliable source of positive knowledge for the political
imagination to work with and to honor. It is not the only such check.
The existence, as mentioned, of competing ideologies carried by other
powerful groups in the society is at least as important; as is a liberal
political system in which dreams of total power are obvious fantasies;
as are stable social conditions in which conventional expectations are
not continually frustrated and conventional ideas not radically
incompetent. But, committed with a quiet intransigence to a vision of
its own, it is perhaps the most indomitable.

[]

1 F. X. Sutton, S. E. Harris, C. Kaysen, and J. Tobin, The American
Business Creed (Cambridge, Mass., 1956), pp. 3–6.

2 K. Mannheim, Ideology and Utopia, Harvest ed. (New York, n.d.), pp.
59–83; see also R. Merton, Social Theory and Social Structure (New York,
1949), pp. 217–220.

3 W. White, Beyond Conformity (New York, 1961), p. 211.

4 W. Stark, The Sociology of Knowledge (London, 1958), p. 48.

5 Ibid., pp. 90–91. Italics in the original. For approximation of the
same argument in Mannheim, formulated as a distinction between “total”
and “particular” ideology, see Ideology and Utopia, pp. 55–59.

6 E. Shils, “Ideology and Civility: On the Politics of the
Intellectual,” The Sewanee Review 66 (1958): 450–480.

7 T. Parsons, “An Approach to the Sociology of Knowledge,” Transactions
of the Fourth World Congress of Sociology (Milan and Stressa, 1959), pp.
25–49. Italics in original.

8 R. Aron, The Opium of the Intellectuals (New York, 1962).

9 As the danger of being misinterpreted here is serious, may I hope that
my criticism will be credited as technical and not political if I note
that my own general ideological (as I would frankly call it) position is
largely the same as that of Aron, Shils, Parsons, and so forth; that I
am in agreement with their plea for a civil, temperate, unheroic
politics? Also it should be remarked that the demand for a nonevaluative
concept of ideology is not a demand for the nonevaluation of ideologies,
any more than a nonevaluative concept of religion implies religious
relativism.

10 Sutton, et al., American Business Creed; White, Beyond Conformity; H.
Eckstein, Pressure Group Politics: The Case of the British Medical
Association (Stanford, 1960); C. Wright Mills, The New Men of Power (New
York, 1948); J. Schumpeter, “Science and Ideology,” American Economic
Review 39 (1949): 345–359.

11 There have been, in fact, a number of other terms used in the
literature for the general range of phenomena that “ideology” denotes,
from Plato’s “noble lies” through Sorel’s “myths” to Pareto’s
“derivations”; but none of them has managed to reach any greater level
of technical neutrality than has “ideology.” See H. D. Lasswell, “The
Language of Power,” in Lasswell, N. Leites, and Associates, Language of
Politics (New York, 1949), pp. 3–19.

12 Sutton, et al„ American Business Creed, pp. 11–12, 303–310.

13 The quotations are from the most eminent recent interest theorist, C.
Wright Mills, The Causes of World War Three (New York, 1958), pp. 54,
65.

14 For the general schema, see Parsons, The Social System (New York,
1951), especially Chaps. 1 and 7. The fullest development of the strain
theory is in Sutton et al., American Business Creed, especially Chap.
15.

15 Sutton, et al., American Business Creed, pp. 307–308.

16 Parsons, “An Approach.”

17 White, Beyond Conformity, p. 204.

18 Perhaps the most impressive tour de force in this paratactic genre is
Nathan Leites’s A Study of Bolshevism (New York, 1953).

19 K. Burke, The Philosophy of Literary Form, Studies in Symbolic Action
(Baton Rouge, 1941). In the following discussion, I use “symbol” broadly
in the sense of any physical, social, or cultural act or object that
serves as the vehicle for a conception. For an explication of this view,
under which “five” and “the Cross” are equally symbols, see S. Langer,
Philosophy in a New Key, 4th ed. (Cambridge, Mass., 1960), pp. 60–66.

20 Useful general summaries of the tradition of literary criticism can
be found in S. E. Hyman, The Armed Vision (New York, 1948) and in R.
Welleck and A. Warren, Theory of Literature, 2nd ed. (New York, 1958). A
similar summary of the somewhat more diverse philosophical development
is apparently not available, but the seminal works are C. S. Peirce,
Collected Papers, ed. C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss, 8 vols. (Cambridge,
Mass., 1931–1958); E. Cassirer, Die Philosophie der symbolischen
Foremen, 3 vols. (Berlin, 1923–1929); C. W. Morris, Signs, Language and
Behavior (Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1944); and L. Wittgenstein,
Philosophical Investigations (Oxford, 1953).

21 W. Percy, “The Symbolic Structure of Interpersonal Process,”
Psychiatry 24 (1961):39–52. Italics in original. The reference is to
Sapir’s “The Status of Linguistics as a Science,” originally published
in 1929 and reprinted in D. Mandlebaum, ed., Selected Writings of Edward
Sapir (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1949), pp. 160–166.

22 A partial exception to this stricture, although marred by his
obsession with power as the sum and substance of politics, is Lasswell’s
“Style in the Language of Politics,” in Lasswell et al., Language of
Politics, pp. 20–39. It also should be remarked that the emphasis on
verbal symbolism in the following discussion is merely for the sake of
simplicity and is not intended to deny the importance of plastic,
theatrical, or other nonlinguistic devices—the rhetoric of uniforms,
floodlit stages, and marching bands—in ideological thought.

23 Sutton, et al., American Business Creed, pp. 4–5.

24 An excellent recent review is to be found in P. Henle, ed., Language,
Thought and Culture (Ann Arbor, 1958), pp. 173–195. The quotation is
from Langer, Philosophy, p. 117.

25 w. Percy, “Metaphor as Mistake.” The Sewanee Review 66 (1958): 79–99.

26 Quoted in J. Crowley, “Japanese Army Factionalism in the Early
1930’s,” The Journal of Asian Studies 21 (1958): 309–326.

27 Henle, Language, Thought and Culture, pp. 4–5.

28 K. Burke, Counterstatement (Chicago, 1957), p. 149.

29 Sapir, “Status of Linguistics,” p. 568.

30 Metaphor is, of course, not the only stylistic resource upon which
ideology draws. Metonymy (“All I have to offer is blood, sweat and
tears”), hyperbole (“The thousand-year Reich”), meiosis (“I shall
return”), synechdoche (“Wall Street”), oxymoron (“Iron Curtain”),
personification (“The hand that held the dagger has plunged it into the
back of its neighbor”), and all the other figures the classical
rhetoricians so painstakingly collected and so carefully classified are
utilized over and over again, as are such syntactical devices as
antithesis, inversion, and repetition; such prosodic ones as rhyme,
rhythm, and alliteration; such literary ones as irony, eulogy, and
sarcasm. Nor is all ideological expression figurative. The bulk of it
consists of quite literal, not to say flat-footed, assertions, which, a
certain tendency toward prima facie implausibility aside, are difficult
to distinguish from properly scientific statements: “The history of all
hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles”; “The whole
of the morality of Europe is based upon the values which are useful to
the herd”; and so forth. As a cultural system, an ideology that has
developed beyond the stage of mere sloganeering consists of an intricate
structure of interrelated meanings—interrelated in terms of the semantic
mechanisms that formulate them—of which the two-level organization of an
isolated metaphor is but a feeble representation.

31 Percy, “Symbolic Structure.”

32 G. Ryle, The Concept of Mind (New York, 1949).

33 E. Galanter and M. Gerstenhaber, “On Thought: The Extrinsic Theory,”
Psychol. Rev. 63 (1956):218–227.

34 Ibid. I have quoted this incisive passage above (pp. 77–78), in
attempting to set the extrinsic theory of thought in the context of
recent evolutionary, neurological, and cultural anthropological
findings.

35 W. Percy, “Symbol, Consciousness and Intersubjectivity,” Journal of
Philosophy 55 (1958): 631–641. Italics in original. Quoted by
permission.

36 Ibid. Quoted by permission.

37 S. Langer, Feeling and Form (New York, 1953).

38 The quotations are from Ryle, Concept of Mind, p. 51.

39 T. Parsons, “An Approach to Psychological Theory in Terms of the
Theory of Action,” in Psychology: A Study of a Science, ed. S. Koch (New
York, 1959), vol. 3. Italics in original. Compare: “In order to account
for this selectivity, it is necessary to assume that the structure of
the enzyme is related in some way to the structure of the gene. By a
logical extension of this idea we arrive at the concept that the gene is
a representation—blueprint so to speak—of the enzyme molecule, and that
the function of the gene is to serve as a source of information
regarding the structure of the enzyme. It seems evident that the
synthesis of an enzyme—a giant protein molecule consisting of hundreds
of amino acid units arranged end-to-end in a specific and unique
order—requires a model or set of instructions of some kind. These
instructions must be characteristic of the species; they must be
automatically transmitted from generation to generation, and they must
be constant yet capable of evolutionary change. The only known entity
that could perform such a function is the gene. There are many reasons
for believing that it transmits information, by acting as a model or
template.” N. H. Horowitz, “The Gene,” Scientific American, February
1956, p. 85.

40 This point is perhaps somewhat too baldly put in light of recent
analyses of animal learning; but the essential thesis—that there is a
general trend toward a more diffuse, less determinate control of
behavior by intrinsic (innate) parameters as one moves from lower to
higher animals—seems well established. See above, Chapter 3, pp. 70–76.

41 Of course, there are moral, economic, and even aesthetic ideologies,
as well as specifically political ones, but as very few ideologies of
any social prominence lack political implications, it is perhaps
permissible to view the problem here in this somewhat narrowed focus. In
any case, the arguments developed for political ideologies apply with
equal force to nonpolitical ones. For an analysis of a moral ideology
cast in terms very similar to those developed in this paper, see A. L.
Green, “The Ideology of Anti-Fluoridation Leaders,” The Journal of
Social Issues 17 (196l):13–25.

42 That such ideologies may call, as did Burke’s or De Maistre’s, for
the rein-vigoration of custom or the reimposition of religious hegemony
is, of course, no contradiction. One constructs arguments for tradition
only when its credentials have been questioned. To the degree that such
appeals are successful they bring, not a return to naive traditionalism,
but ideological retraditionalization—an altogether different matter. See
Mannheim, “Conservative Thought,” in his Essays on Sociology and Social
Psychology (New York, 1953), especially pp. 94–98.

43 It is important to remember, too, that the principle was destroyed
long before the king; it was to the successor principle that he was, in
fact, a ritual sacrifice: “When [Saint-Just] exclaims: ‘To determine the
principle in virtue of which the accused [Louis XVI] is perhaps to die,
is to determine the principle by which the society that judges him
lives,’ he demonstrates that it is the philosophers who are going to
kill the King: the King must die in the name of the social contract.” A.
Camus, The Rebel (New York, 1958), p. 114.

44 Alphonse de Lamartine, “Declaration of Principles,” in Introduction
to Contemporary Civilization in the West, A Source Book (New York,
1946), 2: 328–333.

45 The following very schematic and necessarily ex cathedra discussion
is based mainly on my own research and represents only my own views, but
I have also drawn heavily on the work of Herbert Feith for factual
material. See especially, The Decline of Constitutional Democracy in
Indonesia (New York, 1962) and “Dynamics of Guided Democracy,” in
Indonesia, ed. R. McVey (New Haven, 1963), pp. 309–409. For the general
cultural analysis within which my interpretations are set, see C.
Geertz, The Religion of Java (New York, 1960).

46 R. Heine-Geldern, “Conceptions of State and Kinship in Southeast
Asia,” Far Eastern Quarterly 2 (1942): 15–30.

47 Ibid.

48 The whole expanse of Yawa-land [Java] is to be compared with one town
in the Prince’s reign.

               By thousands are [counted] the people’s dwelling places,
to be compared with the manors of Royal servants, surrounding the body
of the Royal compound.

               All kinds of foreign islands; to be compared with them
are the cultivated land’s areas, made happy and quiet.

               Of the aspect of parks, then, are the forests and
mountains, all of them set foot on by Him, without feeling anxiety.

Canto 17, stanza 3 of the “Nagara-Kertagama,” a fourteenth century royal
epic. Translated in Th. Piegeaud, Java in the 14th Century (The Hague,
i960), 3:21. The term nagara still means, indifferently, “palace,”
“capital city,” “state,” “country,” or “government”—sometimes even
“civilization”—in Java.

49 For a description of the Pantjasila speech, see G. Kahin, Nationalism
and Revolution in Indonesia (Ithaca, 1952), pp. 122–127.

50 The quotations are from the Pantjasila speech, as quoted in ibid., p.
126.

51 The proceedings of the Convention, unfortunately still untranslated,
form one of the fullest and most instructive records of ideological
combat in the new states available. See Tentang Negara Republik
Indonesia Dalam Konstituante, 3 vols. (n.p. [Djakarta?], n.d. [1958?]).

52 Feith, “Dynamics of Guided Democracy,” p. 367. A vivid, if somewhat
shrill, description of “Manipol-USDEKism” in action can be found in W.
Hanna, Bung Karno’s Indonesia (New York, 1961).

53 Feith, “Dynamics of Guided Democracy,” 367–368. Pegang literally
means “to grasp”; thus pegangan, “something graspable.”

54 Ibid.

55 For an analysis of the role of ideology in an emerging African
nation, conducted along lines similar to our own, see L. A. Fallers,
“Ideology and Culture in Uganda Nationalism,” American Anthropologist 63
(1961): 677–686. For a superb case study of an “adolescent” nation in
which the process of thorough-going ideological reconstruction seems to
have been conducted with reasonable success, see B. Lewis, The Emergence
of Modern Turkey (London, 1961), especially Chap. 10.

56 This point is, however, not quite the same as saying that the two
sorts of activity may not in practice be carried on together, any more
than a man cannot, for example, paint a portrait of a bird that is both
ornithologically accurate and aesthetically effective. Marx is, of
course, the outstanding case, but for a more recent successful
synchronization of scientific analysis and ideological argument, see E.
Shils, The Torment of Secrecy (New York, 1956). Most such attempts to
mix genres are, however, distinctly less happy.

57 Fallers, “Ideology and Culture.” The patterns of belief and value
defended may be, of course, those of a socially subordinate group, as
well as those of a socially dominant one, and the “apology” therefore
for reform or revolution.

