Preface

[]

When an anthropologist, urged on by an attentive publisher, begins to
gather together certain of his essays for a kind of retrospective
exhibition of what he has been doing, or trying to do, over the
fifteen-year period since his release from graduate school, he is faced
by two tearing decisions: what to include, and how reverently to treat
what is included. All of us who write social science journal pieces have
a nonbook in us, and more and more of us are publishing them; all of us
imagine that anything our past self has done our present self could do
better, and stand ready to perpetrate improvements upon our own work we
would never stand for from any editor. To try to find the figure in the
carpet of one’s writings can be as chilling as trying to find it in
one’s life; to weave, post facto, a figure in—“this is what I meant to
say”—is an intense temptation.

I have faced up to the first of these decisions by including in this
collection only those of my essays which bear, directly and explicitly,
on the concept of culture. The majority of the essays are, in fact,
empirical studies rather than theoretical disquisitions, for I grow
uncomfortable when I get too far away from the immediacies of social
life. But all of them are basically concerned with pushing forward,
instant case by instant case, a particular, some would say peculiar,
view of what culture is, what role it plays in social life, and how it
ought properly to be studied. Though this redefinition of culture has
perhaps been my most persistent interest as an anthropologist, I have
also worked with some extensiveness in the areas of economic
development, social organization, comparative history, and cultural
ecology—concerns which are, save tangentially, not reflected here. Thus,
what is ostensibly a set of essays emerges, so I hope, somewhat as a
treatise—a treatise in cultural theory as developed through a series of
concrete analyses. Not just an “and then I wrote . . .” review of a
somewhat vagrant professional career, this book has an argument to make.

The second decision has been a bit trickier to deal with. In general, I
hold to a stare decisis view of published pieces, if only because if
they need very much revision they probably ought not to be reprinted at
all, but should be replaced with a wholly new article getting the damn
thing right. Further, correcting one’s misjudgments by writing changed
views back into earlier works seems to me not wholly cricket, and it
obscures the development of ideas that one is supposedly trying to
demonstrate in collecting the essays in the first place.

However, for all that, there does seem justification for a certain
amount of retroactive editing in cases where the substance of the
argument is not seriously affected but to leave things exactly as
originally written is either to purvey out-of-date information or
undercut a still valid discussion by tying it too closely to a
particular set of now faded events.

There are two places in the essays below where these considerations
seemed to me relevant, and where I have therefore made some changes in
what I originally wrote. The first is in the two essays of Part II on
culture and biological evolution, where the fossil datings given in the
original essays have been definitely superseded. The dates have, in
general, been moved back in time, and as this change leaves my central
arguments essentially intact, I see no harm in introducing the newer
estimations. There seems little point in continuing to tell the world
that Australopithecines go back a million years when archeologists are
now finding fossils datable to four or five million years. The second is
in connection with Chapter 10, in Part IV, “The Integrative Revolution,”
where the flow—if that is what it should be called—of new state history
since the article was written in the early 1960s makes some of the
passages read oddly. As Nasser is dead, Pakistan has split, Nigeria has
been defederalized, and the Communist Party has disappeared from the
Indonesian scene, to write as though these things had not occurred is to
give a sense of unreality to the discussion, a discussion which, again,
I regard as still valid, even if it is Nehru’s daughter rather than
Nehru who now leads India and the Republic of Malaya has expanded into
the Federation of Malaysia. Thus, I have in that essay made two sorts of
changes. First, I have changed tenses, introduced clauses, added a
footnote or two, and so on, in the body of the text to make it read a
little less as though the last ten years had not occurred. I have not,
however, changed anything of substance so as to improve my argument.
Second, I have added to each of the case histories—and clearly set off
from them—a paragraph summary of relevant developments since the essay
was written, so as to indicate that, if anything, those developments
demonstrate the continued relevance of the issues the essay treats in
terms of earlier events, and again to dissipate the Rip Van Winkle
effect. Except for minor typographical and grammatical corrections (and
changes in referencing style for the sake of consistency), the remainder
of the book is essentially unaltered.

I have added, however, a new chapter, the first one, in an attempt to
state my present position as generally as I can. As my views on the
matters the chapters discuss have evolved over the fifteen years they
span, there are indeed some differences in the way certain things are
put in this introductory chapter and the way they are put in some of the
reprinted ones. Some of my earlier concerns—with functionalism, for
example—now are less prominent in my mind; some of my later ones—with
semiotics, for example—are now more so. But the trend of thought in the
essays—which are arranged in a logical, not a chronological, order—seems
to me relatively consistent, and the introductory chapter represents an
effort to state more explicitly and systematically what that trend of
thought is: an attempt, in fine, to say what I have been saying.

I have eliminated all the acknowledgments contained in the original
essays. Those who have helped me know that they have and how very much
they have. I can only hope that by now they know that I know it too.
Rather than implicate them in my confusions once again, let me instead
take the rather peculiar tack of thanking three remarkable academic
institutions that have provided me with the kind of setting for
scholarly work I am convinced could not be surpassed right now anywhere
in the world: The Department of Social Relations of Harvard University,
where I was trained; the Department of Anthropology of the University of
Chicago, where I taught for a decade; and The Institute for Advanced
Study in Princeton, where I now work. At a time when the American
university system is under attack as irrelevant or worse, I can only say
that it has been for me a redemptive gift.

C. G.

Princeton

1973

PART I

Chapter 1/ Thick Description: Toward an Interpretive Theory of Culture

[]

I

In her book, Philosophy in a New Key, Susanne Langer remarks that
certain ideas burst upon the intellectual landscape with a tremendous
force. They resolve so many fundamental problems at once that they seem
also to promise that they will resolve all fundamental problems, clarify
all obscure issues. Everyone snaps them up as the open sesame of some
new positive science, the conceptual center-point around which a
comprehensive system of analysis can be built. The sudden vogue of such
a grande idée, crowding out almost everything else for a while, is due,
she says, “to the fact that all sensitive and active minds turn at once
to exploiting it. We try it in every connection, for every purpose,
experiment with possible stretches of its strict meaning, with
generalizations and derivatives.”

After we have become familiar with the new idea, however, after it has
become part of our general stock of theoretical concepts, our
expectations are brought more into balance with its actual uses, and its
excessive popularity is ended. A few zealots persist in the old
key-to-the-universe view of it; but less driven thinkers settle down
after a while to the problems the idea has really generated. They try to
apply it and extend it where it applies and where it is capable of
extension; and they desist where it does not apply or cannot be
extended. It becomes, if it was, in truth, a seminal idea in the first
place, a permanent and enduring part of our intellectual armory. But it
no longer has the grandiose, all-promising scope, the infinite
versatility of apparent application, it once had. The second law of
thermodynamics, or the principle of natural selection, or the notion of
unconscious motivation, or the organization of the means of production
does not explain everything, not even everything human, but it still
explains something; and our attention shifts to isolating just what that
something is, to disentangling ourselves from a lot of pseudoscience to
which, in the first flush of its celebrity, it has also given rise.

Whether or not this is, in fact, the way all centrally important
scientific concepts develop, I don’t know. But certainly this pattern
fits the concept of culture, around which the whole discipline of
anthropology arose, and whose domination that discipline has been
increasingly concerned to limit, specify, focus, and contain. It is to
this cutting of the culture concept down to size, therefore actually
insuring its continued importance rather than undermining it, that the
essays below are all, in their several ways and from their several
directions, dedicated. They all argue, sometimes explicitly, more often
merely through the particular analysis they develop, for a narrowed,
specialized, and, so I imagine, theoretically more powerful concept of
culture to replace E. B. Tylor’s famous “most complex whole,” which, its
originative power not denied, seems to me to have reached the point
where it obscures a good deal more than it reveals.

The conceptual morass into which the Tylorean kind of pot-au-feu
theorizing about culture can lead, is evident in what is still one of
the better general introductions to anthropology, Clyde Kluckhohn’s
Mirror for Man. In some twenty-seven pages of his chapter on the
concept, Kluckhohn managed to define culture in turn as: (1) “the total
way of life of a people”; (2) “the social legacy the individual acquires
from his group”; (3) “a way of thinking, feeling, and believing”; (4)
“an abstraction from behavior”; (5) a theory on the part of the
anthropologist about the way in which a group of people in fact behave;
(6) a “store house of pooled learning”; (7) “a set of standardized
orientations to recurrent problems”; (8) “learned behavior”; (9) a
mechanism for the normative regulation of behavior; (10) “a set of
techniques for adjusting both to the external environment and to other
men”; (11) “a precipitate of history”; and turning, perhaps in
desperation, to similes, as a map, as a sieve, and as a matrix. In the
face of this sort of theoretical diffusion, even a somewhat constricted
and not entirely standard concept of culture, which is at least
internally coherent and, more important, which has a definable argument
to make is (as, to be fair, Kluckhohn himself keenly realized) an
improvement. Eclecticism is self-defeating not because there is only one
direction in which it is useful to move, but because there are so many:
it is necessary to choose.

The concept of culture I espouse, and whose utility the essays below
attempt to demonstrate, is essentially a semiotic one. Believing, with
Max Weber, that man is an animal suspended in webs of significance he
himself has spun, I take culture to be those webs, and the analysis of
it to be therefore not an experimental science in search of law but an
interpretive one in search of meaning. It is explication I am after,
construing social expressions on their surface enigmatical. But this
pronouncement, a doctrine in a clause, demands itself some explication.

II

Operationalism as a methodological dogma never made much sense so far as
the social sciences are concerned, and except for a few rather too
well-swept corners—Skinnerian behaviorism, intelligence testing, and so
on—it is largely dead now. But it had, for all that, an important point
to make, which, however we may feel about trying to define charisma or
alienation in terms of operations, retains a certain force: if you want
to understand what a science is, you should look in the first instance
not at its theories or its findings, and certainly not at what its
apologists say about it; you should look at what the practitioners of it
do.

In anthropology, or anyway social anthropology, what the practioners do
is ethnography. And it is in understanding what ethnography is, or more
exactly what doing ethnography is, that a start can be made to ward
grasping what anthropological analysis amounts to as a form of
knowledge. This, it must immediately be said, is not a matter of
methods. From one point of view, that of the textbook, doing ethnography
is establishing rapport, selecting informants, transcribing texts,
taking genealogies, mapping fields, keeping a diary, and so on. But it
is not these things, techniques and received procedures, that define the
enterprise. What defines it is the kind of intellectual effort it is: an
elaborate venture in, to borrow a notion from Gilbert Ryle, “thick
description.”

Ryle’s discussion of “thick description” appears in two recent essays of
his (now reprinted in the second volume of his Collected Papers)
addressed to the general question of what, as he puts it, “Le Penseur”
is doing: “Thinking and Reflecting” and “The Thinking of Thoughts.”
Consider, he says, two boys rapidly contracting the eyelids of their
right eyes. In one, this is an involuntary twitch; in the other, a
conspiratorial signal to a friend. The two movements are, as movements,
identical; from an I-am-a-camera, “phenomenalistic” observation of them
alone, one could not tell which was twitch and which was wink, or indeed
whether both or either was twitch or wink. Yet the difference, however
unphotographable, between a twitch and a wink is vast; as anyone
unfortunate enough to have had the first taken for the second knows. The
winker is communicating, and indeed communicating in a quite precise and
special way: (1) deliberately, (2) to someone in particular, (3) to
impart a particular message, (4) according to a socially established
code, and (5) without cognizance of the rest of the company. As Ryle
points out, the winker has not done two things, contracted his eyelids
and winked, while the twitcher has done only one, contracted his
eyelids. Contracting your eyelids on purpose when there exists a public
code in which so doing counts as a conspiratorial signal is winking.
That’s all there is to it: a speck of behavior, a fleck of culture,
and—voilà!—a gesture.

That, however, is just the beginning. Suppose, he continues, there is a
third boy, who, “to give malicious amusement to his cronies,” parodies
the first boy’s wink, as amateurish, clumsy, obvious, and so on. He, of
course, does this in the same way the second boy winked and the first
twitched: by contracting his right eyelids. Only this boy is neither
winking nor twitching, he is parodying someone else’s, as he takes it,
laughable, attempt at winking. Here, too, a socially established code
exists (he will “wink” laboriously, overobviously, perhaps adding a
grimace—the usual artifices of the clown); and so also does a message.
Only now it is not conspiracy but ridicule that is in the air. If the
others think he is actually winking, his whole project misfires as
completely, though with somewhat different results, as if they think he
is twitching. One can go further: uncertain of his mimicking abilities,
the would-be satirist may practice at home before the mirror, in which
case he is not twitching, winking, or parodying, but rehearsing; though
so far as what a camera, a radical behaviorist, or a believer in
protocol sentences would record he is just rapidly contracting his right
eyelids like all the others. Complexities are possible, if not
practically without end, at least logically so. The original winker
might, for example, actually have been fake-winking, say, to mislead
outsiders into imagining there was a conspiracy afoot when there in fact
was not, in which case our descriptions of what the parodist is
parodying and the rehearser rehearsing of course shift accordingly. But
the point is that between what Ryle calls the “thin description” of what
the rehearser (parodist, winker, twitcher . . .) is doing (“rapidly
contracting his right eyelids”) and the “thick description” of what he
is doing (“practicing a burlesque of a friend faking a wink to deceive
an innocent into thinking a conspiracy is in motion”) lies the object of
ethnography: a stratified hierarchy of meaningful structures in terms of
which twitches, winks, fake-winks, parodies, rehearsals of parodies are
produced, perceived, and interpreted, and without which they would not
(not even the zero-form twitches, which, as a cultural category, are as
much nonwinks as winks are nontwitches) in fact exist, no matter what
anyone did or didn’t do with his eyelids.

Like so many of the little stories Oxford philosophers like to make up
for themselves, all this winking, fake-winking, burlesque-fake-winking,
rehearsed-burlesque-fake-winking, may seem a bit artificial. In way of
adding a more empirical note, let me give, deliberately unpreceded by
any prior explanatory comment at all, a not untypical excerpt from my
own field journal to demonstrate that, however evened off for didactic
purposes, Ryle’s example presents an image only too exact of the sort of
piled-up structures of inference and implication through which an
ethnographer is continually trying to pick his way:

The French [the informant said] had only just arrived. They set up
twenty or so small forts between here, the town, and the Marmusha area
up in the middle of the mountains, placing them on promontories so they
could survey the countryside. But for all this they couldn’t guarantee
safety, especially at night, so although the mezrag, trade-pact, system
was supposed to be legally abolished it in fact continued as before.

One night, when Cohen (who speaks fluent Berber), was up there, at
Marmusha, two other Jews who were traders to a neighboring tribe came by
to purchase some goods from him. Some Berbers, from yet another
neighboring tribe, tried to break into Cohen’s place, but he fired his
rifle in the air. (Traditionally, Jews were not allowed to carry
weapons; but at this period things were so unsettled many did so
anyway.) This attracted the attention of the French and the marauders
fled.

The next night, however, they came back, one of them disguised as a
woman who knocked on the door with some sort of a story. Cohen was
suspicious and didn’t want to let “her” in, but the other Jews said,
“oh, it’s all right, it’s only a woman.” So they opened the door and the
whole lot came pouring in. They killed the two visiting Jews, but Cohen
managed to barricade himself in an adjoining room. He heard the robbers
planning to burn him alive in the shop after they removed his goods, and
so he opened the door and, laying about him wildly with a club, managed
to escape through a window.

He went up to the fort, then, to have his wounds dressed, and complained
to the local commandant, one Captain Dumari, saying he wanted his
‘ar—i.e., four or five times the value of the merchandise stolen from
him. The robbers were from a tribe which had not yet submitted to French
authority and were in open rebellion against it, and he wanted
authorization to go with his mezrag-holder, the Marmusha tribal sheikh,
to collect the indemnity that, under traditional rules, he had coming to
him. Captain Dumari couldn’t officially give him permission to do this,
because of the French prohibition of the mezrag relationship, but he
gave him verbal authorization, saying, “If you get killed, it’s your
problem.”

So the sheikh, the Jew, and a small company of armed Marmushans went off
ten or fifteen kilometers up into the rebellious area, where there were
of course no French, and, sneaking up, captured the thief-tribe’s
shepherd and stole its herds. The other tribe soon came riding out on
horses after them, armed with rifles and ready to attack. But when they
saw who the “sheep thieves” were, they thought better of it and said,
“all right, we’ll talk.” They couldn’t really deny what had
happened—that some of their men had robbed Cohen and killed the two
visitors—and they weren’t prepared to start the serious feud with the
Marmusha a scuffle with the invading party would bring on. So the two
groups talked, and talked, and talked, there on the plain amid the
thousands of sheep, and decided finally on five-hundred-sheep damages.
The two armed Berber groups then lined up on their horses at opposite
ends of the plain, with the sheep herded between them, and Cohen, in his
black gown, pillbox hat, and flapping slippers, went out alone among the
sheep, picking out. one by one and at his own good speed, the best ones
for his payment.

So Cohen got his sheep and drove them back to Marmusha. The French, up
in their fort, heard them coming from some distance (“Ba, ba, ba” said
Cohen, happily, recalling the image) and said, “What the hell is that?”
And Cohen said, “That is my ‘ar.” The French couldn’t believe he had
actually done what he said he had done, and accused him of being a spy
for the rebellious Berbers, put him in prison, and took his sheep. In
the town, his family, not having heard from him in so long a time,
thought he was dead. But after a while the French released him and he
came back home, but without his sheep. He then went to the Colonel in
the town, the Frenchman in charge of the whole region, to complain. But
the Colonel said, “I can’t do anything about the matter. It’s not my
problem.”

Quoted raw, a note in a bottle, this passage conveys, as any similar one
similarly presented would do, a fair sense of how much goes into
ethnographic description of even the most elemental sort—how
extraordinarily “thick” it is. In finished anthropological writings,
including those collected here, this fact—that what we call our data are
really our own constructions of other people’s constructions of what
they and their compatriots are up to—is obscured because most of what we
need to comprehend a particular event, ritual, custom, idea, or whatever
is insinuated as background information before the thing itself is
directly examined. (Even to reveal that this little drama took place in
the highlands of central Morocco in 1912—and was recounted there in
1968—is to determine much of our understanding of it.) There is nothing
particularly wrong with this, and it is in any case inevitable. But it
does lead to a view of anthropological research as rather more of an
observational and rather less of an interpretive activity than it really
is. Right down at the factual base, the hard rock, insofar as there is
any, of the whole enterprise, we are already explicating: and worse,
explicating explications. Winks upon winks upon winks.

Analysis, then, is sorting out the structures of signification—what Ryle
called established codes, a somewhat misleading expression, for it makes
the enterprise sound too much like that of the cipher clerk when it is
much more like that of the literary critic—and determining their social
ground and import. Here, in our text, such sorting would begin with
distinguishing the three unlike frames of interpretation ingredient in
the situation, Jewish, Berber, and French, and would then move on to
show how (and why) at that time, in that place, their copresence
produced a situation in which systematic misunderstanding reduced
traditional form to social farce. What tripped Cohen up, and with him
the whole, ancient pattern of social and economic relationships within
which he functioned, was a confusion of tongues.

I shall come back to this too-compacted aphorism later, as well as to
the details of the text itself. The point for now is only that
ethnography is thick description. What the ethnographer is in fact faced
with—except when (as, of course, he must do) he is pursuing the more
automatized routines of data collection—is a multiplicity of complex
conceptual structures, many of them superimposed upon or knotted into
one another, which are at once strange, irregular, and inexplicit, and
which he must contrive somehow first to grasp and then to render. And
this is true at the most down-to-earth, jungle field work levels of his
activity: interviewing informants, observing rituals, eliciting kin
terms, tracing property lines, censusing households . . . writing his
journal. Doing ethnography is like trying to read (in the sense of
“construct a reading of”) a manuscript—foreign, faded, full of ellipses,
incoherencies, suspicious emendations, and tendentious commentaries, but
written not in conventionalized graphs of sound but in transient
examples of shaped behavior.

III

Culture, this acted document, thus is public, like a burlesqued wink or
a mock sheep raid. Though ideational, it does not exist in someone’s
head; though unphysical, it is not an occult entity. The interminable,
because unterminable, debate within anthropology as to whether culture
is “subjective” or “objective,” together with the mutual exchange of
intellectual insults (“idealist!”—“materialist!”;
“mentalist!”—“behaviorist!”; “impressionist!”—“positivist!”) which
accompanies it, is wholly misconceived. Once human behavior is seen as
(most of the time; there are true twitches) symbolic action—action
which, like phonation in speech, pigment in painting, line in writing,
or sonance in music, signifies—the question as to whether culture is
patterned conduct or a frame of mind, or even the two somehow mixed
together, loses sense. The thing to ask about a burlesqued wink or a
mock sheep raid is not what their ontological status is. It is the same
as that of rocks on the one hand and dreams on the other—they are things
of this world. The thing to ask is what their import is: what it is,
ridicule or challenge, irony or anger, snobbery or pride, that, in their
occurrence and through their agency, is getting said.

This may seem like an obvious truth, but there are a number of ways to
obscure it. One is to imagine that culture is a self-contained
“super-organic” reality with forces and purposes of its own; that is, to
reify it. Another is to claim that it consists in the brute pattern of
behavioral events we observe in fact to occur in some identifiable
community or other; that is, to reduce it. But though both these
confusions still exist, and doubtless will be always with us, the main
source of theoretical muddlement in contemporary anthropology is a view
which developed in reaction to them and is right now very widely
held—namely, that, to quote Ward Goodenough, perhaps its leading
proponent, “culture [is located] in the minds and hearts of men.”

Variously called ethnoscience, componential analysis, or cognitive
anthropology (a terminological wavering which reflects a deeper
uncertainty), this school of thought holds that culture is composed of
psychological structures by means of which individuals or groups of
individuals guide their behavior. “A society’s culture,” to quote
Goodenough again, this time in a passage which has become the locus
classicus of the whole movement, “consists of whatever it is one has to
know or believe in order to operate in a manner acceptable to its
members.” And from this view of what culture is follows a view, equally
assured, of what describing it is—the writing out of systematic rules,
an ethnographic algorithm, which, if followed, would make it possible so
to operate, to pass (physical appearance aside) for a native. In such a
way, extreme subjectivism is married to extreme formalism, with the
expected result: an explosion of debate as to whether particular
analyses (which come in the form of taxonomies, paradigms, tables,
trees, and other ingenuities) reflect what the natives “really” think or
are merely clever simulations, logically equivalent but substantively
different, of what they think.

As, on first glance, this approach may look close enough to the one
being developed here to be mistaken for it, it is useful to be explicit
as to what divides them. If, leaving our winks and sheep behind for the
moment, we take, say, a Beethoven quartet as an, admittedly rather
special but, for these purposes, nicely illustrative, sample of culture,
no one would, I think, identify it with its score, with the skills and
knowledge needed to play it, with the understanding of it possessed by
its performers or auditors, nor, to take care, en passant, of the
reductionists and reifiers, with a particular performance of it or with
some mysterious entity transcending material existence. The “no one” is
perhaps too strong here, for there are always incorrigibles. But that a
Beethoven quartet is a temporally developed tonal structure, a coherent
sequence of modeled sound—in a word, music—and not anybody’s knowledge
of or belief about anything, including how to play it, is a proposition
to which most people are, upon reflection, likely to assent.

To play the violin it is necessary to possess certain habits, skills,
knowledge, and talents, to be in the mood to play, and (as the old joke
goes) to have a violin. But violin playing is neither the habits,
skills, knowledge, and so on, nor the mood, nor (the notion believers in
“material culture” apparently embrace) the violin. To make a trade pact
in Morocco, you have to do certain things in certain ways (among others,
cut, while chanting Quranic Arabic, the throat of a lamb before the
assembled, undeformed, adult male members of your tribe) and to be
possessed of certain psychological characteristics (among others, a
desire for distant things). But a trade pact is neither the throat
cutting nor the desire, though it is real enough, as seven kinsmen of
our Marmusha sheikh discovered when, on an earlier occasion, they were
executed by him following the theft of one mangy, essentially valueless
sheepskin from Cohen.

Culture is public because meaning is. You can’t wink (or burlesque one)
without knowing what counts as winking or how, physically, to contract
your eyelids, and you can’t conduct a sheep raid (or mimic one) without
knowing what it is to steal a sheep and how practically to go about it.
But to draw from such truths the conclusion that knowing how to wink is
winking and knowing how to steal a sheep is sheep raiding is to betray
as deep a confusion as, taking thin descriptions for thick, to identify
winking with eyelid contractions or sheep raiding with chasing woolly
animals out of pastures. The cognitivist fallacy—that culture consists
(to quote another spokesman for the movement, Stephen Tyler) of “mental
phenomena which can [he means “should”] be analyzed by formal methods
similar to those of mathematics and logic”—is as destructive of an
effective use of the concept as are the behaviorist and idealist
fallacies to which it is a misdrawn correction. Perhaps, as its errors
are more sophisticated and its distortions subtler, it is even more so.

The generalized attack on privacy theories of meaning is, since early
Husserl and late Wittgenstein, so much a part of modern thought that it
need not be developed once more here. What is necessary is to see to it
that the news of it reaches anthropology; and in particular that it is
made clear that to say that culture consists of socially established
structures of meaning in terms of which people do such things as signal
conspiracies and join them or perceive insults and answer them, is no
more to say that it is a psychological phenomenon, a characteristic of
someone’s mind, personality, cognitive structure, or whatever, than to
say that Tantrism, genetics, the progressive form of the verb, the
classification of wines, the Common Law, or the notion of “a conditional
curse” (as Westermarck defined the concept of ‘ar in terms of which
Cohen pressed his claim to damages) is. What, in a place like Morocco,
most prevents those of us who grew up winking other winks or attending
other sheep from grasping what people are up to is not ignorance as to
how cognition works (though, especially as, one assumes, it works the
same among them as it does among us, it would greatly help to have less
of that too) as a lack of familiarity with the imaginative universe
within which their acts are signs. As Wittgenstein has been invoked, he
may as well be quoted:

We . . . say of some people that they are transparent to us. It is,
however, important as regards this observation that one human being can
be a complete enigma to another. We learn this when we come into a
strange country with entirely strange traditions; and, what is more,
even given a mastery of the country’s language. We do not understand the
people. (And not because of not knowing what they are saying to
themselves.) We cannot find our feet with them.

IV

Finding our feet, an unnerving business which never more than distantly
succeeds, is what ethnographic research consists of as a personal
experience; trying to formulate the basis on which one imagines, always
excessively, one has found them is what anthropological writing consists
of as a scientific endeavor. We are not, or at least I am not, seeking
either to become natives (a compromised word in any case) or to mimic
them. Only romantics or spies would seem to find point in that. We are
seeking, in the widened sense of the term in which it encompasses very
much more than talk, to converse with them, a matter a great deal more
difficult, and not only with strangers, than is commonly recognized. “If
speaking for someone else seems to be a mysterious process,” Stanley
Cavell has remarked, “that may be because speaking to someone does not
seem mysterious enough.”

Looked at in this way, the aim of anthropology is the enlargement of the
universe of human discourse. That is not, of course, its only
aim—instruction, amusement, practical counsel, moral advance, and the
discovery of natural order in human behavior are others; nor is
anthropology the only discipline which pursues it. But it is an aim to
which a semiotic concept of culture is peculiarly well adapted. As
interworked systems of construable signs (what, ignoring provincial
usages, I would call symbols), culture is not a power, something to
which social events, behaviors, institutions, or processes can be
causally attributed; it is a context, something within which they can be
intelligibly—that is, thickly—described.

The famous anthropological absorption with the (to us) exotic—Berber
horsemen, Jewish peddlers, French Legionnaires—is, thus, essentially a
device for displacing the dulling sense of familiarity with which the
mysteriousness of our own ability to relate perceptively to one another
is concealed from us. Looking at the ordinary in places where it takes
unaccustomed forms brings out not, as has so often been claimed, the
arbitrariness of human behavior (there is nothing especially arbitrary
about taking sheep theft for insolence in Morocco), but the degree to
which its meaning varies according to the pattern of life by which it is
informed. Understanding a people’s culture exposes their normalness
without reducing their particularity. (The more I manage to follow what
the Moroccans are up to, the more logical, and the more singular, they
seem.) It renders them accessible: setting them in the frame of their
own banalities, it dissolves their opacity.

It is this maneuver, usually too casually referred to as “seeing things
from the actor’s point of view,” too bookishly as “the verstehen
approach,” or too technically as “emic analysis,” that so often leads to
the notion that anthropology is a variety of either long-distance mind
reading or cannibalisle fantasizing, and which, for someone anxious to
navigate past the wrecks of a dozen sunken philosophies, must therefore
be executed with a great deal of care. Nothing is more necessary to
comprehending what anthropological interpretation is, and the degree to
which it is interpretation, than an exact understanding of what it
means—and what it does not mean—to say that our formulations of other
peoples’ symbol systems must be actor-oriented.¹¹

What it means is that descriptions of Berber, Jewish, or French culture
must be cast in terms of the constructions we imagine Berbers, Jews, or
Frenchmen to place upon what they live through, the formulae they use to
define what happens to them. What it does not mean is that such
descriptions are themselves Berber, Jewish, or French—that is, part of
the reality they are ostensibly describing; they are
anthropological—that is, part of a developing system of scientific
analysis. They must be cast in terms of the interpretations to which
persons of a particular denomination subject their experience, because
that is what they profess to be descriptions of; they are
anthropological because it is, in fact, anthropologists who profess
them. Normally, it is not necessary to point out quite so laboriously
that the object of study is one thing and the study of it another. It is
clear enough that the physical world is not physics and A Skeleton Key
to Finnegan’s Wake not Finnegan’s Wake. But, as, in the study of
culture, analysis penetrates into the very body of the object—that is,
we begin with our own interpretations of what our informants are up to,
or think they are up to, and then systematize those—the line between
(Moroccan) culture as a natural fact and (Moroccan) culture as a
theoretical entity tends to get blurred. All the more so, as the latter
is presented in the form of an actor’s-eye description of (Moroccan)
conceptions of everything from violence, honor, divinity, and justice,
to tribe, property, patronage, and chiefship.

In short, anthropological writings are themselves interpretations, and
second and third order ones to boot. (By definition, only a “native”
makes first order ones: it’s his culture.)²² They are, thus, fictions;
fictions, in the sense that they are “something made,” “something
fashioned”—the original meaning of fictiō—not that they are false,
unfactual, or merely “as if” thought experiments. To construct
actor-oriented descriptions of the involvements of a Berber chieftain, a
Jewish merchant, and a French soldier with one another in 1912 Morocco
is clearly an imaginative act, not all that different from constructing
similar descriptions of, say, the involvements with one another of a
provincial French doctor, his silly, adulterous wife, and her feckless
lover in nineteenth century France. In the latter case, the actors are
represented as not having existed and the events as not having happened,
while in the former they are represented as actual, or as having been
so. This is a difference of no mean importance; indeed, precisely the
one Madame Bovary had difficulty grasping. But the importance does not
lie in the fact that her story was created while Cohen’s was only noted.
The conditions of their creation, and the point of it (to say nothing of
the manner and the quality) differ. But the one is as much a fictiō—“a
making”—as the other.

Anthropologists have not always been as aware as they might be of this
fact: that although culture exists in the trading post, the hill fort,
or the sheep run, anthropology exists in the book, the article, the
lecture, the museum display, or, sometimes nowadays, the film. To become
aware of it is to realize that the line between mode of representation
and substantive content is as undrawable in cultural analysis as it is
in painting; and that fact in turn seems to threaten the objective
status of anthropological knowledge by suggesting that its source is not
social reality but scholarly artifice.

It does threaten it, but the threat is hollow. The claim to attention of
an ethnographic account does not rest on its author’s ability to capture
primitive facts in faraway places and carry them home like a mask or a
carving, but on the degree to which he is able to clarify what goes on
in such places, to reduce the puzzlement—what manner of men are
these?—to which unfamiliar acts emerging out of unknown backgrounds
naturally give rise. This raises some serious problems of verification,
all right—or, if “verification” is too strong a word for so soft a
science (I, myself, would prefer “appraisal”), of how you can tell a
better account from a worse one. But that is precisely the virtue of it.
If ethnography is thick description and ethnographers those who are
doing the describing, then the determining question for any given
example of it, whether a field journal squib or a Malinowski-sized
monograph, is whether it sorts winks from twitches and real winks from
mimicked ones. It is not against a body of uninterpreted data, radically
thinned descriptions, that we must measure the cogency of our
explications, but against the power of the scientific imagination to
bring us into touch with the lives of strangers. It is not worth it, as
Thoreau said, to go round the world to count the cats in Zanzibar.

V

Now, this proposition, that it is not in our interest to bleach human
behavior of the very properties that interest us before we begin to
examine it, has sometimes been escalated into a larger claim: namely,
that as it is only those properties that interest us, we need not
attend, save cursorily, to behavior at all. Culture is most effectively
treated, the argument goes, purely as a symbolic system (the catch
phrase is, “in its own terms”), by isolating its elements, specifying
the internal relationships among those elements, and then characterizing
the whole system in some general way—according to the core symbols
around which it is organized, the underlying structures of which it is a
surface expression, or the ideological principles upon which it is
based. Though a distinct improvement over “learned behavior” and “mental
phenomena” notions of what culture is, and the source of some of the
most powerful theoretical ideas in contemporary anthropology, this
hermetical approach to things seems to me to run the danger (and
increasingly to have been overtaken by it) of locking cultural analysis
away from its proper object, the informal logic of actual life. There is
little profit in extricating a concept from the defects of psychologism
only to plunge it immediately into those of schematicism.

Behavior must be attended to, and with some exactness, because it is
through the flow of behavior—or, more precisely, social action—that
cultural forms find articulation. They find it as well, of course, in
various sorts of artifacts, and various states of consciousness; but
these draw their meaning from the role they play (Wittgenstein would say
their “use”) in an ongoing pattern of life, not from any intrinsic
relationships they bear to one another. It is what Cohen, the sheikh,
and “Captain Dumari” were doing when they tripped over one another’s
purposes—pursuing trade, defending honor, establishing dominance—that
created our pastoral drama, and that is what the drama is, therefore,
“about.” Whatever, or wherever, symbol systems “in their own terms” may
be, we gain empirical access to them by inspecting events, not by
arranging abstracted entities into unified patterns.

A further implication of this is that coherence cannot be the major test
of validity for a cultural description. Cultural systems must have a
minimal degree of coherence, else we would not call them systems; and,
by observation, they normally have a great deal more. But there is
nothing so coherent as a paranoid’s delusion or a swindler’s story. The
force of our interpretations cannot rest, as they are now so often made
to do, on the tightness with which they hold together, or the assurance
with which they are argued. Nothing has done more, I think, to discredit
cultural analysis than the construction of impeccable depictions of
formal order in whose actual existence nobody can quite believe.

If anthropological interpretation is constructing a reading of what
happens, then to divorce it from what happens—from what, in this time or
that place, specific people say, what they do, what is done to them,
from the whole vast business of the world—is to divorce it from its
applications and render it vacant. A good interpretation of anything—a
poem, a person, a history, a ritual, an institution, a society—takes us
into the heart of that of which it is the interpretation. When it does
not do that, but leads us instead somewhere else—into an admiration of
its own elegance, of its author’s cleverness, or of the beauties of
Euclidean order—it may have its intrinsic charms; but it is something
else than what the task at hand—figuring out what all that rigamarole
with the sheep is about—calls for.

The rigamarole with the sheep—the sham theft of them, the reparative
transfer of them, the political confiscation of them—is (or was)
essentially a social discourse, even if, as I suggested earlier, one
conducted in multiple tongues and as much in action as in words.

Claiming his ‘ar, Cohen invoked the trade pact; recognizing the claim,
the sheikh challenged the offenders’ tribe; accepting responsibility,
the offenders’ tribe paid the indemnity; anxious to make clear to
sheikhs and peddlers alike who was now in charge here, the French showed
the imperial hand. As in any discourse, code does not determine conduct,
and what was actually said need not have been. Cohen might not have,
given its illegitimacy in Protectorate eyes, chosen to press his claim.
The sheikh might, for similar reasons, have rejected it. The offenders’
tribe, still resisting French authority, might have decided to regard
the raid as “real” and fight rather than negotiate. The French, were
they more habile and less dur (as, under Mareschal Lyautey’s seigniorial
tutelage, they later in fact became), might have permitted Cohen to keep
his sheep, winking—as we say—at the continuance of the trade pattern and
its limitation to their authority. And there are other possibilities:
the Marmushans might have regarded the French action as too great an
insult to bear and gone into dissidence themselves; the French might
have attempted not just to clamp down on Cohen but to bring the sheikh
himself more closely to heel; and Cohen might have concluded that
between renegade Berbers and Beau Geste soldiers, driving trade in the
Atlas highlands was no longer worth the candle and retired to the
better-governed confines of the town. This, indeed, is more or less what
happened, somewhat further along, as the Protectorate moved toward
genuine sovereignty. But the point here is not to describe what did or
did not take place in Morocco. (From this simple incident one can widen
out into enormous complexities of social experience.) It is to
demonstrate what a piece of anthropological interpretation consists in:
tracing the curve of a social discourse; fixing it into an inspectable
form.

The ethnographer “inscribes” social discourse; he writes it down. In so
doing, he turns it from a passing event, which exists only in its own
moment of occurrence, into an account, which exists in its inscriptions
and can be reconsulted. The sheikh is long dead, killed in the process
of being, as the French called it, “pacified”; “Captain Dumari,” his
pacifier, lives, retired to his souvenirs, in the south of France; and
Cohen went last year, part refugee, part pilgrim, part dying patriarch,
“home” to Israel. But what they, in my extended sense, “said” to one
another on an Atlas plateau sixty years ago is—very far from
perfectly—preserved for study. “What,” Paul Ricoeur, from whom this
whole idea of the inscription of action is borrowed and somewhat
twisted, asks, “what does writing fix?”

Not the event of speaking, but the “said” of speaking, where we
understand by the “said” of speaking that intentional exteriorization
constitutive of the aim of discourse thanks to which the sagen—the
saying—wants to become Aus-sage—the enunciation, the enunciated. In
short, what we write is the noema [“thought,” “content,” “gist”] of the
speaking. It is the meaning of the speech event, not the event as event.

This is not itself so very “said”—if Oxford philosophers run to little
stories, phenomenological ones run to large sentences; but it brings us
anyway to a more precise answer to our generative question, “What does
the ethnographer do?”—he writes.³³ This, too, may seem a less than
startling discovery, and to someone familiar with the current
“literature,” an implausible one. But as the standard answer to our
question has been, “He observes, he records, he analyzes”—a kind of
veni, vidi, vici conception of the matter—it may have more deep-going
consequences than are at first apparent, not the least of which is that
distinguishing these three phases of knowledge-seeking may not, as a
matter of fact, normally be possible; and, indeed, as autonomous
“operations” they may not in fact exist.

The situation is even more delicate, because, as already noted, what we
inscribe (or try to) is not raw social discourse, to which, because,
save very marginally or very specially, we are not actors, we do not
have direct access, but only that small part of it which our informants
can lead us into understanding.⁴⁴ This is not as fatal as it sounds,
for, in fact, not all Cretans are liars, and it is not necessary to know
everything in order to understand something. But it does make the view
of anthropological analysis as the conceptual manipulation of discovered
facts, a logical reconstruction of a mere reality, seem rather lame. To
set forth symmetrical crystals of significance, purified of the material
complexity in which they were located, and then attribute their
existence to autogenous principles of order, universal properties of the
human mind, or vast, a priori weltanschauungen, is to pretend a science
that does not exist and imagine a reality that cannot be found. Cultural
analysis is (or should be) guessing at meanings, assessing the guesses,
and drawing explanatory conclusions from the better guesses, not
discovering the Continent of Meaning and mapping out its bodiless
landscape.

VI

So, there are three characteristics of ethnographic description: it is
interpretive; what it is interpretive of is the flow of social
discourse; and the interpreting involved consists in trying to rescue
the “said” of such discourse from its perishing occasions and fix it in
perusable terms. The kula is gone or altered; but, for better or worse,
The Argonauts of the Western Pacific remains. But there is, in addition,
a fourth characteristic of such description, at least as I practice it:
it is microscopic.

This is not to say that there are no large-scale anthropological
interpretations of whole societies, civilizations, world events, and so
on. Indeed, it is such extension of our analyses to wider contexts that,
along with their theoretical implications, recommends them to general
attention and justifies our constructing them. No one really cares
anymore, not even Cohen (well . . . maybe, Cohen), about those sheep as
such. History may have its unobtrusive turning points, “great noises in
a little room”; but this little go-round was surely not one of them.

It is merely to say that the anthropologist characteristically
approaches such broader interpretations and more abstract analyses from
the direction of exceedingly extended acquaintances with extremely small
matters. He confronts the same grand realities that others—historians,
economists, political scientists, sociologists—confront in more fateful
settings: Power, Change, Faith, Oppression, Work, Passion, Authority,
Beauty, Violence, Love, Prestige; but he confronts them in contexts
obscure enough—places like Marmusha and lives like Cohen’s—to take the
capital letters off them. These all-too-human constancies, “those big
words that make us all afraid,” take a homely form in such homely
contexts. But that is exactly the advantage. There are enough
profundities in the world already.

Yet, the problem of how to get from a collection of ethnographic
miniatures on the order of our sheep story—an assortment of remarks and
anecdotes—to wall-sized culturescapes of the nation, the epoch, the
continent, or the civilization is not so easily passed over with vague
allusions to the virtues of concreteness and the down-to-earth mind. For
a science born in Indian tribes, Pacific islands, and African lineages
and subsequently seized with grander ambitions, this has come to be a
major methodological problem, and for the most part a badly handled one.
The models that anthropologists have themselves worked out to justify
their moving from local truths to general visions have been, in fact, as
responsible for undermining the effort as anything their
critics—sociologists obsessed with sample sizes, psychologists with
measures, or economists with aggregates—have been able to devise against
them.

Of these, the two main ones have been: the Jonesville-is-the-USA
“microcosmic” model; and the Easter-Island-is-a-testing-case “natural
experiment” model. Either heaven in a grain of sand, or the farther
shores of possibility.

The Jonesville-is-America writ small (or America-is-Jonesville writ
large) fallacy is so obviously one that the only thing that needs
explanation is how people have managed to believe it and expected others
to believe it. The notion that one can find the essence of national
societies, civilizations, great religions, or whatever summed up and
simplified in so-called “typical” small towns and villages is palpable
nonsense. What one finds in small towns and villages is (alas)
small-town or village life. If localized, microscopic studies were
really dependent for their greater relevance upon such a premise—that
they captured the great world in the little—they wouldn’t have any
relevance.

But, of course, they are not. The locus of study is not the object of
study. Anthropologists don’t study villages (tribes, towns,
neighborhoods . . . ); they study in villages. You can study different
things in different places, and some things—for example, what colonial
domination does to established frames of moral expectation—you can best
study in confined localities. But that doesn’t make the place what it is
you are studying. In the remoter provinces of Morocco and Indonesia I
have wrestled with the same questions other social scientists have
wrestled with in more central locations—for example, how comes it that
men’s most importunate claims to humanity are cast in the accents of
group pride?—and with about the same conclusiveness. One can add a
dimension—one much needed in the present climate of size-up-and-solve
social science; but that is all. There is a certain value, if you are
going to run on about the exploitation of the masses in having seen a
Javanese sharecropper turning earth in a tropical downpour or a Moroccan
tailor embroidering kaftans by the light of a twenty-watt bulb. But the
notion that this gives you the thing entire (and elevates you to some
moral vantage ground from which you can look down upon the ethically
less privileged) is an idea which only someone too long in the bush
could possibly entertain.

The “natural laboratory” notion has been equally pernicious, not only
because the analogy is false—what kind of a laboratory is it where none
of the parameters are manipulable?—but because it leads to a notion that
the data derived from ethnographic studies are purer, or more
fundamental, or more solid, or less conditioned (the most favored word
is “elementary”) than those derived from other sorts of social inquiry.
The great natural variation of cultural forms is, of course, not only
anthropology’s great (and wasting) resource, but the ground of its
deepest theoretical dilemma: how is such variation to be squared with
the biological unity of the human species? But it is not, even
metaphorically, experimental variation, because the context in which it
occurs varies along with it, and it is not possible (though there are
those who try) to isolate the y’s from x’s to write a proper function.

The famous studies purporting to show that the Oedipus complex was
backwards in the Trobriands, sex roles were upside down in Tchambuli,
and the Pueblo Indians lacked aggression (it is characteristic that they
were all negative—“but not in the South”), are, whatever their empirical
validity may or may not be, not “scientifically tested and approved”
hypotheses. They are interpretations, or misinterpretations, like any
others, arrived at in the same way as any others, and as inherently
inconclusive as any others, and the attempt to invest them with the
authority of physical experimentation is but methodological sleight of
hand. Ethnographic findings are not privileged, just particular: another
country heard from. To regard them as anything more (or anything less)
than that distorts both them and their implications, which are far
pro-founder than mere primitivity, for social theory.

Another country heard from: the reason that protracted descriptions of
distant sheep raids (and a really good ethnographer would have gone into
what kind of sheep they were) have general relevance is that they
present the sociological mind with bodied stuff on which to feed. The
important thing about the anthropologist’s findings is their complex
specificness, their circumstantiality. It is with the kind of material
produced by long-term, mainly (though not exclusively) qualitative,
highly participative, and almost obsessively fine-comb field study in
confined contexts that the mega-concepts with which contemporary social
science is afflicted—legitimacy, modernization, integration, conflict,
charisma, structure, . . . meaning—can be given the sort of sensible
actuality that makes it possible to think not only realistically and
concretely about them, but, what is more important, creatively and
imaginatively with them.

The methodological problem which the microscopic nature of ethnography
presents is both real and critical. But it is not to be resolved by
regarding a remote locality as the world in a teacup or as the
sociological equivalent of a cloud chamber. It is to be resolved—or,
anyway, decently kept at bay—by realizing that social actions are
comments on more than themselves; that where an interpretation comes
from does not determine where it can be impelled to go. Small facts
speak to large issues, winks to epistemology, or sheep raids to
revolution, because they are made to.

VII

Which brings us, finally, to theory. The besetting sin of interpretive
approaches to anything—literature, dreams, symptoms, culture—is that
they tend to resist, or to be permitted to resist, conceptual
articulation and thus to escape systematic modes of assessment. You
either grasp an interpretation or you do not, see the point of it or you
do not, accept it or you do not. Imprisoned in the immediacy of its own
detail, it is presented as self-validating, or, worse, as validated by
the supposedly developed sensitivities of the person who presents it;
any attempt to cast what it says in terms other than its own is regarded
as a travesty—as, the anthropologist’s severest term of moral abuse,
ethnocentric.

For a field of study which, however timidly (though I, myself, am not
timid about the matter at all), asserts itself to be a science, this
just will not do. There is no reason why the conceptual structure of a
cultural interpretation should be any less formulable, and thus less
susceptible to explicit canons of appraisal, than that of, say, a
biological observation or a physical experiment—no reason except that
the terms in which such formulations can be cast are, if not wholly
nonexistent, very nearly so. We are reduced to insinuating theories
because we lack the power to state them.

At the same time, it must be admitted that there are a number of
characteristics of cultural interpretation which make the theoretical
development of it more than usually difficult. The first is the need for
theory to stay rather closer to the ground than tends to be the case in
sciences more able to give themselves over to imaginative abstraction.
Only short flights of ratiocination tend to be effective in
anthropology; longer ones tend to drift off into logical dreams,
academic bemusements with formal symmetry. The whole point of a semiotic
approach to culture is, as I have said, to aid us in gaining access to
the conceptual world in which our subjects live so that we can, in some
extended sense of the term, converse with them. The tension between the
pull of this need to penetrate an unfamiliar universe of symbolic action
and the requirements of technical advance in the theory of culture,
between the need to grasp and the need to analyze, is, as a result, both
necessarily great and essentially irremovable. Indeed, the further
theoretical development goes, the deeper the tension gets. This is the
first condition for cultural theory: it is not its own master. As it is
unseverable from the immediacies thick description presents, its freedom
to shape itself in terms of its internal logic is rather limited. What
generality it contrives to achieve grows out of the delicacy of its
distinctions, not the sweep of its abstractions.

And from this follows a peculiarity in the way, as a simple matter of
empirical fact, our knowledge of culture . . . cultures . . . a culture
. . . grows: in spurts. Rather than following a rising curve of
cumulative findings, cultural analysis breaks up into a disconnected yet
coherent sequence of bolder and bolder sorties. Studies do build on
other studies, not in the sense that they take up where the others leave
off, but in the sense that, better informed and better conceptualized,
they plunge more deeply into the same things. Every serious cultural
analysis starts from a sheer beginning and ends where it manages to get
before exhausting its intellectual impulse. Previously discovered facts
are mobilized, previously developed concepts used, previously formulated
hypotheses tried out; but the movement is not from already proven
theorems to newly proven ones, it is from an awkward fumbling for the
most elementary understanding to a supported claim that one has achieved
that and surpassed it. A study is an advance if it is more
incisive—whatever that may mean—than those that preceded it; but it less
stands on their shoulders than, challenged and challenging, runs by
their side.

It is for this reason, among others, that the essay, whether of thirty
pages or three hundred, has seemed the natural genre in which to present
cultural interpretations and the theories sustaining them, and why, if
one looks for systematic treatises in the field, one is so soon
disappointed, the more so if one finds any. Even inventory articles are
rare here, and anyway of hardly more than bibliographical interest. The
major theoretical contributions not only lie in specific studies—that is
true in almost any field—but they are very difficult to abstract from
such studies and integrate into anything one might call “culture theory”
as such. Theoretical formulations hover so low over the interpretations
they govern that they don’t make much sense or hold much interest apart
from them. This is so, not because they are not general (if they are not
general, they are not theoretical), but because, stated independently of
their applications, they seem either commonplace or vacant. One can, and
this in fact is how the field progresses conceptually, take a line of
theoretical attack developed in connection with one exercise in
ethnographic interpretation and employ it in another, pushing it forward
to greater precision and broader relevance; but one cannot write a
“General Theory of Cultural Interpretation.” Or, rather, one can, but
there appears to be little profit in it, because the essential task of
theory building here is not to codify abstract regularities but to make
thick description possible, not to generalize across cases but to
generalize within them.

To generalize within cases is usually called, at least in medicine and
depth psychology, clinical inference. Rather than beginning with a set
of observations and attempting to subsume them under a governing law,
such inference begins with a set of (presumptive) signifiers and
attempts to place them within an intelligible frame. Measures are
matched to theoretical predictions, but symptoms (even when they are
measured) are scanned for theoretical peculiarities—that is, they are
diagnosed. In the study of culture the signifiers are not symptoms or
clusters of symptoms, but symbolic acts or clusters of symbolic acts,
and the aim is not therapy but the analysis of social discourse. But the
way in which theory is used—to ferret out the unapparent import of
things—is the same.

Thus we are lead to the second condition of cultural theory: it is not,
at least in the strict meaning of the term, predictive. The
diagnostician doesn’t predict measles; he decides that someone has them,
or at the very most anticipates that someone is rather likely shortly to
get them. But this limitation, which is real enough, has commonly been
both misunderstood and exaggerated, because it has been taken to mean
that cultural interpretation is merely post facto: that, like the
peasant in the old story, we first shoot the holes in the fence and then
paint the bull’s-eyes around them. It is hardly to be denied that there
is a good deal of that sort of thing around, some of it in prominent
places. It is to be denied, however, that it is the inevitable outcome
of a clinical approach to the use of theory.

It is true that in the clinical style of theoretical formulation,
conceptualization is directed toward the task of generating
interpretations of matters already in hand, not toward projecting
outcomes of experimental manipulations or deducing future states of a
determined system. But that does not mean that theory has only to fit
(or, more carefully, to generate cogent interpretations of) realities
past; it has also to survive—intellectually survive—realities to come.
Although we formulate our interpretation of an outburst of winking or an
instance of sheep-raiding after its occurrence, sometimes long after,
the theoretical framework in terms of which such an interpretation is
made must be capable of continuing to yield defensible interpretations
as new social phenomena swim into view. Although one starts any effort
at thick description, beyond the obvious and superficial, from a state
of general bewilderment as to what the devil is going on—trying to find
one’s feet—one does not start (or ought not) intellectually
empty-handed. Theoretical ideas are not created wholly anew in each
study; as I have said, they are adopted from other, related studies,
and, refined in the process, applied to new interpretive problems. If
they cease being useful with respect to such problems, they tend to stop
being used and are more or less abandoned. If they continue being
useful, throwing up new understandings, they are further elaborated and
go on being used.⁵⁵

Such a view of how theory functions in an interpretive science suggests
that the distinction, relative in any case, that appears in the
experimental or observational sciences between “description” and
“explanation” appears here as one, even more relative, between
“inscription” (“thick description”) and “specification”
(“diagnosis”)—between setting down the meaning particular social actions
have for the actors whose actions they are, and stating, as explicitly
as we can manage, what the knowledge thus attained demonstrates about
the society in which it is found and, beyond that, about social life as
such. Our double task is to uncover the conceptual structures that
inform our subjects’ acts, the “said” of social discourse, and to
construct a system of analysis in whose terms what is generic to those
structures, what belongs to them because they are what they are, will
stand out against the other determinants of human behavior. In
ethnography, the office of theory is to provide a vocabulary in which
what symbolic action has to say about itself—that is, about the role of
culture in human life—can be expressed.

Aside from a couple of orienting pieces concerned with more foundational
matters, it is in such a manner that theory operates in the essays
collected here. A repertoire of very general, made-in-the-academy
concepts and systems of concepts—“integration,” “rationalization,”
“symbol,” “ideology,” “ethos,” “revolution,” “identity,” “metaphor,”
“structure,” “ritual,” “world view,” “actor,” “function,” “sacred,” and,
of course, “culture” itself—is woven into the body of thick-description
ethnography in the hope of rendering mere occurrences scientifically
eloquent.⁶⁶ The aim is to draw large conclusions from small, but very
densely textured facts; to support broad assertions about the role of
culture in the construction of collective life by engaging them exactly
with complex specifics.

Thus it is not only interpretation that goes all the way down to the
most immediate observational level: the theory upon which such
interpretation conceptually depends does so also. My interest in Cohen’s
story, like Ryle’s in winks, grew out of some very general notions
indeed. The “confusion of tongues” model—the view that social conflict
is not something that happens when, out of weakness, indefiniteness,
obsolescence, or neglect, cultural forms cease to operate, but rather
something which happens when, like burlesqued winks, such forms are
pressed by unusual situations or unusual intentions to operate in
unusual ways—is not an idea I got from Cohen’s story. It is one,
instructed by colleagues, students, and predecessors, I brought to it.

Our innocent-looking “note in a bottle” is more than a portrayal of the
frames of meaning of Jewish peddlers, Berber warriors, and French
proconsuls, or even of their mutual interference. It is an argument that
to rework the pattern of social relationships is to rearrange the
coordinates of the experienced world. Society’s forms are culture’s
substance.

VIII

There is an Indian story—at least I heard it as an Indian story—about an
Englishman who, having been told that the world rested on a platform
which rested on the back of an elephant which rested in turn on the back
of a turtle, asked (perhaps he was an ethnographer; it is the way they
behave), what did the turtle rest on? Another turtle. And that turtle?
“Ah, Sahib, after that it is turtles all the way down.”

Such, indeed, is the condition of things. I do not know how long it
would be profitable to meditate on the encounter of Cohen, the sheikh,
and “Dumari” (the period has perhaps already been exceeded); but I do
know that however long I did so I would not get anywhere near to the
bottom of it. Nor have I ever gotten anywhere near to the bottom of
anything I have ever written about, either in the essays below or
elsewhere. Cultural analysis is intrinsically incomplete. And, worse
than that, the more deeply it goes the less complete it is. It is a
strange science whose most telling assertions are its most tremulously
based, in which to get somewhere with the matter at hand is to intensify
the suspicion, both your own and that of others, that you are not quite
getting it right. But that, along with plaguing subtle people with
obtuse questions, is what being an ethnographer is like.

There are a number of ways to escape this—turning culture into folklore
and collecting it, turning it into traits and counting it, turning it
into institutions and classifying it, turning it into structures and
toying with it. But they are escapes. The fact is that to commit oneself
to a semiotic concept of culture and an interpretive approach to the
study of it is to commit oneself to a view of ethnographic assertion as,
to borrow W. B. Gallie’s by now famous phrase, “essentially
contestable.” Anthropology, or at least interpretive anthropology, is a
science whose progress is marked less by a perfection of consensus than
by a refinement of debate. What gets better is the precision with which
we vex each other.

This is very difficult to see when one’s attention is being monopolized
by a single party to the argument. Monologues are of little value here,
because there are no conclusions to be reported; there is merely a
discussion to be sustained. Insofar as the essays here collected have
any importance, it is less in what they say than what they are witness
to: an enormous increase in interest, not only in anthropology, but in
social studies generally, in the role of symbolic forms in human life.
Meaning, that elusive and ill-defined pseudoentity we were once more
than content to leave philosophers and literary critics to fumble with,
has now come back into the heart of our discipline. Even Marxists are
quoting Cassirer; even positivists, Kenneth Burke.

My own position in the midst of all this has been to try to resist
subjectivism on the one hand and cabbalism on the other, to try to keep
the analysis of symbolic forms as closely tied as I could to concrete
social events and occasions, the public world of common life, and to
organize it in such a way that the connections between theoretical
formulations and descriptive interpretations were unobscured by appeals
to dark sciences. I have never been impressed by the argument that, as
complete objectivity is impossible in these matters (as, of course, it
is), one might as well let one’s sentiments run loose. As Robert Solow
has remarked, that is like saying that as a perfectly aseptic
environment is impossible, one might as well conduct surgery in a sewer.
Nor, on the other hand, have I been impressed with claims that
structural linguistics, computer engineering, or some other advanced
form of thought is going to enable us to understand men without knowing
them. Nothing will discredit a semiotic approach to culture more quickly
than allowing it to drift into a combination of intuitionism and
alchemy, no matter how elegantly the intuitions are expressed or how
modern the alchemy is made to look.

The danger that cultural analysis, in search of all-too-deep-lying
turtles, will lose touch with the hard surfaces of life—with the
political, economic, stratificatory realities within which men are
everywhere contained—and with the biological and physical necessities on
which those surfaces rest, is an ever-present one. The only defense
against it, and against, thus, turning cultural analysis into a kind of
sociological aestheticism, is to train such analysis on such realities
and such necessities in the first place. It is thus that I have written
about nationalism, about violence, about identity, about human nature,
about legitimacy, about revolution, about ethnicity, about urbanization,
about status, about death, about time, and most of all about particular
attempts by particular peoples to place these things in some sort of
comprehensible, meaningful frame.

To look at the symbolic dimensions of social action—art, religion,
ideology, science, law, morality, common sense—is not to turn away from
the existential dilemmas of life for some empyrean realm of
de-emotionalized forms; it is to plunge into the midst of them. The
essential vocation of interpretive anthropology is not to answer our
deepest questions, but to make available to us answers that others,
guarding other sheep in other valleys, have given, and thus to include
them in the consultable record of what man has said.

[]

1 Not only other peoples’: anthropology can be trained on the culture of
which it is itself a part, and it increasingly is; a fact of profound
importance, but which, as it raises a few tricky and rather special
second order problems, I shall put to the side for the moment.

2 The order problem is, again, complex. Anthropological works based on
other anthropological works (Lévi-Strauss’, for example) may, of course,
be fourth order or higher, and informants frequently, even habitually,
make second order interpretations—what have come to be known as “native
models.” In literate cultures, where “native” interpretation can proceed
to higher levels—in connection with the Maghreb, one has only to think
of Ibn Khaldun; with the United States, Margaret Mead—these matters
become intricate indeed.

3 Or, again, more exactly, “inscribes.” Most ethnography is in fact to
be found in books and articles, rather than in films, records, museum
displays, or whatever; but even in them there are, of course.
photographs, drawings, diagrams, tables, and so on. Self-consciousness
about modes of representation (not to speak of experiments with them)
has been very lacking in anthropology.

4 So far as it has reinforced the anthropologist’s impulse to engage
himself with his informants as persons rather than as objects, the
notion of “participant observation” has been a valuable one. But, to the
degree it has lead the anthropologist to block from his view the very
special, culturally bracketed nature of his own role and to imagine
himself something more than an interested (in both senses of that word)
sojourner, it has been our most powerful source of bad faith.

5 Admittedly, this is something of an idealization. Because theories are
seldom if ever decisively disproved in clinical use but merely grow
increasingly awkward, unproductive, strained, or vacuous, they often
persist long after all but a handful of people (though they are often
most passionate) have lost much interest in them. Indeed, so far as
anthropology is concerned, it is almost more of a problem to get
exhausted ideas out of the literature than it is to get productive ones
in, and so a great deal more of theoretical discussion than one would
prefer is critical rather than constructive, and whole careers have been
devoted to hastening the demise of moribund notions. As the field
advances one would hope that this sort of intellectual weed control
would become a less prominent part of our activities. But, for the
moment, it remains true that old theories tend less to die than to go
into second editions.

6 The overwhelming bulk of the following chapters concern Indonesia
rather than Morocco, for I have just begun to face up to the demands of
my North African material which, for the most part, was gathered more
recently. Field work in Indonesia was carried out in 1952–1954,
1957–1958, and 1971; in Morocco in 1964, 1965–1966, 1968–1969, and 1972.

