                             CHAPTER       I


                         Introductory

THERE is no right way of digging, but there are many wrong ways.
Amongst the latter our successors will no doubt include ways which
we regard to-day as relatively right, in accordance with the natural
principle whereby every generation is liable to belittle the achieve-
ment of its predecessors. This attitude is often enough unjust. Before
heaping scorn too promiscuously upon our untutored forebears, it is
at least only fair to classify their shortcomings and to differentiate be-
tween culpability and immaturity. It is unprofitable to blame Xerxes
for omitting to deploy torpedo-boats at Salamis, or Napoleon for
attacking the British squares with cavalry instead of machine-guns.
Nor, by the same token, can we honourably blame an Early Victorian
barrow-digger for omitting to record by the three-dimensional
method. But there is much, far too much, in more recent archaeologi-
cal excavation that falls short of the highest available standards and
therefore deserves the lash. At the best, excavation is destruction; and
destruction unmitigated by all the resources of contemporary know-
ledge and accumulated experience cannot be too rigorously im-
pugned. In the following pages attention will be drawn from time
to time to the crimes no less than to the virtues of contemporaries and
forebears, in the full awareness that, as a fellow-practitioner, the
author is himself avulnerable target.
  And when in these pages certain methods are suggested as prefer~
able to others in certain contexts, I would at once make it clear that
I am indulging in reminiscence, not laying down laws. For thirty
years it has been my occupation to dig up antiquity in a variety of
countries and circumstances, and I have sought to profit from experi-
ence and criticism. But there is no term to either, and I have no doubt
that, as I write, further experience and criticism are building up or
eliminating what I have written. Who would have it otherwise:
mayta pel. We cannot twice descend into the same stream, said the
philosopher.
   To-day it is indeed no easy matter to preserve a just balance
                                    T5
              ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

between aim and method in this business of digging up the past. De-
veloping technique is liable to obscure the objective; at the best a sort
of leap-frog progress ensues. Attempts of a semi-philosophic kind
to adjust the priorities are not always very helpful. What in fact is
Archaeology? I do not myself really know. Theses have been written
to demonstrate that it is This or That or not the Other Thing; for
example, I may refer the reader, if he will, to a laborious analysis with
a bibliography of 612 works which was produced in 1948 by an
American exponent.! It may be doubted whether all this matters
very much to us in our daily application. We may be content to see
that the grass is green without understanding the mysteries of chloro-
phyll or attempting to distinguish too cleverly between botany and
chemistry; we may appreciate the Unfinished Symphony without a
profound knowledge of the physics of the vibratory disturbance
which we call sound. I do not even know whether Archaeology is to
be described as an art or as a science; more will be said of this in the
concluding chapter. But it is at least abundantly clear that Archae-
ology is increasingly dependent on a multitude of sciences and is itself
increasingly adopting the methodology of a natural science. It draws
to-day upon physics, chemistry, geology, biology, economics, politi-
cal science, sociology, climatology, botany, and I know not what else.
Asa science, it is pre-eminently a synthetic process; and if we prefer to
regard it as an art, or even as a philosophy, we must still affirm that it
is an integration of scientifically observed and dissected phenomena
relating to man; it is still a synthesis. These are not definitions,
they are merely description, and incomplete at that. It will not”
help us forward      to our main      objective,    the study of human
cultures, to spend time and ingenuity upon the academic niceties of
definition.
   But there is one guiding condition of our work which I would
emphasize at the outset. We belong, some of us, to a generation which
has been involved actively in two wars. Military similes are therefore
not entirely alien to us. And I would accordingly urge that in one vital —
respect at least there is an analogy between archaeological and military ~
field-work that is recurrent and illuminating. The analogy rests -
strangely enough as between the dead and the deadly — in the under-
  1. Walter W. Taylor, ‘A Study of Archaeology’, American Anthropologist, 1,
Memoir no. 69 (Indiana University, 1948).                                    “4

                                     16
                          INTRODUCTORY

lying humanity of both disciplines. The soldier, for his part, is fighting
not against a block of coloured squares on a war-map; he is fighting
against a fellow-being, with different but discoverable idiosyncrasies
which must be understood and allowed for in every reaction and
manoeuvre. Equally, as has been urged in the preface, the archae-
ological excavator is not digging up things, he is digging up people;
however much he may analyse and tabulate and desiccate his dis-
coveries in the laboratory, the ultimate appeal across the ages, whether
the time-interval be 500 or 500,000 years, is from mind to intelligent
mind, from man to sentient man. Our graphs and schedules mean
nothing if they do not ultimately mean that. Of our scraps and pieces
we may say, with Mark Antony in the market-place, ‘You are not
wood, you are not stones, but men’. It is a truism of which I con-
stantly find it necessary to remind the student and indeed myself:
that the life of the past and the present are diverse but indivisible;
that Archaeology, in so far as it is a science, is a science which must
be extended into the living and must indeed itself be lived if it is to
partake of a proper vitality.
   Let me for a moment amplify this matter. I have said that we
cannot properly understand the past unless we have a living sym-
pathy with the human stuff which its relics represent. We cannot
understand, for example, the structural mechanism of an ancient
burial-mound unless we can bring to bear upon its details a rational
imagination capable of comprehending and vitalizing them. If we
fail to do that, we are not humanists but mere collectors of disjected
minutiae, signifying almost nothing. We would be better employed
collecting bus-tickets, an occupation which at least involves no damage
to scientific evidence. And since I have mentioned burial-mounds,
let me carry my example a stage further. No one has done more to
vivify the mumbo-jumbo of our Bronze Age burials than has Sir
Cyril Fox during a long series of excavations as Director of the
National Museum of Wales. One example in particular recurs to my
mind. Many years ago, Fox and I were trudging across a desolate
Welsh moorland and came upon a small barrow set within an earthen
                                                                  and
circle. Offa’s Dyke came steadfastly up to the lip of the circle
                               off again with equal determination  on
then on the other side started
a new alignment. The whole scene stirred Fox’s ready enthusiasm,
and a week or two later he had dug himself well into the landscape.
                                    17
                ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

The mound had by now vanished, and Fox stood, in the spirit,
amongst its makers. He was almost physically present at the living
ritual, the actual procedure of burial. I quote his own words:
   Under the centre of the mound was a deep and large grave-pit on the
floor of which lay the skeleton of a full-grown man. To enable this
grave to be entered with ease and dignity a sloping passage from ground-
level had been cut on the north side. Surrounding the grave-area was
a circular trench, which also had a sloping entrance, and on the same
side. But it had no exit: the area round the grave was isolated. The con-
clusions drawn from these facts were that the dead man’s home was on
the north side of the site chosen for his burial; that he had been cere-
monially borne by friends or kinsfolk up to, and into, the trench: that
those who carried him were not allowed to enter the consecrated area
round the grave, but that the persons charged with the performance of
the burial rites were awaiting the bearers beyond the trench. The body
was handed over, and these persons descended with it into the grave.

  What matters to us here and now is not, of course, the particular
episode whichI have cited but the creative act of reasoned imagina-
tion that has gone to the making or remaking of it. Fox’s interpreta-
tion may not be correct in all its details; in any event the objective         —
facts upon which it is based are fully recorded, and the interpretation
of them can be reshaped in the light of fuller knowledge. The great
thing is that those facts are infused with a rational intelligence; they
emerge from Fox’s brain as three-dimensional entities. Contrast the
ordinary excavation-report. Year after year, individual after indi-
vidual, learned society after learned society, we are prosaically reveal-          —
ing and cataloguing our discoveries. Too often we dig up mere
things, unrepentantly forgetful that our proper aim is to dig up
people.
   So too with ancient fortifications. It is no accident that leaders in
their interpretation have so often been soldiers: General Roy, for
example, in the eighteenth century; General Pitt Rivers, Napoleon
IIl’s colleagues, and the distinguished officers who manned the Ger-
man Limes Commission in the nineteenth. Our hill-forts, as Leland -
long ago remarked, are the works of ‘men of warre’; and their study
demands the virile spark of the mind militant. It is no mere by-
  1. C. Fox and Bruce Dickins, The Early Cultures of North-west Europe (Cam-
bridge, 1950), p. 54.

                                     18
                         INTRODUCTORY

product of the study of culture-creeps and ceramic crosswords: both,
be it added, admirable and indeed essential preoccupations, and
lovable after their fashion.
  Enough, now, of these general matters of approach. Some pains
have been taken to emphasize initially the vital principle because so
much of the substance of the following chapters is concerned with the
dry bones, with procedures, with the extraction of evidence rather
than with its interpretation. It is to be hoped that, even so, their con-
tents may be of some slight interest beyond the limited range of
archaeological practitioners. To-day, we can scarcely touch history
without touching archaeology; and for the greater part of human
existence we cannot touch history at all. Prehistory is a hundred times
as long as history, in the isolationist usage of the terms. The proper
study of mankind involves therefore a disproportionate amount of
archaeology; and, unless the reader have more faith in the professors
than I have, he will demand, and very properly demand, to know
something of their credentials. How does archaeology work: We
know that the historian goes to his documents and his epigraphs. On
what does the prehistorian depend? An attempt will be made in these
chapters to indicate, mainly from personal experience, some part of
the rather complicated machinery with which he wrings his evidence
from the earth.




                                    19
                             CHAPTER      2


                           Historical

First it may be useful to see something of the upgrowth of the tech-
nique of archaeological excavation during the past century, and so to
establish, however summarily, a perspective for our subject. It would
be of little profit to carry the matter further back behind the Victorian
era, and to follow others in a general discussion of the evolution of
conscious antiquarian thought from the time of the Renaissance or
earlier. We are concerned here with methodical digging for system-
atic information, not with the upturning of earth in a hunt for the
bones of saints and giants or the armoury of heroes, or just plainly for
treasure. It is of no importance to us that, as long ago as the twelfth
century, the monks of St Albans were digging up, recording, and
sanctifying the remains of some poor Saxon in Hertfordshire; nor
even are the early probings of the curious into sites such as Pompeii or
Herculaneum strictly relevant to the theme, although they no doubt
played their part as a stimulus to subterranean research in partibus.
True — a truth stranger than fiction — as early as 1784 a future Presi-
dent of the United States of America, of all people, was already carry-
ing out an excavation on surprisingly modern lines in Virginia — the
first scientific excavation in the history of archaeology. This astonish-
ing episode will be described in a future chapter (p. 58). It was
unique, not only in its age but for long afterwards, and it were better
to begin here with an incident of more normal kind.
   The chosen incident occurred in those forties of the nineteenth cen=
tury which were more fruitful than any other decade, whether in
Britain or abroad, in the foundation of new institutions for the fur-
therance of our science. On all hands new antiquarian societies were _
being established in England and Wales. The close of the decade was
marked by the transfer of the collections of the Society of Antiquar-
ies of Scotland to the Crown, and by the establishment of a separate
section of British and Medieval Antiquities in the British Museum.
“Within no very distant period’, wrote a contemporary observer,
‘the study of antiquities has passed, in popular esteem, from contempt
                                   20
                              HISTORICAL

to comparative honour.’! And it was in accordance with the new
spirit of the times that on an August day of 1844, on an obscure hill in
Kent above the vale of Maidstone, there assembled a top-hatted
gathering of the local nobility and gentry, reinforced by some twelve
or fourteen labourers who proceeded to hew a great gash through a
tall Romano-British barrow.
   It was the labour of four long days [the contemporary account in-
forms us] to cut entirely through the barrow, but we who were not
absolutely diggers contrived to pass our time to the full satisfaction of
all the party. . . . A plentiful supply of provisions had been procured for
picnicking on the hill, and we remained by the barrow all day, watching
and directing the operations. . .. We contrived to pass our time, at in-
tervals between digging and picnicking, in games of various descriptions
... and in other amusements. The season was fortunately exquisitely
fine, and it was only once or twice that we were visited with a
heavy shower from the south-west, when the only shelter was
afforded by the hole we had ourselves dug . . . in which we managed
to interlace parasols and umbrellas — much as the Roman soldiers
are said to have joined together their shields when advancing to the
attack of a fortress — so as to form a tolerably impenetrable roof over
our heads. .. .2
  The woodcuts (Pl. 1) speak for themselves.
   Such was the sense of light-hearted adventure that stirred our great-
grandparents in the dawn of a popular interest in archaeological field-
work. That spirit is not to be scorned. These gentry were, of course,
thé veriest amateurs (blessed word!) or merely curious spectators.
But their curiosity was the chrysalis of cultivated opinion from which,
                                                              take
in the fullness of time, modern archaeology was to emerge and
wing. Of the same ilk were the ladies and gentlemen who a little
later flocked in their carriages to watch Canon Greenwell dig a bar-
row on the Yorkshire wolds. A very notable man, the Canon; at the
                                                                          the
age of 97 he could still land his salmon, and those of us who have
good sense to be fishermen are careless of our best interests if we
cannot find a ‘Greenwell’s Glory’ somewhere in our fly-books. But
it is as the author of British Barrows that for the moment he recurs
                                                                    ogical In-
   1. ‘Introductory Address’ by E. Oldfield to the (Royal) Archaeol
stitute (itself founded in 1844), Arch. Journ. ix (1852, 1).
  2. Gentleman’s Magazine, Dec. 1852, p. 569.

                                     21
              ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

to us. The apocryphal history has it that on one occasion an elegant
and admiring assembly clustered round him whilst, with the intuition
of the inspired connoisseur, he chose his barrow from a series within
range and turned his labourers on to it. In due course, a handsome
burial-urn began to emerge from the excoriation, amidst the manly
gasps and ladylike cries of the spectators. As always, the dear and
wonderful Canon was infallible! The workmen gingerly lifted the
urn — exposing beneath it a copy of the previous day’s Times!
   Such were the methods of a less finicky age. Nevertheless, a proce-
dure which was stil] justifiable in Kent in 1844 or on the wolds a few
years later was in fact rendered obsolete by a young army officer
working in his spare moments in central India as long ago as 1851.
These dates are worth emphasizing because the work of Captain
Meadows Taylor, though limited in scope and scarcely noticed at
the time, marked or should have marked the beginning of a new
epoch in technical method and scientific observation. It did not, of
course, stop or even check picnic-party excavation. But the fact
remains that, after 1851, digging such as that described above, or
such as normally indeed persisted until far more recent times, was
for ever obsolete and culpable. Let us pause for a moment to examine
this innovation more nearly.
   The basis of scientific excavation is the accurately observed and
adequately recorded section. More will be said of this matter in a
later chapter. Here it will suffice to premise that the successive accu-
mulations of construction and debris on a buried occupation-site
have much the same validity as the successive pages of a book, and, to
be understood, must be comprehended in their proper sequence,
like the pages of a book. In a haphazard excavation such as that of
 the Kentish barrow it is scarcely necessary to observe that such accu-
mulations or strata as may have been present are not merely torn
 ruthlessly from their context but are not even postulated by the
 carefree excavator. The whole mechanism of the ‘book’ is ignored
 or misunderstood. If we set aside the eighteenth-century American
statesman of whom mention has been made, Meadows Taylor was
the first man, so far as I know, to hint implicitly at the true function
of the excavator and recorder in this vital matter. He was an officer
and highly successful administrator in the relatively obscure service
of the Nizam of Hyderabad State. He is known to fame, if at all, as _
                                   22
                             HISTORICAL

the author of The Confessions of a Thug; but of his work as an amateur
archaeologist the Dictionary of National Biography says nothing. For
that we have to turn to three papers published in the Journal of the
Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, iii (1851), 179-93, and iv
(1852), 380-429; and, unexpectedly, in the Transactions of the Royal
Trish Academy, xxiv, pt. iii, Antiquities (1862), 329-62. These three
papers show an acuteness of perception and a technical competence
far in advance of the time. Meadows Taylor dug into a number of the
megalithic tombs characteristic of central and southern India, and
drew and described sections which preserve an informative and con-
vincing record of what he found, with differentiated strata (Fig. 1).
When one recalls that only seven or eight years divide the work of
the Kentish party from that of the lone fever-stricken Englishman in
native India, the latter’s achievement stands out as a landmark in the
annals of archaeology. Unfortunately, British archaeology in India
was not destined to maintain this pre-eminence.
   During the following decades much pick-and-shovel work of a
spectacular kind drew increasing attention to the possibilities of the
craft. Troy and Mycenae set Homer and Schliemann firmly upon
their feet. In France, under the eagle of Napoleon III, the admirable
Colonel Stoffel ran Julius Caesar to earth with a considerable measure
of success, combining military manoeuvre with a certain rudimentary
technical skill. He realized, for example, the significant fact that soil,
once disturbed, rarely quite resumes its original compactness, and
that in particular the ditches of Caesar’s camps, now utterly levelled,
could still be detected in section. His method of search, reasonably
enough, was to attack his buried fortifications with massed formation
of trial-trenches.
   I placed the workmen [he wrote] with picks and shovels in several
files, in a direction perpendicular to one of the presumed sides of the
[buried] camp, the workmen in each file 20 or 30 metres from one an-
other. Each of them was ordered to remove the layer of humus to a width
of 2 feet. If, after having removed this layer to a depth of 70 centimetres,
they felt that their picks were striking a resistant soil, the inference was
that this soil had never been removed and that there was no Roman
ditch. The workmen then continued to advance so long as nothing
different was encountered. But when they arrived, beyond doubt, at the
ditch, the difference was at once apparent.

                                     23
                                                 SNOZDVITNOLY
                                                        JIVHS




                        ENS UABef9        (QUEUES
        *z   eoedg poapy YIM Asis ‘qizvapue         suojo[oys
              Sor ApIepN UMOIY)
                              “Ur
        *        soueUY‘souoys      ouosoury7
                                          ‘sqeys “33 ‘qaede                                                   ‘VW “y        squis
                                                                                                                                FO                      DUOJsoUIT]
                                                                                                                                                            IOF    *‘IOOP
        °      pIsinod[DIID *S3U0}$                                                                          “gf “g                wySudcq,
                                                                                                                                         squisJog “Opts
        *    as007T sauojspure *yjive
mtrno   °    eoedg paypy TIIM [[tuIs ‘sun
        °     apSutg yNysuo do} Jo ‘sun                                                                       ‘C      “CG
                                                                                                                            OMT,
        °    sSutg T[Nysuo do} Jo        ‘suojoTays
        °     oSurg[[Nysuo    ISpoy
                                  Jo BeYs I9AO "suIN
                                                                                                     PFT
                                                                                                     PUL
                                                                                                     “OD
                                                                                                     ‘D
                                                                                                     JOOF
                                                                                                     “SqeTS “A
                                                                                                            sr
                                                                                                            Poy
                                                                                                            TIM
                                                                                                             ‘SUIN
BRON                                                                 uNeD
                                                                        *q   punorg
                                                                                 UT JO    3SI-                                             “suojZ[OYs

                         “SLY"I      woTs0g   ySnory3
                                                &             orpTeSow
                                                                   oaeI3
                                                                      ut     peqesopAP]
                                                                                   ‘o7e1g “erpuyAg                   smopeoyw‘JojAvy,
                                                                                                                                   ISgi
                             HISTORICAL

   It may be added that the Colonel’s regimented enthusiasm was
shared by his Emperor who, at Gergovia, “was so wonder-struck on
seeing the profiles [of the Caesarian ditches thus revealed in section]
that he thought of buying the hill to preserve them. He abandoned
this idea when he learned that the inhabitants did not desire to be
dispossessed, and he ordered me to fill in my trenches and to restore
everything to its former state.’! The path of science never did run
smooth!
  But it was left to another soldier, a Briton, to make the first sub-
stantive advance in the technique of excavation and recording. In the
year 1880, General Lane Fox by a surprising series of chances suc-
ceeded to the Rivers estate situated in Wiltshire and eastern Dorset,
and under the terms of the will assumed the name Pitt Rivers. He had
already varied a military career by a study of artifacts along evolu-
tionary lines, and had been admitted to the Royal Society for his
anthropological work. The principle of the evolution of human insti-
tutions was no new concept. It had indeed found expression as far
back as 1786, when Sir William Jones in Calcutta had enunciated the
evolutionary relationship of certain languages — Sanskrit, Greek,
Latin, Persian, Celtic, and ‘Gothick’ - another example of British
pioneer scholarship in partibus. But the dramatic development of that
principle in relation to natural species during the fifth and sixth
decades of the nineteenth century had given a new impetus to its
application in the humanistic field. And now the General, in the
course of his musketry, had found the same basic principle in the
development of fire-arms, and had extended it to other human
instruments. His whole approach to archaeology was thus from
a modern angle, and for twenty years. he explored the ancient
sites on or adjoining his estate with a science and scholarship that
half a century of subsequent work has supplemented rather than
superseded.
   Above all, the General’s constant plea was for ‘greater precision
and detail in excavation’.?
   It will, perhaps, be thought by some [he remarks] that I have recorded
the excavations... with unnecessary fullness, and I am sure that I have
                                                                        as
done it in greater detail than has been customary, but my experience
                                                                   xxv ff.
  1. T. Rice Holmes, Caesar’s Conquest of Gaul (Oxford, 1911), pp.
  2. Excavation s in Cranborne Chase, i (1887), pp. Xvi-xvii.

                                     25
                                                              usaf                                                                                                               BIv>s
                                                                                                                                                                                    40|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OLNI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SIHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OZL9E°0Hd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    "NOILIES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ayuVv



                                                                                      6         e        a          9                 +       &        sf           ‘    oe
                                                                                                                                                                        449-85 WOLLOG     ZOVURAV
                                                                                   40
                                                                                   HL
                                                                                   YOs‘HILIO
                                                                                   DILVWVUOVIA
                                                                                   *SESOSUNE
                                                                          JUV
                                                                           JIIML
                                                                           SOTSe
                                                                           FL
                                                                           NAVE
                                                                           HL

                                                                                   GYIHL-4NO
                                                                                   BITVS
                                                                                   FHL
                                                                                   SNOLZ
                                                                                   JHL
                                                                                   TINS
                                                                                   AO
                                                                                   JO
                                                                                   FHL
                                                                                   FIVIS
                                                                                   ONW'HILIC
                                                                                   IZIS
                                                                                                                                                                         HILIG    ONNOM
                                                                                                                                                                                      HL       SITE GNNOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ITV   BHL
            wna nnane nanan ne LIE IDAW--n2-=-nenennnny




                                                                                     f                                    sao corey           oe ew
                                                                                                                                  oY
                                                                                                                           é Zarmas ’
                                                                                                             SINOW BOVAUNS IHL 0 NIDMVW Yo!           sOvunAY
                                                                                                                                                  i
                                                          SNOLIIIe
                                                           “gon
                                                                                                             010
                                                                                     =—             wo                          Cc)
[ecee
  2
              “ed
            TE,                                  ‘        #          06                oo 5
                                                                                      pin aes
                                                                                          a                        ONO’    sunsONY sunt
                                                                                                                                          me wh
                                                                                                                                          z    Cosme
                                                                                                                                                Be
                                                                                                                                                                8        bo we
                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                         $10
                                                                                                                                                                                 6h       %
                                                                                                                                                                                              sO
                                                                                                                                                                                                     s
                                                                                                                                                                                                    vr
   =                                             6        =
       a                                                                                             *HLONZ1         NI L334 02+ LNOGV            HOLIG
       tf
p1o0se1 [euorsustuIp-sery} & WoT poyofosd a Surmoys ‘g6gi “Yastog] ‘MOTI JOM\ “Jo Yop oy} sore sr9aNy Wg Aq WoNdeg “zt “BLY
                                                                                       ‘y 3-0 yydap ‘peoy-reods tozy “91
        *(qouIp Jo o]e9s 07 UMeIp) yIdop oyeuT                                                                  “wadop oyeurrxosdde ‘sueysu0D Jo uIOD “qSI
-rxoidde ‘ur10j orpprjooreg jo yuourozdun yurpy *$€                                                          “yidep oyeumrxoidde ‘snyususepy Jo UIOD “PST
                                                                 SLNHOWATIWI




                                        Ys                                                                           ‘4 1 Mydop ‘{ suNUEsUOD Jo MIOD ‘SI
yadep ‘g “ON :JO4S JO squt ul peoy-Morse yup *6z                                                                     "3g 1 apdop ‘[ ouNUEIsUOD jo WIOD ‘FI
                                                                               HNOLS
                  ‘yb yydop ‘peoy-moure yur] “gz                                                                           "y 1 ydop ‘snommey, Jo uloD “£1
                 "Y 8-¥ Gadop ‘a[20 3UTY poystfod “Lz                                                                   *Y T-1 Wydap ‘snore, Jo uroD   “cI
                            "y ¥ yadop ‘3[99 UML “97                                                                                 *e ‘ON WOIPYS
                              "yy I qadop ‘mes yup    *Sz                                            cyHys reo “yy L.o yydep ‘q] ounuesuoD Jo uIOD                        ‘II
                                                                                                                       “yy $-1 qydap ‘snuaryed Jo uloD                    ‘or
                                                                                                                                                                                    NYWOU

                                            ‘Yy F.7
                                                                               HZNOUG

wadap ‘suorstour yItAA poyuourvuio ‘ayejd ozuosg,     “bz
                                                                 HOV                                                    ‘snomjay,
                                                                                                                               midep
                                                                                                                                   g-0 *Y                 uIODJo         *6
                        “yy 1 ydop ‘1ozer ozuoIg,     “£7                                                                      ‘yy tI uydap reu ozuoIg                        °g
                             "y S.1 09 YI s~doq       ‘zz                                                              "1 yadop ‘ureyo Jo yur] ozuorg                         *L
                                                            0}                                                                ‘yy 1 wadop ‘apjonq ozuoig                      *9
                       ‘Kroyod jo stroqa-sppurds “gr                                                                           "4 8-0 tidop ‘Surz ozuorg                      °*S
“43 £.1 yydop ‘o3po snonurs yI1AA ‘soys-asi10y Uo “pLI
                                                                 NVYWOU

                                                                                                                       "Y 8-0 tadop ‘enqy porepd-soais                        “F
                                                                                                                                            uoxes-ojsuy


   *pfnout oovgins ‘asn uMouyUN Jo yolqo uo “ILI                                                                               “y I tadap ‘emnqy azuoig                       *f
                                                                                        Atqeqoard)                     “uoureaso
                                                                                                                                                               “(mores
                           4g: 1 yydop ‘sreu wor “9qL1                                                              “plnour sovjins “Iouvepo-[reu ozuoIg “c
                                                                                                                                   oppriq
                                                            ‘PLT
                                                            9-0
                                                            or
                                                            ‘ayruy
                                                            yidap
                                                            ‘y
                                                                                                          -y
                                                                                                          L.1
                         yy b.1 yadop ‘oxrery ory “LI                                                     yydop                                                          “1
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM      THE    EARTH

an excavator has led me to think that investigations of this nature are not
generally sufficiently searching, and that much valuable evidence is lost
by omitting to record them carefully. . . . Excavators, as a rule, record
only those things which appear to them important at the time, but fresh
problems in Archaeology and Anthropology are constantly arising, and
it can hardly fail to have escaped the notice of anthropologists . . . that,
on turning back to old accounts in search of evidence, the points which
would have been most valuable have been passed over from being
thought uninteresting at the time. Every detail should, therefore, be re-
corded in the manner most conducive to facility of reference, and it
ought at all times to be the chief object of an excavator to reduce his
own personal equation to a minimum.
   In practice, Pitt Rivers’s method was to record every object in such
a manner that it could be replaced accurately in its findspot on the
recorded plan and section. That is the essence of three-dimensional
recording, and three-dimensional recording is the essence of modern
excavation. Since the time of Pitt Rivers we have in some respects
elaborated his technical processes, and there is no doubt that the best
records of the present day surpass the General’s. It is salutary to reflect,
however, what he might himself have done with another fifty years
of experience behind him!
   Let us glance for a further moment at the master’s working prin-
ciples. From the outset, he grasped the vital need of an adequate staff,
a need which has since his time been too often neglected, with deplor-
able consequences. He at once
 determined to organize a regular staff of assistants, and to train them to
their respective functions after establishing a proper division of work.
.-. The work of superintending the digging — though I never allowed
it to be carried on in my absence, always visiting the excavations at
least three times a day and arranging to be sent for whenever anything
of importance was found—was more than I could undertake single- -
handed .. . and I had by ample experience been taught that no excava-
tion ought ever to be permitted except under the immediate eye of a
responsible and trustworthy superintendent.
Or again:
   The excavations in Winkelbury [a Wiltshire ‘camp’] having been
carried on before my assistants were sufficiently trained, I never left the
                1. Excavations in Cranborne Chase, i, p. xviii.

                                      28
                              HISTORICAL

ground during any great part of them. One or more of the assistants was
always engaged in superintending the workmen upon the ground or in
drawing the objects, in repairs to the skulls and the pots, and in forming
the relic tables, by which means the records have been kept up to date,
and it has been found important that, as far as possible, everything
should be recorded whilst it was fresh in memory.
The fruits of this irreproachable system are shown in the classic
sections across the Dorset dykes or the ditches of Wor Barrow (Fig. 2),
where every object found is projected carefully on to stratified sec-
tions in a fashion which has stood the test of constant back-reference
by two generations of archaeologists.
  I pass on to 1904, four years after the General’s death. In that year,
Flinders Petrie, whose genius will long outlive the occasional gibes of
his successors, described his aims and methods in a classic monograph
which is itselfacuriosity. Typical, for example, both of the man and
of the age in which he worked is his advocacy of the payment of
labourers on a piece-work basis rather than by the day. “Working by
the piece saves all this trouble [i.e. of constant supervision], and if the
men are well-trained, and the work is simple, it goes on automatically
and takes the smallest amount of attention. In detached small sites men
may even be left unvisited for two or three days, merely reporting each
evening how they have worked.’? My pen melts as I transcribe those
words. The almost complete absence of measured sections from
Petrie’s reports is the inevitable corollary of his ‘method’. His great
problem was to keep his labourers at work. An air of vigilant sur-
prises had to be sustained. He devised sunken approaches to the scene
of operations, so that he could come upon his diggers unawares and
catch them out; and he supplemented this device by long-range
snooping through a telescope, with results which he triumphantly
retails. The same spirit, with an alternative remedy, survived a
quarter of a century later in a manual on field-work issued in 1929 by
no less exalted a body than the French Prehistoric Society. There also
it is the congenital ‘dishonesty’ of the workman rather than the
scientific need for constant skilled supervision that constitutes the
major problem; but the remedy, printed in italics and praiseworthy
       1. Excavations in Cranborne Chase, ii (1888), p. xiv.
                                                                 p. 29.
       2. W.M. Flinders Petrie, Methods and Aims in Archaeology,
       3. Ibid., p. 28.

                                       29
                ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

enough in itself, is: The best way to ensure the honesty ofyour workmen
is not to leave them a minute. That is by the way; to return to Petrie, it
is only fair to add that I knew him well, and, like all who knew him,
profoundly admired his untiring search for truth by such means as
he understood. But it is abundantly apparent that, between the
technical standards of Petrie and those of his older contemporary Pitt
Rivers, there yawned a gulf into which two generations of Near
Eastern archaeologists have in fact plunged to destruction. Petrie
worked for more than the normal span and with more than the
normal energy in a particularly spectacular field. His pupils were
legion and his hold upon them was manifested in an unquestioning
fidelity that was sufficiently intelligible and creditable but was itself
a bar to progress. When I last visited him, on his deathbed inJerusalem
at the beginning of 1942, his restless brain was still hovering over a
multitude of problems and possibilities which extended the smaller
minds of his listeners, and I left him for the last time with a renewed
sense of that devotion which he inspired in the hearts of his pupils
and friends. It is almost with a feeling of guilt that I now, after con-
siderable experience of his work and of the tradition which he
established widely over the East, find myself compelled to deplore an
influence which in much of its technique so long outlasted its scientific
usefulness.
   Thirty years after Petrie’s ingenuous self-revelation, another
archaeologist, arguing from experience in Palestine (where more sins
have probably been committed in the name of archaeology than on
any commensurate portion of the earth’s surface), could still write
as follows:
{the foreman] receives general instructions from tne director for each
day’s work, picks men for special tasks, . . . sees to it that regulations are
carried out, . . . [and] usually stands on some high point from which he
can oversee the excavations. ... Of course, it would be very unwise for a
director to leave him or any overseers of gangs to their own devices for long,
since their understanding ofmethods is mechanical? [italics mine].
The glimmerings of conscience are visible in that sentence,
                                                         but the
   1. Manuel de recherches préhistoriques, published by the Société Préhistorique
Frangaise (Paris, 1929), p. 23.
   2. W. F. Badé, A Manual of Excavation in the Near East (Univ. of California      —
Press, 1934), p. 20.                                     ‘

                                       30
                              gf6r ‘ounsoreg ‘inffy Jo Tor, YSnomp oNses t jo ye *€ “Sty
                                                                                                                                                                     oot-SaNQNI
                                                                3               ‘oso.:        ngs         «ad            Zao             Dee          eals
              nents Tee
                                                                                                                                                             woiva
                                                                                                                                                             SN
                              nC          BOSHIX ENAV
                                                            BiZovauns
                                                                 40 TIL                  a   ES
                                                                                                     Re                  |
                                                                                                                                                ©
                                                                                                                                                      SBH      OME
                                                                                                       ATH OGH AE   et   “wvWw   G38uAAsIGNA    | |
     fo         BM- a vo                   uvo      a                 hy   ve       i    ,         a earns
                                                                                                  Ve                     cs 7      : ;                  :
          —    -—      —              —    -              e     Sv)
                                                                                                                                                       QHD
                    Wega eam eke ae   OW D         sates) -FVO_.MONAVAV2xE BMOMET i       B>vawNS
                                                                                  WIBL wo ee
OL        el Fel”                           Fite
                                                                                                                                               Bg
                                                                      =n
          uo
                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                            i.
                                                                                                                                                            mmm
                                                                                                                                                            ‘=
                                                                                                                                                            re,
                                                                                                                                                            ote
                                                                                                                                                            ani
                                                                                                                                                            oe
                                                                                                                                                             mee
                                                                                                                                                             ese
                                                                                                                                                             06
                                                                                                                                                             tes
               ARCHAEOLOGY               FROM     THE     EARTH

old sin shows through. There is still no real understanding of the
primary principle of all excavation, that no shovelful of earth shall
be cut save under direct and skilled supervision. And those who have
witnessed Palestinian excavation with a critical eye know all too well
how widespread and enduring has been the technical irresponsibility
of much of its direction throughout an active half-century.
   Let us transfer our cautionary tale from precept to practice: not to
stir more mud but to point the lesson, however negative it be. The
sections (from Tell el Ajjil in Palestine) reproduced in Fig. 3 represent
a long and hard-worn tradition which dies hard and still awaits a
coup de grace. They were drawn in 1938 and published in 1952, so
that they may be regarded as of comparatively modern date. Never-
theless, they belong technically to the infancy of archaeology and
were, in fact, obsolete more than a century ago. Regard the absence
of associated strata, the omission even of symbolical levels, so that
the walls are suspended in section as in a vacuum. And that this sort of
technical atavism is still international in its vogue is shown by a




                  ZZ BYZANTINE            5     ION I
                  RGSS PERSIAN
                          GHELLENISTIC    [IN LATE   BRONZE
                  (Rg TRON                ERY MIDDLE    BRONZE


      Fig. 4. Section through part of the site of Bethel, Palestine, 1939

section from another Palestinian site (Bethel), reproduced here from
an authoritative American commentary published in 1939 (Fig. 4).
Better far is a section through one of the mounds of Sialk, in central
Iran, published in 1938 (Fig. 5): yet, even here, observation and record
are sctappy, strata are unlabelled and are left incomplete and in mid-
ait, detailed reconstruction of the picture is impossible and the
                                     32
                          gl6r ‘uey ‘yYeIS Jo punour oy} Jo yzed YSnoy UoNdeg *S “Sty
          ce
                     7°                                                HLUYa G2Y gen         = —       =e) ecto
                   My r                'aoldad                     SIHSV   39 HLYV]   §GES    ang                  JVUNLVN
                     rs      i           1311s                        Hluva AIUD      EB      Brae           hit
                   of               Tial HIMON                      hiuya AAoTIaA CI          eeos| ost
           Vi
           dordd
                     {
                                                                                                      oA
                                                                                        WME   Ue cE   | ve
gomad
   t)
  ‘|   GOWAd
dOMWad
   Su
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

accurate projection of finds on to the section would be impracticable
even were the necessary data tabulated. But for downright technical
incompetence, the largest archaeological department in the world —
the old Archaeological Survey of India - was unbeatable. Here the
primary blame rests not with the Indians, who are quick and ready to
learn, but with the successive British staffs responsible for the estab-
lishment and initial running of the department. It is almost beyond
belief that as recently as 1940 the Survey could publish in monumen-
tal form ‘sections’ such as those here illustrated (Figs. 6 and 7): the
one showing walls suspended, like those of Bethel, in a featureless
profile of the site, with neither building-lines nor occupation strata,
varied only by indications of the completely unmeaning piles of
earth on which the excavator left some of his walls standing; the
other showing the burials of two variant cultures floating like a rather
disorderly balloon-barrage, without hint of the strata and the grave-
lines which would have indicated their scientific inter-relationship.
It is sad to compare these caricatures of science with the admirable
sketch-records of Meadows Taylor, nearly a century earlier.
   This circumstance is the more remarkable in that the average stand-
ard of field-archaeology in Great Britain itself during the past half
century has been unsurpassed, if approached, by that of any other
country. That statement is made with no insular prejudice. In Hol-
land, Dr van Giffen and others have evolved methods of excavation
which mark a new standard of finesse, and certain of the German
excavators, notably Dr Gerhard Bersu, need no commendation from
me. Since its inauguration in 1890, the German Limes Commission,           ;
though often technically below the General Pitt Rivers standard, has
produced admirably co-ordinated work, particularly valuable in its
attention to small finds. But in the very limited area of the British
Isles, rich in remains of differentiated cultures, with the General’s          —
example behind them, field-archaeologists have worked within               —
close range of one another and under the fire of constant and even
fierce mutual criticism. Bad work has been done, but rarely with
impunity. Experience has been readily shared and a steady progress
assured, from the days of J. P. Bushe-Fox in the first quarter of the
century to those of Ian Richmond and Grahame Clark in the second. _
   In the face of this achievement at home, what has gone wrong with
Eastern or Near Eastern field-archaeology? The question is worth —
                                  34
                             HISTORICAL

asking if a remedy is to be found. The answer is not in fact difficult,
and the remedy follows. The error has lain not in quantity but in
quality. In the first place, few excavators who have gone East have in
the past received adequate preliminary training under closely critical
observation such as has been noted above from Britain. They have
generally gone East as class-room or museum orientalists, with the
bare knowledge of an ancient language or of more-or-less classified



                 aa
                    LL Tees        TTT]
                    ALT TN




             Fig. 6. Section of part of Harappa, Pakistan, 1940

 exhibits and disjecta but without practical experience of the field-
problem. And, once there, they are generally lost. An excavator may
work for years on a remote Asiatic site without being able to discuss
 his methods and results on the spot with competent critics. In the
 second place, Eastern excavation has in the past tended to attract
 relatively liberal endowment, either through the natural lure of a
 Biblical context, or of association with famous and impressive civiliza-
tions, or of the general ‘romance’ of the Orient, or even of the East
as a winter-tourist objective to wealthy Western benefactors. This
liberal endowment, coupled with the relatively cheap cost of native
labour, has encouraged wholesale mass-excavation,             rewarded   by
extensive building-plans and ample finds which gratify the patron
but are far beyond the capacity of anything approaching exact record.
Indeed, cheap oriental labour has in the past been a constant snare
(compare PI. 4a). ‘The maximum number of labourers employed at
any one time was something over thirteen hundred’, states the report
of the excavation (in 1912-13) of an outstandingly important Eastern
site where only one supervisor was present. In the third place, the
‘common use of mud-brick for building and the impact of extreme
                                      35
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE   EARTH

weather-conditions have often (though not always) combined to
deepen the strata on an Eastern site, so that their over-all depth may be
at least five times as great as on a closely interleaved British site. It is
understandable that these deep strata encourage proportionately
drastic methods of excavation which tend to outpace supervision. A
ruined mud-brick building will dissolve into several feet of almost
uniform deposit; desert winds will cover it with a thick mantle of
undifferentiated sand; torrential rains will transfer material in bulk
and may artificially intermix and level it. 1 have indeed heard it




   Fig. 7. Section through part of a cemetery at Harappa, Pakistan, 1940

stated that there is often no appreciable stratification on a sun-
bleached, monsoon-swept Eastern site. The allegation is quite untrue. —
There is no method proper to the excavation of a British site which is not
applicable — nay, must be applied ~ to a site in Africa or Asia.
                                    36
                             HISTORICAL

   The remedy therefore is that the oriental field-worker shall, as a
matter of routine, have a preliminary and thorough grounding in the
West, where critical control is at hand, and where strata are liable to
be more concise and so to provide a more concentrated experience
than an Eastern site can be expected to furnish. There is scarcely any-
thing, be it repeated, in the work of Pitt Rivers or his accredited
 British successors that is not relevant to the excavation of a tell in
 Turkestan or a tomb in Syria. It is the more astonishing that those
 standards have so rarely penetrated to the further shores of the Medi-
 terranean; east of Suez, they were until very recent years almost
 unknown.
    It will thus, I hope, be appreciated that these remarks thinly veil an
 appeal — an appeal above all to the younger generation of archaeolo-
 gists. I have, from experience, recommended elsewhere? the use of
 Roman Britain as a suitable basic training-ground for excavators of
 all periods and regions, by reason of its structural variety, its abundant
 stratigraphy, its productiveness, and its ready availability. There are
 many alternatives but the principle is the same: always that of precise
 and detailed training. We must give our recruits their Aldershot dis-
 cipline before sending them out on to the battlefields of the world.
 In the past we have been unwisely casual in this matter.
    In the present chapter an attempt has been made by way of intro-
 duction to do two things: first to sketch, very summarily, the main
 phases of technical development during the past century, and secondly
 to hint at a sustained and dangerous cleavage in technical standards
 between East and West. This cleavage will be reconsidered at a later
 stage; meanwhile, in the next two chapters something ofa more posi-
‘tive and constructive kind must be said of the ordering of our field-
evidence, and of its interpretation in terms of an absolute or relative
chronology.
   1. ‘The Archaeology of the Roman Provinces, and Beyond’, Fifth Annual
Report of the London University Institute of Archaeology, 1948.




                                     37
                              CHAPTER       3

                          Chronology

It is a truism that the backbone of history is an agreed chronology.
Yet it sometimes seems that to-day chronology of the old rigid type
is a trifle out of fashion in the routine of historical studies. To an older
generation the mathematics of the business were important; the treas-
ure-house could only be unlocked by combinations of integers pain-
fully remembered often long after the treasure itself had passed into
limbo. Now that is in some measure changed, doubtless on the whole
for the better. Archaeology, not as a rule clogged with overmuch
‘arithmetic, may be in part responsible for the shifting bias. It has
begun to percolate through our universities to our schools, and some-
times forms innocuous pools of somewhat colourless knowledge —
mostly a refined Darwinism — in which our kindergartens are encour-
aged to paddle. Ships and sealing-wax are beginning to rank almost
with kings, dateless everyday things with calendared State secrets.
The recentness and incompleteness of this emergence of archae-
ological as distinct from historical education is hard to realize until
we recall, for example, that it is still possible to take a First in Greats
at Oxford without even glancing at a Parthenon sculpture or an Attic
vase. To-day, when the traditional precision of history has nevertheless
been extensively supplemented by broadly based cultural studies, it
may seem reactionary and perverse to reaffirm, as I do, at the be-
ginning of a book on archaeology in the field that mere dates are still
of primary and ultimate and unrelenting importance. And by dates
I mean not simply those nebulous phases and sequences, those date-
substitutes, with which archaeologists often enough try to bluff us.
I mean time in hard figures. I mean Bradshaw.
   The need for re-establishing the relative sequence of ancient cultures
or cultural episodes, if we are to begin to understand their interactions
and values, is self-evident, and stratigraphical excavation, of which
more will be said in the next chapter, is a primary means to that end.
The old comparison between the successive strata in the soil and the
successive leaves in a book holds good: and is emphasized negatively
                                     38
                           CHRONOLOGY

by the fact that displacement in either case involves a non sequitur
which confuses and frustrates and, in excavation, cannot be rectified.
To that matter I shall recur. But even the most careful maintenance
of correct succession and the postulation of a convincing culture-
sequence are not in themselves enough. And for two reasons. First,
without an absolute chronology cultures of different regions cannot
accurately be compared, their inter-relationship cannot be assessed:
in other words, the vital causative factors of human ‘progress’ cannot
be authoritatively reconstructed, and may be widely misunderstood.
Secondly, the fluctuating tempo of human achievement — itself an
integral quality of that achievement - cannot be estimated: the
lightning flash, for example, of Periclean Athens, or the glow of the
slow-moving riverine civilizations. It is important but not enough to
know that in the twentieth century A.D. an aeroplane flew from Lon-
don to Singapore. It is almost equally important, in our estimate of
human achievement, to know that in 1950 the aeroplane took 50
hours for the journey, and in 1999 only 50 minutes. Do not let us
forget the significance of tempo; and that implies a time-table in the
most literal sense, nothing less.
   This question of tempo is worth a further moment’s thought. It is
at least as deserving of the attention of the archaeologist who is con-
cerned with the evolution of human institutions as it is of the biolo-
gist who is concerned with the formal evolution of natural species and
genera. In the language of the biologist, phases of ‘increase’, phases —
expressive term— of ‘explosive’ evolution, ‘stationary’ or ‘decline’
phases, the whole rhythm of human as of animal life is itselfanabsorb-
ing phenomenon, full of meaning, often full of mystery. I happen
recently to have been making some slight study of one of the great
civilizations of the ancient East, the Indus Valley Civilization of the
third and second millennia B.c. in what used to be called India but is
now Pakistan, and, though it is true that at present we know all too
little about the beginnings of that civilization, the indications are that
it lowered with an almost dramatic celerity, the sudden offspring of
opportunity and genius. It was preceded by a miscellany of upland
villages and cultures, set in the tumultuous eastern borderland of the
great Iranian plateau. Such villages, grouped and confined by precipi-
tous ranges, provide the optimum conditions for the earlier essays in
communal life within the boundaries of a parochial self-sufficiency.
                                    39
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

But for wider political horizons wider geographical horizons are a
prior condition. Tentative moves from the highland zone down on
to the great riverine plain must have drawn an immediate and com-
pelling challenge. On the plain, the dangerous annual flood can only
be constrained or utilized by combined effort on a large scale. On the
plain, fertile soil resulting from that same flood is as abundant as
mineral and other resources are scarce. With the added urgency of
one cause and another, the river itself and its flanking lowlands facili-
tate and stimulate traffic, commercial or military, and at once enlarge
human relations far beyond the precedent of the upland valley. The
opportunities and difficulties implicit in civilization, in the full sense
of the term, are at once present and insistent. The remaining postulate
is that of a creative imagination sufficient to grasp the occasion. And
without that creative imagination, no stretch of time could provide
a substitute. A phase of increase, amounting even to ‘explosive’ evolu-
tion, may be assumed.
  Many other significant examples of rapid evolution might readily
be cited: an obvious one is the invention of the great windows, barred
with a simplified perpendicular grid of tracery, wherewith the medie-
val builders illuminated the dim interiors of English churches in the
latter part of the fourteenth century — sudden and triumphant answer
to an insistent problem of engineering towards which earlier builders
had merely groped. And on the other hand the patient ‘stationary’
evolution of Byzantine art is sufficiently familiar and significant to
need no elaboration in the present context. Speed is a mighty factor
in our evaluation of human achievement, and it is a mere truism to
affirm that our appreciation of speed is contingent upon a nice
chronology.
  How then are we archaeologists, we fumblers in the earth, to attain
this difficult degree of precision? For something like one-hundredth
of the vast period with which modern archaeology is concerned, the
historians have given us a framework in the Old World. Let us be
grateful to them and take them into the fullest partnership. In a region
which has a history, the archaeologist must know the framework of
that history from A to Z (not merely the miserable fraction of it in
which he happens to be interested) before ever he enters the field.
The day is gone by when the Egyptologist, intent upon the Pharaonic ©
period, may cast the Greek and the Roman, the Arab and the China-
                                   40
                           CHRONOLOGY

man, carelessly upon his tip-heap. But that is by the way. The import-
ant thing is that the archaeologist must know his dates and how to use
them: recorded dates where they are valid, and unwritten dates where
geological or physical or chemical or botanical science can win them
fromthe earth. And year by year the objective sciences are coming more
and more to the rescue of that subjective science, the study of man.
   Chronology was once a simple enough matter. In a notorious pro-
nouncement, Archbishop Ussher, properly styled ad miraculum doctus,
affirmed that the world was created in the year 4004 B.c. A more
sceptical age has been content, until quite recently, to postulate 4241
B.C. as the earliest calendar-date. It was believed — and the textbooks
still have it — that the Egyptians, having observed the approximate
coincidence of the reappearance(just before dawn) of Sirius or Sothis,
the Dog Star, after a period of invisibility, with the beginning of the
Nile flood, chose the date on which this phenomenon occurred in that
year (July roth of the Julian Calendar) as their calendrical New Year’s
Day. The initial date was inferred backwards from a.D. 139, when the
synchronization again occurred, by a logical computation which was
generally accepted. The Egyptian calendar, recognizing the incom-
patibility of the lunar months with the solar year, divided the latter
into artificial calendar-months each of thirty days, and added five
feast-days in an attempt to make up the required total. These inter-
calary periods, however, still fell short of the Sothic year (approxim-
ately the same length as the solar year) by one day in four years (hence
our Leap Year); with the result that the synchronization was exact
only once in 1,460 years. But it seemed likely that the calendar was
already in use in the time of the Pyramid-builders of the Egyptian
IVth dynasty, who were computed on the basis of native annals to
have lived before 2775 B.c.; which took the calendar back to an
initial Sothic synchronism not later than 2781 B.C. and more probably
not later than 4241 B.c. So much for the long-established view. In
recent years this view has been modified; on cultural grounds (the
absence of writing) so early a date as 4241 is now regarded as impos-
sible. It is now argued that, although the Egyptians at an early period
were able by their observations of the heliacal rising of Sothis to
check the position of their 365-day calendar in the Solar year, they
never had a Sothic calendar. But on the generally accepted assump-
tion that the 365-day calendar operated continuously from early
                                   4I
               ARCHAEOLOGY               FROM   THE   EARTH

Dynastic times, combined with the contemporary records which
have survived of heliacal risings of Sothis in terms of that calendar and
the lengths of reigns given in ancient King Lists, Egyptian history —
the oldest history in the world — can still be carried back continuously,
if not to 4241 B.C., at least to the last centuries of the fourth millen-
nium B.C.
   It would be irrelevant here to develop the far-reaching implications
of this Egyptian calendar. It underlies the whole of our pre-classical
chronology in so far as that stands on a historical basis. Slightly modi-
fied, we still use it. But it is more to our purpose to consider parallel
and supplementary methods of calculation, and, by way of transition, —
reference may first be made to an ingenious theory propounded in
1949 by Dr Claude Schaeffer.
  At Ras Shamra, on the coast of Syria, Dr Schaeffer has for many
years excavated the Bronze Age metropolis of Ugarit, and has there
determined five main successive layers. Of these the last, marking the
end of the Late Bronze Age, shows evidence of destruction by a vio-
lent earthquake which dislocated the buildings at ground-level. Con-
temporary sites in Syria, Palestine, and Asia Minor have yielded simi-
lar evidence of violence; on dating now superseded, the fallen walls
of Jericho were witness to it; and Dr Schaeffer ascribes the wide-
spread disaster to ¢. 1365 B.c. when, according to a Tell el Amarna
letter, “Ugarit has been destroyed by fire; half the city has been burnt, -
the other half has ceased to be’. Ifthis basis be accepted — and it is not
perhaps quite as clear as Schaeffer maintains — a definite phase in all the
cities in question is dated with an insignificant margin of error. Nor —
need this line of research end there. Another catastrophic earthquake
seems to have centred upon Asia Minor at the beginning of the Middle
Bronze Age, between 2100 and 2000 B.c., and may be thought to tie
together the whole or partial destruction of Troy and Tarsus, Alaja
Hiyik on the Anatolian plateau, Chagar Bazar and Tel Brak, Tepe
Gawra north-east of Mosul, and a series of Syro-Palestine cities, once
more including Ugarit itself. And yet other earthquakes, between                   —
2400 and 2300 B.c. and about 1730 B.c., provide further chronological              —
bonds. It all seems too good to be true, but is not on that ground —
false. Schaeffer was not indeed the first to recognize something of the —
  1. C. F. A. Schaeffer, Stratigraphie comparée et chronologie de 1Asie occidental —
(IH* et 1° millénaires), Oxford, 1948.

                                         42
                             CHRONOLOGY

 archaeological potentiality of earthquakes. In 1926 Sir Arthur Evans
 wrote a description of a violent earthquake shock which he had just
 experienced at Knossos in Crete, and added:
    The archaeological sequitur of this is very important. When in the
 great Palace of Knossos, we find evidence of a series of overthrows,
  some of them on a scale that could hardly be the work of man, there
  seems real reason for tracing the cause to the same seismic agencies that
  we have certainly to deal with in the case described above. It may be
- possible even to fix approximately the date of seven earthquakes, four
  of them of great severity, between the last century of the third millen-
  nium and the beginning of the 14th century B.c.!
 Therein lies a germ of the Schaeffer scheme, though not the scheme
 itself. The general suggestion is indeed a serious one, and archaeology
 may take a cautious cognizance of it, with the neutralizing proviso
 that the earthquake synthesis is used only where other evidence has
 already established contemporaneity. In other words, we must in
 fact regretfully admit that earthquakes, in view of our limited know-
 ledge of their incidence and frequency in ancient times, are a shaky
 basis on which to build a precise chronology. But the theory is of
  interest.
     In another context, geology has given us a surer and now very
- familiar footing. The recognition of the clearly stratified varved or
  laminated clays of Sweden (and elsewhere) as the annual deposits of
  the retreating ice, and as the time-table therefore of a related human
  phase, is aow notorious. By counting these annual deposits in a series
- of sections from the south of Sweden to recent deposits in north-
  central Sweden, the Swedish geologist de Geer and some of his
  colleagues calculated 6839 3.c. as the beginning of the post-glacial
  period in their country and as the beginning, therefore, of potential
  human life there.? Others prefer a slightly earlier date, but the prin-
  ciple is the same. On this basis, a series of changes in the Scandinavian
  coast-line, climate and vegetation have been given approximate dates
  which can now claim a value approaching the absolute and are funda
  mental for the mesolithic of northern and north-western Europe.’
                                                            p- 382.
    1. Cited by Joan Evans, Time and Chance (London, 1943),
                                                                  1950), pp-
    2. Summary by F. E. Zeuner, Dating the Past (2nd ed., London,
  20 ff.
    3. Ibid., pp. 46 ff.

                                      43
              ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

Incidentally, it follows that a proportionate chronological value is
thereby attached to the identification of pollen and the reconstruc-
tion of vegetation on mesolithic sites.?
   Geological stratification further plays an important part in the
chronology of the palaeolithic cultures. Artifacts belonging to the
Old Stone Age are frequently found in the gravels of river terraces,
in brick-earths, in cave sediments and so forth, under conditions
which enable the Pleistocene geologist to determine the age of these
artifacts relative to the sequence of climate-fluctuations that make up
what is commonly called the Quaternary Ice Age. In particular the
wind-borne loess deposits and-solifluction layers formed in the cold
phases and the fossil soils resulting from the weathering of ancient
land-surfaces have contributed to the establishment of a relative
chronology in an area ranging from northern France through Ger-
many, Austria, Bohemia, and Hungary to the Ukraine. But there is
more in it than that; for the attempt has repeatedly been made to
convert this relative into an absolute time-scale. ‘Time-gauges’ are
provided by the rates of weathering, of denudation and of sedimenta-
tion, calculated upon such evidence as that provided by varved clays
and, more recently, for restricted periods by C14 (see below); so that
if the geological results obtained by Penck and others are applied to
the sequence of palaeolithic industries, the Abbevillian would appear
to be about half a million years old, the middle Acheulian about a
quarter of a million, and the Mousterian about a hundred thousand
years.
   When we leave geological stratification and turn to stratification
derived mainly from human occupation, inference is less certain. It
is impossible to lay down any law for the equation of man-made
strata with an absolute time-scale. For example, at a site (Chandravalli)
which I excavated in India, coins that were not, apparently, earlier
than $0 B.c. or much later than a.D. 200 ranged through a vertical
accumulation of 5 feet; the period thus represented was probably in
fact not more than two centuries. In what is now Pakistan, at the
famous site of Taxila (Sirkap), excavations in 1944-5 indicated that
6-9 feet of floors and debris were deposited during some two cen- —
turies of very intensive occupation. In an earlier phase of the same
city, Taxila (Bhir Mound), an untidy site, 14-15 feet were ascribed to
              1. Dating the Past, pp. 56 ff. and bibliography.

                                    44
                             CHRONOLOGY

 three centuries or a little more; but the masonry and building-
 methods were here of so unstable a character that the accumulation
 may well have been exceptionally rapid. In every instance a multitude
  of unknown and variable factors is involved, and objective calcula-
  tion on the basis of depth is virtually impossible. Nevertheless, forti-
  fied by the seasonal regularity of the Nile valley, Petrie was greatly
  daring. ‘Generally’, he maintained, ‘it is possible to date the latest
  date of a town by the potsherds lying on the surface; and to allow a
  rate of growth of 20 inches a century down to the visible level; if that
_ gives a long period we may further carry down the certainly artificial
  level by 4 inches in a century for the Nile deposits when in cultivated
  ground’ ~and so on.! Such calculations have, if any, a purely academic
  or abstract interest. They make no allowance for the intermittencies
  and vagaries which, alike in human and in geological history, defy
  the confines of mathematical formulae.
     Only on rare occasions can a chronological connotation in terms
  of calendar-years be attributed with plausibility to man-made strata.
  I will give two examples. My first comes from Scarborough in York-
  shire where, during the excavation of prehistoric pits of the fifth
  century B.c. underlying the Roman signal-station, Mr F. G. Simp-
  son, always most scrupulous of excavators, observed that the human
  debris — sherds, bones, ash, etc. — in the pits was interleaved with
  layers of clean soil (PI. 2a). He further observed, on returning to the
  site after a winter’s absence, that an identical clean layer had accumu-
  lated in the re-excavated pits as a result of the rains and frosts of the
  preceding winter months. From this observation, two inferences were
  deducible: first, that each of the pits had only been used by the
  prehistoric inhabitants for some three or four years (represented by
  three successive ancient rainwash layers with interposed occupation-
  debris); and, secondly, that the site, on a stormy headland over-
  looking the North Sea, had been abandoned during the winter
  months, when the deposition of occupation-debris had ceased, and
  that the place was used only as a summer station.” Both these infer-
  ences are of importance in the chronological and sociological evalua-
  tion of the settlement.
     1. Aims and Methods in Archaeology, pp. 10-11.
                                                                       32, and
     2. A. Rowntree, History of Scarborough (London, 1931), pp- 20 and
  fig. 6.

                                       45
               ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

  My second example comes from Iraq. At Khafajah, in the Diyala
region north of Baghdad, a temple dedicated to the moon-god Sin
was built and rebuilt ten times on the same site in the fourth and third
millennia, and an elaborate attempt was made to construct an absolute
chronology for the building, and hence for its dynastic or cultural
background, upon certain structural evidences. It is not necessary here
to reproduce the argument in all its more theoretical ramifications,*
but its root is of interest. The seventh Sin temple showed two phases,
with two floor-levels for the second (later) phase. Between these two
secondary floor-levels, the temple-wall had been mud-plastered
sixteen times, each plaster coat being applied to the surface of its
predecessor (PI. 2b). Now, to-day it is the custom in the Near East
to plaster the surface of adobe (or mud) walls, such as those of the
temple, every summer in preparation for the winter rains; and, since
circumstances have not materially changed, it is a fair assumption
that the sixteen plasterings represent in fact a lapse of sixteen years.
But during that inferred sixteen years the ground-level at the entrance
to the temple rose 12 cm. — the vertical distance between the two
floors. Applying this ratio to the accumulation on the floor of the
first phase, namely 75 cm., we may calculate the time represented by
that accumulation at 16 X 73 = 100 years. To this we must add the
16 years already calculated for the interval between the two floors of
the later phase, and we get a total of 116 years for the time-interval
between the first and last floors or made-levels of Sin temple VIL.
There we will leave the computation, at a point beyond which infer-
ence becomes increasingly conjectural. But as far as we have carried
it, the argument has considerable weight, and well represents the type
of evidence for which the excavator in search of precision may use-
fully keep an open eye.
  From vertical stratification we may turn for a moment to what is in
effect horizontal stratification: a method of computation, simple in
theory but full of pitfalls in practice, which has been disguised under
the term Dendrochronology. The principles of Dendrochronology
have been widely advertised, and a convenient summary will be
  1. They will be found in Pinhas Delougaz and Seton Lloyd, Pre-Sargonid
Temples in the Diyala Region (Univ. of Chicago Orient. Inst. Publications,
lviii, 1942), pp. 125 ff. I am indebted to Professor M. E. L. Mallowan for
drawing my attention to this.

                                   46


                                                                             e
                           CHRONOLOGY
                                  |

found in Professor Zeuner’s handbook." It is a sufficiently familiar fact
that a section across a tree grown in a climate with seasonal variations
reveals more or less concentric growth-rings, usually representing
annual accretions, which will differ with the age of the tree and the
climate of the particular year. In years of drought the growth will
naturally be less than in wet years, but a tendency for the rings to
group in 11-year cycles, in conformity with the 11-year sun-spot
cycle, has suggested that solar radiation is a further and independent
factor. On the basis of the ring-sequence of long-lived trees in
California, Dr A. E. Douglass and his associates were able to work
out climatic curves for that part of North America for the last 3,000
years; but it is more important to us that variant features of individual
tings or their grouping can be plotted and compared from long-lived
trees to timbers cut in the same region as the type-specimens in ancient
times. Thus in Arizona tree-ring analysis has been brought to the
rescue of American prehistory with astonishing results. Here the
correlation of the tree-rings of timbers from prehistoric (i.e. pre-six-
teenth century) Indian houses with dated sequences enabled Douglass
to determine, with a minute margin of error, dates at which the
ancient timbers had been cut as far back as his material could take him,
in fact to the eighth century a.D. and earlier. There always remains,
of course, the imponderable factor of the date of construction relative
to the date at which the component timbers were actually cut. Tim-
bers were liable to be reused from building to successive building, and
a particular structure may thus be as much as some centuries later
than the tree-ring dating of one or more of its timbers would alone
suggest. In other words, tree-ring analysis can only provide a terminus
postquem.
   Attempts have been made to apply the tree-ring method to
material from Europe, but so far with limited success, although some
value has been claimed on insecure evidence for tree-ring graphs pre-
pared in this country from Roman and medieval timbers.* The
absence of very ancient trees, however, and the much greater remote-
ness of European prehistory combine with a (usually) less discrimin-
ating climate to militate against success. Nor have attempts to project
  1. Dating the Past, pp. 6 ff.
  2. A. W.G. Lowther, ‘Dendrochronology’, The Arch. News Letter (London),
March 1949.

                                      47
                 ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM     THE    EARTH

  American data across the Atlantic (‘teleconnexion’”) met with wide
  acceptance. On the other hand Africa and Asia have not yet been
  adequately exploited by dendrochronologists and may in future add
  new laurels to a technique which has certainly been dramatically
  successful in the land of its origin.
     The mention of solar radiation opens up wide vistas in the com-
  putation of geological time and the dating of remote men in their
  geological setting. It is not for a layman like myselftopretend to more
~ than the most general understanding of the methods employed. It is,
  however, comforting to be told that ancient climatic fluctuations, de-
 duced from the examination of loess-deposits and the analysis of river-
 gravels, agree closely with certain fluctuations of the intensity of solar
 radiation calculated on an astronomical basis; with the corollary that
 these fluctuations, with their related human phenomena, are approx-
 imately dated objectively. Thus it is calculated that in the open spaces
 of north-western Europe palaeolithic man began his Sisyphean task
 some $00,000 years ago, without any pedantic limitation within
  30,000 or 40,900 years on either side: a date which is found to be in
  excellent agreement with that which I have already mentioned as’
  obtained from the rates of weathering and denudation.! It may there-
  fore be regarded for some time to come as sufficiently absolute in
  relation to an epoch when fashions in craftsmanship may have lasted
  for anything up to, or even beyond, a quarter of a million years. —
     I mention these calculations, merely to hurry on; like the measure-
  ment of geological time on the premise that the time-rate at which the
  disintegration of a radioactive mineral proceeds is constant and deter-
  minable,? I accept them calmly with other marvels of the age. But it is
  important to know what the geochronologists want for their al-
  chemy, and to see that they get it. It is the duty of the field-archae-
  ologist to supply them, for example, with classified gravel and loess
  and with related artifacts. They are gradually bringing order into
  our remoter prehistory, transforming the jellyfish of its chronology
  into something vertebrate. Their work is integral with ours, both in
  the laboratory and in the field.
     The marvels of science as applied to archaeology would not be
    1. F. E. Zeuner in Proc. Linn. Soc. Lond., 162 (2), p. 125.
     2. Again I refer to reader to Zeuner, Dating the Past (2nd ed., 1950), with
  bibliography,

                                         48
                              CHRONOLOGY

fully catalogued, however, without a reference to two developments
of another kind. The first is the so-called Fluorine Test. Since 1844 it
 has been recognized that buried bone absorbs an element known as
 fluorine from the moisture of the sand or gravel in which it lies.
 The process is a very slow one, and it varies quantitatively with the
 amount of fluorine which happens to be present in the ground-water
 of a particular site. This variability obviously robs fluorine-content
 of any value as an absolute time-indicator. On the other hand, as
 Dr Kenneth Oakley and his colleagues have demonstrated, it may
 be of use within very wide limits as an indicator of the approximate
 contemporaneity or otherwise of bones from the same locality, and
 one notable instance of this utility is already on record. A brief glance
 at it will suffice to indicate the potentialities of the method.t
    The example relates to the much-discussed skeleton found in 1888
in the Galley Hill (north) gravel-pit at Swanscombe in Kent, 8 feet
  below the surface. The gravel in which the skeleton was found is of
  middle pleistocene or early palaeolithic age, and controversy has
 raged as to whether the skeleton, unmineralized and modern in
 character as it is, was (say) a quarter of a million years old or of rela-
 tively modern date. If the former it is obviously a remarkable proof
 of the antiquity of a modern skeletal type. The general problem has
 now been set at rest. A number of fossil bones, including the famous
 Swanscombe skull, has been collected from the same early palaeolithic
 gravel, and others from later palacolithic deposits in neighbouring
 gravel-pits, together with some from local recent deposits, including
 part of an Anglo-Saxon skeleton. Analysis showed that the Swans-
 combe skull and other early palaeolithic bones contained about 2 per
 cent fluorine, the later palacolithic about 1 per cent, and the recent
 bones 0-3 to 0-05 per cent. The Galley Hill skeleton was found to
 contain only 0-3 per cent, and its relatively modern date is thus
 apparent. It passes finally and inescapably out of the textbooks into
 limbo.
                                                              Test’, The
    1. See Kenneth Oakley, ‘Some Applications of the Fluorine
                                                           K. P. Oakley and M. F.
  Archaeological News Letter, Nov.—Dec. 1949, pp. 101 ff.;
                                                                  , Bulletin o,
  Ashley Montagu, ‘A Reconsideration of the Galley Hill Skeleton’
                                                                  ‘Relative Dating
  the British Museum (Nat. Hist.), i, no. 2 (1949); K. P. Oakley,
                                                          no. 24 (1950); K. P.
  of the Piltdown Skull’, The Advancement of Science, vi,
                                                                    y of Piltdown
  Oakley and C. Randall Hoskins, ‘New Evidence on the Antiquit
  Man’, Nature, clxv (11 Mar. 1950), 379-

                                         49
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE   EARTH

  Similar fluorine tests have been applied to the much-discussed
human or simian bones from the gravels of Piltdown in Sussex. The
results, confirmed whilst this book was in the press, are dramatic in
the extreme. The jaw and canine tooth, found subsequently to the
 skull-cap, are now demonstrably of modern date, altered and col-
oured by a forger and carefully ‘planted’ for discovery by distin-
guished visitors. The cranium found nearby by gravel-diggers, on
the other hand, is genuine and of Upper Pleistocene date. In itself it
presents no special problem, but the removal of all temptation to
associate it with the jaw removes also a potential anomaly from the
complex problem of skull-evolution. See Bull. of the British Museum
(Nat. Hist.), vol. 2, no. 3 (1953), and J. S. Weiner, The Piltdown
Forgery (Oxford, 1955).
   At the best, however, the local and relative value of the fluorine
test must not be forgotten; at the best, as Dr Oakley emphasizes,
it does not provide a means of close relative dating. A given bone or
group of bones shows a certain range in fluorine content. Unless the
difference in age between the bones which are being compared is con-
siderable (e.g. 10,000 years), there is usually an overlap in the range of
their fluorine-contents. For this reason it would probably be impossible —
by this method to differentiate clearly between say a Saxon and a neo-
lithic skeleton; whereas it should enable one, for example, to distinguish
bones of neolithic or later age from others of Acheulian age, when both
occur under similar conditions at the same locality.
   Potentially more sensitive is anew method of dating organic mater-
ial by means of its radiocarbon content. This method, a by-product of
atomic research, was announced in 1949 from America and, though
still in the experimental stage, may eventually enable specimens up to
40,000 years old to be dated objectively. The method, known sum-
marily as the ‘Carbon 14’ method, has been described by Professor
W.F. Libby, DrE.C. Anderson, and Dr R. J. Arnold, of the Insti-
tute of Nuclear Studies in the University of Chicago, who have tested
it upon wood-samples from Egyptian tombs.! The possible error is at
present appreciable but will probably be reduced, and it seems likely
that for the mesolithic at any rate the new method, if made sufficiently
accessible, will produce useful results.
   1. Science, cix, no. 2827, 227-8 (4 Mar. 1949); Science Today, v, no. 125
(24 Mar. 1949); Antiquity, xxiii (1949), 113-14 and 229. See also Hallam L.

                                    50
                                                                               T
                              CHRONOLOGY

   The principle of the method, if not its practice, is simple and logical
enough and may be stated categorically and very summarily:
   (i) Cosmic rays, which arrive from the outer space, produce radio-
active carbon atoms of atomic weight 14 in the atmosphere. The C14
thus formed is an isotope of ordinary carbon of atomic weight 12
(C12); and both are contained in the carbon dioxide of the atmosphere
in a proportion which is stable and corresponds with the rates of
production and disintegration of C14.
   (ii) Now this carbon dioxide is taken in by plants, and, since all
animals derive their body-material ultimately from plants, it is univer-
sally incorporated in living organic matter. Therefore, the proportion
of C14 to C12 in all living organic matter is the same as in the
atmosphere.
   (iii) But once an organism is dead (e.g. when a tree is cut down), it
ceases to take up carbon from the atmosphere. On the contrary, the
C14 content slowly diminishes, reverting to nitrogen at such a rate
that after about 5,600 years (termed the “half-life’) only half the orig-
inal amount of C14 is left. After twice that period, only half the resi-
due —i.e. a quarter of the original quantity — is left, and so forth until
all the C14 has disappeared.
   (iv) In dead organic matter, therefore, the ratio of C14 to C12
decreases with time at a known rate. The proportion of C14 to C12
in a given organic specimen can be determined in the laboratory, and
from it the time elapsed since the ‘death’ of this organic matter can
be calculated.
   That is the principle. The chief practical difficulty is that, at the
best, the initial ratio of C14 to C12 is exceedingly small and therefore
difficult to measure with precision. Some organic substances are
 indeed relatively easier than others to deal with; such are wood or
 charcoal, which contain much carbon. Bones, on the other hand, con-
 tain only small amounts of carbon, and it seems doubtful whether even
 Movius   ibid. xxiv. (1950), 99-101;     report of Brit. Assoc.   discussion in
                                                                                 ;
 Nature, clxvi (4 Nov. 1950), 756(J. V. P. Long, F. E. Zeuner, and K. P. Oakley)
 F. E. Zeuner in Science Progress, no. 154 (London, April 1951) pp. 225-38 (with
 bibliography); G. H. S. Bushnell inAntiquity, xxv (195 1), 145-9; and especially
 ‘Radiocarbon Dating’ assembled by Frederick Johnson in American Antiquity,
 xvii (Soc. for Amer. Arch., Salt Lake City, Utah; July 1951), and W. F. Libby,
- Radiocarbon Dating (Univ. of Chicago, 19 52).

                                        SE
                                                           4


                ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

very large quantities of them, with special “boosting” superadded,
will in fact yield the necessary concentration.! As a whole, the
technique is still (1955) in the experimental stage, and a number of
unresolved difficulties remain. For example, a specimen of ancient
charcoal may have been contaminated by the absorption of sub-
stances containing charcoal of younger age; a particularly dangerous
source of contamination is fungal and bacterial growth which, even
when removed from the specimen, may have falsified (reduced) its
apparent age. But, in spite of these and other complications, there is
 reason to hope that it may be possible to achieve an average accuracy
of ---200 years in the dating of charcoal and certain other categories of
organic material ranging in date from the late palaeolithic to the begin-
 ning of the present era. Consistent accuracy within those limits would
 mark a formidable advance in the pursuit of prehistoric chronology.
 . Anumber of examples of the application of C14 analysis have now
been released. Thus it has been announced that the last (Mankato) ad-
vance of the Wisconsin glaciation of North America passed over tree-
trunks the average age of which by the Carbon 14 method is about
11,400 years from the present day, less than half the age expected by
geologists. It is shortly after that time that man is believed to have
first appeared in North America. The oldest artifacts determined in
America are several pairs of rope sandals covered by volcanic deposits
in Oregon; the age indicated was about 9,050 years, i.e. about 7000
B.C. In the eastern United States, the earliest cultures are proving so
far to be later than in the west. Carbon 14 dates suggest that man
spread there under 5,000 years ago, but much verification is needed.
Other C14 determinations are reported to confirm the beginning of |
the First Dynasty of Egypt at about 3000 B.c., and that primitive
agriculture was already being practised in the Kurdish hills at about
4700 B.C, — charcoal and shells of land-mollusca from a village-site
excavated by Mr R. J. Braidwood at Jarmo in northern Iraq have
given the remarkably consistent C14 dates of 4757 B.c.-320 years,
4654 B.C. 330 years, and 4743 B.c.-+360 years. Nearer home, Dr

   1. In order to obtain the quantity of pure carbon required for a satisfactory
determination based on several test runs, the following minimum quantities are
recommended: 65 grammes of charcoal, 200 grammes of other types of vege-
table remains (wood, grain, basket-work, &c.), and 700 grammes of molluscan
shells. H. L. Movius in Antiquity, xxiv (1950), 99—I0r.

                                      §2
                             CHRONOLOGY

Grahame Clark’s already-famous village of mesolithic food-gatherers
at Seamer in east Yorkshire seems, by this method of diagnosis, to
have flourished at about the acceptable date of 7000 8.c. But it is fair
to repeat the emphatic affirmation of Dr Libby and his associates that
all such results are at present tentative.
   In this chapter nothing has been said of typology as a basis for
chronology, nor do I propose to enter generally upon this thorny
subject. The study of the systematic development of types or forms
was long normal to biological studies before it became a recognized
method in archaeology; indeed it scarcely entered into our discipline
until Petrie based the relative chronology of his famous Diospolis
Parva cemetery upon it in 1901.1 Its virtues and its vices* now consti-
tute a standard question in archaeological examination-papers, and it
is not necessary here to attempt a model answer. But there are two
points upon which a word may be said. Much work — and much able
work — has been done in the European and in the Asiatic fields upon
the comparative typology of industries, particularly of pottery. In this
valuable endeavour may be observed the recurrence of two sources of
doubt. The first is a tendency to give a diagnostic significance to types
of pattern which are cither insufficiently specialized or are at any rate
repeated, without likelihood of contact, in widely disparate times
and places. The second tendency, not unrelated to the first, is to
devolve the comparative study of pottery into a pursuit more akin to
philately than to archaeology: to compare line-illustrations of pattern
with insufficient reference to other factors such as paste, method of
manufacture, and firing. For a reductio ad absurdum of this abstract and
theoretical procedure I may refer once more to that unfailing source
of cautionary examples, Palestine. In a monumental report on Tell
en-Nasbeh, the date of a series of tombs has been ‘calculated’ by an
astonishing statistical method.
   All parallels in form to a pot-type have been traced, including Middle
                                                                            being
Bronze ones, to a clearly Early Iron pot (differences in technique
   1. Diospolis Parva (Egypt Exploration Fund, 1901), pp. 4 ff.
                                                                     the Christian
   2. For example, see G. Coffey, Guide to the Celtic Antiquities of
                                                                        ve forms
Period ..., p. 4: ‘It is not to be supposed that a series of progressi
                                                               has been reached,
always correspond to a series of dates. After the final form
                                                               of ornament from
earlier steps may re-appear; the whole series forming a stock
which the artificer could draw.’

                                        53
                ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM     THE    EARTH

ignored). The result, as a graph of frequency, is plotted for the tomb, in
combination with the frequency graphs of other forms (from the same
tomb). This yields a series of peaks which more or less coincide, but
gives the ludicrous result that the extremes of the graph stretch from the
seventeenth to the second centuries B.c. !On the other hand, no account
is taken of the appearance or non-appearance of diagnostic forms or
techniques. ...}
In other words, we have here a crude example of the impact of two-
dimensional diagnosis upon three-dimensional material.
   The other point which may be stressed is the risk inherent in the
broadcast application of typological criteria which may in a majority
of instances be perfectly sound in themselves within their proper and
restricted context. For example, those antiquaries who are accustomed
to deal with ancient building-construction are familiar enough with
the potential time-values of evolving structural or ornamental feat-
ures. Thus, students of medieval mouldings, of ancient styles of
masonry, of ancient brickwork, of ancient staircases, window-frames,
roof-constructions, have evolved criteria of a rule-of-thumb charac-
ter which are more often correct than not, if cautiously used. “Rusti-
cated’ masonry — ashlar with rough surface and drafted margins — is
A.D. I-50 in Rome.? Roman bricks and brick-joints vary in absolute
and relative thickness in accordance with a time-scale.? Deeply invol-
uted Gothic mouldings of the thirteenth century contrast with the
plump mouldings of the fourteenth and the flatter mouldings of the
fifteenth century. Queen-post roof-trusses begin in the time of Henry
VIII. And so on. But in all these rules lurk hidden dangers. Thus out-
side Rome, in Palestine for example, rusticated masonry may be at
least as early as the ninth century B.c.;4 the smooth chronology of
Roman bricks has been established only for Rome itself, and there
perhaps only for certain categories of building; the Gothic mouldings
of Britain do not apply to Gothic France; most British queen-post
roof-trusses are of the sixteenth century, but they occur occasionally
  1. K. M. Kenyon in Antiquity, xxiv (1950), 200, commenting upon C. C.
McCown,    Tell en-Nasbeh, i (1947), with special reference to pp. 146-7.
   2. G. T. Rivoira, Roman Architecture (Oxford, 1925), p. 70, ascribes it especi-
ally to the Claudian period, but notes its earlier occurrence in Etruscan tombs.
  3. Esther B. van Deeman, American Journ. ofArchaeology, 2S., xvi (1912); &c.
  4. G. A. Reisner and others, Harvard Excavations at Samaria (Harvard, 1924),
p- 104 and pl. 27.

                                       54
                                CHRONOLOGY

as early as the fourteenth.1 Taken alone, therefore, almost any one
of these and comparable criteria may trap the unwary. Their values
are liable to be local rather than universal, and must be established
afresh and objectively for every fresh locality. With that proviso, they
may be of great use, but the proviso is an important one.
  So much, then, for some of the principles or practices underlying
archaeological chronology. Their importance is manifest; so much
so that it is perhaps advisable to end on a note of warning. We must
not allow chronology to monopolize our discipline. It is a means to
an end, not an end in itself. Those of us who know the deep-seated
satisfaction which accrues from the settlement of the chronology of a
site know also something of the danger imminent in that satisfaction.
What are we really out for? I began this chapter by describing chron-
ology as the backbone of archaeology; and so it is, but the backbone
is not the whole skeleton, still less is it the flesh and blood and spirit
of our subject. Our objective is a reconstruction of human cultural
achievement in all those aspects of life which are susceptible to
material evidence. A chronologist is not an archaeologist. As an
American writer has put it, “Chronology is admittedly an important
factor in any archaeological research, and the earliest and. surest
method of establishingit is to be commended. But after a sequence
of periods has been established, if then the very culture of those
periods is unknown, we may justifiably ask “so what?””’? Something
will be said about ‘so what2’ in Chapter 17. Meanwhile, we must
proceed to consider how in practice our cultural material may best
be equated with our time-scale both in the digging and in our records
of it.
  1. Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (Eng.), Essex, ii, Central
and SW. (1921), p. 76, Gatehouse Farm.
   2. W. W.Taylor,     ‘A Study of Archaeology’,   American Anthropologist,
(Indiana Univ., 1948), p. 62.                 :




                                     55
