                              CHAPTER      13


                   The Pottery-Shed#

 EXCAVATIONS may be expected to produce material which requires
 to be collected, labelled, stored, and eventually packed and trans-
  ported from the site. However abundant or restricted this material
  may be, commensurate arrangements must be made to ensure that it
_ will reach its destination adequately labelled, and so treated and
  packed that it arrives in at least as good a condition as that in which
  it was found. These notes are designed as an aide-mémoire for pottery-
  or small-finds assistants (see above, pp. 163-4) or for the student-
  excavators who may be expected to assist in the work of handling
  the material. It is assumed throughout this chapter that the pottery-
  assistant is in supreme charge of the staff detailed for the reception,
  preliminary classification, and dispatch of all “finds’.

                               THE ‘FINDS’

 The material found will fall roughly into two large classes:
   (i) Pottery and bones, which usually form the bulk of the material
 and are treated mainly as a series of groups of material rather than on
 an individual basis.
   (ii) Other material, which is treated on an individual basis and may
 be included, whatever its size, under the general term ‘small-finds’.


                          ACCOMMODATION

 It is obvious that the amount of storage-space and working space re-
 quired will be related directly to the type of excavation and its
 location. For the purposes of the present description, it is proposed to
 take a moderate-sized excavation on a site producing a fair amount
 of finds in a country with a rainy climate; but the same basic principles
 apply to all excavations, whatever their location and problem.
   1. I gladly acknowledge the help of Mrs M. Aylwin Cotton, 0.8.8., F.S.A.,
 in the preparation of this chapter.

                                    182
                        THE   POTTERY-SHED

   The director (or deputy director) of the expedition will have made
arrangements for the necessary accommodation for handling and
storage. The pottery-assistant will, however, be expected to utilize
these facilities as advantageously as possible, and there is commonly
much scope for his initiative in this matter. He (or she) should aim at
organizing:
   (a) A pottery-shed in which all the bulky material can be handled
and stored.
   (6) An office in which the ‘small-finds’ can be recorded and stored.
   Ifpottery or objects are to be drawn on the site, a quiet drawing-
office is also desirable, and a small field-laboratory will be necessary
(p. 195). Locks should be fitted to all these rooms or sheds.

                            HOURS    OF   WORK

It is usual for the ‘finds’ to be transferred from the excavations to the
pottery-shed at the end of each working-session. Whatever arrange-
ments are made for working-sessions on the “dig’ itself, the pottery-
shed should be open for a reasonable time after the end of each work
ing session to receive and stack the incoming material. As site-
supervisors may need at any time to examine the stored material or
to obtain supplies or trays, the pottery-shed should also be open as
far as possible throughout the day. As it should not be left unsuper-
vised at any time when it is open, the assistant in charge should
arrange to ‘stagger’ the hours of his workers, or, if single-handed, to
arrange for a volunteer to take charge during absence.

                     SITE   AND     WATER-SUPPLY

The desirable attributes of a pottery-shed are that it shall be spacious
and light and equipped either with running water or within easy
reach of a water-supply. It should be as close as possible to the areas
under excavation, and should have a clear space outside for pottery-
washing and drying in fine weather. In wet weather, if sufficiently
spacious, it can also be used for washing and drying pottery, but, if
space is restricted, the pottery-assistant should try to arrange that
shelter elsewhere can be used where volunteers can work on the
material. A tent ora marquee is an inadequate substitute for a pottery-
shed. A barn, large shed, Nissen hut, empty garage, or bare room
                                    183
              ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM   THE   EARTH

serves well. Ifrunning water is not at hand but exists in the immedi-
ate vicinity, a labour-saving device, well worth consideration, is to
run a long hose from the source of supply to a tank or water-butt
outside the shed or building. Ifwater has to be carried from a dis-
tance, arrangements for local storage are even more necessary.


                             EQUIPMENT

The minimum furniture required for comfortable working in a
pottery-shed is one large trestle-table and a bench or seats. Boxes,
ranging in size from tea-chests to match-boxes, are of the first im-
portance. Large storage-boxes can be used both for storage and for
the packing and the transport of the heavier finds but, as these are not
acquired nowadays easily or cheaply, smaller light wooden crates and
strong cardboard boxes should also be collected. Wooden fruit-boxes
are very useful for storage and for the transport of lighter materials,
and will carry pottery if it is not too heavy. They can often be ob-
tained in the local market from a fruit-merchant or from the head
porter at the goods entrance of a large store. They can be stacked in
the pottery-shed with their open sides outwards to form racks for
the temporary storage of material. Smaller cardboard boxes and tins,
of all shapes or sizes, are useful for packing separate pots, small-finds,
and earth-samples.

  Stationery supplies required are:
    Paper bags of varying sizes.
    Pay-envelopes.
    Tie-on labels and small white tags.
    Paper-clips and balls of string and twine.
    Index-cards and guide-cards.
    Pens, mapping-pens, pencils, chalks, and small paint-brushes.
    Black waterproof Indian, red, and white inks.
    Blotting-paper.

Pottery-washing equipment consists of:
    Trays of various sizes or drying mats.
    Washing-bowls.
    Nail-brushes, soft paint or pottery-brushes, and old tooth-brushes.

                                  184
                         THE    POTTERY-SHED


                           POTTERY     WASHING

 *Finds’ from the excavations are received at the pottery-shed in trays,
 baskets, or bags. Each receptacle will have with it two labels record-
 ing its provenance: one loose and one tied on to the receptacle. From
 the time of its reception until it is dispatched, all or any part of the
 contents of these receptacles must always have an accompanying
 label giving this information. In so far as is practicable, the material
 received at the end of each working-session should be worked over
 during the succeeding session. If this cannot be done, it should be
 bagged temporarily and stacked in order of date received. A wet day,
 with extra assistance, may provide an opportunity for clearing up
 arrears, the material being dealt with so far as possible in the order of
 receipt.
    The pottery assistant will be expected to instruct volunteers in the
 details of the handling of the material and will be responsible for
 seeing that they give it proper treatment and that it is correctly
 labelled and packed. Although the site-supervisors may have handed
 in their more important small-finds separately it will be found that the
 so-called pottery-trays often contain much that is not pottery. On a
 Roman site a tray may well contain a few bones, oyster-shells, iron
 slag, brick or tile, tesserae, and perhaps fragments of painted plaster.
  A preliminary examination should be made, therefore, to see whether
  there is any material that should either not be washed at all or should
  be washed with special care. In both cases it is advisable to isolate this
  material on separate trays, of course with duplicate labels. Soft or
  fragile pottery should be dried out thoroughly under cover before
  being washed. If it is still unsuitable for-washing, it can be brushed
  with a soft brush and then impregnated with bedacryl in toluol to
  consolidate it, or, if bedacryl is unobtainable, a 10 per cent celluloid
  solution can be substituted.
     Each washer, starting with a tray of unwashed pottery and other
  washable material, requires a clean drying tray or mat, a bowl with
- washing water, and suitable brushes. The first step is to place one of
  the two labels in the drying tray. This is essential as it ensures that if
  the washer is called away and a partly finished tray is moved, the
  material still retains its identity. Unmarked material isolated from its
  label cannot be used as dating evidence, and the carelessness of a
                                     185
               ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

washer in this respect can destroy the work of a careful excavator.
The material is then washed piece by piece and placed on the clean
tray to dry. It is not a good thing to empty a number of sherds into
the washing bowl. They may not benefit from soaking in the water,
they may sink into the muddy sediment which soon collects in the
bowl and get thrown away when the water is changed and, in any
case, the washing bowl has no label! Hard wheel-turned and well-
baked coarse pottery can be scrubbed with a nail-brush or tooth-
brush. Hand-made pottery, glazed pottery (e.g. Samian), and badly
baked pottery should be washed with a soft pottery-brush. Painted
pottery, painted plaster, etc., should not be washed until the director
or the site-supervisors have been consulted. The edges of sherds
should be brushed as well as the insides and outsides. It will save time
in marking and sorting trays if the material is placed on the drying
tray in an orderly manner. All rims, bases, and decorated sherds
should be placed in the top half, plain sherds at the bottom and sundry
objects such as shells, nails, tile, etc., piled in separate small heaps.
Finally the washer adds to the finished drying tray the second label
from the now empty ‘unwashed’ tray. Unless the supply of water is
restricted, the water in the bowl should be changed frequently.
(Pottery washed in muddy water retains a thin coating of mud when
dry and may require to be rewashed.) The drying tray is then placed
in the open or under shelter until its contents are dry, care being
taken to anchor its label firmly.
   Washers should be encouraged to take an interest in the material
they handle and in its provenance; their memory of where a particu-
lar pot can be found has often proved valuable when it has been
required quickly for inspection.
   Trays of dried material should be shown to the site-supervisors so
that they may note the contents in their field notebooks and so that
they can reject any material that is not required further. Pottery that
has not reacted adequately to simple washing in water can at this
stage be segregated and re-treated by further washing in teepol (a deter-
gent) and water, or, if coated in lime which it is desired to remove,
treated by soaking in a dilute solution of nitric acid (10 or 20 per cent
solution) followed by several rinsings in clean water. Pottery in acid
must be kept under observation: often 10 minutes’ treatment or
until effervescence stops is all that is required. Painted sherds should
                                  186
                        THE    POTTERY-SHED

only be dipped in the solution, and a corner should always be tested
first to see if the colour is fugitive.

                          POTTERY     MARKING

The trays are now ready for marking. As a general rule all rims, bases,
and decorated sherds are marked. The site-supervisors should be con-
sulted to ascertain whether they require that all sherds of a particular
group should be marked. The aim in marking is to give each marked
piece its provenance in a clearly legible but inconspicuous position so
that it can be handled with safety when removed from its label. Rims
and sherds are marked on the inside, bases on the underside. For all
sherds on which it shows clearly, black waterproof ink is used; black
and dark-grey sherds can be marked with white ink. Mapping-pens
are used, and, if they are kept clean by wiping, washing, or scraping
after use, will write more legibly and will last longer. Markers
should remember that sherds may be required for display and
that it should be possible to lay them out right side up so that the
marking does not show. Some wares, especially Samian, are easily
marked on the line of fracture. The exact lettering to be used will be
indicated on the labels. As a rule, it consists of a letter or abbreviation
to indicate the location of the excavations; a letter or number to
indicate the site; the area, square, or trench involved; and the number
and perhaps the orientation of the actual layer. Conventionally this
last is encircled: e.g. VER/G MII means @#®>) Verulamium, Site
G, Area M Il, Layer 14 North. ‘Group’ material does not need any
closer identification. If, however, material has been pin-pointed
three-dimensionally (p. 87) and given a-serial number in the field
notebook (a number which is conventionally included in a triangle,
e.g. /\) this may be added. Porous pottery does not take ink readily.
The area to be marked should first be varnished and then marked
over the dry varnish.

                        SORTING    AND    BAGGING

 To bundle into a bag the contents of a mixed tray of material is
 deleterious to the material itself and throws extra work on to the
‘experts who handle the material later. Well-washed pottery if mixed
                                    187
                ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM   THE    EARTH

 with oyster shells comes out of the bag with a film of shell fragments;
 large pieces of tile and brick may bruise or break the finer sherds; and
 iron slag and nails when mixed with the pottery are a constant nuis-
 ance. Fresh duplicate labels should be written for each type of material
other than pottery in the tray, and these collections with their labels
should be placed in separate bags and relegated for further treatment.
 When the material is reduced to a group of clean, marked pottery
only, it is ready for bagging. The site-supervisor should be consulted
as to whether special wares or types should be subdivided and bagged
separately. If so, further labels will have to be written. The final
group of pottery is then placed in a strong paper bag, or, if bulky,
in a double bag, together with one of its two labels. The other label
is threaded on a suitable length of string. Pottery bags should
be treated as small parcels and should be tied up firmly both along
their length and their width, the string being tied in a single reef-
knot or bow and not in a multiple knot. Knots are a menace to
anyone who may have to open hundreds of bags. Whole pots, or
a collection of sherds which may join to form part of a pot, can be
bagged or boxed separately. The pottery bags are now ready for
storage.

                     STORAGE    OF   POTTERY,    ETC.

Pottery bags should be sorted into groups from each site, and from
each area or trench in that site. They should be stored so that all the
bags from any particular area or level can be produced quickly for
inspection. Storage-boxes should be labelled clearly with the name
of the excavation, the site number or letter, the trench or area num-
ber or letter, and the type of object stored in them. If more than one
box is required for an area or trench, boxes should be numbered and
kept together. They should be packed firmly, but only filled level
with the top so that they can be either fitted with lids or slats or piled
on top of each other to save space in transport. It is usually convenient
to store all bulky material in the pottery-shed, even though it may
include sherds which have been indexed separately as ‘small-finds’.
The boxes used for non-ceramic material should be clearly labelled
for each site (e.g. ‘bones’, ‘iron slag’, ‘architecture’, “earth-samples’,
‘charcoal’, ‘shells’).
                                     188
                          THE   POTTERY-SHED


                                  PACKING

  At the close of the excavation-season, the material will probably have
  to be packed for removal from the site. Ifit is to be sent by rail or by
  sea, arrangements must be made to pack the boxes securely, to close
~ them with lids or slats and to nail on addressed labels. Whole pots
  should be filled with wood-shavings or other packing-material. The
  wedging material in the packing-cases should be rammed in with a
  wooden rammer to make it so compact that the pots will not work
  loose and break in transit. Sawdust is not satisfactory as a wedging
  material. A list of the contents of each case should be included in it
  and a duplicate list be sent by mail or taken with the excavation-notes.

                            POTTERY     MENDING

  If pottery is to be mended on the site, the pottery-shed should be
  equipped with boxes of sand, plasticine, and jars of cellulose dope,
  amyl-acetate and acetone. Methods are a matter of demonstration
  rather than description.

                        INDEXING      ‘SMALL-FINDS’

   All material treated individually as a ‘small-find’ will be received by
   the small-find recorder (p. 163) either direct from the site-supervisor
   oras bags of material sorted out from the pottery trays and transferred
   from the pottery-shed. Whether or no this material is to be cleaned
   and marked on the site, it should always be indexed. ‘Small-find’
   material usually includes the more closely datable evidence and, in
   addition, tends to be fragile and to require extra care in handling and
   treatment.
                                                                          the
      The record falls into two parts: (a) the accession-registers, (b)
   card-indexes.
                                                                        small
      The most convenient system of registration is to keep a
                                   (i.e. for each  main  subdivi sion  of the
   accession-book for each site
                           are ruled in  column s for enterin g the accessi on
   excavation). Its pages
                                                          and amount of
   number, type of object, provenance, finder, date
                                                   from a  site is received,
   bonus paid (if any, see p. 176). As each ‘find’
                                                         in red ink
   it is given a serial accession-number which is marked
                                       189
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

on its bag and/or labels. The appropriate details are added:
e.g. G. 49. 123, Bronze brooch, M II (8) Dark Earth, John Smith,
1.8.49, 6d.
    The card index is then prepared in duplicate, for arrangement on
 the one hand by categories and on the other hand by sites. On the
 first or ‘object’ card, the type of object is printed at the top; the
 accession number is written in red ink on the top right-hand corner;
 then the provenance and any other useful details follow; and finally
 a sketch or small photograph is added (ifnecessary on the back of the
card) so that the object can be-identified if at any time it should be-
come detached from its label. The second or ‘site’ card is a duplicate
of the first except that the provenance of the object is printed on the -
top of the card and the type of object below. Two boxes are provided
to hold the cards: one for the ‘Object Index’ and one for the ‘Site
Index’. The object cards are filed in the Object Index behind guide
cards for each type of object. Objects made of the same kind of
material should be filed next to each other (e.g. Bronze, Bronze
Bracelets, Bronze Brooches). The guide cards should be arranged in
alphabetical order. In the Site Index, guide cards are made out for
each area or trench (e.g. VER/G M II), and behind these all cards
belonging to that area are filled in order of successive layers. The
groups of cards for each site should be filed separately so that, for
example, all coins from Site A can be looked up easily and are not
intermingled with those from Site B. In excavations in which the
material has to be left behind, or in which a record of the finds has to
be furnished to a local authority, a single card index is inadequate.
Arrangements may have to be made to compile a duplicate catalogue
in addition. If so, when photographic assistance is available on the
site, one drawing of the object may be made, and as many prints of
it made as are required. These can then be pasted on to the index cards
and in the catalogue in the appropriate places. Often, in this system,
type-forms of pottery are drawn and should be treated on a routine
“small-find’ basis,

                        INDEXING        COINS


Coins should be identified and fully indexed in both ‘object’ and
‘site’ indexes, by reason of their importance as date-indicators.
                                  190
                        THE    POTTBRY-SHED

Beside the record of provenance, the cards should contain the follow-
ing information:
  1. The obverse legend and type. Breaks in the legend are indicated
by a /; illegible letters are enclosed in square brackets [].
  2. The reverse legend and type.
  3. The mint-mark, if present.
  4. The condition of the coin, whether it is in mint condition, good
condition, worn, corroded, or illegible.
  s. Ifno reference books are available, the date of the emperor’s reign
should be added. If reference books are available, the coin should be
looked up in these and its denomination (e.g. sestertius, antoninianus,
etc.) and a more precise dating added.
   References for Roman coins down to A.D. 300 can at present be
quoted from Mattingly and Sydenham’s Imperial Roman Coinage:
later coins from Cohen’s Monnaies frappées sous l’empire romain. A
specimen card might read as follows:

     DUPONDIUS           of DOMITIAN                    VER/G 49 123
          M It @® Dark Earth A\ NE S 4’ 1’-2/ 1-6"
     Obv. IMP      CAES       DOMIT       AUG        GERM     COS      XIl
            [CENS      PER    PP] head L.
     Rev. MONETA/AUG [USTI] S C Moneta stg. 1., hold-
           ing scales and cornucopiae.
               Worn
                  383                                               A.D. 86
     M. &S.


                             BONES    AND    SOILS

                                                                            must
Somewhere in this book, and here as well as anywhere, a plea
                               ly   collect ion  of  biologi cal  and  botanic al
be put in for a more scholar
                even  our  better  excavat  ors  have   normal  ly  achieve  d in
material than
                                                                        been the
the past. For example, animal bones have, it is true, long
                                                  reports , but  few,  very  few,
subject of special sections in archaeological
                                  analyti cal  details  which,   in  the  present
of those reports give us the
                                                                      happens is
state of knowledge, are urgently required, What usually
                                                         to some    compla isant
this: a few bundles of selected bones are sent off
                                      191
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE    EARTH

biologist, who subsequently reports the presence of Bos longifrons,
Ovis aries Studeri, Equus agilis, and Canis familiaris lacustris, and receives
a fulsome tribute therefor in the published report. Let it be said at
once that this sort of thing nowadays gets us almost nowhere. Bones
are documents as are potsherds and demand the same scrupulous
attention both on the site, in the small-finds shed, and in the labora-
tory. Consider the information which we may expect from them.
If in sufficient quantity (as they not infrequently are) they can give us
from phase to phase, not merely a list of the fauna category by cate-
gory, but also = what is far more important — a hint as to the economic
function of that fauna. To what extent do the bones represent food?
To what extent do they indicate sheep or cattle killed young, before
the winter? Alternatively, what proportion of the sheep or cattle
represented were sufficiently aged to prove organized winter-feeding?
Were sheep thus maintained more extensively than cattle, implying
a dominant importance of wool: Were horses eaten? ridden? driven?
(Size and age are here amongst the diagnostic factors.) Were pigs
 kept in sufficient numbers to imply appreciable exploitation of mar-
 ginal forest-land: Did the proportion of one category of stock to
 another vary in the course of the occupation of a site? These are some
 of the questions on which excavator and biologist must confer after
 examination of all significant bones from a site in their stratigraphical
 contexts. How often is this done? Of course the quantitative analysis
of animal-bones has in it an element of unreality, since a single
skeleton is frequently multiplied arbitrarily in its fragments. The
same objection applies to the quantitative analysis of potsherds.
Nevertheless, exercised with common sense, the counting of bones,
as of sherds, may, under normally favourable conditions, be expected
to yield usable statistics, and must be attempted.
   Similarly with the collection of soil-samples. The preservative
capacity of damp soils is truly astonishing. Seeds, leaves, plants, wing-
cases of beetles, may be incorporated in a condition that renders
recognition easy. At Stanwick in 1951 we found at the bottom of a
rock-cut ditch of the first century A.D. a layer of wet clay representing
a pool of water which stood there from the earliest days of the cutting.
In it, amongst other organic remains, was a puff-ball which the British
Museum (Natural History) had no difficulty in recognizing and
naming at once after nineteen centuries in the soil. A word of warn-
                                      192
we


                             THE     POTTERY-SHED

ing may be added: some seeds may be less durable than others, and,
whilst positive evidence of an ancient vegetation is satisfactory enough
negative evidence may require further thought and consultation.
   Finally, whilst on the subject of plant-seeds it may be added that an
impressive number of cereal-identifications has been rendered pos-
sible by impressions of grains on hand-made pottery. Sherds of little
intrinsic significance may in this fashion achieve an accidental im-
portance which justifies and indeed necessitates a careful examination
of every scrap, however featureless otherwise, from the moment of
 discovery onwards. .

                   VARIANT       LAYOUT      FOR   DRY    CLIMATES

 Where rain is not a factor and work can be carried out for weeks on
 end in the open, the task of the pottery-assistant can be simplified by
 the use of a grid outside the pottery-shed.
    A reasonable area adjoining the pottery-shed is carefully levelled
 and smoothed, and a rectangular framework x yards (say, 20 yards)
 square is marked out by neat lines of stones. Within the frame, sub-
 sidiary compartments are formed by similar lines of stones laid down
 in both directions at 1-yard intervals. These subsidiary squares are
 then demarcated by flat wooden labels driven in along the margins
 of the framework and bearing in one direction the denominations of
 the various excavated sites (square-number or trench-number) and
 in the other direction the successive numbers of the layers (525.35
 etc.). Thus every subsidiary square is identified with a horizontal and
 a vertical datum on the excavated site. In the illustration (PI. 20),
 taken from the Arikamedu excavations of 1945, the line of labels
 across the foreground represents the site (A1, A2, A3, etc.) and the
 line receding from the camera represents the layer or stratum.
    The operation of the grid is as follows. As the basket-carriers
                                                                         the
 bring in the labelled baskets of pottery at intervals during the day,
 pottery-assistant empties  the contents, with  their two  labels, carefully
 on to the appropriate square. In the illustration, he is actually empty-
                                                                        This
 ing a basket on to the square representing stratum 8 on site Ag.
                                                            this stage the
     task is never delegated; it must be remembered that at
                                                                    nalysis, see J. G. D.
        1. For an excellent account of the applications of pollen-a
                                    nt of Northern Europe (Cambri dge,   1936), pp- 31 ff.
     Clark, The Mesolithic Settleme

        G                                    193
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

individual shetds are riot snatked, and any careless spilling will irre-
parably transfer a sherd to its wrong stratigraphical position. After
being emptied, the basket, no longer labelled, is sent back to the
éxcavation for re-use.
  The next stage is to inspect the sherds thus lumped and to transmit
all that do not require special treatment to the washers, who in the
illustration are seen squatting under the banyan-tree at the back. The
cotitents of one square only ate washed by each washer or group of
washers at any otie time, otherwise admixture is inevitable. When
dry, the washed sherds are transferred group by group to the table,
where they are further examined by the pottery-assistant (and as
often as possible by the director) and are marked carefully, sherd by
sherd, by the marker under the pottery-assistant’s direction, in accord-
ance with the two labels which still, of course, accompany them.
Finally, the marked sherds are bagged, group by group, with one
label in the bag and the other tied on outside, in accordance with the
procedure already described.




                                  194
                               CHAPTER         I4

                  The Field-Laboratory

AN archaeological chemist must be available to any excavation where
friable or perishable materials are likely to be found, and in most parts
of the world this means that a small field-laboratory is an integral
part of the outfit. It has already been affirmed (above, p. 168) that the
primary functions of the field-chemist are to help in the removal of
fragile objects from the soil and in their subsequent transportation;
to arrest the decay or distortion of objects on exposure; and to clean
objects, notably coins, which must be identified as the excavation pro-
ceeds. He must also, as a guide to later treatment, keep a log-book of
all first-aid administered by him, object by object.
   The chemist does not require extravagant accommodation, but he
must have a plentiful supply of salt-free water. In desert or semi-desert
regions, this is not easy. To test for salinity, a silver nitrate solution
is recommended. The solution is prepared by dissolving 5 gm. of
silver nitrate crystals in 500 c.c. of distilled water, followed by 10 c.c.
of strong nitric acid. The test is carried out thus: Two clean test-tubes
of the same size are half-filled, one with pure water from the expedi-
tion’s reserve and the other with the local water. To each of these
tubes are added ten drops of the silver nitrate solution, and the tubes
are shaken. A white precipitate or milkiness is produced which varies
with the amount of the chlorides (which are invariably present with
other salts) in the water. The milkiness produced in the pure water
will be relatively slight.
   The same test can be applied to water in which salt-impregnated
                                                                                 be
objects, such as pottery, have been washed, and the washing should
continued until the wash-water shows no more reaction than the pure
water.
   Distilled water is also essential, together with the following chemi-
cals, etc.:2
                                                                the Archaeological
   1. Miss Ione Gedye, who is in charge of the laboratory of
          of the Universi ty  of London,  has kindly   prepared  the list on p. 196,
Institute
                             has been good  enough   to read the  chapter.
and Dr H. J. Plenderleith
                                        195
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE   EARTH

  Nitric acid (or hydrochloric acid if nitric is unobtainable).
  Acetone.
  Amyl-acetate.
  Silver nitrate,
  Citric acid.
  Sulphuric acid.
  Acetic acid.
  Ammonia.
  Caustic soda.
  Celluloid cuttings.
  Shellac.
  Bedacryl 122 x.
  Toluol.
  Teepol or similar detergent.
_ Sodium sesquicarbonate.
  Polyvinyl acetate.
  Methylated spirit or alcohol.
  Plaster of Paris.
  Granulated zinc.
  Graphite slab.
  Copper wire.
  Copper and brass rods.
  Batteries or transformer.
  Glass or pottery tank.
  Glass or porcelain dishes and beaker.
  Saucepans.
  Measuring glass.
  Test-tubes.
  Glass bottles.
  Spoons.
  Penknives.
  Wire brushes (steel and brass).
  Nail-brushes.
  Tooth-brushes.
  Paint-brushes (1 inch and 2 inch).
  Emery paper.
  Sand-bath.
  Wire wool,
  Soap.
  ‘Wax (to wax labels).
  Small tag labels.

                                    196
                        THE    FIELD-LABORATORY

  Reinforcing material (sacking, iron rods, and wire).
  Paraffin wax.
  Some source of heat.
   Sandpaper.
   I do not propose here to present a manual of first-aid: several books
are available.1 But to indicate something of the required scope of this
little laboratory, I append a few notes on typical operations.
    1. Metal objects, particularly ironwork, must be preserved suffici-
 ently to enable them to travel without further damage. Iron objects
 can often be salved temporarily by covering them with a plaster
 envelope, a process which must sometimes be done before the
 removal of the objects from the position in which they are found.
 After being thus treated, they should be carefully but firmly bound
 to wooden splints by means of a cloth bandage. (Prior to treatment,
‘however, they should be drawn to scale by the expedition’s drafts-
 man, where possible on a glass plate - see p. 171.) Subsequent treat-
 ment depends upon circumstances, but should normally be deferred
 until full laboratory equipment is available. Paraffin wax (with a
‘high melting-point) has frequently been used instead of plaster as a
‘temporary jacket for metal or other fragile objects, but is a last
 resort. Care must be taken to avoid melting the wax into the objects;
the wax is not easy to remove completely for the subsequent treat-
 ment, and, if salts are thus imprisoned, disintegration is hastened
 rather than delayed.
    2. Coins, if still illegible after drying and brushing, must usually be
 treated on the spot. The nature of the treatment will depend upon
 their metal and its condition, and the field-chemist must be fully
 trained and experienced in this work if he is to do more good than
 harm. In particular, it must at the outset be ascertained whether there is a
reasonable core of the original metal - otherwise the washing away of
 impurities will wash away the coin. (The presence of a metal core in
 a corroded iron object can generally be detected by its being strongly
 attracted by a magnet.) In a majority of instances, where there is a
 considerable surviving core, the electrolytic method is the safest for
 metal, but this is not always feasible. It consists of the suspension of
the object (coin, etc.) on a copper wire attached to the negative pole of
                                                                        1934); also
    1. e.g. H.J. Plenderleith, The Preservation of Antiquities (London,
 Ancient India, no. 1 (Delhi, 1946), pp. 77-82.

                                        197
                ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

 a battery, and immersing it in a 23 per cent caustic soda solution con-
 tained ina glass vessel, in which is immersed a piece of graphite wired
 to the positive pole of the battery. The electric current passes through
 the object and the solution and removes impurities from the metal.
 The difficulty is that the battery needs recharging after 24-48 hours’
 work, and it is not always possible to sustain the necessary battery ser=
 vice. After treatment, the objects are thoroughly washed in distilled
 water and are then coated with bedacryl or polyvinyl acetate or some
 equivalent protective covering; bakelite varnish will serve if nothing
 better is available. Gold, of course, needs no chemical treatment, unless
 marred  by obstinate stains orincrustation      s, can be freed byimmer-
                                               which
  sion in a strong hydrochloric acid or by boiling in a detergent solution.
     Ifthe electrolytic method is considered unsafe, copper or its alloys
  may be cleaned in a mixture of 1 part tartaric acid, 1 part of caustic
" soda, and 10 parts of water. The objects should be kept in the mixture
  until all the green incrustations have been dissolved away, leaving the
  liver-red core behind. They are then thoroughly washed in water and
  finally coated with bedacryl or polyvinyl acetate. An alternative
  treatment is: (i) citric acid, and pickling in 50 per cent sulphuric acid
 to remove any red oxide; (ii) neutralize with ammonia or any alkali
 after the acid treatment; (iii) wash in distilled water; (iv) carry out the
 silver nitrate test with the last wash-water (see above); {v) dry in
 alcohol; and (vi) coat with bedacryl or polyvinyl acetate. Com-
 pletely oxidized copper coins should, at the outset, be left in a 10 per
 cent sodium metaphosphate solution until free from calcareous
 matter. Sometimes this is sufficient to reveal the inscription; if not,
 they should be treated with the above-mentioned tartrate mixture
 diluted to half strength.
    Silver coins and other objects, if the metal is debased with copper
  (as it not infrequently is in the later Roman coinage), can be cleaned
  with 3 per cent sulphuric acid until free from all red spots of copper
  oxide. Thereafter, the coins are brushed and well washed in water.
  Pure silver, if superficially corroded, can be cleaned by immersion in
  dilute ammonia or dilute formic acid. Or it may be wrapped in zinc
  sheeting and suspended for a couple of hours in water acidified with
  a few drops of acetic acid.
    Whatever process be adopted, the director must ensure that at no
  stage is the object separated from its site-label (which should be waxed to
                                     198
                     THE   FIELD-LABORATORY

avoid defacement). The chemist must be sufficiently an archaeologist
to appreciate fully the importance of the label. See that he does not
undertake too much work at any one time; a crowded laboratory
will inevitably lead to confusion of evidence, particularly in the case
of coins and other small objects. When a coin is immersed for cleaning,
its label must be securely attached to the wire whereby it is suspended.
   3. Tablets or seals of unbaked clay, such as are found on Mesopo-
tamian and Indian sites, must be baked carefully for handling and
preservation. This work should be within the scope of any experi-
enced excavator, but, all things being equal, is a fair charge upon the
chemist’s time. The method is fully described and illustrated by P.
Delougaz, “The Treatment of Clay Tablets in the Field’, Studies in
Ancient Oriental Civilization, no. 7 (Chicago, 1933), and need not here
be repeated. It may be added, however, that the exposure of orna-
ment or script is deferred until after the baking and is most effectively
developed, according to moder practice, with the aid of a simple
form of sand blast.
   4. Objects ofwood freshly dug from damp soil are liable to split, warp,
 ot be destroyed altogether on drying. The task in the field is to maintain
 their humidity, for example by embedding them in athick layer of wet
sawdust, moss, or newspaper. Sometimes the wood can be slowly dried
 and the moisture replaced by glycerine, which is retained by a skin of
 10 per cent polyvinyl acetate or shellac in alcohol. Wood from saline
 areas should be washed in salt-free water or treated with applications
 of liquid paper-pulp for the purpose of drawing out the salt.
    An equivalent treatment is necessary for shale and leather.
    The working principle should be to keep all such objects damp
 until they can be handed over to a fully equipped laboratory, and to
 avoid impregnation with wax or other material liable te make per-
 manent conservation difficult (see p. 197).
    5. Bones must be carefully and lightly brushed clean, and can be
 painted or sprayed before removal with polyvinyl acetate diluted
 with toluene or methylated spirits or shellac diluted with methylated
 spirits or alcohol. If the bones can be removed but are still fragile,
 they can be soaked for 3-4 days in a tank containing bedacryl or
 polyvinyl acetate suitably diluted with toluol with an air-space under
 the lid. They should then be laid out on a wire grid, otherwise they
 will stick to everything.
                                    199
                              CHAPTER       I5

                         Photography?!
Tue overriding difficulty of the archaeological photographer is to
induce his camera to tell the truth. That quality is as much a matter
of proper emphasis as of accumulative statement, and not a little of |
the photographer’s time and.skill, both in the field and in the studio,
are devoted to the rescue of the more from the less significant. The
preparation of the subject, the selection of light and angle and lens,
the use or non-use of filters, the choice of ‘hard’, ‘soft’, or ‘medium’
_printing-paper, the differential printing of portions of the same nega~
 tive are all matters which extend the photographer’s function beyond
the limits of mere technical skill. In all of them the director is as            :
busily concerned as is his photographer.
   No attempt is made here to interpolate a manual of photography.
It is assumed that technical proficiency and good equipment are
alike at the director’s disposal. They are not difficult to find. On
the other hand, their efficient utilization is rare enough to be classed
amongst the virtues, and a few notes upon this matter are not out of
place.
   No amount of mechanical skill is a substitute for the careful pre-
paration of the subject. Clean, sharp angles between the divergent —
planes of a section, carefully and emphatically cut with trowel, knife,
or edging-tool, are essential if the section is to tell its story with the
minimum of confusion. Furthermore, a spotlessly clean trench is no —
mere “eye-wash’, if only because it gives the spectator a justifiable
trust in the orderliness and accuracy of the work. Even the top edges —
of a trench should be neatly trimmed and the grass cut and swept
along them; a stray blade of grass in the foreground of the picture —
may be overlooked by the eye but may loom embarrassingly in the
lens. Strata readily distinguishable in nature may merge in the black-
and-white of the plate and may, on occasion, have to be emphasized —
by careful spraying or by additional smoothing or even deliberate
     1. Mr M. B. Cookson has been good enough to check the technical points in
 this chapter.

                                     200
                               PHOTOGRAPHY
 roughening, though such aids should be used only where all other
 methods (e.g. the use of a filter) fail. An example is illustrated on
 Pl. 19. Sometimes, particularly in a dry Eastern climate, a whole
  section may have to be damped to bring out its texture or colouring.
  In one way or another must we thus compensate for the absence of
_ photographic colour until such time as colour-photography becomes
 the normal medium.
    Then there is the selection of light. For most archaeological sub-
 jects in the open there is one optimum moment during the day, and
 the day itself may have to be chosen carefully for sun, shadow, or
 half-light. In the East, where the strong sun usually kills the detail of
 a subject, most of my photography was done in the fleeting moments
 between first light and sunrise. The time-margin in these circum-
 stances is a matter of minutes, and everything must be prepared
 beforehand. In special circumstances reflected sunlight may be em-
 ployed; thus I photographed the sculptures in the Elephanta caves
 near Bombay by means of sunlight reflected into the dark recesses
 by a succession of large mirrors. Whatever the special problem, it
 may in fact be laid down as a general rule that the preparation of a
 subject occupies hours, occasionally days, before the brief session with
 the camera. Innumerable slipshod and uninformative photographs
 in excavation reports (Pl. 22) prove that this elaborate preparation is
 not unnecessary.
    Every archaeological photograph should include a scale, either in
 the form of a graduated rule or rod or in that of a human figure.
  (Adult human skeletons provide their own scale with as much accur-
  acy as may be expected from a photograph.) The scale should nor-
  mally be parallel with the plane of the camera-plate; if the latter is.
  tilted! the graduated scale should be correspondingly tilted, other-
  wise the graduations are in perspective and of variable length. With
  very rare exceptions, the scale must be precisely parallel with the side
  of the plate, and great care should be taken in its placing. Nothing
  looks worse than a scale unintentionally out of the vertical or hori-
  zontal, Incidentally the scale should be clean and unscarred; it is
  preferable to reserve a graduated pole specially for photography.
                                                                            it must be
     1. Note that, however much tilted forward the camera may be,
                      if any horizon is visible, and the levelling of the camera  with
   evel horizontally,
  a bubble-level is one of the first acts of the photographer.
                                          201
              ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

  Care should also be taken to ensure that the scale is in the same
plane as the main feature of the subject. It is surprising how often
this obvious precaution is overlooked, a scale, for example, being
placed considerably nearer the camera than a small object with which
it is supposedly associated. On the other hand, the scale should not
monopolize the attention of the spectator. A central scale is, for this
reason, usually bad. Where the scale is a human being, as is often
desirable in large subjects, the individual thus honoured must remem-
ber that he is a mere accessory, just so many feet of bone and muscle.
I have in front of me as I write.a monumental report on a Palestinian
excavation in which a collotype illustration nominally representing a
building under excavation shows in the centre the figure of the
director facing the camera with a look of smug self-satisfaction, his
hat in his hand so that no feature of interest may escape his admirers.
Another, even more ludicrous, misuse of the human scale further
East is illustrated in Pl. 24b, the sinner again being the director him-
self. Two axioms of the use of the human scale are (1) that the figure
shall not occupy a disproportionately large portion of the picture
(if so, a linear scale must be substituted), and (2) that the figure shall
not look at the camera but shall be ostensibly employed in as imper-
sonal a manner as possible. On occasion the figure can be something
more than a passive scale. For example at Wroxeter, Mr J. P. Bushe
Fox was hard put to it to express the placing of a flue in an un-
spectacular fragment of walling, but eventually lighted upon the
successful device of including in his snapshot a workman pouring a
bucket of water into the upper end of the flue so that the water,
emerging from the lower end, indicated the continuity of the open-
ing through the thickness of the wall.
   With panchromatic plates or films a colour-filter is not usually
necessary. To emphasize reds and blacks, however, and to eliminate
greens and yellows, a green filter may be used with these plates;
whilst a yellow filter will produce tone-values more nearly approxi-
mating to those observed by the naked eye. The red filter will lighten
all reds and yellows, darken all greens and blues (e.g. in the sky, thus
emphasizing clouds), and will separate red from black. Variations of
exposure for panchromatic plates are as follows:

  1. Wrexeter Report 1914 (Soc. Ant. Lond. Research Report), pl. x, fig. 1.

                                    202
                           PHOTOGRAPHY

  With a green filter, an exposure six times as long as normal.
  With a yellow filter, an exposure twice as long as normal.
  With a red filter, an exposure four times as long as normal.

   Orthochromatic or yellow-sensitive plates are not used with a red
filter. The yellow filter with these plates will lighten yellow up to’
light orange and will darken all blues, The variant exposures are as
follows:
  With a green filter, an exposure nine times as long as normal.
  With a yellow filter, an exposure five times as long as normal.
   Other matters of importance are the focal length of the lens and
the regulation of the lens-aperture or ‘stop’. These factors are related
to each other and to the size of the camera. Remarkable results can
be obtained by very small cameras, and on distant expeditions it may
be necessary to adhere to them exclusively. But I have no hesitation
in recommending the use of a full-plate (6} % 84 inches) camera
whenever possible. The main reason for this choice has recently been
concisely expressed by Miss Alison Frantz as follows:
   Lenses are described and identified by their focal lengths. The focal
length, which is fixed for each lens, is approximately the distance be-
tween the lens and the image on the film when the lens is focused on
a distant point. Lenses of different focal lengths may be used, within
reason, on cameras of different sizes. For general use, however, a lens
of focal length equal to or slightly greater than the diagonal of the
picture-area is customary. Therefore the larger the camera the greater
the focal length of its normal lens. The images projected on the film by
lenses of the same focal length at a given distance from the object are
the same size regardless of the size of the camera, and the image-size
increases with the focal length. Therefore a larger camera will take
in a greater field than a smaller camera equipped with the same
lens.}
   Lenses with a short focal length and a proportionately wide angle
of vision are sometimes necessary, particularly at close range in a
confined space. But such a lens exceeds the capacity and expectation
of the human eye and reduces the normal visual emphasis of the sub-
ject, ic. flattens it; so that the effect is distortion and falsification.
                                                                 205.
         1. Archaeology (Arch. Inst. of America), Dec., 1950, p.

                                     203
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE   EARTH

The golden rule is to use as long a focal length (i.e. as narrow a visual
angle) as the subject will permit. And since, as explained above, a
large plate facilitates this procedure by providing a larger and more
inclusive field for any given lens, a large camera is preferable to a
small one.
   In practice, every archaeological camera requires three alternative
lenses: a long-focus (narrow angle) lens, a medium-focus lens, and a
short-focus (wide angle) lens. Something like a 12-inch lens, a 9-inch
lens, and a 6-inch lens, respectively, will suffice in normal usage. To
these may be added a telephoto lens, not often used but occasionally
of great value.
  The use of a large camera with a long-focus lens, however, necessi-         _
tates a proper understanding of the use of the ‘stop’, i.e. of the regu-
lation of the aperture in front of the lens. The depth of the field, or in
other words the distance between the nearest and the farthest points
of sharp focus, decreases as the focal length of the lens increases. On the
other hand, the depth of the field increases as the aperture in the dia-
phragm (or screen in front of the lens) decreases. In a subject of any
appreciable depth, therefore, the one factor has to be set off against
the other. A long or longish lens, desirable to ensure an undistorted
perspective, must be given a greater depth of focus by reducing the
size of the aperture, i.e. by ‘stopping down’. The widest stop is gener-
ally £.6-3, the narrowest £.64, the usual series being 6-3, 8, 11, 16, 22,
32, 45, 64. For subjects of average depth, something midway between
the two extremes — e.g. f.32 - is commonly adequate. It must be
remembered that as the aperture narrows the length of exposure
increases because less light penetrates, the rate of increase being X 2
for each successive smaller stop. Thus if f.22 requires an exposure of
half a minute, £32 will require an exposure of a minute.
   One further point in connexion with the ‘stop’. With any appreci-
able reduction of the aperture, the lens must be focused on the fore-
ground — say, 15 feet from the camera on the average — and not on
the middle distance or background.
  In the actual exposure, care must be taken to avoid halation. Al-
though modern films are normally ‘backed’ or ‘dyed’ to reduce this,
the difficulty is not thereby eliminated. Sky seen through trees or
over a building or rampart may produce indistinctness or fogging
during a long exposure timed to bring out the detail of a dark
                                   204
                            PHOTOGRAPHY

 foreground. When      the lens is within 45 degrees of the sun it
  must be carefully shaded by means of a hat or book or sheet of
  cardboard.
     To the apparatus already indicated for outdoor photography one
  more item should be added: a mobile tower 10-15 feet high. In
_ the East, where supplies and labour were relatively abundant, I
  had a wooden tower run up on every major site (Pl. 21). In
  Britain also towers of various designs have been widely used,
  though here I generally use trestles borrowed locally - a lazy man’s
  substitute.
     So much for out-of-doors. For the indoor photography of indi-
  vidual objects many of the same rules or recommendations apply but
  a few others may be added. When possible, it is the convention that
  objects shall be lighted from the top left, but this usage has often to
  be varied in order to emphasize a design or inscription for which
  some other angle is more suitable. In any case a proportion of reflected
  light, transmitted from a white board or a sheet of tin or a board
  covered with tin-foil, is usually necessary to show up the shadowy
  side and to lift the object from its background. In a fully equipped
  studio, artificial lighting may be used throughout, and with experi-
  ence, undoubtedly yields the most reliable results.
     For background I prefer black velvet save when the object itself
  approximates to that colour. For dark objects, a sheet of glass raised
  4 or § inches above a sheet of light-coloured (not quite white) paper
 on four corner-blocks gives a good shadowless background. Pure
 white paper may produce a slight halation. When, as in the photo-
 graphy of coins, it is desirable to include both sides of an object on
 the same plate, by interrupting the exposure and turning the object
 over, a black background is of course essential.
    In photographing an object at close range, it is important to ensure
that the scale is in or very near the frontal plane. Otherwise, if the
 object is of any considerable depth and the scale is placed on the back-
 ground, an appreciable disparity will result. In these circumstances the
 scale should be raised to the required height on a thin strip of wood or
 plasticine.
    Whatever the subject, the background and lighting should be such
 that no cutting out is subsequently necessary on the film or plate. To
 have to block out an irrelevant shadow or other feature is a confession
                                    205
               ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

of failure and, particularly if the object is a work of art, materially
reduces the value of the record.
   Lastly, all field-photographs must be developed immediately. Many of
them cannot be repeated at a later date, and the director must be
assured of his results within 20 minutes of the exposure. Rough
prints should follow within 12 hours.

            ADMINISTRATION        AND    RECORD    KEEPING


The photographer’s notebook. must contain all details relating to
time, position, exposure, and filter used. Thus

                   Harappa

                   Site E, Sect. X, South face

                   11.45 hrs. Strong sunlight

                   12” lens. Red filter. F.22. 3 secs.

   Ease of access to negatives is essential from the outset of an excava-
tion and, to this end, all negatives made and approved should be
numbered with a serial number orientation, the page in the site-super-
visor’s notebook, and, if possible, the position on the site and the
general plan or the drawing number (see below). It is quite simple to do
all this in the rebate or margin made by the dark slide, and the work
should be carried out with waterproof ink and a mapping pen, If
Cellophane envelopes are used for storing negatives, then the same
details will be added to the envelope, together with the type of print-
ing paper used in the print produced, Thus, if the Negative Register
is ever lost or destroyed, the details would still be available. In the
same manner the keeping of a Negative Register is essential, colum-
nized to receive all the foregoing details but with an added ‘Remarks’
column in which notes can be made of such matters as the existence
of lantern-slide negatives of the same subject, or whether the negative
has been used for publication, the date and reference of publication
being given.

                                  2.06
                             PHOTOGRAPHY

                           Diagrammatic Examples
               Negatives                                            Negative bag

237. RANCHI.    SITE SECT.         X.                    237
                                                         RANCHI
                                                         SITE B. SEGT. X
                                                         SOUTH FACE HUMUS
                                                               REMOVED
                                                         NOTEBOOK 10. P.41
                                                         DRAWING NO. 15
                                                         KODAK BROMIDE GRADE 5
                                                         TOMSHES


                                         “BMI
                                         ‘1h
                                         “STON
                                         “GN
                                         "gq
                                         01


                               Negative Register
RANCHI
                                                Siip.
                                    Drwwg. | note-
 serial } Site | Section       |        no. | book                     Remarks
 ay        E          x                  15         10    | Humus removed. Interim
                  South face                   | p. 41           Report pl. x.
                                                               Lantern-slide made.


                                        EQUIPMENT

In summary, the archaeological photographer in the field needs the
following equipment:

   1. A field camera of strong construction, full-plate size (64    83
      inches), with rising and  falling lens-panel and swing-back .
      At least six dark slides, each to hold two plates or films, and
        numbered.
      . Not less than three lenses: a long-focus lens, a medium-focus
      lens, and a short focus or wide angle. All should be of the best
      quality and anastigmatic, with a maximum aperture of £6°3
      (most of the exposures will be ‘time’). A telephoto lens may
      usefully be added for occasional use.
   3. Aset of filters (red, green, and yellow) to fit each lens or adapted
       to fit the whole series of lenses.

                                              207
                 ARCHAEOLOGY       FROM     THE   EARTH

   4. A heavy tripod, capable of raising the camera to a height of 6 feet,
       with a ‘tilting head’ to enable vertical photographs to be taken.
     . A 6-inch bubble-level.
   AW A large focusing cloth.
     .
   7. A small hand-camera of the Retina Contax or Rollicord type for
       speed or colour work.
   8. A small box which can hold paint-brush, small scales, pins, and
       plasticine.
   9. Tanks or dishes, one for developer, one for fixing, and one for
      washing. For economy, use packed developer and hypo powder
      in tins.
  io. Printing frame. Chétorines from negatives will have to be made
      in the field, and, since conditions are likely to be cramped, the
      printing can be carried out with a printing frame. Bromide paper
      in three grades (soft, normal, and contrast) is required.

  Note. For both negative-development and printing, a small timing
clock is an essential, together with a thermometer to ensure that all
solutions are at a working temperature. In Great Britain even in
summer it is necessary on occasion to bring the developer tempera-
ture up to 65° F., and in Eastern countries it often becomes essential to
bring the solution down to a maximum of 75° F. by the use of ice.




                                   208
                                    CHAPTER       16


                    Publication and Publicity
  ‘A piscoveEry dates only from the time of the record of it, and not
  from the time of its being found in the soil.’ This classic sentence of
  Pitt Rivers proclaims fairly and squarely the ultimate moral and
  scientific duty of the field-archaecologist. It may be amplified by the
  familiar corollary that unrecorded excavation is the unforgivable
  destruction of evidence; and the more complete and scientific the
  excavation, the greater the measure of destruction. The less per-
  sistent methods of an older age may yet leave vital evidence for
  recovery: for example, in Lydney Park, Gloucestershire, a prehistoric
  and Romano-British site dug very extensively by an antiquary in
   1805 retained all the evidence necessary to reconstruct its character
_ and chronology by re-excavation in 1929. But to-day a site com-
   prehensively excavated by modern methods may be practically
- gutted of its evidence, and must be written off. The emphasis is on the
   word ‘written’.
      The first task in the compilation of an excavation-repott is ade-
   quate illustration. In this matter there is little to add, in principle, to
   Sir Flinders Petrie’s assertion half a century ago that ‘nowadays the
   main structure of a book on any descriptive science is its plates’. In
         fact, Petrie’s own standards of illustration, genius though he was,
  generally fell far short of those of his older contemporary, Pitt Rivers,
  and would not be accepted by the average British excavator of to-
  day. Nevertheless, his chapter on publication! stands as a fair general
_ statement of the theory of the business.
     In the matter of literary content it may be said that there are two
  preliminary problems to consider: those of substance and of form.
  First, how much detail shall a report contain? The answer is necessarily
  conditioned in some degree by circumstance. Quantitatively, Pitt
  Rivers digging a reluctant ditch in Cranborne Chase and Petrie
  digging a crowded cemetery in Egypt are up against very different
  propositions. Let us glance at their reactions.
                      1. Methods and Aims in Archaeology, pp. 114-21.
                                            209
eMATTE
               ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

  Pitt Rivers approaches the problem with a formidable combination
of acute sense and Victorian probity.
   The record of an éxcavatot [he says] takes about five times as long as
the actual digging. ... In my fourth volume ... everything has been
recorded, however small and however common. ... Everything has
been drawn, down to the most minute fragment of pottery that had a
pattern on it. Common things are of more importance than particular
things, because they are more prevalent. I have always remembered a
remark of Professor Huxley’s in one of his addresses. ‘The word “‘im~
portance”’,’ he said, ‘ought to be struck out of scientific dictionaries;
that which is important is that which is persistent.” Common things
vary in form, as the idea of them passes from place to place, and the
date of them and of the places in which they are found may sometimes
be determined by gradual variations of form. There is no knowing
what may hereafter be found to be most interesting. Things apt to be
overlooked may afterwards turn out to be of the greatest value in
tracing the distribution of forms. This will be admitted when it is recog-
nized that distribution is a necessary prelude to generalization. I regret
to find in endeavouring to trace the distribution of patterns, that archae-
ological societies illustrate fewer things than formerly. It is thought,
perhaps, that when a form has become commion, there is no use repeat-
ing or even recording it. This is a great mistake in my opitiion. ... The
illustrations need not be elaborate, but sufficient to trace the transitions
of forms.

  The General goes on to describe his modus operandi.
   The compilation of a work of so much detail necessitates the employ-
mient of clerks. I make it a rule that nothing in the letter-press should be
issued that is not in my own writing, and of course I am responsible for
the whole. But the calculation of the numerous and tedious indices; the
compilation of relic tables; the photographs; the identification, mea-
surement and restoration of the skulls, bones and pottery;, the surveys,
the contouring; careful labelling and correction of proofs; the draw-
ing of the plates; . . . requires the assistance of at least three men of
 different qualifications. Living in my house [he adds with a delightful
 Victorian smugness] they must necessarily be men of good character
as well as energy. Those who have left me have generally obtained
more lucrative employments. ... As a rule I have been well served by
my clerks.
             1. Excavations in Cranborne Chase, iv (1898), 37-8.

                                     210
                 PUBLICATION        AND     PUBLICITY

   Thus Pitt Rivers. Petrie, overwhelmed by the mass of finds from
his Egyptian sites, seeks refuge less in men of good character than in
basic index-series or corpora, to which newly found material can be
briefly and simply related.
   The practical utility of such a corpus is found at once when excavating.
Formerly it was needful to keep dozens of broken specimens, which
were of no value except for the fact of being found along with other
vases. Now the excavator merely needs to look over the corpus of plates,
and writes down on the plan ofthe tomb, say B 23, P 35 b, C15, F 72,
thus the whole record is made, and not a single piece need be kept unless
it is a good specimen.

   Be it repeated that these two different methods arise from different
local problems, and for neither can universal validity be claimed.
There cannot be the slightest doubt that the Pitt Rivers system is the
ideal aim, but it is only feasible where the material is limited in quan-
tity, or where it does not lend itself to corpus classification: that is,
where it is too fragmentary or variable for easy systematization. It
cannot be disputed that in the more evolved industries, with which
Petrie mostly dealt, a useful corpus-system can and should be evolved.
An obvious example of a ceramic susceptible of corpus treatment is
Roman terra sigillata or Samian ware, which is, or shortly should be,
nearly as capable of a detailed standard notation as are Roman coins.
These are now becoming a relatively simple matter. Thus in a report
of mine some years ago Mr B. H. St J. O’Neil, later Chief Inspector
of Ancient Monuments,         was able to list the Roman       coins with
abbreviated references largely to the then new standard works of
Mattingly and Sydenham, and thereby compressed his reasoned
catalogue of 1,668 coins into eleven pages. This achievement may be
contrasted with the allocation of eighty pages to 1,000 coins required
in the Wroxeter reports in the same series, issued before the Mat~
tingly-Sydenham corpus was published. In other words, publication
without the corpus occupied twelve times as much space as publication
with the corpus. The advantages of a scholarly corpus or yardstick need
no further emphasis in such cases, and the extension of the corpus-
system is certainly no less urgent now than it was in Petrie’s day. But
always with the proviso that it presents a very serious danger: it lends
itself to loose usage and to the overlooking of those subtle variations
                                    211
               ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

of form, the importance of which Pitt Rivers rightly emphasized.
Generally speaking, only an evolved and largely mechanized industry
offers suitable material for a corpus. In practice, particularly in a mal-
leable material such as pottery (unless made in moulds), it will always
have to be extensively supplemented by individual illustration.
   Whilst on the subject of the illustration of pottery, it may be re-
called as a matter of passing interest that 1952 marked the centenary
of the systematic sectional illustration of pottery in this country.
The method, now standard, whereby a pot is represented wholly or
partly in section, although used. occasionally by Samuel Lysons early
in the nineteenth century, was first formulated by (Sir) John Evans in
his report on ‘Roman remains found at Box Moor, Herts.’, published
in Archaeologia in 1852. He there shows four Samian vessels in section,
and is at pains to describe his modus operandi. His description is a
curious legacy from a painstaking age, and the description is worth
quoting.
   As the taking an accurate section of vessels such as those delineated
[he writes] at fitst sight presents some little difficulty, it may not be alto-
gether useless to record the process by which these sections were
obtained. The piece of Samian ware after being slightly greased was
plunged into fine sand, in a direction perpendicular to the axis of the
vessel, to within about a quarter of an inch of the centre, and the surface _
of the sand was then made level. A thin mixture of plaster of Paris was
next poured upon the sand until its upper surface was level with the
centre of the vessel. When this was set, the fragment of Samian and the
plaster were removed from the sand, and the plaster broken into a suffi-
cient number of pieces to set the fragment free, and these pieces being
reunited with their upper side downwards on a piece of paper, gave a
section from which the form of the vessel could be accurately traced.

All this is a little reminiscent of the burning-down of the swineherd’s
cottage to procure roast pig; but in substance the procedure was a
cardinal one, and is not the least of the many gifts for which our
 discipline is indebted to the great Evans clan.
    I turn now to the second of our preliminary problems, that of the
form which the excavation-report should assume. Here there is more
room than usual for idiosyncrasy. Certain desiderata can, however,
be premised. The report is intended primarily for the specialist-
 reader, but even the specialist may be accredited with a measure of
                                     212
                  PUBLICATION          AND    PUBLICITY

‘human frailty. He is not above the appreciation of conciseness, clarity,
 and ready accessibility — three virtues which are less common than
 they should be in such literature. The Royal Society, in a pamphlet
 issued recently on “The Preparation of Scientific Papers’, has clear
 words upon this matter. “Most [scientific] journals’, it remarks with
 an amiable cynicism, ‘prefer papers written for the moderate special-
 ist, that is to say, an author should write, not for the half-dozen
people in the world specially interested in his line of work, but for
the hundred or so who may be interested in some aspect of it if the
paper is well written.’ After all, an excavation-report is a scientific
newspaper, with news-paragraphs, leading-articles, stock-market,
 hatch-match-and-despatch, and even “small wants’. Let the writer of
 it study unashamedly the higher forms of journalism, and neither he
 nor his clientele will lose thereby. And just as, in a newspaper, one
 does not want or expect to read solidly from front to back in order to
 discover the salient news and views of the day, so in a well-balanced
 excavation-report the student may properly expect to discover some-
 thing of the wood without a prolonged, tedious, and exasperating
 hunt amongst the trees. Of course the trees must be there, or the wood
 would not exist. But, alas, how many reports are merely jungle! -
 biblia a-biblia, fit only to be added to Elia’s catalogue of books which
-are no books.
    A year or two ago, a joint-meeting of three sections of the British
 Association for the Advancement of Science discussed ‘The presen-
 tation of technical information’, and the primary speaker, Professor
 R. O. Kapp, had much that was pertinent to say. To-day, he ob-
 served, talk and paper were among the more important of the tools
 with which the scientist and the engineer had to work. Time was just
 as precious when reading a report as it was when using an instrument,
 and the worker could not afford to wait while a verbose author was
 developing an argument at unnecessary length. If one could justify
 training for research one could justify training in the art of exposition.
 Let scientists attempt deliberately and systematically to raise the
 standards of exposition in all its aspects, and try to perfect and teach it.
 Until that was done, science would continue to be hampered by the
 bad work of poor expositors. Professor Kapp was followed and
    1. General Notes on the Preparation of Scientific Papers (London, the Royal
 Society, 1950), p. 3-

                                      213
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE    EARTH

reinforced by the representative of a distinguished firm of publishers,
who remarked that in ten years, of over 600 articles of a scientific kind
read and checked for publication, only five authors had sent in manu-
scripts in such a form that they could be forwarded to the printer
without delay or query. He might well have added an old dictum of
J. M. Barrie’s: ‘The Man of Science appears to be the only man who
has something to say, just now - and the only man who does not
know how to say it.’ It is but fair, however, to add that our leading
scientists are to-day aware of this shortcoming. At the Royal Society's
Scientific Information Conference in 1948 considerable concern was
expressed about the quality of scientific papers presented for publica-
tion, and the pamphlet (already referred to, p. 213) on “The Prepara-
tion of Scientific Papers’ was a result. Nor are the disease and its
remedies confined to the scientific world. I commend to all and
sundry two excellent booklets issued as directives to the Civil
 Service in an attempt to purge official English. They are entitled
Plain Words and are from the experienced pen of Sir Ernest Gowers.*
They are admirable reading and should be in the hand of every
 archaeologist.
  Yet another word may be said upon this matter, for it is near to the
heart of the business. I would appeal for a little more artistry in our
scholarship. A generation ago, G. M. Trevelyan was inveighing
against the dullness of historians, and we archaeologists are certainly
in no better case.
 . The idea that histories [Trevelyan said] which are delightful to read
must be the work of superficial temperaments, and that a crabbed style
betokens a deep thinker or conscientious worker, is the reverse of truth.
What is easy to read has been difficult to write. The labour of writing
and rewriting, correcting and recorrecting, is the due exacted by every
good book from its author, even if he knows from the beginning exactly
what he wants to say. A limpid style is invariably the result of hard
labour, and the easily flowing connexion of sentence with sentence and
paragraph with paragraph has always been won by the sweat of the
brow,?
That is, of course, as true to the archaeologist as to the historian.
   1. Sir E. Gowers, Plain Words; A Guide to the Use ofEnglish (H.M. Stationery
Office, 1948), and ABC of Plain Words (same, 1951).
   2. Clio a Muse and other Essays (London, 1913), p. 34-

                                     214
                 PUBLICATION          AND     PUBLICITY

Sweating with the pen is no less important than sweating with the
spade. And Trevelyan cannot be bettered when he stresses the literary
function of the historian,
the exposition of the results of science and imagination in a form that
will attract and educate our fellow countrymen. . . . I wish [he adds] to
lay greater stress than modern historians are willing to do both on the
difficulty and also on the importance of planning and writing a power-
ful narrative. ... Arrangement, composition and style are not as easily
acquired as the art of typewriting. Literature never helps any man at his
task until, to obtain her services, he is willing to be her faithful appren-
tice. Writing is not, therefore, a secondary but one of the primary tasks
of the historian.’
   Of this excessively neglected matter of literary style more will be
said later in the chapter. Meanwhile, it is opportune at this point to
consider the form and planning of an excavation-report. Plain and
effective writing implies a plain and effective structure, and even
second-rate expression may sometimes pass if the basic arrangement
is sound and simple. At the risk of raising a personal prejudice to 2
ptinciple, I would lay down certain constituents as a sine qua non of
every excavation-report. There need be little hesitation in demanding
that the report shall begin with a very short summary, giving the
main headings of the matter, the plot of the play, so that the reader
is at once in possession of the context of all that follows. This summary
may usefully be isolated in italics; let there be no mistake as to what
and where it is. The nature of the second section of the report is more
variable, depending upon the scope and character of the material.
Where complex issues are involved, it is useful to have here a reasoned
review and interpretation of the new evidence in the light of previous
knowledge, recounting the new evidence only in sufficient detail to
indicate the nature and degree of its authority. How far interpretation
should partake of ‘theory’ at this stage and in this factual context is
matter for judgement and opportunity. But an element of theory
there must be if our facts are to mean anything. Julian Huxley well
expressed it when he said that ‘facts are too bulky to be lugged about
conveniently except on wheels of theory’.* The facts of to-day are
largely the selected and verified theory of yesterday. Once more, it
                 1. Ibid., p. 31.
                 2. Essays of a Biologist (London, 1926), p- 32.
                                      215
                ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

  is all a matter of proportion, and incidentally of a conscientious bor-
  derline between fact and theory, in so far as it is humanly possible to
  distinguish the two. In any case, either succeeding or preceding this
~ section must, of course, come the full statement of structural and
  stratigraphical evidence which is the hard core of the whole report,
  followed by description and analysis of the finds. Lastly, it is some-
  times useful (before a very full index) to include a short postscript to
  tie up loose ends and to indicate future needs, Appendices may deal
  with specially detailed-or controversial problems, but it is not usually
  advisable to clutter up an already elaborate report with an excessive
  number of appended essays.
     In brief, the nucleus of a report comprises: summary, synthetic
  review, full statement of evidence, discussion of general context,
  appendices (if any), index; and, however elaborated, these cardinal
  features should be clearly defined, immediately obvious and acces-
  sible to the reader.
     So much for the general shape of the report. Of details I do not
  propose to say very much, unless to reiterate the plea for brevity.
  There are reports that are excellent in substance but of such a pro-
  lixity as to make them difficult and painful of access. Suitable models
  are, however, readily available in our own language, and still shining
  at the head of them is Dr James Curle’s monumental work on New-
  stead, published as long ago as 1908. The importance of a clear
  exposition of the geographical and physiographical features of the
  site is now reasonably well understood, thanks largely to the work of
  O. G. S. Crawford, Cyril Fox, Stuart Piggott, and Grahame Clark
  in these matters. The “synthetic section’ of the report will deal also
  with the distribution of forms: we may recall once more the Pitt
  Rivers axiom — ‘distribution is a necessary prelude to generalization’
  - with the renewed reminder that a secondary function of the field-
  worker, if he be something more than a mere technician, is to place
  the evidence which he garners in its general context. Relic-tables, such
  as those evolved by General Pitt Rivers, have largely been abandoned
  by his successors in publication (though not in the field), and I am
  inclined to regret their omission. In suitable circumstances, particu-
  larly in dealing with the classification of a new or little-known
  culture, they serve a useful purpose, provided that they are associated
  with adequate sectional illustration. Graphs are sometimes a con-
                                    216
                   PUBLICATION          AND    PUBLICITY

 venient and concise form of record: here again we may easily forget
 that the General led the way,1 though in recent years Grahame Clark
 has developed them effectively for pollen distribution? and Chris-
 topher Hawkes for pottery.® Soil-analysis, where appropriate, is of
 such importance as to demand a special treatment which lies outside
 the scope of this book.
    But always we come back to the vital and basic problem of illus-
 tration. All along the line, the excavator’s fundamental function is
 that of record, primarily pictorial record. And in the preparation of
 his pictorial record he must clearly understand those technical pro-
 cesses of pictorial reproduction to which his draftsmanship and his
 photography must be subordinated if his published record is to do
 justice to his work. Satisfactory presentation is by no means a mono-
 poly of the printer and the blockmaker. Authors and editors must
  know exactly what they want, and exactly what the technicians and
  their machines and the kind of paper available may legitimately be
  expected to achieve. To this chapter are appended brief descriptions
  of the processes commonly used for archaeological illustration; here
  I would merely emphasize as an elderly editor that too many authors
  are insufficiently aware of them. It is indeed highly advisable — one
  might say essential - for the student, as a part of his archaeological
  training, to visit a blockmaker and to see the processes in operation.
  Pity the poor blockmaker! His task at the best is no easy one.
     A few other elementary exhortations may be added. Let us see to
- it that our maps, plans, diagrams, photographs state their purpose
  lucidly and concisely, without excessive margins and other waste
  space, illegible or untidy figures and lettering, or other irrelevant
  litter; and let them be printed on the right kind of paper. ‘Of course’,
  you will remark; but in self-justification I reproduce here two
                                                                         y
  illustrations from standard archaeological publications as cautionar
                                                          ensure clean
  examples (Pl. 24, a and b). Let us in our line-drawings
                                                                        properly
  lines, with proper differential emphasis, and simple lettering
           ated  into the ‘picture’ with  a justsense   of balance.  And  though
  incorpor
                                                 is of  secondar  y  importan ce,
  the artistic appeal of a scientific drawing
                                         e  factor.  It is at least as importan t
  aesthetic quality is not a negligibl
                1. Cranborne Chase, i, following p. 162.
                                                                &c.
                2. Antig. Journ. xvi (1936), 35; XX (1940), 68,
                3. Camulodunum (London, 1947)» P- 175+
                                        217
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

as is good literary form in the text. It can help to attract and hold the
eye, and so tighten the liaison between author and reader - an emi-
nently desirable objective. In an archaeological photograph, a clear-
cut, well-swept subject will tell its story with least effort to the
spectator and will, incidentally, carry additional conviction as evi-
dence of deliberation (contrast Pl. 22). It is a sound general rule that
untidy work is muddled work. All that I have said in the earlier part
of this chapter about the need for clarity of literary style applies to
the all-important matter of illustration.
   So much for general principle. In practice, as we all well know,
archaeological illustrations are normally reproduced in one of three
ways: (a) by half-tone block, (6) by line-block, or (c) by lithograph
(direct and offset). Collotype and equivalent processes are sometimes
used, particularly in foreign publications, with results which may be
superficially attractive, even sumptuous; but detail is liable to be lost
in inky shadows, and the result does not, as a rule, compete with good
half-tone. It should be added, however, that the plates in the present
book are reproduced by photogravure. Colour-processes are here
omitted, although they have manifest advantages over black-and-
white and will in due course become the normal medium. Indeed, they
would doubtless already be the standard method, but for the mess
which the world has made of its economics during the past dozen
years.
                                    *


But it is time to pass on to another aspect of the subject: to turn from
the problems attendant upon scientific publication to a related matter
which is at the same time easier and more difficult: to the not unim-
portant question of publicity and vulgarization.
   Once more we may begin with Pitt Rivers. Speaking in 1897 he
Jaments the inadequacy (at that period) of archaeological publicity.
   If ever a time should come [he observes] when our illustrated news-
‘papers take to recording interesting and sensible things, a new era will
have arrived in the usefulness of these journals. The supply, of course,
must equal the demand, but the demand shows what intensely stupid
people we are. People bowing to one another appears to form the staple
of those productions, as if it were not bad enough for those who are
compelled actually to take part in such functions. Field sports are no

                                  218
                  PUBLICATION           AND     PUBLICITY

doubt things to be encouraged, but can it be necessary to have a picture
of a man running after a ball on every page of every illustrated journal
in this country? Let us hope for evolution in this as in all other things.
It is gratifying to observe that, since 1897, evolution has not been
idle in this matter. Within the last thirty years, our leading news-
paper has seen fit to acquire exclusive rights in the primary publica-
tion of an Egyptian tomb. Another daily newspaper has financed the
excavation of a Roman amphitheatre in Wales. Yet another has dug
for prehistory in the bed of the Thames at Brentford, under arc-lamps
at midnight. A well-known illustrated weekly is frequently first in
the field in the announcement of archaeological discovery. Pulvis et
umbra are news-items, and the excavator is perpetually harassed by
 amiable young men and women with probing pencils and cameras.
In such circumstances, whether he wills it or no, it pays the excavator
to give his courteous attention. A ‘story’ is in any case in the making
and, if it is to have any sort of authenticity, its fabricator must be led
gently up the right sort of path. The press is not always accurate and
does not always emphasize those aspects of an excavation which are
scientifically the most important; but sympathetic help is the best
corrective of these failings, and may be regarded as a scientific no
Jess than a social duty on the part of the modern archaeologist.
   Long ago, G. M. Trevelyan remarked that ‘if historians neglect to
                                                                     past,
educate the public, if they fail to interest it intelligently in the
                                     is  valueles s except in so far as  it
then all their historical learning
                                                                         has been
 educates themselves’.1 Recently, Mrs Jacquetta Hawkes
 urging much the same thing.
                                                                   the
   This [she remarks] is the century of the common man. Just as in
                                                            to the art
 eighteenth and nineteenth centuries archaeology was adding
                                                        furniture of the
‘collections, the architecture, interior decoration and
                                                                       we must take
 wealthy and aristocratic, so it seems that in the twentieth
                               it add  somethi   ng   to  the  life of  a democratic
 deliberate pains to make
           Our   subject has  social  responsib ilities   and  opportunities which
 society.
                                                                      and books and
 it can fulfil through school education, through museums
            all the instrume nts   of what   is  often   rather  disagreeably called
 through
                                                  films and now tele-
 ‘mass communications’ — the press; broadcasting,
                                                      to contemporary life
 vision. Ifarchaeology is to make its contribution
                                    jettison ed by society, all its followers,
 and not risk sooner or later being
                                1. Clio, &c., p. 18.

                                         219
                   ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE    EARTH

 even the narrowest specialists, should not be too proud to take part in
 its diffusion. I would go further and say that we should not forget the
 problems of popular diffusion in planning our research.
    Indeed, at the present time the public is prepared, nay eager, to meet
 the scientist more than half-way. It is now up to the scientist to con-
 tribute his share. To do him justice he is not unaware of this duty.
 There may yet linger in remote cloisters a few pedants of the old
 school who will have none of this vulgarization, but their mortality-
 rate is happily high. The modern scientist increasingly recognizes the
 public as his partners. He spreads the empyrean at their feet; he serves
 up to them the principles of evolution in simple language, sometimes
 spiced a little with a topical tendentiousness. A monumental work
 entitled A Study of History is a best-seller in ten volumes. Prehistoric
 Britain and Prehistoric India are popular Pelican books. A scholarly
 account of the Pyramids of Egypt finds thousands of readers. Of
~ Digging up the Past a quarter of a million copies have, I believe, been
  sold. And so on. In this welter there is no secret refuge for the field-
  archaeologist. Ifhe would hide, he must hide in the limelight.
     All this is as it should be. A present-day excavation must provide
  for the General Public as a routine activity. Indirectly at least, that
  public is paying for a good deal of archaeology, through the national
  or rate-aided museums, through the Ministry of Works, through
  various Royal Commissions, through the universities, through archae-
  ological schools overseas in Italy, Greece, Turkey, Iraq, and Jerusalem,
  through the British Council, and in a variety of other ways. In spite
  of taxation, it still contributes also a little directly and personally as a
  testimony of its practical interest. The popes and princes of the
  Renaissance have in fact been replaced by the British taxpayer. How-
  ever embarrassing its attentions may be on occasion, the public is
  now in one way and another our patron, and must be cultivated and
  suitably rewarded.
     On all my major excavations I have accordingly made some special
  provision for this incidental partner to our work. I may again quote
  from one of my reports on a site in Dorset.
    Under conditions of unobtrusive discipline, the general public were
    1. ‘Purpose in Prehistory’, in London and Middlesex Arch. Soc. Trans., N.S.,
  X (1951), 198.
                                      220
                  PUBLICATION           AND     PUBLICITY

deliberately encouraged to visit the site. Notices directed the visitor’s
approach from the nearest main road. He was told (by notices) where to
park his car and where to apply for information. Throughout the exca-
vations it was the duty of an official guide-lecturer either to explain the
work to visitors or to organize reliefs of student-lecturers who, for regu-
lated periods, undertook this task, which, incidentally, provided for
the students in question an admirable training in clear thinking and
simple exposition. The public was not charged for these services, but
‘was invited to contribute to the cost of the work — a system which is in
practice both more democratic and more productive than a fixed tariff.
And, finally, a well-stocked postcard-stall is as popular as it is profit-
able. Picture-postcards of the site can be produced [or rather, could be-
fore 1939] at a cost of little more than a halfpenny each and will sell
readily at twopence each. Interim reports of the work, produced at
fourpence each, will sell at one shilling each. [Approximately 64,000
postcards and 16,000 interim reports were sold at the site in question.]
... In such multifarious ways can the present-day public be drawn to
contribute directly or indirectly to archaeological research.

    I would particularly stress the value to the archaeologist himself of
 speaking to and writing for the General Public. It is not difficult to be
 a specialist, to write fairly intelligibly for two or three fellow-special-
 ists, to produce ‘a preparation of opium distilled by a minority for a
 minority’. I know a distinguished archaeologist who claims that he
 writes for five people; most of us are less ambitious. And as specialists
 we tend to develop a sort of professional jargon which is a deterrent
 to a wider audience and ultimately a handicap to the specialist him-
‘self, [have already in this chapter quoted from the proceedings of the
British Association, and I am now reminded of a relevant presidential
address at an earlier meeting of the same eminent body. At this meet-
ing attention was drawn to the plague of pedantic verbiage which
had infested modern science, and a plea was made for simplification
and classification. That plea was a timely one; it might fittingly have
been extended from professional science to professional sport, to the
cinematograph industry and to professional journalism in general.
‘The danger of all this jargon, at any rate in science, is not merely that
it alienates the ordinary educated man but that it is a boomerang
liable to fly back and knock the sense out of its users. In the words of
                                                                          but singu-
   1. R. le Gallienne, Prose Fancies (1895), p. 81, speaking of poetry,
larly appropriate to much archaeology!
                                        221
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

the infallible Quiller-Couch, ‘If your language isJargon, your intel-
lect, if not your whole character, will almost certainly correspond.
Where your mind should go straight, it will dodge: the difficulties it
should approach with a fair front and grip with a firm hand it will
seek to evade or circumvent.’ I have been turning over the pages of
an excellent journal which makes it its business to present the results
of scientific archaeology to the general public, and my eye has fallen
upon three articles by three of the most eminent archaeologists of the
day. On one page I am caught up in the hyphenated tongue-twister
“leaf-shaped-sword-culture-complex’; on another I am invited to
consider ‘the diagnostic value of negative lynchets’; on a third I am
informed that certain place-names ‘were left by the equestrian inhum-
ators who brought in the later Hallstatt culture’. (One almost expects
to turn the page and find a reference to *tram-riding cremators’.)
An excellent friend of mine, in an attempt to distinguish between
the significant and the accidental aspects of megalithic tombs, has
recently brought to birth two hideous monstrosities, the twins
genomorph and phenomorph. I pray in all friendliness that they may be
short-lived. Yet another of my friends has attempted to make the
fairly simple phrase “historical approach’ easy for us by defining it as
“the endeavour to achieve a conceptual integration of individual
phenomena in terms of specified time and space’. For a less academic
parallel to this sort of thing I need look no further than the newspaper
which lies beside me as I write: on its front pages is a quotation from
a diplomatic manifesto in which the United States reaffirms ‘its stand
against unilateral cancellation of contractual relationships and actions
of a confiscatory nature’ - lovely phrase! Well, well; so one might
go on; I have in fact quoted relatively innocuous examples of a wide-
spread and malignant disease — far worse might readily be found,
Admittedly, an advancing science is from time to time faced with a
genuine and rational need for new nomenclature, new phrasing. But
let the need be met with restraint and circumspection. One word is
not necessarily more economical than two, whatever may be said
elsewhere (in other contexts) to the contrary. On the other hand, one
word will suffice to describe the scientific argot of which I am speak-
ing; and that word is Hokum, an alternative to Quiller-Couch’s
‘Jargon’. Let us purge our writing and our thinking of Hokum. It is
an infection to which the over-educated and the under-educated are

                                  222
                    PUBLICATION     AND    PUBLICITY

alike prone. G. M. Trevelyan oncé lamented a comparable failitig
amonest histotians. ‘The substitution of a pseudo-scientific for a
literary attnosphere in historical circles’, he wrote, ‘las not only done
much to divorce history from the outside public, but has dimimshed
its humanizing power over its own devotees in school and wiii-
versity.”
  A household remedy for this disease is not far to séek. It is to be
found in deliberate and periodical vulgarization. My advice to the
aspiring archaeologist is, Go and explain your ideas, young man, to
the Much-binding-on-the-Marsh Antiquarian Society and Field
Club. Shun all that is comprised in ‘gobbledygook’, that wonderful
American carpet-bag for wordy atid woolly pomposity;? use lan+
guage intelligible to the local bitd-scarer. Then at last you will begin
to understand yourself if you have aught to say. Let us not scorn the
profanum vulgus, In fact some of our greatest archaeologists and anthro-
pologists have needed no reminder in this matter. The classic Romani-
zation of Roman Britain, by Haverfield, J. G. Frazer’s Golden Bough
(until it became an encyclopaedia), and more recently Prehistoric
Britain, by Jacquetta and Christopher Hawkes, and Archaeology and
Society by Grahame Clark, are outstanding examples of the scholarly
approach to a wide public, whilst Sir Leonard Woolley is a famous
adept at the art. But pethaps for the masterpieces of popular writing
ih the scientific field as a whole we have still to look to men likeJ.H.
Jeatis ot J. B. S. Haldane or Julian Huxley, or ultimately to Charles
Darwin hitnself, whos¢ strong, simple prose thrust down all batriets
between minds and men. There was no Horatian sniff about Darwin.
  Terse, vigorous, direct prose is ultimately a matter of the sensibility
of the writer, but the smallest seed of it can be cultivated. I know cap-
able archaeologists who are yet so myopic as scarcely to read a book
outside their tiny ‘subject’. And I find that Mr St John Ervine has
                                                              ‘are
observed the same pheriomenon: ‘Archaeologists’, he reriarks,
odd fish addicted to periods, and unwillirig to take interest in any-
thing outside their own speciality.’ They have ceased, or have not
begun, to cultivate their garden; at best, they are concerned only with
a cabbage-patch. What can they really comprehend of works and
  1. Clio, p. 25.                           oS       :
                                                                        y
   2. On gobbledygook see E. Gowets, ABC of Plain Wotds (H.M. Stationer
Office, 1951), p- 57:
                                   223
              ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE   EARTH

days, or how express their comprehensions? It is a truism that words
create thoughts, only less than thoughts words. And the creation of
words is no unskilled job. “You will not get there,’ says the infallible
‘Q’, ‘by hammering away on your own untutored impulse. You
must first be your own reader, chiselling out the thought definitely
for yourself; and, after that, must carve out the intaglio yet more —
sharply and neatly, if you would impress its image accurately upon
the wax of other men’s minds. We found’, he adds, ‘that even for
Men of Science this neat clean carving of words was a very necessary
accomplishment.’ Yes, words are uncommonly important things,
even for Men of Science. And in the end, the vulgus is no bad judge.
Tt is the duty of the archaeologist, as of the scientist, to reach and
impress the public, and to mould his words in the common clay of its
forthright understanding.



               POSTSCRIPT           TO CHAPTER            16

With reference to pp. 217—18 above, the following notes are added on
the three principal processes of pictorial reproduction. By way of
preface it may be observed that line blocks, when not exceeding the
dimensions of the text-page, are printed with the text and are normally
numbered as text-figures, with Arabic numerals. Half-tone blocks and
lithographs are usually printed separately from the text, on higher-
grade paper, and are normally numbered as plates, with Roman
numerals, Line blocks of larger dimensions than the text-page are also
treated as plates,


                        (a) HALF-TONE BLOCKS
Wash-drawings, photographs, paintings, etc., are ‘continuous tone’
subjects. For purposes of reproduction, such pictures have to be broken
up into half tones (or broken tones), so that the final result is a printing-
block made up ofa series of dots, varying in size with the relative light
and shade of the copy. This necessity arises because half-tone blocks are
printed in exactly the same manner as type. A printing-roller charged
with printers’ ink passes over the surface of the block and by a ‘kiss’
touch imparts ink to whatever it contacts.
   In order to produce these dots for inking, the process includes the
                                     224
ti
 7




                   PUBLICATION        AND    PUBLICITY

 re-photographing of the original through a ruled screen interposed in
 front of the photographic plate. The screen consists of lines ruled on
  optical glass to form square apertures with opaque dividing lines. These
  break up the continuity of the subject into dots of varying sizes, the
  high lights being represented by exceedingly fine dots, the middle tones
by larger dots, and the deeper tones by still larger dots. From the nega-
  tive so obtained a copper plate is made: this is done by coating the
“copper with bichromated glue and printing it in contact with the
  negative: the intersections between the dots are eaten away chemically,
 ‘thus leaving the dots in relief. This copper plate is then mounted on
  wood and printed just as type is printed in a letterpress machine.
  - The size of the dots is controlled to meet various conditions of print-
_ing. Coarse newspaper-printing calls for a screen-ruling with approx-
"imately 60 lines per square inch, ruled at right angles to another 60 lines,
- giving intersections of 60 x 60 = 3,600 dots per squareinch. For maga-
" zine-printing and such like, a screen-ruling of 100 to 120 is mostly used;
for commercial work, 120 to 133 lines per square inch; while for the
finest printing, such as that of scientific subjects printed on high-grade
“art paper, the screen-ruling is generally 133 to 150.
_ A printer may spoil a good block by bad inking — by the use of too
much or too little ink, or by uneven inking. Only an experienced and
:skilled printer will get the best out ofa block, and it is sometimes prefer-
able to have the blocks printed by the blockmaker himself, if he has the
“necessary trained staff. Again, a block may be spoilt by the use of poor-
Be lity paper. At its best, a halftone block can be very good, but a
second-rate block or the second-rate printing of a good block will very
seriously mar any publication, however brilliant its other matter may
be. Careful scrutiny in the proof-stage is essential.
 ; There are certain points in which the author must help the block-
maker. First, glazed photographic prints are best for reproduction:
 matt prints, ‘art surfaces’, and toned prints should be avoided. Good
                                                                       be
 glossy black-and-white are best. Secondly, the subject must not
 overcrowded    with   detail, having regard  to  the scale of reduction
                                                                be quite as
     desired. Remember that, at the best, no halftone block can
                                                                       detail)
  clear as the original photograph, and detail (sometimes essential
                                                                    size and
 is liable to be obscured in reproduction. Thirdly, the actual
                                                            reproduced by
  shape to which it is required that the original shall be
                                                               Unnecessary
 ‘the blockmaker should be indicated clearly on the back.
                           of sky, or of foreground) should not  actually be
 _margins (e.g. an excess
                                                              indicated on
  cut off the original, but the required margins should be
                                                                not to press
  the back by lightly ruled pencil-lines: care must be taken

         H                            225
               ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE   EARTH

heavily on the pencil and so to furrow the working-surface. Half-tone
blocks, though not normally printed with the text, should not as a rule
exceed the dimensions of the text-page, In ‘sizing’ blocks, do not
forget to allow for the titles or ‘legends’. Fourthly, avoid, if possible,
the preparation of fresh half-tone blocks from existing half-tone
illustrations. This involves double-screening and the production of a
second-hand doubly obscured version of the original, and is almost
always unsatisfactory.
   A half-tone block may normally be made up to 15 X 12 inches.
   Half-tone blocks, be it repeated, are commonly printed separately
from the text and half-tone illustrations are inserted, usually on special
paper, as plates (not figures). See above.


                            (b) LINE BLOCKS
“Line-drawings in black ink are reproduced by the line-block process:
 that is to say, they are photographed by the blockmaker in a special
 camera, and the lines are transferred on to a zinc plate, the ‘background’
of which is then eaten away in an acid bath, leaving the black lines in
relief for subsequent inking and printing. The zinc plate is then nailed
or screwed to a wooden block through certain of its recessed portions.
The line block, being printed in exactly the same fashion as letterpress,
can, as noted above, be reproduced simultaneously with the latter,
provided the size permits.
   Normally, a one-third (linear) reduction gives satisfactory results, but
one-half or one-quarter (rarely smaller) may have to be used. In the
case of a one-third reduction (linear) a drawing 12 X 6 inches will come
out at 4 X 2 inches and will therefore actually be only one-ninth of the
area of the original :hence the use here of the term ‘linear’ in specifying
degree of reduction.
   It is essential that the draftsman, in preparing’his drawing, shall know
the extent of proposed reduction, and shall so be enabled to regulate the
 thickness of his lines, the size of his lettering, and his general style
accordingly. An excessively thin line in the original will become in the
zinc-plate an edge of metal so thin as to be liable to -flaw in manu-
facture and damage ‘in the act of printing. Lines drawn excessively close
together wil] tend to merge on reduction: either the metal or the ink,
 or both, will tend to run from one line to the other, forming an untidy
 and unexpressive blot. This is particularly prone to ‘happen in the
 hatching, especially the cross-hatching, of a plan. It is essential that-the —
 individual lines of the hatching shall be bold and distinct from one
                                     226
                  PUBLICATION          AND     PUBLICITY

another. And nothing is more unsightly in a plan or diagram than
lettering which cannot be easily read. The fullest allowance for reduc-
tion must be made in sizing the lettering of the original drawing. Make
the lettering rather too large than too small.
   In selecting the size, shape, and extent of reduction of a drawing, do
not forget to allow space for the necessary title or legend (figure-
number, etc.) at the foot. If the illustration is to be printed with the
text — a desirable aim, not always feasible — the reduced drawing plus
title must not exceed the outside dimensions of the text of a printed
page.
  A maximum size for a line block may be taken as 26 X 19 inches.
Drawings to a scale above that size are reproduced by lithography, and
it is better to use this process for all line-illustrations over text-size. A
small lithograph is more costly than a small line block, but a large litho-
graph is less costly than a large line block. Small and simple corrections
can be made on a line block but are very undesirable.

                              (c) LITHOGRAPHS

The old method of lithography — printing from drawings on plane-
surface stone — has given way to modern processes of photo-litho-
graphy in which the map or plan is reproduced first as a photographic
negative and then printed therefrom on to a thin sheet of zinc. By
chemical processes the image is made to attract ink and the clean por-
tions of the zinc to repel ink. Such a plate is held taut on a machine
printing-cylinder. Ink-rollers charged with litho-ink and damper-
rollers charged with water alternately pass over the entire surface of the
                                                                          which
plate. The inked image is pressed on to another cylinder around
a sheet of special rubber is stretched and therefrom on to the paper,
hence the term ‘offset’ or ‘litho-offset’ or ‘photo-litho-offset’.
                                                                              be
   The advantage of the ‘offset’ process is that fine line-work can
                           ‘kiss’ touch  of a pliable  rubber  sheet  so that all
printed by the resilient
                                                                            into
undue pressure is avoided, and the inked lines are pressed gently
                                                                     the reverse
the texture of the paper without any image being visible on
     of the sheet. Correcti ons,  even minor   correctio ns, should be avoided
side
so far as possible.
                                                                      cannot be
   A lithograph thus requires careful separate printing and
struck off with the text.
                                                                X 30 inches.
   Lithographic plates may normally be made up to 40


                                      227
                              CHAPTER 17                                   )

  What are we digging up, and why?
       ‘No amount of technical knowledge can replace the comprehen-
       sion of the humanities or the study of history and philosophy.’
       WINSTON    S. CHURCHILL,    reported in Kabenhavns   Universitets
      Promotionsfest den rookt. 1950 (Copenhagen, 1951).


T HE previous chapters have touched upon the history of archaeologi-
 cal excavation, upon the search for an absolute chronology as the
 ultimate basis for the ordering and interrelating of our data, upon the
-stratigraphical method as a contributory procedure, upon the need
 for long-term planning if we are to secure the systematic advance of
 knowledge, and latterly upon the very vital questions of publication
and publicity. A little has been said also of the actual technique of
digging, of recording in the field, of laboratory-work, and of staff.
But there is one overriding aspect of our task which cannot be passed
by in a concluding chapter; and that aspect may best be expressed by
the question, “What does it all amount to?’ What are we trying to
do in this rather complex fashion, and how far can we hope to suc-
ceed? Any answer to this question is inevitably subjective and preju-
diced, but there is no great harm in a little honest prejudice. It may
at least stimulate the wiser judgement of those happy critics who are
devoid of bias.
   Archaeology is primarily a fact-finding discipline. It has indeed
been stated by an American writer that “Archaeology per se isno more
than a method and a set of specialized techniques for the gathering of
cultural information. The archaeologist, as archaeologist, is really
nothing but a technician.’! I have no hesitation in denouncing that
extreme view as nonsense. A lepidopterist is a great deal more than a
butterfly-catcher, and an archaeologist who is not more than a pot-
sherd-catcher is unworthy of his logos. He is primarily a fact-finder,
 but his facts are the material records of human achievement; he is
 also, by that token, a humanist, and his secondary task is that of
                     1. W. W. Taylor, as cited, p. 43.

                                     228
        WHAT      ARE    WE   DIGGING       UP,   AND    WHY?

revivifying or humanizing his materials with a controlled imagina-
tion that inevitably partakes of the qualities of art and even of phil-
osophy.
   But these are after all mere words. What in fact does this thing,
Archaeology, really amount to? The question is one which, in our
evaluation of evidence, can never be far from our minds. No matter
that in a majority of instances we cannot truly know: it is the privi-
lege of the intelligent to ask questions, and the claim of the unin-
telligent to have all the answers. The state of philosophic doubt is not
the least enviable of human conditions. Definition does not neces-
sarily clarify.
   Here at the outset we are confronted with elements of conflict.
We have on the one hand the technician or, if you will, the ‘scientist’,
busy with inches and analyses and smudges in the soil; busy with the
anatomy of history or prehistory. On the other hand we have the
humanist busy with its vital interpretation. There is a widespread
fashion to-day to incline towards the former trend, to regard archae-
ology as a natural science and to discount the intervention of ‘motive’
and ‘free will’. ‘Motives’, says Professor Gordon Childe, ‘are in fact
hardly capable of genuine historical study.’ This trend is a useful
teaction from the romanticism of a past century. But it can easily be
carried too far. [have remarked elsewhere upon a tendency to devolve
archaeology into a sort of dehydrated humanism, to mummify the
past, to transform our predecessors into “battle-axe folk’ or “beaker
folk’, until, by an instinctive and forgivable reaction, we begin almost
to personify battle-axes or beakers with a sort of hungry latter-day
 animism. Such phraseology represents a tendency that can only be
deplored. It runs deeper than its exponents sometimes realize. How-
ever broadly we use the words, man is in some sense the casket of a
 soul as well as five-shillings-worth of chemicals. And the soul or
 sensibility or mind - whatever we choose to call it - is beyond the
 reach of finite intelligence, since the mind obviously cannot encom-
 pass itself. Within the far-off limit of ultimate causes, the geologist
 can encompass or objectify the rocks with which he deals; not so the
 humanist with the intellect. There in the last resort all is subjective,
it cannot be otherwise. Archaeology increasingly and very properly
 adapts and adopts the methods of natural science and unblushingly
‘seeks its aid. It is not on that account itself a science in the class-room
                                    229
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

 meaning of the term. At the best it is a very inexact science. But per=
 haps for that reason its demands upon the constructive imagination
 are more immediately insistent than are those of some of the more
 self-explanatory class-room sciences. For that very reason, be it
 repeated, the archaeologist is a great deal more than a rather superior
 laboratory-assistant. He is also something of an artist. O. G. S. Craw-
 ford was near the mark when he affirmed that ‘Archaeology is an art
 which employs a scientific technique’. Or, as the Oxford historian,
 Sir Llewellyn Woodward, remarks, “Historical understanding is more
 than a series of detective tricks. It requires a mind already attuned to
 the scale of human action and practised in the subtlest use of language
 to express the depths and heights.” That is well said. The historian, and
 with him I group the archaeologist, must have a spark of the intui-
 tive comprehension which inspires the painter or the poet. “The
“highest reach of science’, proclaimed Matthew Arnold, ‘is, one may
 say, a faculty of divination, akin to the highest power exercised
 in poetry.’ All great historians have something of this power, and
 owe their greatness no less to it than to their scholarship. They
 make the past live because they are themselves alive and can
 integrate their reasoned facts with the illogicalities of life. Other-
 wise they were mere cataloguers, adding dust to dust and ashes to
 ashes.
   As archaeologists, then, we are at the same time collectors and inter-
 preters. The obvious next question is, What do we collect and seek to
 interpret? The question lands us at the outset in a minor quandary
 from which escape is urgent. Throughout these chapters the term
 archaeology has been used in the widest possible sense, including
 equally the study of eolithic choppers and of Victorian gas-lamps.
 Others are, I am afraid, sometimes less catholic in their usage. The
 French appear to have evolved a hierarchical distinction between
 Varchéologie and la préhistoire that is subtle enough to escape the
 average foreigner, but we have our British counterpart. From time
 to time one hears the terms ‘archaeologist’ and ‘antiquary’, or even
 that hideous and unnecessary pseudo-noun ‘antiquarian’, used with
 a sense of divergence significantly akin to that of ‘sheep and goats’,
 or ‘chalk and cheese’. The antiquary, it seems, is the more genteel of
 the two; he sits in a chair and uses a quizzing-glass, or in moments of
 supreme afflatus crashes upon his knees and rubs a brass. The archae-
                                   230
          WHAT     ARE   WE   DIGGING     UP,   AND   WHY?

ologist, on the other hand, wears corduroy shorts, strides about on
draughty landscapes with a shovel and an odorous pipe, and is liable
to be an undergraduate. To these divergent types, might be added a
third, the anthropologist, vaguely interested in flagrantly un-British
*natives’. Of course all this dichotomy or trichotomy is nonsense;
but there does lurk behind it a nucleus of actuality of a not wholly
desirable kind. The common tendency to discriminate archaeologists
as prehistorians and antiquaries as medievalists does good to nobody.
If anything, it attempts on the one hand to rob prehistory of a little
of the humanity that comes more easily to the Middle Ages; and
on the other hand to deprive medieval studies excessively of the cold
and calculating objectivity that is attributed to the prehistorian.
Recently, after training the young members of the staff of one of our
Historical Monuments Commissions on a typical prehistoric site, I
was glad to see them proceed with the excavation of a medieval site
by the identical technique, with fruitful results ranging in period
from the eleventh to the seventeenth centuries. And yet how rarely
has that simple and obvious procedure been attempted! Let it be
agreed that the two words ‘archaeologist’ and ‘antiquary’ shall in
future be exactly synonymous, rooted in a common discipline
and striving by the same or closely similar methods to the same
end,
  But what, when all is said and done, is that end? We have just
agreed (I hope) to work as brothers, but what of the nature of our
task Let us for a moment consider its range, with specific examples.
In a single year we have had the (former) Disney Professor of Archae-
ology at Cambridge busily and successfully exploring the Upper
Palaeolithic in France and Dr Leakey sweating after his pleistocene
industries through tropical Africa. Professor Grahame Clark in York-
shire was extracting with consummate skill the remarkable relics of
as squalid a huddle of marsh-ridden food-gatherers as the imagination
could well encompass. Sir Cyril Fox, of science and imagination all
compact, was, as recalled in a previous chapter (p. 18), reconstructing
the mumbo-jumbo of miserable Bronze Age barrow-burials on the
ultimate fringes of the ancient world. The writer was digging into the
first foothold of wretched Iron Age immigrants on the English south
coast and classifying their incompetent dog-biscuit potsherds. Mrs
 Stuart Piggott, with an inspiring fortitude, was ransacking the wacant
                                  231
                ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

 windswept vestiges of first-century hill-forts in the Scottish Low-
 lands, buoyed by the thought that it is better to travel hopefully
 than to arrive. Professor Ian Richmond, on Hadrian’s Wall, was
 expending the profoundest learning and an incomparable astuteness
 upon the uncovering of a medicine-man’s go-down. The list might
 easily be extended. But whither is it getting us? One may sometimes
 find oneselfintwo minds about it all. Is all information worth while,
  or are we justified in selecting and grading our material on a basis of
  priorities? And, if so, what priorities?
     This question might easily lead us into a prolonged discussion of a
  semi-philosophical nature. The temptation may be resisted without
  complete evasion of the issue. At the outset it is sufficiently clear that
  no single or simple answer is adequate. Much depends upon the angle
  of approach. Man is an animal with a biological tree. He is physically
~ an unspecialized animal, but with a specialized brain which enables
  him to elaborate and amplify his physique by means of an increasing
  range of artifacts or artificial limbs. He thus becomes the author of
  industries, which accumulate into cultures: until ultimately he is
  sufficiently Equipped to live in large communities, or in other words
  becomes civilized. In a large community the constant clash or col-
 laboration of brains leads, under balanced conditions, to a great
 civilization; under unbalanced conditions, to a proportionately great
 human catastrophe. The period of balance may be brief, as in fifth-
 century Greece, or long as in Dynastic Egypt. The period of unbal-
 ance may be one of obliteration and oblivion, or it may be one of
 patching and reshaping, of constant if unequal striving towards a new
 goal. Such sequences and possibilities are sufficiently familiar and
 need not be particularized, if only because Mr Arnold Toynbee has
 displayed them to a wide public in terms of his own ei
 philosophy of history.
    This elaborate process manifestly offers to the student more than
 one line of approach. In fact, modern archaeological research displays
 a recurrent duality. The normal approach of archaeology in Great
 Britain has in the past been along the lines of the classical tradition.
 The Grand Tour and the standard classical education have never, until
 recent years, been far from the mind of the British archaeologist; and
 names such as those of Stukeley or Sir John Evans or even Pitt Rivers
 himself do not outweigh the average truth of that statement. Greece
                                    232
                                                                               |sl
           WHAT      ARE   WE    DIGGING       UP,   AND    WHY?

  and Rome were the Mecca of the British student, provincialized a
  little in latter years by the great influence of Haverfield. For example,
  the Yates Chair of Archaeology in the University of London, in spite
  of its generalized designation, has always been interpreted as a chair
  of classical archaeology. And long ago we find the young Arthur
  Evans inveighing against the same bias at Oxford. Evans in his twen-
  ties was urged to apply for an archaeological studentship which had
_ just been established in the University. His immediately reaction was:
   © One feels that what is wanted is a student of “Classical Archaeology”
   and that anyone who wasn’t would probably have scant justice done
   him at Oxford.’ He went on to protest that “the great characteristic
   of modern Archaeological progress has been the revelations as to
   periods and races of men about which history is silent. . . . Oxford,
 however, seems to have set itself to ignore every branch of Archae-
_ ology out of its own classical beat.’ Evans's youthful protest was in
    1879. Four years later his mind was turning once more towards
    Oxford, and Dr Joan Evans has recorded an entertaining and signi-
   ficant correspondence between him and Freeman which further
    defines the contemporary attitude towards archaeology in these
    islands.
    There is going to be established a Professorship of Archaeology
  [wrote Evans], and I have been strongly advised to stand for it. Ido not
  think I shall, unless I see any real prospect of getting it: and to say the
  truth I see very little. To begin with, it is to be called the Professorship
  of ‘Classical’ Archaeology, and ... to confine a Professorship of
  Archaeology to classical times seems to me as reasonable as to create
 a Chair of ‘Insular Geography’ or ‘Mesozoic Geology’. ... Europe,
                                                                            that
  except of a favoured period and a very limited area (for I take it
  neither   Gaul,  Britain  or  Illyricum  were   ever  ‘classical’ in Jowett’s
  sense) is to be rigorously excluded!
  Freeman’s reply to Evans was,
                                                                       they will
     I think you should stand, if only for a protest.... Of course
                                                                      at the end
  have some narrow Balliol fool, suspending all sound learning
                                                               against you, but
~ of his hooked nose, to represent self-satisfied ignorance
  I would   go in just to tell them a thing or two.”
                                                                and his Forebears
     1. Joan Evans, Time and Chance: the story of Arthur Evans
  (London, 1943), pp. 221-2.
    2. Time and Chance, pp. 261-2.
                                       233
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

The upshot was that Arthur Evans went his own way and discovered
immortality in Crete. Not indeed until 1926, when the Abercromby
Chair was established in Edinburgh, was there a real professorship of
prehistoric archaeology in Great Britain; and, if we ignore the purely
personal and honorific appointment eventually extended to Arthur
Evans (in 1909) as “Extraordinary Professor of Prehistoric Archae-
ology’, only within the last few years has Oxford so shaken free from
the old Jowett tradition as to follow suit with its own substantive
chair of European archaeology. This is remarkable, but such is the
fact.
   In Scandinavia, on the other hand, the situation has been exactly the
reverse. There not merely prehistory in general but Scandinavian
prehistory in particular, to which much other European prehistory
is very greatly indebted, held the field from the beginning of the
nineteenth century onwards, and it is only in recent years that classi-
cal archaeology has achieved a recognized academic status; for ex=
ample, by the foundation of classical chairs at Lund and Uppsala
about roto. In Scandinavia the undisguised parish pump has been
respectable fot a century and a half; in Western Europe as a whole
it has, until recent years, been scarcely tolerated save under a classical
pavilion.
   To-day a great reaction is in progress. Swedes have become
classicists and are digging up the Roman Forum; Britons, careless
of their classics, are digging up mesolithic forest-scavengers in the
mists of their own countryside. Indeed at the present time, save in the
dilute form of Romano-British archaeology and apart from some
notable work in North Africa by the British School at Rome, classical
archaeology is here largely under an eclipse, whilst prehistory flour-
ishes as never before. Even the modern Romans themselves have
brazenly uncovered the post-holes of some disreputable prehistoric
huts within a few yards of the respectable House of Livia on the
Palatine. Old values are being shuffled and new ones are emerging.
What is their relative significance? For example, is it really worth our
while to expend money and talent upon an entirely empty stone hut
on a Welsh mountain, whilst great sites on the arterial routes of
human development remain scientifically untouched? True, the one
is nearby and costs a few pounds, the other may be thousands of miles
away and will cost thousands of pounds; but such opportunist factors

                                   234
          WHAT      ARE   WE    DIGGING      UP,   AND    WHY?

are not for the moment at issue. The question is rather one of the
principle upon which we are going to work, of our sense of propor-
tion.
   Once more, it is, one may suppose, all a matter of our line of ap-
proach. Much depends upon whether our starting-point is that of the
biologist or that of the humanist. It has been argued by the biologist
that human institutions are governed by the same kind of natural
laws as is the development of the human body; that humanity and
human institutions may properly be studied in much the same way as
pigeons or earthworms. It is the developmental process itself that
focuses the inquiring mind. Achievement, good or bad, is an element
of processional change and is of no special intrinsic interest; it is a
register of trial and error in the stumbling progress of evolution. In-
deed the words ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are subjective misnomers. Who
are we to distinguish between them? They are arbitrary grades in our
 yardstick of change; we might as well say that a fish is ‘good’ and a
jellyfish ‘bad’.
    Admittedly the biological attitude is here stated crudely and per-
 haps unfairly, But Oswald Spengler, who has done not a little to lend
 this attitude the combined prestige of philosophy and history, states
 the matter in no very different style, and Professor Henri Frankfort
 has recently commented upon him in terms essentially parallel with
 my own. Spengler, remarks Frankfort,
 actually calls civilizations ‘living beings of the highest order’, and he
 undertakes to state with precision which phenomena characterize each
 stage in their life-circle. For him, an imperialistic and socialistic order
 follow a traditional and hierarchical society; expanding technique and
 trade follow greatness in art, music and literature as certainly as the
                                                                        never
 dispersal of the seeds follows the maturing of a plant which will
                                the biologica l metaphor literally,  to grant
 flower again. But to take
                                                                  but myth-
 in this manner reality to an image, is not morphology
                                                                     to
 logy; and it is belief, not knowledge, which induces Spengler
        the freedom  of  the spirit and the impredict ability of human
 deny
 behaviour.*
                                                               Spengler
    I too am of those,’then, who, with all proper respect for
                                                                        pment
 and his kind, are not over-readily tempted to equate the develo
                                                                (London, 1951),
    1. H. Frankfort, The Birth of Civilization in the Near East
 pp. 18-19.

                                      235
               ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM      THE    EARTH

of human institutions with the normal processes of organic evolution,
to Darwinize human ‘progress’. As Julian Huxley long ago observed,
“Numerous writers - largely because purely biological are simpler
than human phenomena — have been obsessed with the idea that the
study of biology as such will teach us principles which can be applied
directly and wholesale to human problems.’! The tendency is doubt-
less in part a reaction from the Book of Genesis, but needs a more
serious apologia than that. Organic evolution and social evolution are
not, in the present or any forseeable stage of research, equivalent
processes. Doubtless a remote eye, with a comprehension beyond that
of the mere homunculus, would integrate organic and intellectual
development and see them both as facets of the same crystal, cogs of
the same machine. But to the close-up, myopic view with which we
must content ourselves, the differences between the two processes are
more significant than the resemblances. Professor Gordon Childe has
recently had wise words to say on this matter. Speaking of the nature
of cultural changes, in fact of ‘progress’, he remarks:
   Inventions can be transmitted from one society to another [by diffu-
sion]. But that is just what is impossible in organic evolution. By no
possible means can one species transmit to another the mutation which
has proved beneficial, even though both inhabit the same region. All
that can happen is that natural selection gradually eliminates the species
that lacks the mutation. It is, I suggest, the operation of diffusion more
than anything else that distinguishes social from organic evolution and
explains the curvatures of the lines in any graphic representation of the
process.#
   No doubt the old postulate of universal and identifiable and even
predictable stages in human progress was the wishful thinking of an
age which, both in the moral and in the scientific sphere, was strenu-
ously setting its facts in order. Only, in the scientific sphere at any
rate, its facts were, of course, inadequate. They constituted a sort of
half-knowledge which, as is the way of half-knowledge, has usurped
an authority out of all ratio with its intrinsic worth. It is a paradox
that in an age when on the one hand the rights and prerogatives of
man have been asserted as never before, on the other hand the scien-
tific urge towards system and sequence has tended to put him into a
                1. Essays of a Biologist (London, 1926), p- 75.
               2. Social Evolution (London, 1951), p. 170.

                                    236
          WHAT      ARE    WE    DIGGING       UP,   AND     WHY?

queue or ‘crocodile’. Must we queue up for everything, even for our
humanity? Are we not all, even our scientists, getting excessively
queue-minded? I am indeed at one with G. M. Trevelyan when he
says that, “even if cause and effect could be discovered with accuracy,
they still would not be the most interesting part of human affairs.
It is not man’s evolution but his attainment that is the great lesson of
the past and the highest theme of history.’ There speaks one with a
surviving belief in that archaic phrase, the Nobility of Man. We need
not close our eyes to Man-the-Jelly-fish or Man-the-Whole-time-
Food-gatherer in order to believe in Man-with-Time-to-think-be-
 tween-Meals, in Civilized Man, but the last is, surely, of overriding
 importance. Civilization has been defined as ‘the aggregation of large
 populations in cities; the differentiation within these of primary
 producers (fishers, farmers, etc.), full-time specialist artisans, mer-
 chants, officials, priests, and rulers; an effective concentration of
 economic and political power; the use of conventional symbols for
 recording and transmitting information (writing), and equally con-
 ventional standards of weights and measures of time and space leading
 to some mathematical and calendrical science.’? What a ripeness of
 human mind and effort all that implies! Man in his most fully expres-
 sive phase. As long ago as 1852 the president of the Archaeological
 Institute could pronounce with some show of reason that in archae-
 ology
 it can no longer be assumed that the obscurest periods are the most
 worthy of investigation. Those, on the contrary, should be preferred
 which are richest in the materials intrinsically deserving of study; that
 is, in the visible development of the human intellect, the display of per-
 sonal character, the creative activity of the arts, the variety of the social
 relations, and the analogies or contrasts which these may present to life
 amongst ourselves.

  True, a modern supporter of that view lays himself open to an easy
  charge of atavism, and of choosing as his subject the kind of Man who
_ has had most to say, has expressed it most amply in material things,
  and is therefore the most susceptible subject for the archaeologist.
                   TZ. Gio, 0C.,; p12.
                  _2. Childe, op. cit., p. 161.
                   3. E. Oldfield in Arch. Journ., ix (1852), 3-

                                       237
               ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM     THE    EARTH

 But I think not. After those words had been written, I heard Sir
 Llewellyn Woodward, whom I have already quoted, saying much
 the same thing, though in better shape. He was speaking of certain
  scholars who had, he said, regained for history a place among the
  Muses, affirming that they did so ‘ultimately because they set a high
  value upon the dignity of man’, ‘I repeat this term deliberately,’ he
  added, “because one of the signs of disintegration in our own culture
  is an unwillingness to consider that man has dignity, that his acts may
  be noble. Once this conception of nobility is lost, history becomes
  nothing more than a rag-bag, a pawnbroker’s catalogue, or at best a
  psychiatrist’s case book.’ To this it may be countered that ‘nobility’
  is not of necessity absent from the savage, and that for example a
  Chitelperront point or a Solutrian lance-head may represent an
  achievement which partakes of the quality of intellectual nobility.
~ But [am not prepared to admit the Noble Savage within my general
 definition of the term, for the simple reason that he is a savage, suffer-
 ing from a savage’s restricted vision, tangental reasoning and lack of
 opportunity. 1 have in mind something far more complex and com-
 prehensive; something in fact which implies the background of
 civilization or some approximation to it; where the intelligence has
 been subjected to the widest possible range of stimuli and where its
 fruits have been most widely, quickly, and intelligently shared.
    There may be less hesitation in emphasizing this approach, since
 there is, it seems, a likelihood that it may receive less than its due
patronage from the archaeological student of the future. It seems
probable that the humanistic approach to the study of antiquity may
from now on give way increasingly to what has above been crudely
dubbed the biological approach. That change is due in part to the
fault of the humanists themselves, Until the citizens of Minos and
of the Indus valley arrived with their unread scripts to complicate the
scene, a normal approach to the great civilizations of the ancient
world — those of Greece, Rome, the Nile, Palestine, the land of the
Twin Rivers - was through the study of language. Archaeology
suffered from a linguistic preoccupation, very necessary and valuable
in itself but liable to obscure more material and equally valuable
aspects. For it would appear to be a truism that the preoccupying
study of language is rarely in practice compatible in one and the same
               1. Proc, of the British Academy, xxxvi (1950), I12.

                                     238
           WHAT     ARE   WE   DIGGING      UP,   AND    WHY?

 individual with the scientific, analytic study of phenomena as they
 present themselves in the earth. The linguist is, in my experience, a
 different sort of man from the excavator or the methodical student of
 cultural evidence in the wider sense. He is liable to be Little Johnnie
 Head-in-Air, and we all know what happened to him w'en he came
~ toa hole in the ground. The consequence of al} this has been to isolate
 certain fields of study, notably the classical civilizations, as preserves
 of a particular class of humanists, who have tempered their linguistic
  and historical training with art-criticism but have rarely got down to
  earth and studied the stuff of which their chosen civilizations are com-
  posed, or out of which their civilizations have grown. For them, Pitt
  Rivers has lived in vain. And now their own days appear to be num-
  bered, and with a perverseness which I do not attempt te conceal I
  begin to lament their passing. To-day the study of Greek is very
  definitely on the decline and even Latins under a cloud. We are in a
  period of speedy transition. The most eminent of our materialistic
  archaeologists to-day can, and does, read the odes of Pindar after
  dinner, but he is an elderly gentleman and it may be doubted whether
  there are more of his kind. The time has come to ask, What is replac-
  ing the traditional disciplines? A great variety of skills and techniques,
  but comparatively little that can educate and stimulate the humanistic
  imagination. For this vital quality is, it would seem, onlyin part in-
  nate. It isliable in most of us to be a tender growth and needs.careful
  nourishment. It needs the sort of nourishment that reflective liter-
  ature of the ‘highest quality, with an historical colouring, can best
  supply. It needs something equivalent to a classical education, and it
  is difficult to say what the suitable equivalents are. Whatever they be,
  they are urgently necessary if we are now to save archaeology from
  an overwhelmingly biological bias.
     In the past few moments the argument may seem fo have turned a
  cirde. It began with regret for the stranglehold of the linguistic
                                                                 with
  tradition on certain fields of archaeological study, and ended
  regret for the decline of that tradition. In actual fact I am.once more
  regretting the prospect of archaeology passing wholly into the hands
  of the biologist and the technician, just as much as I havebeen regret-
  ting the older and now doomed monopoly of the linguist and his-
  torian. There is to-day a genuine risk of a new severance between
                                                                         a
  humanism and science in these matters, just at the time when
                                      239
              ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

closer integration of the two is feasible and necessary. The co-opera-
tion of biologists and geologists and botanists and physicists in our
research is a welcome portent; there is more cause for doubt when
we find our research passing increasingly to those whose main educa-
tion has been in these fields of natural science. Man, we may be
forgiven for recalling, is something a good deal more to us than an —
ingredient in the chemistry of the cosmos; and a course of poetry or
philosophy may properly be regarded as no less needful for the young
archaeologist — or the old one for that matter — than a course of pot-
making or pollen-analysis.
  This part of the present chapter may be closed, then, with the truism
that Man is not only the author or vehicle of a culture-trend, he is
also a personality. The struggle towards civilization has been the
struggle towards the fuller development and the more ample expres-
sion of that personality. The corollary is that a fair proportion of our
effort should be expended upon the exploration of sites and regions
which are likely to reflect the major achievements of civilization. At
present we are not doing that. Half a century ago the situation was
different. In r908 Hadrian Allcroft could write: ‘Characteristically
the English, who have done so much for the Hittite, the Minoan, and
the Egyptian, have as yet scarcely concerned themselves to apply the
same methods to the secrets of their own soil.’ To-day the position
is reversed. To-day we are perhaps excessively content with those
little domestic secrets: year after year we devote in our island an
abounding skill and enthusiasm to the huts or graves of the uttermost
rejects of the ancient world. True, we add thereby some particle to
the sum-total of human knowledge. But what does it all really
amount to? How much does it really matter? What of the great world
beyond? I was standing not long ago 5,000 miles away from here, in
the steppe of Turkestan, upon a tumult of mighty mounds whither
age after age came men from China, from the Mediterranean, from
Ind, to exchange their goods and fertilize their ideas, to express the
ancient world socially and aesthetically in the most complex polity
then known to man. Could we but transfer a tithe of our scholarship
for a few seasons to this great workshop of civilization — or indeed to
many others of the same high potentiality — what should we not gain
in our knowledge of human achievement: What could matter to us
more than that?                   .
                                 240
            WHAT      ARE    WE   DIGGING        UP,   AND    WHY?

    This final chapter, therefore, is primarily an appeal for a higher
 measure of concentration, on the part of British archaeologists, upon
 the riper achievements of Man as a social animal. It sometimes seems
 to me that we are liable to start the race in fine form, but to run out
_ halfway down the course. Let us for a change try to come in over the
  last jump. There is no sort of doubt that we in this United Kingdom
  can supply an initial field-training of a quality unsurpassed in the
_ world. Here, in Britain, is our training-ground; but where is our
ultimate fulfilment? The great adventure still awaits us in a shrinking
 and increasingly regimented world; and surely adventurers were ever
 a British export?
    The word ‘adventure’ may be allowed to evoke a tangental sen-
 tence or two about a theme which is near my heart. The term ‘adven-
 ture’ is, of course, a relative one. Some, like the late Andrew Lang,
     are content to find ‘ Adventures among Books’. Others have to go to
     the poles or climb Mount Everest to find them. Many so-called ad-
  _ ventures are entirely spurious. The other day I was reading a prepos-
     terous account by a professional adventurer of a journey through the
 _ Khyber Pass to Kabul, such as is made daily by countless green-
 _ grocers’ vans. It was described as a journey ‘through the Pass of Death
_ to the City of Brooding Suspicion’. But, nonsense apart, I am firmly
  _ of the opinion that our young men and women will lose nothing by
     a little real adventuring, and their search as archaeologists for the
     footsteps of civilized man in Asian or African tracks will add an inci-
     dental stimulus of a kind which is otherwise increasingly hard to find,
   It is now nearly thirty years since John Buchan wrote The Last Secrets,
     heralding the end of discovery in a world which now had nothing
   more to hide from us. Nevertheless, until a very few years ago the
     young Briton was still enticed into the paths of adventure by the
   worldly prospects of governing a tract of Asia many times the size
   _ of England, or of trafficking with tribesmen on the roof of the world.
  Now, in 1952, numbers of these avenues are closed by political
  change. Much of the potential adventure overseas has suddenly gone
  out of our life, and, with it, that sharpening and shaping of the
  character which is a by-product of it. Iam speaking soberly, not as a
  romanticist. Romance is merely adventure remembered in tranquil-
  lity, devoid of the ills and anxieties, fleas, fevers, thirst, and toothache,
_ which are liable to be the more instant experience. Iam commending
                                       241
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM      THE   EARTH

first-hand adventure as a necessary medicine to the character of
the young, and archaeology of the kind which I have been trailing
before the reader is fraught with the right sort of adventure. If ever
the student, in the chill recesses of his northern university, feel some-
thing of ‘that love of the sun, that weariness of the north (cette fatigue
du nord)’ of which Madame de Stiel wrote, with Winckelmann in
mind, let him indulge it for a while and give him opportunity to do
so. It will serve ultimately to enhance his proper patriotism, and
meanwhile will harbour him suitably, as an aspiring humanist, in the
lands of the south and the sunrise where the humanities and science
and civilization were themselves brought to birth. He will gather no
harm and possibly much good.
   It remains to touch lightly on the large problem of the ultimate
potentiality of our archaeological evidence. Whither, at the best, can
it lead us? What, after all, matters most in this discipline of ours?
If we are, perhaps, to select our objective with a little more thought
for essentials than we sometimes do, what shall ultimately govern
our choice? Recently, in an after-dinner discussion on relative values,
it was rashly Suggested to a Palestinian archaeologist that Palestine
was rather a backwater. “Yes,” he replied modestly, “but, after all, we
did produce the Trinity.’ The conversation then lapsed. I have since
been wondering afresh what the value of our archaeological evidence
really is. What do our bits and pieces amount to? Listen to the grave
words which Dr John Donne uttered on this subject three and a half
centuries ago?
  The ashes of an Oak in the Chimney are no epitaph of that oak, to tell
me how high or how large that was; it tells me not what flocks it shel-
tered while it stood, nor what men it ‘hurt when it fell. The dust of
great persons’ graves is speechless, too; it says nothing, it distinguishes
nothing. As soon the dust of a wretch whom thou wouldest not, as of —
a prince whom thou couldest not look upon will trouble thine eyes if
the wind blow it thither; and when a whirlewind hath blown the dust
of the Churchyard into the Church, and the man sweeps out the dust
of the Church into the Churchyard, who will undertake to sift those
dusts and to pronounce, this is the Patrician, this is the noble flour, and
this the yeomanly, this the Plebeian bran?
  Who indeed? Not the poor archaeologist, who may at best bottle.
the dust and send 1t hopefully to Professor Zeuner. Dr Donne cannot —
                                    242
          WHAT     ARE    WE   DIGGING     UP,   AND   WHY?

_ be gainsaid, but see how he cuts at one of the roots of our study! In
 a classic sentence it has been observed that a great nation may leave
 behind it a very poor rubbish-heap. And are we, as practising archae-
_ clogists, to award the palm to the unknown Sumerian who was
 buried at Ur with sixty-three helmeted soldiers, grooms, and gold-
 garlanded damsels, two chariots and six bullocks, or to the Nazarene
 in a loin-cloth who was nailed up on Golgotha between two thieves?
 I merely ask the question, but cannot help feeling that, were archae-
 ology alone the arbiter, the answer would not be in doubt. Give us
 helmets and gold garlands every time; bread and circuses give us,
 provided that the bread is carbonized and the circuses well-furnished
 with good solid bronze and marble. But let us at least, in our grati-
 tude for these things, remember the missing values that cannot be
appraised in inches or soil-samples or smudges in the earth.
    All this is not very encouraging. The archaeologist may find the
 tub but altogether miss Diogenes. He may answer with botanical
 precision Browning’s question, “What porridge had John Keats?’
 without a passing recognition of the author of Endymion. He must
 accept these risks, consoling himself with the reflection that no single
 approach to human accomplishment can be other than partial and
 chancy. The literary historian who overlooks art and craftsmanship
