                              CHAPTER       8


                               Burials
       “Where necessary, the dolmens were blasted, the circles of
      stones were removed and the cistvaens constructed with large flat
      slabs were made available for study.’ Mysore State Archaeological
      Department, Annual Report for 1942.

From the living we turn to the dead. The varieties of burial-ritual
devised by man in his care alike for the departed and for their sur-
vivors are legion. The body may be buried intact or after cremation;
it may be left awhile to the weather, the kites, and the jackals, where-
after a few representative bones may be collected and piously interred.
Burials may be communal or individual. The dead may be thrust
with no durable equipment into the earth; they may be accompanied
by the treasury of Sutton Hoo, or by a sumptuous army of attendants
as at Ur; they may go naked to St Peter or with a harem to Paradise;
they may be enclosed in a humble pot or in relays of costly sarco-
phagi; their grave may be marked by no lasting monument or by ge
mound on the hill, high and broad, by wave-farers wide to be seen’;
or their ashes may be tipped into a river which will bear them happily
from our ken. Fear, habit, a little affection, and much affectation go
to the making of these things. It is fortunate for the prying archae-
ologist that his technical problem is often a relatively simple one. His
difficulty begins when he comes to reconstruct the ritual represented
by the particles of evidence uncovered by his skill (for an example,
see above, p. 18); and if he steps beyond ritual to its fancied signifi-
cance, he will scarcely find the answer in the cartload of books which,
says the Chinese proverb, contains all wisdom.
   Here is no place for the anthropology of this vast subject. From the
technical point of view only, I will deal in turn with certain broad
categories such as are known to me as an excavator or observer.

                  ROUND     BARROWS        AND    CAIRNS

Round barrows (of earth) or cairns (of rubble), ranging in Britain
from the end of the Stone Age to the Viking period and abundant at
                                     113
              ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

various periods in many other parts of the world, provide a useful
starting-point. They may be a few feet or more than 50 feet in dia-
meter, and their present altitude shows an equivalent variation. But,
whatever their size, their excavation can, in a majority of instances,
follow one of two alternative procedures. The best introduction to
them is to emphasize how not to proceed.
  The day is not long past when barrow-digging, or rather barrow-
hogging was a polite amusement on a summer’s day. Something has
been said about this in Chapter II (see also Pl. 1): and it will suffice
to recall how in 1849 Dean Merewether ‘opened’ thirty-one barrows
in twenty-six days in the Avebury district. This is probably a world
record, but there are several runners-up whom it would be waste of
time to catalogue. The method was to plunge downward into the
centre of the mound in the hope (often, alas, fulfilled) of finding a
primary or secondary burial, or both. The crime lay, not merely in
the neglect of all the structural and ritual minutiae which are a large
part of the interest of a barrow, but that, working downwards in a
central cavity upon the strata of successive structures or burials no
investigator, however experienced, could correlate them owing to
the simple fact that they were largely removed in the process. Not, of
course, that Merewether and his kin had any notion of stratification.
Nevertheless, even after stratification had begun to be dimly under-
stood, the practice of driving a narrow trench through the middle
of a barrow long continued. I remember seeing an excavation of this
kind which in fact revealed the primary burial but - so narrow and
dark and dirty was the trench — failed to discover a surrounding ritual
ditch 6 feet wide, although the trench passed over it at two points.
   The central pit and trench are therefore alike ruled out of court as
methods of excavation. Nothing in archaeological excavation can
be more definite than that.
   Now for the more positive side of the matter. The underlying
principle is that the whole barrow shall be removed and, whenever
 possible, subsequently replaced. This principle was laid down by
Pitt Rivers and cannot be gainsaid. At any point in or about the
mound, structural features or secondary burials are liable to occur,
and nothing short of a complete record can nowadays justify the
excavation of a type of monument which has in the past suffered so
grievously from piecemeal work.
                                  114
                                  BURIALS

  A satisfactory method to this end, adopted, for example, by Sir
Cyril Fox at Ysceifiog in Flintshire! and by myself on Dunstable
Downs in Bedfordshire? was as follows (I quote Fox):
   Two parallel rows of numbered pegs were driven in 1 ft. apart on
either side of the barrow, at right angles to the face on which it was
proposed to work. As the removal of the barrow advanced foot by
foot, the face was maintained in a straight line between pegs similarly
numbered, and on the discovery of a deposit its position was fixed —
firstly, by measuring its distance from the appropriate right-hand peg
along a line stretched to the equivalent peg, and secondly by measuring
its vertical position above or below the original ground-level. In prac-
tice it was found that positions could in this manner be fixed very
easily. The centre of the deposit marked CII on plan [Fig. 18], 1 ft. 6 in.
above the floor of the barrow, was thus quickly recorded as 25’:
18’ + 1’ 6”. The scale of feet on this plan indicates the position of one
row of pegs. . . . As the work proceeded the floor was tested at fre-
quent intervals and holes dug when any indication of disturbance
presented itself.
In this clear description it is of course implied that a carefully meas-
ured cross-section of the barrow is drawn along every face which
revealed any feature of interest. Fox in fact published seven sections
of the Ysceifiog barrow (Fig. 19).
   At the risk of repetition, I would add the following details. First,
the datum-pegs must be substantial and firmly driven in. They must
also be broad enough to bear a clear, painted numeral (I prefer
Roman numerals, both as distinctive and as easier to paint). Thirdly,
a two-inch nail must be driven into the top of the peg at the exact
point of measurement. Incidentally, this nail is useful for holding the
loop of a measuring tape, and the transverse string for each successive
cutting. Fourthly, a continuous string along each datum-line from
nail to nail is useful for intermediate measurements. Fifthly, it is
convenient to record in the fashion already recommended for three-
dimensional    recording (above, pp. 87-90), with ruled columns
arranged across two pages of the notebook.
The great merit of this system of excavation is that the excavator is
working throughout in the fullest possible light and comfort, and the
recording is rendered exceedingly easy. Its demerit is that, unless
  1. Arch: Cambrensis, 1926, pp. 48 ff.     2. Arch. Journ. lxxxviii (1931), 193 ff.

                                      IIS
                  ARCHAEOLOGY              FROM       THE        EARTH

special and rather cumbersome arrangements are made, the records
are exclusively parallel with one axis of the mound, and the other
axis is not adequately recorded. In a majority of instances, this par-
tiality does not matter, but it might.
   The alternative method in general use meets this objection. It

 GROUND-PLAN   OF YSCEIFIOG BARROW ,SHOWING THE CIRCULG2 TRENCH ANDTHE CENTRAL
 PIT-GRAVE WITH THEIR RESPECTIVE ENTRANCES.         Als ATTEMPT HASALSO BEEN MADE
 TO SHOW THE AREAS OF THE FLOOR OF THE GRAVE, Q OFTHE BURIAL DEPOSIT, AND OF THE CAIRN

                                              |                                             &
                                              igeu5
                                              a                                             <
                                             Ween                               M
                                              |
                                              |




      fe at                                                                         SCALE
                                                                                    OF      SPE
                                                                                            ROS
                                                                                    eer
  CI.CY,
       CI REPRESENT
                  To SCALE,                           Fi FW Fw   innicare HE
  THE [SECONDARY] CREMATION INTERMENTS                POSITIONS OF FUNT FLAXESRIMNEMENT]

fig. 18. The Ysceifiog barrow, Flintshire, showing the layout for excavation.
                              After Cyril Fox

is known as quartering or the quadrant method. The mound is marked
out into four quarters by two strings, laid preferably to the cardinal
points of the compass, and over the approximate centre. Opposite
quarters are then excavated in turn, a balk 14-3 feet wide being left
                                           I16

                                                                                                  SS
                                                                                                  a
SECTIONS Ne1 106 ARE PARALLEL. ; Ne 7 ISAT RIGHT ANGLES TO These
|.SECTIONAT 20 FEET AA—B oN PLAN




2..SECTION AT 26 Feer                                      C-~D on PLAN                                                 Ee,
                                                                                                    CREMATIONTE IS PROTECTED
                                                                                                                WNTO THIS PLANE




3. SECTIONAT 33 FEET                                       E~F ON PLAN                                                   Fer RANEFi
                                                                                                                         1S PROTECTED




4. SECTION AT 37 FeeT                                       G—H onPLaN                                                      IMPLEMENT
                                                 ea           Le                    Ekeng OF LIHESTONE DOU-DERS dedLette




                                                                                                                           nw
                                                                                                                           GRAVEL. AND SAND




(SECTION FROM SOUTHTO NorTH                                       P~Q ONPLAN                                        THE ENTRANCETO
                                                                                        caien,or Limestone           ‘THE BURIAL PIT {Ss
                                                                                   aE                                PROJECTED        INTO
                                                                                                                En              THIS PLANE




                                                                                                                                (cewer
                                                                                                                                 Filing
                                                                                                                                 onirrep)



                                      20            2        3o     35        40          45        So         55        60            Os
   =        10            15"                                       te
                                                                     ee et                      ee


   SCALE                  OF          FEET                                                     ee
                                                 eer                                           THE FILLING OF THE TRENCH CONSISTS of
                                                                           Perec. OC         OF MATERIALAIR ND ETOP
                                                                                     VARIETYBASE                            . TIS MOSTLY
                             =a                            eave SAND with Few STOW OAVEL          DHE
SYMBOLS       2ABOVE       aerein een
                                         -BANDED GREY SANDY CLAY
                                    —STogance                                                  CLAY WITH THE WITHOUT OFSTAVES
                                                                                                          OR,FILLING          ALSO
 W&ZD-
 —_——            LeveL.          —
                              (F'*>                                                            OCCUR                     THE BURIAL
                                                                    SHOWN   IN SECTIONS        Pit” 4S STIFF   CLAYEY    SAND    ON WEST
          UNDISTURBED/      (7,   7        7     }CLAYEY   SAND
                           He                  we CRAVEL            Fook AND SEVEN             SIDE, GRAVEL WITH CLAY BANDS
                                                                                                                         ON EAST
             suasolt) /                         |Fiste wHiTe SAND J one                        ae
                                                                                               ei                          GLP * bag gSvthe
                                                                                                                           Ye


                                                             § and 6 omitted).
Fig. 19. Selected sections across the Ysceifiog barrow (nos.
                                After Cyril Fox
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE   EARTH

between each quadrant in such a fashion as to give a complete trans-
verse section across the mound in both directions. The example here
illustrated (PI. 14) is, for convenience, taken from a level site (a burial-
pit at Brahmagiri, Mysore State), on which the system shows up
clearly. It will be observed that the balks are staggered so that the
two halves of each transverse section are in the same plane, although
one half of each is necessarily in reverse in relation to its fellow -
a detail easily adjusted in the final drawing.
   Recording by this method is rather less simple than by the other.
Each quadrant is numbered or lettered or named by compass-point,
and it is desirable to fix a line of pegs at 1-foot intervals along one of
the cardinal lines of the layout. From these pegs, the usual three-
dimensional measurements are taken in each quadrant until, in the
ultimate phase of the work, the balks are themselves cut away. In
the example illustrated, it was easy on the level site to lay out a meas-
uring-tape in lieu of pegs.
  Apart from these two standard methods of excavation, other
methods have, been improvised in recent years in emergency-work
carried out under a time-limit on doomed mounds. With skilful
handling, some of these improvisations have produced important
results, but they are not on that account justified save in emergency.
In particular, there has been some reversion to the axial trench, sub-
sequently expanded about the centre of the mound. With a builder’s
bulldozer in the offing, anything saved is better than everything lost;
but, though this obsolete method be then as inevitable as quarter-day, it
isjust about as desirable. The two standard methods are the best to date.
   Whilst no attempt can be made here to catalogue the varieties of
structural or stratigraphical problem which a burial-mound may
present, a few of the more common features may be noted as a guide
to the beginner. The primary burial is usually central under the
mound as originally formed but not necessarily as later enlarged.
It may bea hole in the ground, with or without a small mound or heap
of stones immediately covering it; it may be in a wooden (dug-out)
coffin or in a stone cist, which may be ‘large’ (3 feet or more in
length) or ‘small’ (under 3 feet) and buried beneath or standing upon
the natural surface. The stones should be examined for intentional
markings. Secondary burials may be inserted into the original mound,
or placed upon it and covered by added material, or even inserted
                                    118
                                  BURIALS

into the added material; the shape and extent of the cuttings contain-
ing secondary burials are therefore vital pieces of evidence, to be
looked for and recorded with the utmost care. The area containing
the original burial may lie within a circular ditch, which may either
 be covered by the original mound or lie alongside it, and may either
_be continuous or interrupted or, significantly, approached by a ramp.
 The shape and character of the ditch - whether flat-bottomed, and
 whether beaten and hardened as by ritual traffic - must be considered
 and discussed. And the bottom of the ditch must be searched for
 material which, on analysis, may show whether the ditch was exposed
 for any appreciable time, or whether it was covered immediately
 after the funeral (cf. p. 63). Alternatively, a “processional way’ round
 the primary interment may be built up above the natural surface, as,
apparently, in the Pond Cairn at Coity, Glamorgan, brilliantly
recorded by Sir Cyril Fox.1 Here, the burial and, as it seems, an
initial infant-sacrifice, were covered by a cylindrical stack of turves,
and around the stack a circular space about 5 feet wide was enclosed
by a surrounding stone wall 15-20 feet wide and perhaps 5 feet
high (a south-western feature in Britain). This interspace appears to
have been used for elaborate ritual, and the excavator’s discussion
 of the phenomena should be studied by all barrow-diggers in what-
 ever part of the world they be.
    The edge of a barrow or cairn may be retained by a stone kerb, or
 revetment or ring-wall, up to 18 inches high,? or may be anchored by
 earthfast buttress-stones.? How far, or in what manner, timber may
 have been used alternatively round British barrows we cannot say
 until many more of them have been completely excavated under
 modern conditions. The practice is known from Holland, where Dr
 van Giffen has excavated examples; and in Holland also timber
 circles were sometimes set up within the mound. Three barrows in
 Britain (on the Yorkshire Wolds, in Lancashire, and in Montgomery-
 shire) have produced analogous evidence,® but whether, as one
   1. Archaeologia, 1xxxvii (1937), 142 ff.
   2. Ibid. lxxxix (1943), 108, 110 (Llandow tumulus, Glamorgan, excavated
 by Fox); and Proc. Prehist. Soc. 1938, p. 112 (Breach Farm, Glamorgan, exca~
 vated by W. F. Grimes).
   3. Ibid. lxxxvii (1937), 134 (Simondstown cairn, excavated by Fox).
   4. A. E. van Giffen, Die Bauart der Einzelgraber.
   5. Grahame Clark in Proc. Prehist. Soc. 1936, pp. 30 ff.

                                       119
                ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM       THE   EARTH

excavator thought, they represent the dead man’s hut is mere spec-
ulation. The whole matter deserves further investigation in the field,
and timbering should be very carefully looked for, not merely at
ground-level, but also in the stuff of the mound itself, in all future
barrow excavation. The timber inside certain Indian Buddhist stupas,
which have been compared with round barrows, is an analogous.
problem.
                      LONG    BARROWS        AND    CAIRNS

Long barrows in Europe represent a group of burial-customs pre-
valent in certain regions approximately between 2500 and 1500 B.C.,
i.e. at the end of the Stone Age and the overlap with the early Bronze
Age. Like round barrows they vary widely in form, size, structure,
and usage, but in general they were intended for multiple burial,
normally by inhumation though occasionally by cremation. As their
name implies, they are distinguished by the fact that one axis is
longer than the other, but the difference may range from only a few
feet to a third of a mile.1 It follows that no uniform procedure can be
commended to the excavator.
   The first long barrow scientifically excavated — and one of the few -
  1. Thus a long barrow on Thickthorne Down, Dorset, was 90 feet wide and
only r10 feet long. On the other hand, the monstrous ‘bank barrow’ in Maiden
Castle, Dorset, was 60 feet wide and no less than 1,790 feet long. True, a writer
in Arch. Journ. civ, 11, has disputed the identification of the latter as a barrow
and prefers to call it (as indeed the excavators nicknamed it) a neolithic race-
course or cursus. But (a) more than $00 feet of it are still a mound and cannot
have been used as a cursus; (b) seemingly comparable long mounds in Dorset
(e.g. in Long Bredy and Broadmayne parishes) are still mounds from end to
end and were never ‘racecourses’; (c) the flattened portion of the Maiden Castle
structure coincides exactly with the extension of the Iron Age Camp and is
susceptible to explanation by that fact; and (d) the Pentridge cursus, which has
been cited as an analogy on the ground that a small long barrow is incorpor-
ated in one of its margins, bears no resemblance to the Maiden Castle plan.
The Pentridge cursus is over four times as broad, and to say that ‘if the Pentridge
cursus was reduced in scale and the offset long barrow placed between its ditches
centrally, the two structures would not differ materially one from the other’ is
to exceed the limits of legitimate hypothesis. To assume at Maiden Castle a
racecourse completely blocked for at least a third of its length is like assuming a
bottle of which one-third is cork! And in fact since this note was written further
excavation has shown beyond doubt that the work was originally a mound
from end to end. — Proc. Dorset Nat. Hist. and Arch. Soc., [xxiv (1953), 36.

                                       I20
                                  BURIALS

was the famous Wor Barrow on Handley Down, Dorset, excavated
by Pitt Rivers in 1893. The published photograph of the finished
work, in which ‘the figure standing at attention in the middle dis-
tance marks the site of the central interment’, is itself a monument
of the General’s scientific discipline. Save for four pyramids of chalk
and turf left to indicate the original height of the mound, the barrow
and the filling of its peripheral ditches have been completely removed.
The pyramids represented the axis of a broad trench, 45 feet wide,
which was cut at the outset centrally along the length of the mound,
jeaving the flanks for subsequent clearance. Objects found in the
ditch-filling were recorded three-dimensionally, and in the report
were projected diagrammatically on to two schematic sections of
the ditch (Fig. 2, pp. 26-27).
   It is no detraction from the outstanding merit of this classic excava-
tion to suggest improvements of method. In the first place, it is a
primary desideratum to record a complete longitudinal section of a
structure of this kind; i.e. along the original axis of approach into
the chamber (here of wood). This is particularly necessary in cham-
bered barrows, where the record of successive entries can best be
shown by a section from the entrance or forecourt inwards. (Supple-
mentary cross-sections are of course also necessary.) Secondly, under
the greatest height of the mound, i.e. along its longitudinal axis, in-
ternal structures (as at Skendleby, p. 101) are most likely to be best
preserved, again demanding a central longitudinal section. Thirdly,
                                                                                  be
it is likely that the two longitudinal halves of the mound will
                             al  in  structure,    and   hints   or   evidences   m
approximately symmetric
          half  dug  can  be followed   up   and   verified   in  the  second   half
the first
if the halves are dug in succession, not as at Wor Barrow simultane-
                                                                                   a
 ously. Fourthly, in an extremely irregular neolithic barrow-ditch
                              cross-secti ons  is  needed.    Pitt   Rivers’s  pro-
series of carefully drawn
                                                                          ditch and
jection of all the finds, some drawn twice the scale of the
                                                    to a  purely    diagramma   tic
 others only one-third the scale (Fig. 2), on
 section is useful but is no substitute  for  an  accurate    picture.
                                                                    Wor Barrow
  ‘There is indeed no reason why a mound such as
                                                                         nded for
 should not be dug by the quadrant-method already comme
                                                       barrow     greatl y exceeds
 round barrows. Only when the length of the
                                          becom   e   cumbe  rsome   .   Whate  ver
 its width does that method tend to
                                               out, and preferably
the method, however, the first step is to mark
                                        121
               ARCHAEOLOGY FROM THE EARTH
peg out, the barrow longitudinally into equal halves, and then to
tackle one half only at a time.                                      j
   As an example of the excavation of a longer barrow of this kind, I
may again refer to the very successful work carried out in 1933-4 by
Mr C.W. Phillips on the Giants’ Hills mound at Skendleby in Lin-
colnshire. Mr Phillips describes his method as follows:
  The first step taken was to lay out a rectangle 180 by 80 ft. round the
barrow and drive in a strong post at each of the corners. A line of levels
was run from the nearest Ordnance bench mark, and a local bench mark
was cut on one of the posts. A contour survey of the barrow was then
made.
   In the case of barrows with large ditches there are two main lines of
investigation which may be pursued. First, there is the actual barrow
with its primary interments and any original structural features it may
have. This gives information about its builders, its value depending on
the degree of preservation of the contents and the absence of distur-
bance. Secondly, there is the evidence of the part which the monument
has played in the life of the district since it was completed. Some of this
may be recovered in the form of stratified traces of casual human settle-
ment in the ditch before the shelter afforded by it was destroyed by
silting. In the case of a long barrow ditch of normal size this may usually
be relied upon to give evidence down to the close of prehistoric times.
There is the further possibility of intrusive secondary burials in the body
of the barrow or in the ditch.
  The season of 1933 was devoted to establishing the second of these
two points by digging a large section of the ditch on the upper side of
the barrow. In 1934 the barrow proper was excavated, and as much
more of the ditch as was necessary to prove its character all round the
barrow.
   In opening the barrow a central spine was left intact right down the
middle to show the original height, and this was carried across the ditch
at the east end. At the same time $-ft.-wide balks at right-angles to the
central spine were left at stated intervals.
   It was originally expected that the east end would contain the burials,
but, when a complete excavation of the eastern third of the barrow had
shown that this was not the case, a 5-ft.-wide trench was driven along
the central spine right through to the west end. In this way the burial
area was approached from the side, and, when found, fully opened out.
Also the remarkable hurdling in the western part of the barrow [see
above, p. 101] was revealed and studied, further cross-cuts over the whole

                                   I22
                                 BURIALS

of the barrow being made at various points to establish the section and
find out about the hurdling offsetting from the central ‘fence’. Another
investigation was the careful clearance of the revetment-trench found
across the eastern end on the old ground-surface. Trenches had also to
be run along the sides of the barrow to follow up the post-holes which
were found to flank it along the greater part of its length on both sides.
The whole of the extreme west end. was also excavated to find out as
oe as possible about the eight posts which were found to have stood
  ere.}
  In all this admirable work, the excavator would probably himself
be the first to admit an element of opportunism, due to the novelty
of the evidence revealed, the immensity of the task, and the conse-
quent necessity for selection as the excavation developed. But the
whole project was well and truly based upon the elements essential to
a long-barrow excavation, namely: (2) the provision of firmly fixed
datum-lines; (b) the preparation of a contoured survey before excava-
tion; (c) the maintenance of a longitudinal section or spine during
excavation; (d) the thorough exploration of the ditches; and (e) the
careful removal of the (greater part of the) mound. The structural
hurdles, first identified at Skendleby, and the marginal posts will now
be looked for in all long-barrow excavations, and the search for them
can therefore be legislated for in the primary layout.
   A further word in regard to the contoured survey of an unex-
cavated long barrow. The contours may not adequately indicate the
actual extent of the mound, particularly on a slope. It may therefore
be necessary to add a basal form-line, differentiated from the contour-
lines, to indicate the approximate line of junction between the struc-
ture and the natural surface of the ground.
   The two long barrows which I have chosen as examples are both
devoid of the stone structures — chambers, passages, peristaliths,
entrance-complexes — which characterize many of the kind. To these
the general principles apply: above all, the restriction of excavation
to one half ofa feature at a time, and, wherever possible, to work upon
                                                                            the
the longitudinal axis or ‘approach axis’ as the base. Thus, in
excavation of megalithic ‘port-hole’ cists       in India  ~  i.e. large   cists
                                                                      cist was
with a small circular entrance through an end-stone — half the
                     such   a fashion  that the section  bisected   the  port-
excavated first, in
                      1. Archaeologia, Ixxxv (1936), 42-4.
                                      123
               ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM   THE   EARTH

hole. By this means it was possible to ascertain exactly what portion
of the filling had been inserted through the port-hole, and so to recon-
struct a feature of the ceremonial usage of the tomb. The procedure
need not be further elaborated; nor need the method of digging and
recording the sections through the ditch, where a simple adaptation
of the three-dimensional method described elsewhere (p. 87) is
applicable.

                          ‘BLATT’ CEMETERIES

Where burials, for example in urn-fields, are not marked on the sur-
face of the ground, their investigation becomes an ordinary area-
excavation of the kind already described (p. 83). Within the squares
of the grid it will obviously be necessary to leave additional ‘keys’ or
cross-sections to interrelate certain of the burial-groups vertically.
Otherwise, the main problem will be that of isolating the individual
graves and planning their outlines by very careful horizontal digging,
often with a knife or trowel. In dealing with inhumations, the exca-
vator may advisedly look particularly for discolorations or impresses
which may indicate the former presence of coffins or shrouds. See Sir
Leonard Woolley’s account of the cemetery at Ur,1 or the reference
above to a coffin-burial of the Indus Civilization at Harappa (p. 100),
all or mostly dating from the third millennium ..c. It is manifestly
important to determine whether burials overlap (and so indicate per-
haps a culture-sequence) or have otherwise been disturbed anciently.
Care must also be taken to discriminate between authentic grave-
goods and objects which may happen to have reached the grave with
the infilling. No rule can be laid down for this; much must depend
upon the precise position of the objects in question, and upon the
general character of the infilling. Where any shadow of doubt exists,
it must be stated in the report.
  1. Ur Excavations II: the Royal Cemetery (London and Philadelphia, 1934),
Pp- 137, 165, 184, &c., and pl. 14.




                                      124
                                     CHAPTER 9

                       Watch-makers’ Jobs
 *“TuatT be a watch-maker’s job’, remarked the ancient, after long
 and meditative observation of an archaeologist on all fours, plying
 a pen-knife and a water-colour brush upon the reluctant soil. And
 watch-makers’ jobs are not the least amongst the employments of the
 director and his supervisors. ‘The archaeologist, who the moment
 before may have been writing notes in a different part of the field, has
  to take his turn with the pick, or more probably with a knife, and
_ may spend the next few hours crouched in the same hole, in the same
uncomfortable attitude, engrossed in the cleaning, recording and
 safe removal of some one particularly fragile object.’1 I do not alto-
 gether applaud the dispersal of effort and the shortage ofskilled assist-
 ance implied in that quotation; save in the direst emergency, the
 general does not have to lay his guns or repair a breech-block. But
 the principle is right enough; the extraction of delicate objects from
 the earth demands the highest skill, patience, and knowledge avail-
 able, and is not lightly delegated.
    First, however, a word or two of warning may be uttered. Avoid
any semblance of excitement when an object of some special dis-
 tinction first begins to emerge. I have seen a director of excavations
 leap excitedly into a trench on such an occasion, communicating a
 false and emotional atmosphere to the incident and interfering there-
 fore with cool, objective workmanship. It is essential to check any
 sort of excitement instantly, and to insist firmly on quiet routine.? In
 particular, let the adjacent gang get on with its allotted task without
 intermission. Nothing unusual has happened. Discipline is now more
    1. Sir Leonard Woolley, Digging up the Past (Pelican Books, 1940), p. 40.
    2. More charmingly expressed by a French writer on excavation: ‘Il faut
                                                                                   et con-
 laisser les vestiges en place aussi longtemps que possible, ne jamais se presser
                                                                                    grande
 server son calme. Le moment le plus dangereux est celui d’une vraie
                                                                                 la moitié
 découverte; l’exaltation risque de devenir telle que le fouilleur oublie
                                                                                     que sa
 des consignes, pousse des exclamations admiratives et s’apercoit trop tard
                                                                              de s’asseoir
 documentation est incomplete. Il est vraiment grand s’il a le courage
                                                                             Les Fouilles
 et d’allumer une cigarette pour réfléchir.’ A. Leroi-Gourhan,
 préhistoriqu es  (technique et méthodes)  (Paris, 1950), P- 7-

                                            125
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM      THE     EARTH

than ever necessary if proper values are to be maintained. And
secondly, the removal of some special object is very rarely an adequate
justification for an ugly untidy piece of excavation. The rules of
stratification must be adhered to; if possible, a part of the object
should first be uncovered in such fashion that the remainder is still
embedded in, and projects from, a clean-cut local section. Apart from
the importance of its relationship with environment, this section may
reveal unexpected information, such as the stain of a vanished casing
which on plan had evaded recognition. In other words, ordinary
rules may not be jettisoned without very exceptional cause. The
warning may seem unnecessary, but experience shows otherwise.
   Having said that, I turn from precept to example. And first I pro-
pose to turn to the ship-burial of Sutton Hoo (p. 102), where Mr
W. EF. Grimes has described the ‘exciting and exacting task’ of
removing the treasure from the burial-chamber.t The following ex-
tensive extracts are reproduced by permission.
  The bronze bowls . . . were standing one inside the other, with a num-
ber of iron objects in association. Three angons [long iron javelins] were
actually pushed through the drop handle of the larger bowl, with spear-
heads and other implements and weapons near at hand. ... Corrosion
was so far advanced that it was unlikely that any free metal could sur-
vive in any of them, ... The weapons were corroded not only to one
another but also to the side of the bronze bow] with which they were
now in contact.., . It was abundantly clear that they could not be me-
chanically separated on the spot, ... They were therefore cleaned up
with care and freed from sand —a task which took some time because
of the large amount of undercutting and the generally restricted condi-
tions—and the whole complex of bowls and iron objects was lifted
intact. ...
   Beneath [a silver dish] was an assortment of articles, most of them in
a fragile and parlous state, the recording, removal and packing of which
took the undivided attention of all working on the site. The most urgent
were the organic materials     — especially a number of small cups which
were thought at one hasty glance to be made of wood. But there were
also leather and other materials, all of which owed their preservation
to their having been more or less encased in fabrics and a flock-like
substance which had kept them in a state of perpetual dampness whilst
shutting out air. Delay here would have been fatal. The cups already
                       1. Antiquity, xiv (1940), 69 ff.

                                     126
                      WATCH-MAKERS’            JOBS
 showed signs of distortion and were damaged in other ways. And a hot
 drying sun poured into the bottom of the ship. If they were to be pre-
 served for future treatment it was obvious that quick measures were
 called for; equally obvious that the best hope for their preservation
 would lie in a reconstruction of the conditions which had already pre-
 served them for so many hundreds of years. The cups were therefore
 closely packed in damp moss in boxes with well-fitting lids to exclude
 as much air as possible, and stored in a cool place away from the sun,
 The leather and fabrics were put temporarily in bowls of water.
    There is little to be said about the removal of the remaining objects
 from beneath the dish. The small silver bow] was taken up with its con-
 tents untouched but protected with a thick layer of moss. ... The fine
leather bag in which the small dish lay was our despair. It had become
 ragged with decay, was cracked and fissured, with all its native tough-
 ness gone. The remnants were cleaned and photographed in situ; after
 that interest concentrated on the size of the largest piece that could be
 detached unbroken from the underlying wood of the trough in which
 all these objects had been deposited. ... The trough and the objects
 surrounding it were left until later; the wood was protected from the
 drying action of sun and air by a thick covering of damp cloths.
   In the western end of the burial-chamber, was revealed
 an iron object which proved to be of quite unexpected size and charac-
ter. As with cleaning its various features became clear we called it a
lamp-stand, It was much corroded but appeared to be fairly strong, and
in spite of its size was lifted quite easily. The surrounding sand was com-
pletely removed and the weight of the stand evenly supported by three
people. It was placed on a wide plank of a suitable length on which its
unsupported parts were propped with packing covered with cotton
wool.                                              :
   Near the lamp-stand was an iron-bound wooden bucket in an ad-
vanced state of decay. The iron binding was badly corroded; the wood
had become friable. The vessel had therefore collapsed upon itself and
become a more or less shapeless mass. Even so it seemed possible that
careful removal might enable some sort of reconstruction to be attemp-
ted later —and there was the further possibility that the bucket might
contain other material of interest.
   Surplus sand having been removed, the bucket was bound firmly
round with webbing, particular care being taken with the lower part,
                                                                        iron
upon which the greatest strain was to be placed. A piece of thin
plate of slightly larger     area than   the  bucket was  then obtained  and

                                    127
                                                                                  a



               ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

                                                             cleared away in
gradually introduced beneath its base, the sand being
                                                              With the plate
front of the forward edge of the plate with a trowel.
                                  was  ready  for lifting. But   the iron was
completely inserted the bucket
                                                                      without
too thin to sustain the quite considerable weight of the bucket
                           of  course  have  disturb ed  the  already  broken
buckling — which would
                                                                   which pre-
pieces. A flat spade was therefore inserted beneath the plate,
                                                                      provid-
vented any lateral pressure being inflicted on the bucket while
                                                                         lifted
ing a large surface for its support. Bucket and plate were then
together on the spade and     placed  on  strong  boards   so  that the  spade
                                                                             ly
could be withdrawn. In this way no part of the bucket was serious
disturbed.
  Mr Grimes remarks parenthetically that he has “used an almost
similar method in removing very fragile Bronze Age pottery. The
consolidation of two Bronze Age urns from Coity, Glamorgan, was
only possible because they were lifted intact in this way and the
crumbling pottery hardened and treated in the workshop before its
contents (which helped to reinforce it) were removed’. I may add
that in similar circumstances, in the removal of a considerable pre-
historic clay oven, I have likewise used the iron-plate method with
success. The preliminary binding of the fragile object — preferably
with an ordinary surgical bandage — is an important stage, and may
sometimes have to be supplemented by a surface-coating of plaster
or melted paraffin-wax to give additional solidity. The particularly
fragile clay oven was coated with a considerable jacket of wax, and
survived the operation of removal perfectly. It is now in the Dor-
chester (Dorset) Museum.
   Enough has been quoted from the Sutton Hoo account to indicate
the general methods used. Mr Grimes observes that the account
is not a story of new and elaborate technical methods, but rather of the
way in which simple readily available means were employed to deal
with an unexpected range of materials, each ... with its own set of
problems, In some cases one could visualize an instrument or method by
which the solutions would have been the more easily obtained. I longed
several times for a broad-bladed implement, a kind of fish-slice, which
(in various sizes) would have been ideal for lifting such things as the
horn mounts, the silver bowls, and even the wooden bucket. But only
a specially made tool could have combined all the necessary qualities:
strength to sustain weight and pressure, thinness and a sharp edge of a
suitable outline for easy insertion beneath the object to be removed.
                                      128
                                                                                  es
                                                                                  oO
                                                               p. 21)
Excavation of a barrow, 1844 (Gentleman’s Magazine, 1852) (See
       fe
 (a) An Early Iron Age pit at Scarborough, Yorkshire, cut to show three
                 interrupted phases of the filling (See p. 45)




(b) Section showing sixteen successive layers of plastering on the wall of the
           temple of the moon-god Sin at Khafajah, Iraq (See p. 46)
Stratification at Brahmagiri, Mysore State, India (See p. 65)
(b) Discipline: excavation at Arikamedu, South India, 1945 (See p. 80)
(Eg ‘d 99) (Pr6r ‘punoyy mYg-e[Ixe].) WoIeAvOXS-vorIe UL JO INOAeT
                                           ai




Section pegged for three-dimensional recording (Maiden Castle, 1935)
                             (See p. 86)
(a) Section pegged for three-dimensional recording (Tale Sittap, 1945)
                               (See p. 86)




                      aera               Se lata   ct ci   liao aa   dx
      ie ctwceeise RWIS By FT   oe: Oe
                                                  Punjab, 1946)
© Similar section linking two cemetery-areas exer
                                     (See p. 87)


                                          I
                                              es      cs

                                         fordshire, 1931 (See p. 98)




(6) Verulamium, north-west gate: part of the plan recovered by clearing
              trenches made by wall-robbers (See p. 98)
(a) Roman timber-buil   ing at Richborough, Kent, traced by coloration
                        of the soil (See p. 100)

                                              ai 8
                                              sas ES




             about 2000 B.C. at Harappa, Punjab, showing outline of
                      wooden coffin (See p. 101)
.




    Lincolnshire (See p. 101)




                to
Section through the mud-brick defences of the Harappa citadel, Punjab,
                  built before 2000 B.c. (See p. 105)
                                                                               aoe:
ydesSojoyd-ary
   Jo  y1edJo oyi   ueryazeg
                         Aq yo   ‘eprxe, ‘qeftng
                                              ysay   Arnqueo
                                                          ‘ary 9ag)‘d   (gor
13
                         (gr ‘d 99s) poqiour quezpenb, aya Sutrmoys
‘eipuy ‘aieig arosAyy ‘UISeuryeag ye (‘o’d Ammquad puodes IO qs) atd-ye1ing & j O   UOTEA 149)   ee
                                                                        74
                                                                                                      14
       ‘d 99g) ypouns ‘drys oofy aoqNg 243 jo sooedy,
(€or
(a) Silver coin of Tiberius, dated a.D. 26-37, from Chandravalli,
                     Mysore State (See p. 147)




 (b) Arikamedu : fragments of Roman amphorae (See p. 142)
                                16
Rouletted ware of the first century a.p. from Arikamedu,   South India
                             (See p. 144)




                                 I7
one
Access



         a




                                                                                LO




                                                                                ee DE A IA




                                                                          4.»   ST EC)
                     17    16   1819   20    2

             Selection of tools from an Eastern excavation (See p. 181)
Part of section through the ‘Fosse’ earthwork at Verulamium, showing turf
    wall embedded in earth and gravel but emphasized by careful lighting
                                  (See p. 201)
(€61 *d aag sayeumts Arp ut asn Oj ‘p
        )                               113-A10330
(Soz -d 995) AydeaZojoyd a]8ur-ySryq OJ JOMOT,
                                                 21
       of
       Informat
       Ministry




     Reconstruc
     of
     homestead
     Early
     Age
     (See
     Little
     Wiltshire
     Woodbury,
     243)
     Iron
      at
      an
      p.




23
              (a) ‘Sir Flinders Petrie in the court-
                 yard of the School in Jerusalem’




                     pete:             i    ee

                      (b) ‘Copper Jar no. 277°

How not to illustrate! Two examples, with captions, from well-known
                  publications (See pp. 202 and 217)
                                  24
                      WATCH-MAKERS’            JOBS
   The absence of some luxuries had to be countered by patience and
perseverance. Our tools were of the simplest kind. Here we were fortu-
nate in our soil: the sand yielded readily to treatment, and especially,
when dry, to brushing for the more delicate objects. For these the usual
procedure was a sequence of alternate phases of brushing and drying,
the surface sand being removed to expose a new damp sand which in
its turn was allowed to dry. Paint brushes were most useful for this pur-
pose. In actually carving sand away from heavy objects calling for no
special treatment of the surface —and also for much of the finer work
—I was very grateful for a curved bodkin or packer’s needle, especially
as long as its point remained sharp. The curve of the needle was par-
ticularly useful for negotiating hollows, angles, and undercutting; it
provided a sensitive ‘feeler’ for unexpected shapes; and since it was not
mounted in a handle it could be used in a restricted space.
    Of the general practice of cleaning it remains to be said that each
specimen, whatever its material and character, was freed as completely
as possible from its matrix: the importance of the first step cannot be too
 strongly emphasized. (Even sand when damp is strongly prehensile, and
the extra strain imposed by its adhesion even to a small area might well |
 result in damage to a fragile specimen.) Care in coaxing the sand away
 without damaging the surface and in lifting the object so that all the
weight was equally distributed, with no strain on any one part, com~
 pleted the process. Such precautions may appear to be obvious, but were
 especially important on a site where all except the most precious metal
 was badly decayed and corroded.
    In the circumstances, dealing as we were with a wide range of objects
 and ‘materials all calling for laboratory treatment, and not knowing
 what else we might have to face, it was sound policy to remove even
 the most unpromising of finds with as little interference as possible.
 Chemical and other methods have now replaced more direct mechani-
 cal treatment of antiquities; here mechanical treatment was reduced to
 the minimum necessary to remove the object from the ground. In addi-
 tion, even with much broken and apparently worthless objects, much
                                                                     various
 time and trouble were expended in attempts to maintain the
                        in their relative positions, as a very valuable  first
 parts and fragments
                                                                information
step in reconstructing the original or obtaining maximum
                                                            stage. This
from it by more leisured laboratory examination at a later
                                                            even from
was not always successful and sometimes was impossible,
                                                           no scrap of
the beginning. But every attempt was made to see that
         from  Sutton Hoo  was lost by lack of care and patience in the
evidence
field.

   B                                 129
               ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM     THE    EARTH

   By way of comment on this account of a difficult and successful
piece of work, I would reinforce Mr Grimes’s plea for a “broad-
bladed implement’. Independent experience has shown me the con-
stant necessity for a selection of implements of this kind. They can
be bought or made without undue difficulty and should be a routine
item in the excavator’s equipment, beginning with the broad-bladed
kitchen knife which every supervisor should carry (p. 179) and includ-
ing fish-slices and the unnamed flat instrument (‘turner’) with which
fried eggs are removed from the adhesive surface of the frying-pan.
  From Sutton Hoo we may travel to Ur of the Chaldees, where Sir
Leonard Woolley had much experience of the “watch-maker’s job’
and has something to tell of it. One of his masterpieces was the recov-
ery of the harp from Shub-ad’s tomb, and he shall tell the story in his
own words.

    The first thing to come to light was the gold cap of the upright, which
seemed to be loose in the soil and gave us no hint as to what lay below.
As the work went on there were found two or three gold-headed nails
and, searching for their possible connexion, we found a hole running
down into the earth across which could be seen the shafts of more nails
obviously in position, i.e. the hole represented some wooden object
which had decayed away altogether but the nails once fixed in it were
being kept in place by the soil against their heads. A stick was therefore
inserted into the hole for so far as it would go and plaster of paris was
poured in round it; when that had had time to set the digging continued
and there was found the lower part of the upright modelled in plaster
with the gold-headed nails in it; measurement of the soil and the calcu-
lation of the distance apart of the dislodged nails gave the full length of
the upright and enabled us to refix the gold cap at the original height.
Below, the plaster had expanded into the ‘shoe’ of the instrument and
its flow had then been stopped by the not altogether decayed bitumen
which had held the shoe to the base; this, with the line of shell and lapis
inlay which emphasized its curve, was at once hardened with paraffin
wax. This brought us to the sounding-box which, being of wood, had
completely perished, but the broad band of mosaic along its edges was
for the most part in position, though rather distorted, and could be
cleared little by little and secured as it appeared by waxed muslin. The
wood had apparently been painted black with a line of red paint running
  1. C.L, Woolley, Ur Excavations, II (London and Philadelphia, 1934), pp.
74 £.; and Digging up the Past (Pelican Books, 1940), pp. 85 ff.

                                      I30
                     WATCH-MAKERS’ JOBS
parallel to the edge a little inside the inlay border. The top edge was
first treated and then the side could be laid bare and the form of it
ascertained; the rectangle of the near side was complete (it was indeed
lifted in one piece) and the back of the inlay of the far side could also
be cleaned and secured. The gold and lapis-lazuli calf’s head which deco-
rated the front of the instrument seemed to be in rather bad condition,
for the whole of the top of the head, consisting of lapis tesserae repre-
senting hair, had fallen down into the hollow left by the decay of the
wooden core, and the metal was a good deal bent, but nothing was
missing; in the end it was restored without much difficulty.

  Thus the available evidence, some of it positive, some negative, was
preserved, and an acceptable reconstruction of the whole instrument
rendered possible. The whole success of the operation depended on
the recognition at the outset of the potential significance of a hole
running down into the earth. Similarly,
ene of our richest graves at Ur, that which contained the famous golden
helmet, was located by the discovery of a copper spear-head sticking
point upwards in the earth. The soil was cleared from round it, and
there came to light a length of thin gold tube which adorned the top of
the shaft; below this there was a hole in the ground left by the wooden
shaft itself when it turned to dust. We followed the hole downwards,
and it led us to the grave, against the corner of which it had been lean-
ing when the earth was thrown back into the pit; with this forewarning
we were able to trace the entire outline of the grave before we started
to lay bare its contents, and so could record in order all the offerings
heaped and crowded round the coffin.

  Where the actual woodwork is preserved, other methods must be
adopted in accordance with circumstances. Thus in 1951 a La Tétne
sword in its bronze-bound wooden scabbard was found in the water-
logged clay at the bottom of an ancient ditch at Stanwick in York-
shire. It was carefully cleared to a rough outline with trowel and pen-
knife, and sufficient mud was then washed from it with a small soft
brush to enable a photograph and an approximate life-size drawing
 to be made of it on the spot. Meanwhile a local carpenter was pre-
 paring a box to receive it, with an ample allowance for packing
 material. When the drawing was completed, a stiff 3-ply board was
 carefully inserted beneath the object, which was then immediately
placed without further cleaning in the box in a thick matrix of wet
                                   131
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM    THE    EARTH

newspaper. The package was then taken by the next train to the
British Museum laboratory, care being taken to maintain the damp-
ness of the packing. The subsequent treatment, applied with great
skill by Dr H. J. Plenderleith, lies outside the scope of the field-
worker.
   Lastly, it is fair to include amongst ‘watch-makers’ jobs’ the
removal of a Roman mosaic pavement, the condition of which usually
demands the utmost delicacy of handling. The surface of the mosaic
may have sunk into hollows: many of the tesserae, even though in
position, may be fractured; and the fine mortar in which the tesserae
were originally embedded may largely have lost its grip. The con~
ventional procedure has been described in categorical form by the
late Mrs T. V. Wheeler, F.s.A., who herself applied it successfully.t
Her account is here reproduced.

    1. Dig a trench 1 foot wide and 18 inches deep round the area of the
pavement to be lifted some days before the work of removal is started.
A considerable amount of moisture is thereby drained away.
    2. Build a shed or shelter of sufficient size to cover the pavement and
the drainage-trenches.
    3. Remove all dirt scrupulously from the pavement and from the
joints between the tesserae. The condition of the pavement will dictate
the means to be employed. These may vary from scrubbing with brush
and soapy water and/or gently scraping with a blunt knife, to the deli-
 cate use of an orange-stick or bellows.
    4. Place coke~buckets on bricks on the pavement and keep fires burn-_
ing day and night until the mosaic, its bedding and the earth beneath are
absolutely dry. The heat not only drives off any remaining moisture but
also disintegrates the Roman mortar. This drying-out is the most im-
portant part of the whole process and may take from two to five days
according to local conditions of dampness.
    5. Before or during the drying of the pavement, prepare a flat board,
 a few inches larger in each direction than the fragment or section under
treatment. A platform of {-inch board, reinforced with cross-battens, is
adequate.
   6. Remove the fires and clean the mosaic finally.
   7. Brush a coat of ordinary glue, prepared in a dixie nearby and suffi-
ciently thin to run into and fill up all interstices, over the surface and
leave it to set.                                  ;
            1. The Museums Journal, xxx (London, 1933), 104 ff.

                                   132
—A




                         WATCH-MAKERS JOBS
 A 8. Brush a second coat of thick glue heavily over this hardened sur-
   ce.
    9. Press down into this hot coat a piece of stout canvas newly wrung
 in boiling water. The canvas should be squeezed down with the fingers
 until it is certain that all air-bubbles are eliminated. A final coat of glue
 on top of the canvas will ensure adhesion to every tessera.
    10. Replace the fires in the drainage-trenches for an hour to drive off
 moisture.
    tz. Remove fires and allow the glue to harden. The time that this will
 take will again depend on local conditions, but upwards of eight hours
 should be allowed. Again, it is essential to make sure that the glue is set
 before attempting the work of removal.
    12. The mosaic can now safely be released from its bedding. Cut into
 the mortar of the bedding with trowels, slate-rippers or, if available,
 bar-chisels, leaving a good clearance of 2-3 inches below the lower
 surface of the tesserae.
133. Slip in planks underneath as the bedding is removed. These
should project beyond the edges of the pavement, for use in reversing it.
14. Lay the prepared board on to the surface of the pavement.
iTS.     Using the lower planks as levers, turn the pavement, now sarid-
_ wiched between wood, on to the prepared board, which now becomes
_ the working-platform. The pavement, or section of pavement, can now
  be removed to a work-shed on this platform.
     16. Remove all Roman mortar. If the heat from the fires has pene-
"trated properly the greater part will come away if gently tapped with a
wooden mallet. Care must be taken to scrape away any obstinate mor-
 tar from the side and back of each tessera, and beliows used to blow
  fine dust from between them. The tesserae are now in position face-
- downwards on the glued canvas and are clean.
                                                                           glue
17. A slight sprinkling of water applied here will soften the
                                                                       surfaces
- sufficiently, without releasing its grip, to ptess the now convex
of the former hollows into their original horizontal position.
18. Nail a two-inch frame round the working platform.
                                                                        so that
19. With soap or thick grease fill up all breaks in the pattern,
      modern    cement  will be kept back  from  the ultimate level of the face
_ the
_ of the finished pavement.
                                                                          Roman
20. Mixa sufficient quantity of modern cement with broken
                                             in the  original pavement ,  to pour
" material, imitative of the mortar used
_ into the joints between   the  now-isola ted   tesserae.
                                                                         is filling
 21. Tap the frame on every side, to ensure that the mixture
all joints and that   all air-bubb les are  eliminat  ed.

                                         133
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM    THE    EARTH

    22. Lay a reinforcement of wire-netting and steel rods within the
frame and fill up with cement. If the section is of considerable size (and
it is possible to handle a section 6 feet by 3 feet by this method) a second
layer of reinforcement may possibly be needed. The cement should be
brought to a smooth surface within the frame and left for two days or
more to set. Where large pavements are to be removed, sections of a
workable size should be determined upon, and marked with tell-tales
on the canvas, which, initially, may cover the whole surface. The
canvas may then be cut along the lines laid out and each section lifted
separately.
   23. The frame can now be knocked away and the pavement re~
versed, canvas-side up.
   24. Flood boiling water on to the canvas until the glue is sufficiently
dissolved to allow the canvas to be lifted, not pulled, away. Any remain-
ing glue should be removed with boiling water and a nail-brush. If, ia
this process, any tessera is found to be loose, it should at once be reset.
   25. The breaks in the pavement may be treated in accordance with the
policy desired. If restoration is envisaged, the newly-cut tesserae will
declare themselves as modern and so prevent deception. If restoration
is not desired, the breaks should be brought to a smooth surface at
the general level of the mortar-bedding.
   The pavement should now be strong enough to withstand any reason-
able handling and ready for exhibition.




                                    134
                             CHAPTER      10


                  Tactics and Strategy

Tue main subject of this chapter is the overall planning of field-
research, a phrase disguised above under the somewhat inflated term
‘strategy’. In retrospect every archaeologist is constantly arranging
his facts into a pattern, his laboriously collected words into a coherent
sentence. Less frequently does he place his inquiries in advance with
an equivalent regard for sequence. There is some excuse in the fact
that at the present time field-archaeology is still dominated in Britain
by special conditions arising out of a hard war and a harder peace.
It is conditioned, too often, by the incidence of a bomb-hole or a
housing scheme or an aerodrome, or by sheer economic duress,
rather than by long-term planning. Yet even between wars, strategic
planning, though sometimes talked about, was rarely carried into
effect. Other factors — personal or international competition, sheer
Jack of imagination — obstructed it. Sites were dug because they
‘looked good’ or because they might produce information, rather like
carrying out a surgical operation at random on a patient in the hope
of finding somewhere the cause of an undiagnosed disease. It was
thus that the neolithic surgeon used to cut a hole in a man’s skull in
the hope of letting out a headache; but not thus, I need hardly say,
is the orderly way of science. As archaeologists we are excessively
prone to opportunism: we do not sufficiently plan or create our
opportunities. Admittedly a happy chance has from time to time
added unexpectedly and even dramatically to knowledge; for instance
the finding of that famous seventh-century boat-burial in the mound
at Sutton Hoo. Nevertheless, the progress of science depends less
en these hazards than on the methodical, logical use of the disciplined
imagination in the evaluation of cause and effect. It depends in no
small measure upon careful strategic planning.
   The nearest approach to planning during the past half-century or
more is probably to be recognized in the discovery and enlargement
of the Minoan civilization of Crete. The vivid quality of the civiliza-
tion itself, the imaginative genius of its prime discoverer, and its
                                   135
             ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM    THE   EARTH

central geographical position have combined to give a certain unity
to the multifarious but more or less related work which has been
carried out by several nations in the adjacent lands. But even there
co-ordination has been notoriously inadequate and the results pro-
portionately scrappy and unsatisfying. A great opportunity has been
missed. In the circumstances, as illustrations of what I mean on the
one hand by tactical and on the other by strategic planning, I may
be forgiven the presumption of taking two examples from work in
which I happen myself to have been concerned, where it is at least
possible to speak at first hand of the conscious and careful sequence
which was present continuously from the outset in the mind of the
director. The first of these two examples is an example of tactical
planning in the development of a local problem. That problem was
the unravelling of the history of Verulamium in Hertfordshire as a
Roman and pre-Roman city, with its potential bearing upon the
Caesarian campaign which culminated hereabouts in $4 B.c.
   I may recall that Verulamium, in the valley below the medieval and
modern town of St Albans, is a site of some exceptional interest in
the protohistory of these islands. There or thereabouts in pre-Roman
times reigned, as his coins tell us, King Tasciovanus, the father of
Cunobelin; and since Cassivellaunus was a predecessor on the same
tribal throne, it was assumed that there also Julius Caesar had found
and stormed the headquarters of his great opponent in 54 B.c. Later
events included the martyrdom of Albanus, a Christian citizen of
Verulamium and our most authentic Romano-British martyr, and a
visitation by St Germanus of Auxerre who thus provided one of the
few unquestioned fifth-century contacts between Britain and the
Roman world. Altogether, the site was fraught with archaeological —
possibilities of an alluringly miscellaneous kind. The historical and
geographical sequence of human occupation in the St Albans region
through the five centuries presented a challenging problem.           ;
   The visual starting-point was the large walled and embanked area,
some 200 acres in extent, which manifestly represented the developed
Roman municipality. The conventional theory before excavation 4         }


was that this area represented also the pre-Roman capital and one of
the first functions of the excavators was to check this view. Accord-
ingly, deep pits were sunk to the natural surface within the walled
area, and at the same time sections were cut through the defences,
                                 136
                                                                        :
                    TACTICS     AND       STRATEGY

The former failed to reveal any pre-Roman occupation; the latter
showed that the defences were not earlier than the second century
A.D.


                                                  VERULAMIUM
                                              THE SUCCESSIVE BELGIC
                                               AND ROMAN CITIES     ‘AN
                                                                      ref




                              Scale of One Hile
                                      Ya



                                                                    on the
Fig. 20. Successive sites of pre-Roman and Roman Verulamium. (Based
Ordnance Survey 6-inch map, Herts. XXIV, by permission of the Controller
                             of H.M. Stationery Office)

   That may be regarded as Stage I of the investigation. Stage II was
directed inevitably to the examination of the next most evident
                                                                        as
structural relic in the vicinity; an unexplained earth-work known
                             ed  on the hill-side from under a part of the
‘The Fosse’, which project
                                    137
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

circuit of the second-century defences. Here, in and under the ram-
part, was found a considerable quantity of native pottery, presum-
ably indicating the proximity of the pre-Roman site; but an admix-
ture of early Roman material indicated a post-conquest date. Stage II,
then, had identified the site of an earlier Roman town, but left the
pte-Roman settlement still in the air.
   The early pottery recovered from ‘The Fosse’ served at least as a
pointer. The earth-work lay just below the brow of the plateau flank-
ing the valley which carried the main Roman site, and the obvious
next step, Stage III, was to pursue the inquiry on to the plateau itself.
Here, in the depths of a tangled game-preserve, lies a complex group
of unmapped and unimpressive earth-works. Some of these were
disused field- or woodland-boundaries, but amongst them was a
nucleus which was proved by excavation to be a portion of the pre-
Roman city. A part of our question was thus answered; the associated
remains, however, were of post-Caesarian date, and evidence was
still lacking for the Caesarian episode. (Fig. 20).
   There was still an unexplained feature which appeared to relate to
the pre-Roman site. A mile to the north of it were traces of a cross-
country dyke or barrier facing away from Verulamium. Excavation,
which may be classified as Stage IV, showed that (a) this dyke was
likewise of pre-Roman date, and (6) it had originally barred an open
gap of chalk-land between the hill-top woodland on the one hand
and the marshy valley on the other. It was presumably a boundary
of the pre-Roman civic territory at a point where natural obstacles
were missing. Its major office in our task of exploration was, however,
as a pointer to draw fresh attention to a seemingly related but mysteri-
ous cross-country dyke of far more formidable size on the opposite
side of the valley.
   This further dyke, known to fame as Beech Bottom, is a remark-
able construction. It is 100 feet wide and upwards of 30 feet deep,
with a bank on both lips. It is sited along the bottom of an east-west
valley, and there is only the greater size of the more southerly marg-
inal bank to show that the work faced north. It was clearly a major
traffic-barrier rather than a military work in the narrower sense.
About a mile of the dyke is still visible, but a further half-mile has
been traced by excavation or safe inference. Its examination had
already been begun as Stage V when a happy chance supplied more
                                  138
                    TACTICS      AND       STRATEGY

definite evidence than unaided science could have expected. Work-
men digging a sewer at measured depths through the dyke, at a point
where it had been filled up, found a coin-hoard of the second century
A.D. deep in the filling but still a dozen feet above the bottom of the
ditch. The coins — a shovelful of them, it was said —- were immedi-
ately scattered amidst the ready hands and pockets of the cosmopoli-
tan gang of workmen concerned. But a strenuous search that night
in a multitude of local places of refreshment and entertainment pro-
duced about forty of them, enough to indicate the general character
and date of the hoard. It was clear that the ditch in which they had
been found was of some considerable age by thé second century
A.D., and that solid fact, combined with its entirely un-Roman
character and siting, placed it fairly and squarely in our pre-Roman
period.                                                                 .
   But this  was not all. Ifthe dyke had  served any  logical purpose at
all, it must have barred a fairly open stretch of country between two
river valleys and fords: that of the Ver, beside which Verulamium
stands to the south-west, and that of the Lea to the north-east (Fig. 21).
Along this line the eye is carried to a height above the ford across the
Lea, where are the remains of the greatest oppidum in this part of
England, tht which adjoins the little country town of Wheathamp-
stead. The present fame of this oppidum may be measured by its
appearance in an historical novel; but it was not in fact until Stage VI
of our planned advance that the significance of the mighty earth-work
became tolerably clear; it had previously attracted little or no atten-
tion. The profile of its defences is of the same kind as that of Beech
                                                                on a
Bottom, only more so. The enclosure is some 90 acres in extent,
platform above the Lea, just as pre-Roman Verulamium stands on a
plateau above the Ver. A significant difference between the two sites
began to emerge, however, as excavation proceeded. Whereas the
                                                                    of
Verulamium site began in post-Caesarian times, when, in the age
                      things  and  forms  were  already beginning   to
Tasciovanus, Roman
                                                                   no
penetrate the backwoods of yet unconquered Britain, there was
hint of Romanization in the equipment        of the Wheathampstead
                                                              decades
oppidum. In other words, this oppidum preceded the last two
                                                      an easy further
of the first century 3.c.; and, that being so, it was
                                                                 even inter-
step to ascribe its great defences to a phase of inter-tribal or
                                                         British campaigns.
national rivalry such as marked the age of Caesar’s
                                     139
   ST ALBANS ann WHEATHAMPSTEAD. HERTS.
   WITH FORMER        WOODLANDS RESTORED ON GEOLOGICAL            BASIS
                                      ROMAN -WORKS:
                                                              &
                                                        em)   Rophhee   OF   OP




                          Rat aeerey o)
                              ee Let So ah
                                          Laortad




     THICKLY WOODED
     CLAY LAND
     LIGHTLY WOODED                                 ?
     GRAVELS ere ||es 9 On es ed igs _,                       ALLUVIUM.


Fig. 21. Map of the earthworks of Wheathampstead and Verulamium, with
                      intervening dykes, (See p. 138)
                     TACTICS      AND      STRATEGY

Here, if anywhere, may we locate the headquarters of such a
one as Cassivellaunus. At least we are approaching closely to his time
and environment, and no rival site is known. The name of Wheat-
hampstead has now, with no great questioning, entered the books as
the scene of Caesar’s culminating British victory.
   Thus in six progressive stages, developing gradually and logically
from known to’unknown, the vista of a formative phase of proto-
historic Britain began to unroll itself. In reverse, the picture is that of
the initial overlordship of a powerful Belgic king, competitively
exploiting a countryside which had previously, it seems, been but
thinly inhabited. Thereafter, during the Augustan Peace on the
Continent and the centralization of native rule in south-eastern
Britain, the emphasis changes: fortifications, hereabouts at any rate,*
are now of trivial size, and continental trade percolates with increas-
ing freedom. The phase culminates in the formal extension of the
Pax Romana to lowland Britain in a.D. 43; thereafter fortification was
discounted by over-confidence, which was in turn countered by the
Boudiccan revolt and by the consequent construction of new defences
of no mean order (‘The Fosse’); and finally, in the spacious days of
the second century, the town took shape on evolved, conventional
continental lines. We are not here concerned with the details, only
with the sequence of thought and action - an elementary illustration
of archaeological tactic on halfadozen miles of landscape.
  From the Hertfordshire parish-pump, I turn to the wide horizons
of Asia, to planning on a large scale to which the term ‘strategy’ may
properly be applied. Again, the example is from my own experience,
on the renewed plea that first-hand witness has an actuality which
may sufficiently counterbalance defects. As Director-General of
Archaeology in India from 1944 to 1948, I had, in spite of war and
acute political difficulties, an opportunity such as few archaeologists
have had: of strategic planning within the far-flung boundaries of a
whole sub-continent. The northern and southern parts of that sub-
continent differ alike in the character of their respective problems
and in the amount of work previously done upon them. Central and
south India, with which I am here concerned, had scarcely been
                                                                       a
worked at all. In the whole of that great southern region, some half
                                                                          cal
million square miles in extent, there wasin 1944 no firm archaeologi
                                                               and ambition.
  1. At Colchester their size was sustained by dynastic wealth
                                     I41
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

 datum-line prior to the Middle Ages. In the north of India, con~
 tacts with prehistoric Mesopotamia and, later, with Persia and the
 lands of the classical West had provided reasonably fixed pegs upon
 which to hang some part of the prehistory of the frontier-lands. In
 the south, most of these pegs were absent. Sporadic exploration of an
 unmethodical kind had there revealed great quantities of material;
 urn-fields had been gathered up like rice-crops, meg@lithic tombs had
 been ransacked (sometimes, as recently as 1942, with the aid of dyna-
 mite— p. 113), town-sites had on occasion been broken into and mis-
 cellaneous debris recovered from them; but nowhere had this archae-
 ological loot been interrelated systematically with itself or correlated
 with any external datum. Of the museums of the region it would have
 been sufficient to quote the words applied by Petrie to nineteenth-
 century museums in general: ‘Our museums are ghastly charnel-
 houses of murdered evidence; the dry bones of objects are there, bare
 of all the facts of grouping, locality and dating which would give
 them historical life and value.’
    In this world of chaos there was, however, one potential fixed
 point. Since 1775, Roman coins, generally in hoards of gold or silver,
 have turned up from time to time, mostly in south India where they
 represent the Imperial luxury trade abundantly vouched for in classi-
 cal and Indian literature. Here was a chance of securing the required
 datum. Could we but find a significant association of Roman coinage
 or other datable Roman imports with a native Indian culture, we
 should have at once a firm base from which to advance upon the
 general problem of the ancient chronology of the Indian peninsula.
    Accordingly it was one of my first acts as Director-General in 1944
 to draw up a list of sites known to have produced Roman coinage and
to send two members of my staff on a 3,000-mile tour of the listed
 sites with a view to selecting one of them for investigation. My envoys
 worked steadily down the west coast of India and round Cape
-Comorin without encountering any very hopeful sign. But the solu-
 tion was in fact imminent from another source.
    InJuly 1944 I visited the Madras Museum and found in a cupboard
 there a part of a Graeco-Roman amphora of a type familiar in the
 Mediterranean region about the beginning of the Christian era. It had,
 I was informed, been dug up recently at a coastal site near Pondi-
 cherry, then the capital of French India, 80 miles south of Madras,
                                   142
                    TACTICS      AND     STRATEGY

I shall not lightly forget the (to me) dramatic moment when chance
put into my hand here on a hot afternoon of a south Indian summer
an answer which I could almost believe that fate had sent me 6,000
miles from my little Roman Britain to discover: an answer which I
had indeed sought but had scarcely dared to expect. By arrangement
with the French authorities, I lost no time in visiting Pondicherry,
and saw in the public library there a collection of objects which had
been recovered during the previous two or three years by French
antiquaries at a site known locally as Arikamedu, 2 miles south of the
town. The collection comprised a considerable quantity of Indian
pottery, beads and other objects, together with a remarkable assem-
blage of material of Mediterranean origin, including many sherds of
amphorae, fragments of glassware, part of a lamp, and an untrimmed
crystal intaglio representing Cupid with an eagle. To these may be
added another gem bearing allegedly a head of Augustus but no
longer available. More important than all these, however, were
several sherds of red-glazed ware of the kind made at Arretium and
other Italian centres prior to c. A.D. 45. The meaning of these things
had not been suspected by their finders, but to an eye trained in the
West it was instantly and easily apparent. Dated pottery, by virtue
of its relatively limited durability, was better evidence even than
dated coins, with their less computable survival-value. It remained to
ascertain, by careful digging, the precise relationship between this
Arretine ware and the Indian culture or cultures found on the same
site.
   Our subsequent (1945) excavations have been fully recorded. It
will suffice to note here that the relationship was readily established,
and that the site will therefore go down in the history of south Indian
archaeology as that from which the classification of ancient south
Indian cultures effectively began. With the aid of the dated imports
referred to, it defined for the first time the chronological position of
an extensive complex of south Indian pottery and other equipment
                                                                       the
dating from the first two centuries A.D.; and it was not long after
conclusion of the work that the importance of     Arikamed   u  was found
to extend far beyond the vicinity of the site itself. This extension was
                                                                         g
the result of carefully planned, progressive research, proceedin
steadily from   known   to part-know  n to unknown,    and its main stages
may be recounted in the present context.
                                   143
              ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

   The first step was to discover the distribution of the more distinc- _
tive of the Indian wares thus newly dated. A tour of south Indian
museums met with immediate success. Amongst the distinctive pro-
ducts of Arikamedu was a type of dish (Pl. 17) decorated on the in-
ternal base with concentric rings of a rouletted pattern otherwise
foreign to Indian ceramic but familiar on certain classical wares
including Arretine ware itself. Some of these rouletted dishes were
doubtless imports from the Mediterranean, others were local Indian
imitations. A search of museums showed that dishes of this kind had
been found in southern India at a number of places separated by
some hundreds of miles from one another (Fig. 22). The famous
Amaravati, for example, which supplied the Buddhist sculptures
displayed in the entrance-hall of the British Museum, had produced
sherds of them, now in the Madras Museum. At other places, such
as Maski and Kondapur in Hyderabad State and Chandravalli and
Brahmagiri in the northern end of Mysore State, this distinctive
decoration, type, and fabric had been found in ill-published and
ill-conducted excavations. Maski, Kondapur, and Chandravalli had
been, in part at least, towns of the central Indian Andhra Empire
which flourished at the end of B.c. and the beginning of a.p., and at
Chandravalli stray denarii of Augustus and Tiberius had also been
found. The historical and archaeological environment was therefore
consistent with the Arikamedu dating. At all these sites the newly
dated rouletted ware introduced at once an element of chronological
precision; and on all of them it was manifestly associated with an
elaborate and distinctive ceramic industry which differed largely from
that at Arikamedu but could now, presumably, be regarded as con-
temporary. Already the fixed-point of Arikamedu had indicated the
possibility of dating, by means of a little careful excavation, a wide-
spread and important Indian culture more than 300 miles away.
  A visit to one of these sites, Brahmagiri, in 1945 indicated other and
wider possibilities. Trial excavations of a somewhat unorthodox kind,
assisted on occasion by high explosive, had here been carried out by
the State Archaeological Department and had revealed remains of an
extensive ancient township. But the outstandingly interesting feature
of the area was this: that adjoining the town-site was a large cemetery
of megalithic tombs of a kind widespread in peninsular India but
never hitherto adequately dated. Further, the Brahmagiri cists were

                                  144
                      TACTICS      AND     STRATEGY

marked by the circular entrance-opening or ‘port-hole’ which is
present on many other Indian examples and on comparable tombs in




                                                           WY? CALCUTTA po
                                                                ge



                                                           ft
                                                           $
                                                           es




                                                 DISTRIBUTION OF
                                              ROULETTED WARE _._@
                                               PAINTED ANDHRA WARE -o
                                               SITES WITH BOTH ~~ --©
                                                    (MODERN CITIES a)
                                                     SCALE or MILES
                                                            100      _200 _300


                                                                            of
 Fig. 22. Map of India showing sites which have produced ‘rouletted ware’
                           the first century A.D.

western Asia, northern Africa, and Europe (including Britain) and
may be a significant common factor. Indeed, these Indian tombs greet
the eye of the visiting European prehistorian witha friendly familiarity
                                     145
              ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

and at the same time with a challenge: their date and origin at
once become matters of more than local importance. Their general
character has indeed been familiar since the work (referred to on p. 23)
by Meadows Taylor in Hyderabad State in the middle of the nine-
teenth century, and James Fergusson drew renewed attention to them
in his Rude Stone Monuments in 1872. The curiosity of others, too,
has not been lacking, and in the aggregate some hundreds of these
cists in central or southern India must have been despoiled at one
time or another for the benefit of public or private museums, from
Oxford to Madras. The result has been merely to pile up the moun-
tain of our ignorance. Until the undated contents of these tombs
could be related to a fixed chronological point, their further spolia-
tion was waste and worse than waste. But here at last, at Brahmagiri,
was a clear opportunity for the establishment of such a relationship;
for the equation of the culture represented by the tombs with evi-
dence from an adjacent town-site containing a known factor — the
dated rouletted ware of which sherds had already been unearthed
there. It remained to ascertain the precise nature of this equation by
the normal methods of scientific excavation.
  Accordingly, as has already been recalled in Chapter 4, in 1947 a
simultaneous exploration was carried out on the Brahmagiri town-
site and in the adjacent megalithic cemetery. The former revealed
three successive and distinctive cultures, of which the uppermost was
associated from the outset with our rouletted ware of the first
century A.D. This topmost culture is now identified as that of the
Andhra phase to which reference has already been made. Below it,
and partially overlapping it, was a culture identical with that which
was being revealed at the same time in the neighbouring megalithic
cists. The overlap between the two, assessed in the manner described
on p. 65, was amply sufficient to indicate that the megalithic culture
with its elaborate iron equipment, lasted into the first century A.D.
Thus, for the first time a fixed chronological point was obtained for a
group of megalithic tombs of characteristic south Indian type.
  But this was not all. A reasonable computation of the time-value
of the megalithic strata - a computation which need not be reviewed
here — suggested a backward duration of some two to two-and-a-
half centuries from the terminal date in the first century a.p.; that is,
the culture had arrived somewhere about 200 B.c. Below that was an
                                  146
                   TACTICS      AND     STRATEGY

8-foot accumulation of occupation material representing an alto-
gether different and more primitive culture. Whereas the Andhra
pottery had been turned on the fast wheel and the megalithic pottery
(it seems) on the slow wheel, the crude wares of the lowest culture
had been hand-made, without any sort of wheel. Again, whereas the
overlying cultures were both in an advanced stage of the Iron Age,
the lowest was essentially in the Stone Age (polished stone axes, rough
microliths), although bronze was not altogether unknown - the first
evidence, incidentally, for anything approaching a Bronze Age in
south India. Yet, in spite of the disparity of the two cultures, there
was clear evidence that this crude chalcolithic community had out-
lasted the arrival of the megalithic intruders: in other words, that the
chalcolithic culture, elements of which had long been recognized,
without context, in many parts of south India, had lasted into the
second century B.c., and extended backwards from that date through
8 feet of deposit.
   It would be irrelevant here to consider the details and implications
ef this happy concurrence of evidence, although in fact it was to the
wider interpretation of the culture-movements represented by it that
our work was directed. Suffice it to observe that we had recovered a
picture of a rudimentary stone-using society overrun suddenly
(during the Time of Troubles following the break-up of the great
Asokan Empire) by an elaborately equipped invasion of iron-users
and megalith-builders, followed in turn by the sophisticated civiliza-
tion of the surgent Andhra empire: three hitherto unclassified but
widespread cultures now for the first time arranged in clear sequence
with a chronological datum-line at one end of the sequence and in
consequence a new significance in subcontinental protohistory. So
important was it to establish this datum-line beyond all shadow of
doubt that a small parallel excavation was in fact carried out simul-
taneously on another Andhra town-site some 45 miles away. This
site (Chandravalli) yielded parallel evidence in the association of our
rouletted ware with local Andhra coins, overlying ‘megalithic’
fabrics, and incidentally produced from one of the Andhra layers a
denarius of Tiberius dated a.D. 26-37 (PI. 16). It would be difficult to
imagine a more satisfactory conclusion to our campaign: at one end
of our story, our key-evidence associated with Roman ware of the
first half of the first century A.D., and at the other end of our story
                                  147
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

identically similar evidence associated with a Roman coin of the same
  eriod.
‘ This story of the ‘opening up’ of central and southern Indian
chronology by gradual pervasion from our starting-point at Arika-
medu may here be carried one further stage. In front of us loomed
the great problem of linking up the newly found chronology with
that of the northern Indian plains, where lay the great cities of Indian
epic and protohistory. The problem threatened difficulty of a special
kind. The cultures of these north Indian cities have been fairly exten-
sively ‘sampled’ in a very rough-and-ready fashion, and are found to
differ in every respect from those of the south. Correlation was there-
fore only feasible on a site where south and north had actually met
and had existed for some time side by side.
   Search revealed exactly such a site, potentially, at a point where the
northern plains bend southwards along the broad coastal strip between
the Bay of Bengal and the Eastern Ghats or inland hill-barrier. In
Orissa, adjoining the old temple-city of BhubaneSwar and not far
from the sacred east-coast town of Puri, home of the notorious
Juggernath, lay the embanked site of an ancient city, now known as
Sigupalgarh, which fulfilled the necessary geographical conditions.
Excavation in 1948 and 1949 showed that it also fulfilled the archae-
ological requisites which we had postulated: for in stratified relation-
ship with a distinctive and widespread northern ceramic lay sherds
of our now-famous rouletted ware, identical with that which only
three years previously we had found nearly 700 miles to the south-
west in association with first-century Arretine. North and south were —
now for the first time firmly interlocked.
   I need not pursue this matter further. Enough has been said to
illustrate how three seasons of carefully planned, progressive work
were able to draw a clear archaeological datum-line across many
hundreds of miles of a sub-continent, and to open up spacious new
vistas of cultural relationship. Generations of fumbling from site to
opportunist site might easily have failed to approach this result — have
indeed in the past failed to do so. The two necessary factors were
present: Opportunity and Planning. To these might be added the
factor of Luck, but I do not much believe in Luck. Hard thinking and’
steady execution are at least its honest and dependable substitutes.
Have a plan, and make the opportunity, remembering with hope and
                                   148
                    TACTICS      AND     STRATEGY

at the same time with humility the dictum of Gibbon that ‘the winds
and the waves are always on the side of the ablest navigator’.

                                    *



Lastly, a problem in which strategy merges closely into tactics may
suitably be considered in this chapter since in fact matters of major
policy are involved. From time to time the question arises: shall stress
be laid (in some particular programme of work) upon horizontal or
upon vertical excavation? By ‘horizontal excavation’ is meant the
uncovering of the whole or a large part of a specific phase in the
occupation of an ancient site, in order to reveal fully its layout and
function (cf. Pl. 12). By ‘vertical excavation’ is meant the excavation
of a restricted area in depth, with a view to ascertaining the succession
of cultures or of phases and so producing a time-scale or culture-scale
for the site. The two procedures are of course complementary, not
antagonistic, and the excavator may be expected to attempt, if rarely
to achieve, both methods of approach. But in a great majority of
instances, a priority has to be determined, having regard to the state
of current knowledge and the resources available.
   Let us consider the nature of the evidence which the two methods
may be expected to supply. Vertical excavation alone, whilst supply-
ing a key to the length of an occupation, to its continuity or inter-
mittency, and to some part of its cultural equipment, cannot be
expected to reveal save in the most scrappy fashion the significant
environment — economic, religious, administrative — of a human
society. In other words, it leaves us in the dark as to those very factors
which fit a past culture or civilization-into the story of human
endeavour and so make its recovery worth while. It is the railway
time-table without a train. On the other hand, the extensive hori-
zontal excavations which were in effect the normal practice before
stratification was adequately understood generally produced an
abstraction — often a very confused and misleading abstraction — un-
related with any sort of precision to the sequence of human develop-
ment. They were trains without a time-table. The trains sometimes
ran vigorously enough, but we knew not when they were running
or where they started, or their intermediate stopping-places, or their
destination.
                                   149
              ARCHABOLOGY           FROM     THE   EARTH

   At certain stages of research both these incomplete methods may
have a substantive value; indeed, they are themselves stages in the
progress of research. I am not, for example, of those who scorn the
horizontal excavation (in the nineties) of the Roman town of Sil-
chester. True it was dug like potatoes, without a shadow of the
scientific nicety of the contemporary excavations in Cranborne
Chase; and the resultant plan is the uncritical synthesis of a varying
urban development through more than three centuries. But it gave
at once, and with a rough accuracy, the general impression of a
Romano-British town such as fifty years of subsequent and often
more careful work have failed to equal. More exact vertical and
horizontal digging on both this and other similar sites has indeed
begun to reveal the sociological evolution essential to our historical
perspective; but who amongst these later and wiser excavators has
not constantly referred back with profit to the crude, primitive
assemblage of Silchester?
   So also elsewhere. The Glastonbury lake-village, excavated un-
critically with results that are often infuriatingly baffling, has never-
theless given us the complete layout of a small Early Iron Age settle-
ment and so enabled us to assess in broad terms the social and econ-
omic significance of such a settlement as no exacting and partial
probing could have rendered possible. For that, even in moments
when the evidence in detail completely fails us, we may be properly
thankful. And let us for a moment look further afield. One of the
most dramatic and revealing of all excavated cities is prehistoric
Mohenjo-daro, beside the Indus in Pakistan. Technically the methods
adopted by a succession of excavators there became almost an inter-
national scandal, and neither Professor Piggott nor I have been at pains
to spare the lash. But the primary marvel of the great Indus city is not
that it did (or did not) develop in such-and-such a fashion between,
let us say, 2500 and 1500 B.c., but that it existed at all in the remarkable
form that extensive, if disproportionately summary, excavation has
revealed to us. Its house-walls, towering accumulatively above our
heads, its long straight streets, its lanes, its elaborate drainage system,
its citadel — these and other things in bulk re-create a whole phase of
human society even though in detail they fail to analyse it for us.
Analysis — by careful vertical digging - should, of course, have accom-
panied all this summary horizontal clearance; but there can be no
                                    150
                    TACTICS      AND      STRATEGY

question that Mohenjo-daro takes its place as the representative of
one of the great civilizations of the ancient world in some measure
by virtue of the crimes of its explorers.
   And since we have arrived in Pakistan, let us take again one more
familiar example from that land. For a thousand years the city of
Taxila stood upon successive sites in the northern Punjab, and one of
these sites, of the first centuries B.c.—A.D., was extensively cleared by
Sir John Marshall so that a considerable portion of a remarkable rect-
angular town-plan was ultimately revealed (Pl. 12). The clearance did
not conform with modern technical standards, and in fact more than
one phase is represented without discrimination in the published plan.
Nevertheless, the outstanding interest of Parthian Taxila is the general
character of its buildings and their relation to a street-grid without
known analogy in this part of Asia. Had the excavator concentrated
on vertical digging on this deep site he would have given us valuable
information for which we are still waiting; but he could scarcely have
given us also the picture which we owe to him of a teeming city with
its streets and temples, its palaces and its shops. He would have given
us a useful catalogue but not, as in fact he has, a vivid chapter of social
history.
   The four examples of horizontal digging which I have given -
Silchester, Glastonbury, Mohenjo-daro, and Taxila (Sirkap) - are
not very happy in that none of them was excavated with adequate
skill. Technically, they all belong to the pre-Pitt-Rivers era, though
Pitt Rivers had in fact established his methods before any of them
began. Needless to say, it must not be inferred that horizontal excava-
tion is necessarily summary and unscientific! Ideally, the excavation
of a town-site would begin with vertical digging, sufficient to estab-
lish the time- or culture-sequence, and would proceed to the careful
horizontal digging of successive phases, one at a time. Obviously
the process cannot be reversed, and at the three sites mentioned, only
the careful vertical excavation of areas not yet touched can partially
replace the squandered evidence. A better example of horizontal
excavation on a small scale is provided by Little Woodbury near
Salisbury, where Dr Gerhard Bersu cleared the greater part of an Iron
Age farmstead and was able to reconstruct both its architecture and
its economy. The site was a shallow one, and the technical problem
was incomparably simpler than on a deeply accumulative town-site;
                                    151
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

nevertheless, it is chastening to reflect how little of the real meaning
of Little Woodbury could have been recovered merely by vertical
samples of it.
    With the proviso, then, that all horizontal digging must proceed
from clear and comprehensive vertical sections, the question of prior-
ity is fundamentally not in doubt. Careful horizontal digging can
alone, in the long run, give us the full information that we ideally
want. Vertical digging will, by itself, serve a valuable purpose in
establishing the geographical distribution of a culture and its time-
relationship with other cultures from place to place; but this evidence
still derives its ultimate significance from a knowledge of the social
environment of the cultures concerned. Wise words are said by the
authors of the Council for British Archaeology’s Survey and Policy of
Field Research in the Archaeology of Great Britain (1948) in their state-
ment with reference to the Early Iron Age, that to have at least one
site in each main region of the country excavated totally ‘will now
be of more value than merely to sample a number of sites in the same
time instead’. But they are equally wise when, on the following page,
they also advise that hill-forts be submitted to ‘selective excavations
to ascertain the date, character, and sequence (if any) of the defences,
and whether or no the fort was permanently inhabited. This method
      . should be continued regionally.’ It is all a matter of bias, and
bias depends upon our knowledge at the moment of the problem of
 the moment. There is no essential conflict, but the question of priority
 is worth careful thought in archaeological planning.
   Once more, the moral is that the exercise of tactical skill without a
controlling strategy is opportunism run riot. Or, to change the meta-
phor, the excavator without an intelligent policy may be described
as an archaeological food-gatherer, master of a skill, perhaps, but not
creative in the wider terms of constructive science.




                                   152
                            CHAPTER       II


                                 Staff
Tue time has come to consider the staff and machinery with which
all the various operations described in the preceding chapters are
carried out. First, the personnel.
   The staff of an archaeological excavation on any considerable scale
includes a director, a deputy director, a supervisor for each area under
excavation, a trained foreman, a small-find recorder, a pottery-
assistant, a photographer, a surveyor, a chemist, a draftsman, and,
according to need, an epigraphist or numismatist. In rare cases, certain
of these posts may be combined, but it is preferable, and often neces-
sary, to subdivide them. Where distances are short, asin Great Britain,
it may be possible to dispense with the chemist and the draftsman
in the field, but it is inadvisable to do so. Only an ignorant critic
could protest that the list is excessive. Nevertheless, large and
relatively costly expeditions in the past have failed of their duty
through false economy or lack of prevision in this all-important
matter of staff.
  To the official and essential nucleus, a valuable addition is student-
labour. I have never undertaken an excavation, whether in Britain or
overseas, without the assistance of university students, and I suppose
that in England, Wales, France, and India soo students or more have
at one time or another worked with me in this fashion. My debt to
them has been immense. They impose a constant need for clear exposi-
tion and therefore for clear thinking. They ask simple, awkward
questions, which have to be answered convincingly or with a frank
                                                               They
and wholesome admission of ignorance. You can’t fool them.
                                                               best of them
are the friendliest and most stimulating of critics, and the
                                                             is to
rapidly become the most co-operative of colleagues. My habit
                                                      give the senior con-
work them in pairs, a senior with a junior, and to
                                                                      visors
siderable, if controlled, responsibility - indeed my site-super
            always  senior students.  A note  on  their   training  will be
are nearly
                                                                   that of a
given below (p. 162). The whole problem is almost exactly
commanding officer with a bevy of     young  subalterns .
                                    153
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

  I append a few observations on each of the posts which I have
named.

                           THE   DIRECTOR

It would be easy to be trite in describing the qualities of the director.
It goes without saying that he must have the combined virtues of the
scholar and the man of action. ‘Scholarship is by no means all that is
wanted,’ affirms Petrie; ‘the engineering training of mind and sense
- . . will really fit an archaeologist better for excavating than book-
work can alone.’ I shall say more about this matter of scholarship in
a moment or two. Meanwhile, it is scarcely necessary to observe that
the director cannot be an expert in every branch of his work, any
more than a general is an expert in every tank or gun under his com-
mand. But, just as a general must be exactly familiar with the per-
formance — the range, fire-power, mobility, and so forth — of every
arm available to him or his enemy, so must the director of an archae-
ological excavation be acquainted with the exact potentiality of the
various techniques appropriate to his craft and the nature of the prob-
lems which are likely to oppose him. He may himself, for example,
be an indifferent photographer, but he must know accurately the
capacity of his cameras, lenses, and filters, and must thoroughly
understand the preparation of a photographic subject; at all points
he must be able to direct or check his expert. I have been blessed with
a series of exceptionally competent photographers, but scarcely ever
have I had an archaeological photograph taken without carefully
checking the subject through the lens before exposure, for lighting,
position of scale, angle, and background. Experience of this proce-
dure (and of the converse) has convinced me of its necessity. The
director, and he alone, is responsible for the record of his work; he
knows, or should know, better than anyone else exactly what his
record should express; and he can achieve the best possible record
only through a full knowledge of the capacity of the mechanism
which he is using.
   So throughout the complex operation of modern field-work. The
director sets the standard of achievement and must know enough to
impose his standards without question on his experts.
  But he is, of course, more than a gauge of technical values. He is a

                                  154
                                STAFF

leader, and it is a truism that leadership is based not merely upon
knowledge but also upon imagination. It is not enough to confront
the situation when it is presented; the leader may be expected in some
considerable measure to create and define the situation, to be some-
thing of a strategist as well as a tactician. The present book deals
mainly with the tactics of archaeology, with technical devices and
local problems, but the ultimate quality of the field-archaeologist
is the wide comprehension of the inter-relationship of major prob-
lems; in other words, a disciplined imagination. An outstanding
example of this quality is easy to recognize in the work of Sir Arthur
Evans, the discoverer of Belgic Britain and Minoan Crete. It is a
quality which exalts field-archaeology from a technical science into
an art.
   Above all, the director must cultivate a scrupulous accuracy and
completeness in the observation and record of his factual evidence.
Accuracy is a fundamental quality of scholarship, and there is a
scholarship of field-archaeology as there is of other scientific discip-
lines. Let us pause for a moment and consider this matter of scholar-
ship a little further. Excavation has been described by a superior
person as ‘dirt archaeology’, with the implication that it bears some-
thing of the same relation to ‘scholarship’ as landscape-gardening
does to botany. But what is ‘scholarship’? It might perhaps be de-
fined in the broadest terms as ‘accurate and comprehensive knowledge
adequately expressed’. Admittedly, other and narrower definitions
have found favour. The Oxford English Dictionary declares that it is
‘learning, erudition; esp. proficiency in the Greek and Latin languages
and their literature’; blandly adding that formerly the scholar was
 often ‘one who had studied at the university, and who, not having
obtained any fixed employment, sought to gain a living by literary
work’. Even that nice definition fails to reach the precision of J. M.
Barrie’s Fleet Street professor who, in his examination of budding
journalists, included the question: ‘Pabulum, Cela va sans dire, Par
                                                                       of
excellence, Ne plus ultra. What are these? Are there any more
them?’ — the correct-answer being,    ‘They  are scholarship,  and  there
                                                                      the
 are two more, namely Tour de force and Terra firma’ Presumably
          of the  phrase  ‘dirt archaeology’   would   equally   describe
 author
                                                                     need
 Darwin’s study of earthworms as “dirt biology’. Anyway, we
                   1. When a Man’s Single, chap. ix.

                                   1$5
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

not bother our heads any more either about the superior person or
about the Oxford English Dictionary. ‘Scholarship’ as a monopoly of
classical erudition has in fact been dead since the 1850s when Nean-
derthal Man, the Boucher-Prestwich hand-axes, and the Origin of
Species almost simultaneously smote it hip and thigh.
  In the liberal and only valid interpretation of ‘scholarship’, field-
archaeology and excavation, no less than textual criticism, may be a
proper qualification of the scholar. Pitt Rivers was a scholar. But
excavation is by itself, of course, no more scholarship than is the
ability to construe the Aeneid. Pitt Rivers was a scholar not merely
because he dug well, but above all because his powerful imagination
enabled him to visualize and create new standards of scientific
accuracy. His super-accuracy was the cardinal quality of his scholar-
ship. It was not simply that he was methodically and pedantically
accurate; added to method was a comprehension of the causative
relations of things which gave structure and corporeality to his
observations and records - ‘comprehensive knowledge adequately
expressed’, as I have understated it. And that comprehension of
causative relations is a vital quality in scholarly field-work. It is a
quality which cannot be initiated but can be immensely developed
by training. It is in fact a necessary part of a modern archaeological
education. The evolutionary development of flint implements, of
pottery-types, of script, of pictorial or sculptural renderings, is taught
to-day to the young archaeologist as a matter of course. But let the
budding director himself take up such a study in detail on an objec-
tive basis, let him explore for himself the possibilities and pitfalls in
the varying categories of evidence bearing upon some selected group
of material — let him discipline his mind for some months in an exact
appreciation of evidential values and inter-relationships, and he will .
acquire a part of the grammar of his subject, without which he can
never achieve full literacy. It matters not at all that his subsequent
studies may take him to Asia or Africa. A detailed study of Bronze
Age wares in Wiltshire will prepare him for a detailed study of the
chalcolithic wares of Persia. After all, Pitt Rivers chose fire-arms.
The procedure is in all essentials identical, and the switch from the
one to the other is merely the redirection of trained eyes.
  And while we are discussing some of the component elements of
the director, let us not omit an understanding of structural relationship,
                                   156
                                   STAFF

  which is another aspect of the causative relationship of which I have
  been speaking. The properly equipped director is one who has had,
  amongst much else, some specific architectural training. His under-
  standing of the Palace of Minos or the Ziggurat of Ur will be none
  the worse if he has learned the sort of things that C. F. Mitchell has
  long taught in his Building Construction (12th edition, 1945). Sooner or
  later, the excavator of neolithic and later cultures will be confronted
_ by structural evidence in stone, brick, or timber, and this evidence
  may mean little or nothing unless viewed with an understanding of
  the significance of structural factors. But, in a wider context, the
  structural sense is one which is invaluable also in the understanding ~
  of the inter-relationship of soil-strata. It is a source of constant aston-
  ishment to me to find how lacking is the average mind in the under-
  standing of what is and what is not structurally possible in the analysis
  of a section. On all grounds I have no hesitation in urging a system-
  atic course of architectural training (lasting, say, six months) upon
  anyone who proposes to devote himself to field-archaeology.
     There is indeed no limit to the desiderata with which one might
saddle the embarrassed director. But before attempting to impose an
  impossible burden upon him, we may distinguish fairly clearly be-
  tween two kinds of qualifications; those which can be delegated and
  those which cannot. Amongst the former are, as I have already sug-
  gested, photography and draftsmanship. One of the best archaeologi-
  cal excavators known to me — unsurpassed as a painstaking and
  accurate analyst of stratigraphy — is devoid of any sort of skill as a
  draftsman. The chemical, physical, or botanical analysis of soils is
  manifestly the task of a separate specialist with laboratory equipment.
  The extent to which the director should be a linguist is more debat-
  able. Technically, the methods of excavation are identical whether a
  literate or an illiterate culture be in question. Petrie’s view was that
  ‘the ancient language of a country, all important as it is in the study
  of remains, is yet in its critical aspects not so essential during field-
  work. But the excavator should at least be able to take the sense of
  ali written material which he finds.’ That is a fair enough statement.
  Nevertheless, every expedition concerned with a literate antiquity
  should have on its staff or within a few hours’ reach a fully qualified
  epigraphist who can gauge instantly and in some detail the potential
                                                                          and
  value of a tablet or a seal or a coin. The necessary linguistic
                                     157
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

epigraphical studies are generally such as monopolize the time and
capacity of the specialist, and they can rarely be combined with the
wider functions and qualifications of the director. With Petrie’s reser-
vation, therefore, linguistic proficiency may be regarded as suscep-
tible to delegation.
   But the qualities which cannot be delegated are the instant under-
standing of structural and stratigraphical problems, the quick and
accurate correlation of the various groups of evidence as they appear,
the reasoned appreciation (sometimes miscalled ‘intuition’) of the
immediate needs of the work as it proceeds from day to day, the
capacity for undelayed but well-founded decision, and the ability to
ensure even progress in all the various departments and sub-depart-
ments of the enterprise. To these qualities must be added a clear antici-
pation of the needs of the ultimate report, and the capacity to present
that report in a clear, concise, and intelligible form. In other words,
and in brief, a precise and trained mind and an informed and inform-
ing imagination are the qualities of the director of an archaeological
expedition. And having said that, I am aware that I have carried the
reader scarcely at all along the upward path. There are, however, a few
practices which I have found of use in an attempted approximation to
those qualities in the field, and I note them for what they may be worth.
  First and foremost, the director must be a free agent, free from
administrative detail. His primary and constant duty is to circulate
from site to site and from workshop to workshop. Every section, in
its latest manifestation, must be clearly in his mind’s eye, and he must
be familiar with every development in the hour-to-hour work of his
team. If plans or sections are being made, he must himself ensure
their adequacy; if his draftsman is drawing pottery, samples must be
tested. His surveyor must be overlooked critically, his photographer
utilized and supervised. Above all, he must familiarize himself with
the groups of pottery as they lie on the tray beside the work or as they
come from the wash, and he must occasionally check the marking
of them. The indexes of small finds must be inspected daily. At some
moment or moments during the day, he must examine the field
notebooks of his supervisors. And he must keep his colleagues and
employees constantly, in varying degrees, ‘in the picture’, and ensure
that they are, each of them, aware of the importance of their indi-
vidual contributions to the progress of the work.
                                   158
                                  STAFF

    This last point is essential to the maintenance of morale and effi-
 ciency. It ensures the fullest and most intelligent co-operation of every
 member of the team. Once more I turn to soldiering for an analogy.
 One of the great qualities of a certain celebrated commander was his
 habit of taking almost every one of his soldiers, from general to
 private, into his confidence before a battle. Almost every British
 fighting-man at E] Alamein was a partner to his general’s plan and
 could collaborate intelligently therefore in victory. As often, military
 and archaeological field-work march alike in this. Tell your unit,
 before you start digging, exactly what problem you are out to solve,
 how you intend to tackle it, and, when possible, the sort of time-table
 which will probably be required. This last is particularly desirable
 with a relatively inexperienced staff. I recall, for instance, how at
 Arikamedu, in south India, where we sought and found for the first
 time extensive evidence of a Roman culture in significant contact
 with a hitherto unknown Indian culture, I explained beforehand in
 detail the nature of our problem and our methods, and ended with the
 warning that significant results need not be expected for a fortnight.
 In fact, the excavation opened badly; the site had been much dis-
 turbed, and for nine days nothing of importance was found. Then,
 on the tenth day, one of my Indian students emerged excitedly from
 the muddy depths of a cutting at sea-level with the stamped base of
 an Arretine dish in his hand. Thereafter the results were overwhelm-
 ingly satisfactory, but in those first days with an untrained staff and
 students and the mercurial south Indian temperament to contend
 with, we had been saved from something approaching disaster by
 the timely warning.
    This is not to say that all can be foreseen and that there is no place
 for opportunism in digging. But the whole framework of the prob-
 lem must be very carefully constructed before the work begins, and
 the use of opportunity is limited by that framework, which must
 itself be comprehensive enough to admit it. Here, however, I am
 again encroaching upon the general problem of archaeological
 strategy (Chapter 10).
    And all the time that the director is attending unrestingly to those
various and vital details, the growing accumulation of evidences and
 inferences is working upon his mind, creating new ideas, suggesting
 working theories or probabilities for trial, confirming or bending his
                                   159
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE     EARTH

plan. He alone can (and must) know all the latest evidences as they
emerge and can fit them into a logical pattern. Nor should he defer
this operation until he reaches the remote sanctuary of his study.
Inferences of a general or far-reaching kind will constantly refer back
anew to detailed observation in the field, requiring fresh trial and
appreciation of the material evidence. The more thinking that the
director can do in the actual presence of that evidence, the better,
and it goes without saying that the factual interpretation must be
absolute and final in that presence. Says Petrie:
   At the moment that a fact is before the eye — a fact which may
never be seen again, and perhaps never paralleled      —it is needful for
the observer to make certain of all the details, to verify every point
which is of fresh value, and to record all that is new with certainty and
exactitude. ... Everything seen should be mentally grasped, and its
meaning and bearings comprehended at the moment of discovery, se
clearly that a definitive statement can be made, which shall be as
certain and as absolute as anything can be which depends on human
sense.         2
There is but little place here for the esprit d’escalier, and the director
must be sufficiently liberated by his staff from routine cares to keep
his wits actively and unceasingly about him. A director who knew
this and always carefully chose his staff was more than once accused
of taking credit for the work of others. The accusation was, of course,
correct; he knew his job and chose a staff capable of doing much of
his work for him. Perhaps, after all, the greatest qualification in a
director is the capacity to select and train a competent staff. Let us
turn now to that staff and consider some of its requisites.

                       THE   DEPUTY      DIRECTOR

Whilst the director is the operational leader of the expedition, the
deputy director is primarily in charge of the administration. He (or
she) deals with the well-being and pay of the various grades of staff,
and is personally responsible for the smooth working of the machine.
He should also be a trained field-archaeologist, in close touch with
the director and able in emergency to represent him, but is not
officially responsible for the scientific aspects of the work. If he is a
specialist in some relevant branch of archaeology, so much the better.
                                   160
                                    STAFF

   The following are amongst his duties:
   (a) Billeting or housing. This problem, of course, varies widely with
local conditions. It ranges from the strenuous task of securing lodg-
ings in a provincial English town to the relatively easy one of building
a village of grass-huts in Bengal. Whatever its precise nature, it must
be tackled well before the actual work of the expedition is timed to
begin. Special attention must be paid to the administrative office, the
drawing-office, the photographic dark-room, and the pottery-shed.
In certain expeditions to the Near East between the wars, an unneces-
 sary degree of luxury was sometimes sought at disproportionate cost
 in the living-quarters of the party. On the other hand, the notoriously
 Spartan conditions under which the Petries used to run their camps
 reached the opposite extreme. Unnecessary discomfort amongst any
 considerable body of people for any considerable time can only lower
 efficiency and is itselfasufficient symptom of inefficiency.
    (b) Equipment. The director is immediately concerned in the choice
of equipment, but its preparedness and maintenance are largely the
 duty of his deputy. The theodolite or its equivalent must be checked,
the surveying-poles must be kept freshly painted (a shabby surveying-
 pole is sometimes hard to see, and is another emblem of inefficiency),
 there must be an adequate supply of bubble-levels and well-con-
 ditioned measuring tapes, there must be good string, pegs, labels,
  cloth or strong paper bags, notebooks with water-proofed covers,
  drawing-boards and paper, and so forth. All these are the proper
  charge of the deputy director, and are a constant drain on his atten-
 tion.

    (c) Accounts. The ungrateful task of keeping the running accounts of
_ the expedition falls to the deputy. This is no light matter, but a deputy
                                                                               l.
  who cannot carry it is an unjustifiable addition to the personne
Above all, he must deal        accurate ly  and   promptl  y  with   the weekly
                                                                               for
 wages bill, including the tiresome complication of baksheesh
           finds where the  hateful bonus-s   ystem  is in  vogue.  Any   sort  of
  special
                                                      reacts  instantly  and  un-
  error in the payment of wages and baksheesh
  favourably on the relations between master and men.
                                                                               the
     (d) Supplies. The organization of food-supplies is the duty of
  deputy, with or without the assistan     ce  of a ‘housek  eeper’.

         F                              161
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

  (e) Hospital. The first-aid box and, if necessary, a supply of other
simple remedies are maintained by the deputy, and a daily “hospital
hour’ is normally necessary in the more remote parts of the world. A
knowledge of first aid is thus added to the deputy’s qualifications, to-
gether with a sympathetic firmness in its application.

                          SITE-SUPERVISORS

I have generally chosen these from amongst my senior students, that
is, students with one or more seasons’ training behind them. They
are in charge of an area sufficiently compact to enable them to keep
in immediate contact with all work done in that area throughout the
day. Scarcely a shovelful of earth is removed save under their eyes.
They are personally responsible for the small ‘control-pits’, each
normally some 2 or 3 feet square, which are cut ahead of the main
work to provide a preview of the strata (p. 84). They write up the
area notebook, keep sketch-plans and sections, and record special
small-finds. They insure that each stratum has its separate small-find
box or basket, with tie~-on labels and supplementary loose label (p. 188).
Their equipment is contained in a portable ‘desk’ or box, for which
they are individually accountable. So far as possible, they have the
same workmen from day to day, get to know them individually, and
allot them tasks suitable to their various capacities. They are, in fact,
platoon-commanders, and on their efficiency depends ultimately the
technical adequacy of the excavation. Wherever feasible, they are
each assisted by a junior student whom they help to train,

                              FOREMAN

The foreman is the sergeant-major. He has proved himselfasa digger
and should be the best workman on the site. He may assist in the un-
covering of especially fragile or important objects, But he must,
above all things, be by nature capable of controlling his men with
firmness and scrupulous fairness. On arrival in the morning and (in
the East) after the midday break he calls the roll, and he marshals the
men on pay-day. He should know his workmen individually from
a somewhat different angle from that of the site-supervisor, and
should show patience and assiduity in their training. At the end of
                                  162
                                STAFF

each week, he is responsible for providing the deputy director with
all information required for the pay-sheet. The best foremen are also
enthusiasts. In England, William Wedlake my foreman and colleague
at Maiden Castle and in France, Thomas Hepple, who assisted Mr
J. P. Gibson and Mr Gerald Simpson on Hadrian’s Wall, and
 W. E. V. Young, Mr Keiller’s foreman at Avebury, are three out-
standing examples of the foreman-archaeologist and friend. In India,
I had one such, a Punjab peasant, whose mind was constantly on his
work whether he was on duty or off, and who used to come and
discuss the problems of the site with me in the evening. One or more
of Sir Leonard Woolley’s Iraqi foremen, I believe, used to travel
voluntarily some hundreds of miles every year across the desert in
erder to rejoin his old chief’s staff during subsequent work near
Antioch. Such friendships are amongst the highest reward that a
director can desire. They bridge the class-room and help to link
inferred fact with basic earthy knowledge.

                   THE   SMALL-FIND      RECORDER

The recording of a ‘find’ begins at the moment of discovery. Unless
it requires special treatment or attention the object is placed immedi-
ately in an adjacent box or tray or basket to which is tied a label
bearing the code-name of the site, the number of the square or other ~
sub-unit, and the number of the stratum. The last I always place
within a circle, to distinguish it unmistakably from all other numbers.
A duplicate label, loose, is placed in the bottom of the receptacle.
(See Chapter 13, pp. 185 ff.)
   At a suitable moment, at the end of the day’s work or earlier, the
receptacle is transferred te the small-finds shed, where its contents are
cleaned, so far as is suitable at this stage, and marked by the small-
finds recorder, either with Indian ink or white paint on the objects
themselves or on labels tied firmly to them. Sooner or later, it is
useful to cover the mark neatly with shellac as a protection.
   The recorder’s next act is to card-index all individual objects of any
possible significance. I always maintain two card indexes, one by
categories, the other by sites. See p. 190.
   Such objects as require first-aid are then handed over to the field-
laboratory for treatment (p. 195). Most of them, however, can be
                                  163
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

immediately packed for transportation to base, either in boxes or in
bags of paper or cloth (pp. 188-9).
   A high responsibility rests upon the shoulders of the recorder. He
is personally responsible that every object is clearly and correctly
marked on as inconspicuous a surface as possible; no object should be
spoilt for subsequent photography or display by an unsightly code-
symbol. He is also responsible for storing the boxed or bagged finds
in such a fashion that they are quickly accessible if required for refer-
ence in the field - a very important desideratum, sometimes over-
looked. The finds-shed must, in other words, be in impeccable order.
Muddle means inaccuracy, delay, incompetence, and the destruction
of evidence laboriously garnered. At a small excavation the problem
is proportionately simple, but at a large one the recorder will require
a staff, which must be subjected by him to the closest supervision and
discipline. Every addition to the staff multiplies manifold the risks of
inadequate or even incorrect recording, and the recorder must
remember that on his unceasing vigilance depends much of the
scientific value of his expedition’s work. He is a pillar of the
enterprise.


                      THE   POTTERY-ASSISTANT

The duties of the pottery-assistant equate with those of the small-
finds recorder, and on a small excavation the two posts may be com-
bined. But at most excavations, particularly in the East, where pottery
is liable to occur in embarrassing quantities and is usually of the highest
possible evidential value, it is essential to have a trained assistant ex-
clusively in charge of this department. And a very exacting task is his.
His preliminary qualifications must include an extensive knowledge
of previously recorded discovery, so that he can instantly spot
analogies amongst his new material and can bring them at once to
the notice of the director. He must also have a sound general know-
ledge of ceramic techniques, so that, for example, he can protect
from the omnivorous pottery-washers such wares (e.g. wares painted
after baking) as require special treatment. He must be a strict discip-
linarian, and possess a clear and orderly mind. And he must have a
simple, effective routine for the marshalling of the fairly considerable
working staff which, on any large-scale excavation, must be allotted

                                    164
:
                                    STAFF

‘to him. No hampering economy should ever be imposed upon him;
 if the expedition cannot afford an adequate pottery-department, it
should close down at once. The hackneyed assertion is a true one:
pottery is the alphabet of archaeology. Its plasticity lends it a special
facility in the imitation of other fabrics such as metal-work, leather,
basket-work, or other pottery. For example, Roman terra sigillata
imitates metal-work or glass-work, some Bronze Age beakers imi-
tate woven grass, some neolithic pottery in Western Europe imitates
leather-work, some pottery both in Europe and in India imitates
  Roman terra sigillata; and so on. Pottery is thus liable to preserve the
  influences of other wares and materials and to represent cultural or
 industrial interactions of various and often vital kinds which would
otherwise be lost to us. Its fragility limits its normal durability and,
unlike metal-work, which may last for generations or centuries and
    is also more liable to be treasured for intrinsic value, the date of its
    destruction (at any rate in mass) can be approximated to its date of
    manufacture. That same fragility tends to restrict the diffusion at
    least of the commoner wares to a measurable vicinity of their kilns;
although it is salutary to recall that Graeco-Roman amphorae, owing
to the popularity of the wines which they contained, found their way
in numbers to the shores of the Bay of Bengal, thar Roman glass
    reached India and China where local glass was almost unknown, that
    Roman Arretine ware found a sale in south India by reason of its
    superiority over local products, and that Chinese celadom ware pene-
    trated far and wide over Asia and Africa in the ninth and following
    centuries A.D. partly because of its quality and partly because of the
    forceful salesmanship of Chinese merchants. But whether because
    most pottery is fairly local or because some of it is astonishingly and
    significantly exotic, it is of the first importance to the archaeologist,
    and the immediate and faultless record of field-evidence relating to it
    is a primary care of the director and his administration.
       The pottery-assistant is therefore a very important person. His
    methods will vary with his own ideas and circumstances. In Chapter
                                                                          e
    13 are discussed procedures suitable on the one hand to a temperat
    (often intemperate) climate and on the other     hand  to the more pre-
                                                                        can
    dictable tropical or sub-tropical climates where most of his work
    be happily done out of doors.

                                       165
                ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE    EARTH

                          THE   PHOTOGRAPHER

 The essential qualifications of the field-photographer are (a) that he
 shall be technically dependable in all lights and colour-schemes, and
 (6) that he shall be quick and ingenious in the improvisation of scaf-
 folding for his camera and, in particular, of a readily accessible dark-
 room; he must at all times be in a position to produce the developed
 plate or film for inspection by the director within 20 minutes of ex-
 posure. To these qualities he must add a thorough understanding of
 the preparation of a subject, whether in the open air or in the studio,
 although this is ultimately the personal responsibility of the director.
 Further notes on these matters will be found in the chapter on
 photography (p. 200).
    An intelligent and experienced photographer is a sine qua non.
From the beginning of the excavation, it is his spare-time job to make
 a study of the site at different times of the day, and so to be prepared
 to advise in regard to lighting and position. Here again, the director
 is primarily responsible, but a good and observant photographer can
 help him a great deal. Like a doctor, the photographer must be avail-
 able and prepared at a moment’s notice and at all times. On an excava-
 tion ef any magnitude his duties cannot be combined with those of
 any other member of the staff.

                            THE    SURVEYOR

The preparation of a measured drawing of a section is the duty of
the supervisor, under the eye of the director. The supervisor and
the director know more about the stratification and meaning of the
sections than anyone else, and the task cannot be delegated.
   On the other hand, the preparation of a contoured survey or the
plan of a building, though, like everything else, demanding constant
supervision, must on a large excavation be delegated primarily to a
professional surveyor. I do not propose to include here a detailed
excursus on the craft of surveying: many handbooks are available.
But there are one or two observations which may usefully be made
  1. e.g. T. Baker and G. M. Leston, Land and Engineering Surveying (2oth ed.,
London, 1945); R. Parry and W. R. Jenkins, Land Surveying (5th ed., London,
1946); R. J. C. Atkinson, Field Archaeology (London, 1946); A. H. Detweiler,
Manual of Archaeological Surveying (New Haven, 1948).

                                    166
                                  STAFF

 in regard to the application of professional survey-methods to
 archaeology.
    First let us consider the nature of the tasks which are likely to await
 the archaeological surveyor. These are: (a) the preparation of a site-
 plan, generally contoured and often of considerable extent; and (b)
 the planning of a structure or group of structures on a small scale or
 in detail. For (a), either a plane-table or a theodolite may be used; (b)
 is normally carried out by triangulation from a base-line. In both
 categories, it is important to remember the degree of accuracy re-
 quired. Here I tread upon delicate ground. Throughout this book I
 have stressed the vital need for accuracy, and I would countenance no
withdrawal from the position. But there is a kind of accuracy which
 frustrates itself by its disproportion to needs or possibilities, or may
even result, paradoxically, in an essential inaccuracy. In my experi-
 ence, professional surveyors are liable to lose the conformation of the
 wood in the planning of the trees; to lavish so much care upon the
 slight irregularities (many of them often secondary and accidental) of
 an ancient wall as to misrepresent its essential character and original
 intention. I have already remarked upon a similar “over-accuracy’ on
 the part of the inexperienced in the rendering of a section (p. 74). In
 all cases, the degree of ‘accuracy’ must be commensurate with the
 scale to which the plan is to be published. A plan drawn to the scale
 of } inch to 1 foot will commonly be published to the scale of 4% inch
 to 1 foot, and on that scale small excrescences of flint work, or small
 variations due perhaps to subsidence or other deformation, will cease
 to signify. Omit them therefore; but do so only after careful con-
 sideration. In a measured section it would be utterly useless pedantry
 to measure every small pebble in a gravel layer, and the same need for
 proportion and common sense is present in the ground-survey. Do
 not be more ‘accurate’ than your scale permits; do not overload your
 machine. We all know the dangerous pedantry of the ultra-careful
 motorist who, in season and out, laboriously obeys every rule of the
 Highway Code. We have seen how agerieved railwaymen or meat-
                                                                         the
 porters can hold up a community by a deliberate adherence to
 mules of their trade. With less deliberation,   perhaps,  but  with  equal
 pedantry, the professional surveyor can not only hold up an excava-
                                                                        sur-
 tion but can imperil the real accuracy of its records. Watch your
 veyor, and train him in the difficult but necessary art  of distinguishing
                                     167
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

essentials without invalidating the impersonality of his record. It can
be done.
   For archaeological purposes, therefore, I prefer a somewhat simpler
instrument than the regulation theodolite. An artillery ‘director’,
designed for quick but essentially accurate survey, meets much of the
need and is a far handier machine, and many instrument-makers have
equivalent instruments on the market.
  Similarly, the use of innumerable ‘checks’ and diagonals from a
base-line to a wall-system, with an accumulation of small errors, is
often better replaced by the careful survey of two terminal points
on which the plan is swung from a quick series of local measurements.
Thereby, the correct local interrelationship of the walls of a building
- in other words, its essential character — is often more accurately and
speedily recorded than by more elaborate professional methods.
   Having said this, I must end by warning the student against the
opposite extreme. A very eminent archaeologist of my acquaintance
used to set out on a surveying-expedition with two pea-sticks and a
visiting card; the former for ‘line’, the latter (sighted along the edges)
for ‘angle’. I saw some of his results, and marvelled that they were
not more inaccurate than they actually were. But then he was a genius.

                         THE   FIELD-CHEMIST

A small field-laboratory and an experienced and resourceful chemist
are essential save in the rare instances where a static laboratory is with-
in easy reach. The work of conservation in the field is limited as a
rule to first-aid, and it is highly important for subsequent treatment
that the field-chemist shall keep a careful and detailed record of all
action taken by him. This record must accompany each object to the
base-laboratory, since subsequent action may be conditioned by it.
For example, not long ago a work of sculpture arrived in Brussels,
seemingly in perfect condition; but shortly afterwards it burst into
pieces — the excavator had imprisoned salts within it by impregnating
the surface with celluloid and had omitted to inform the recipients.
   It is particularly important that the field-chemist shall be able to
treat coins in any metal with a minimum of delay, since their evidence
will be required at once by the director. For the rest, the chemist’s
main functions are (a) to prevent further decay, and (b) to consolidate

                                    168
                                   STAFF

  friable objects sufficiently for removal and transportation. These
  functions will be amplified in Chapter 14 (p. 195).

                             THE   DRAFTSMAN

 The work of the draftsman is various, involving a range of qualities
 rarely possessed by one and the same individual. In practice I have
 generally found it necessary to employ three draftsmen, although I
 have known one or two exceptional men who have covered the
 whole ground.
    Whether one or three, it is essential that the draftsman shall thor-
  oughly understand the technique of line-block reproduction (p. 226),
  and shall so be able to attune his style to the machine: to employ lines
  of the right thickness and firmness, having regard to the extent of
  reduction required in publication, and to avoid too close a proximity
  of one line to another, such as may lead to a fusion of the thin metal
  strips that will ultimately represent those lines on the blocks. Clean
  lines and clean hatching, without an unnecessary coarseness of detail,
  entail a sureness of hand and eye that, combined with experience, are
  a primary qualification in all types of scientific draftsmanship,
     On that common basis, the work falls roughly into three categories:
  the tracing and lettering of maps and plans, the drawing of objects
  and the semi-schematic drawing of pottery. In all these things, the
  critical eye of the director is a present need. As always, the director
  must be able to impose his judgement with an acceptable authority
  upon his draftsman. At the same time, the draftsman’s initiative must
  be encouraged; his advice, comments, criticism are, or should be,
  always worth listening to, and I have often profited from them. Not
  only in matters of scientific interpretation, but in the attractive
 presentation of his material, the draftsman can help the archaeologist
 to ‘get over’ to his public — his scientific no less than his non-specialist
 public. Few scientists are so devoid of humanity that they will not
 look more eagerly and attentively at an attractive diagram than at
 unrelieved geometry. The placing of a plan upon the page, its rela-
 tionship to its lettering, scale, north-point and key, the character and
 placing of its border, the rendering of a bead or bracelet in clear line
 from anexpressiveangle, are all factors worthy of consideration. These
aesthetic attributes do not imply any special measure of elaboration;
                                     169
                 ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM     THE    EARTH

 indeed simplicity of expression is as important in illustration as
in text. Occasionally, scientific illustration has been excessively
elaborate. Good taste is the yardstick, but good taste is a very positive
quality, partly a matter of instinct and partly of deliberation. Let the
director and his draftsman deliberate frequently together, profiting
from their combined good sense and such instinct as may have been
vouchsafed them.
   The difference between a well-presented and an ill-considered plan
is indeed immense. I have referred to the placing of the border: let it
be so placed that no space is unnécessarily wasted, but in such a fashion
as to enable the actual plan to be balanced with the lettering and pleas-
ing to the eye. Whether the observer fully realize it or not, waste
space is distracting and disturbing. Equally, of course, overcrowding
must be avoided, but this is a less frequent crime. Above all, let every
word and figure in the plan be easily legible after reduction by the
block-maker. Far better let them be too large than too small; nothin
can be more frustrating and infuriating than an indifferently legible
scale - a comnion failing. And let the draftsman avoid all unnecessary
underlines and frills ~ a vice to which engineering draftsmen have
been particularly prone. How far he should let himself go in the
matter of additional and scientifically unnecessary decoration is, be it
repeated, a matter of taste. The old map-makers who adored the
seven seas with whales and ships and wrote their titles upon scrolls
sustained by cherubs, or Stukeley who added appropriately romantic
ruins, produced works of art which often disguised a deficiency of
scientific information.      In recent times, Mr Heywood Sumner has
enriched his plans and maps with a décor that is often a pleasure to the
eye but is sometimes overdone.’ Again, the Royal Commission on
Historical Monuments (England), in its Westmorland and other recent
volumes, has made a brave attempt to relieve the monotony of small
plans of hut-circles and the like by the addition of large and highly
ornate titles, which are well meant but not always relevant. On the
other hand, a north-point is fair game for the decorator within
moderation, and has a well-established tradition of ornament behind
it. Generally, when in doubt simplicity is best.
   1 For example, in his Descriptive Account of Roman Pottery Sites at Sloden, etc.
(London, 1921), his general map hasa heavily over-weighted and unnecessary
border, but his other plans and diagrams are, in my judgement, perfect.

                                       170
                                STAFF

   The expression of an object such as a brooch by the draftsman in-
volves a somewhat more developed artistry. Per contra, I have known
draftsmen who could achieve this but who were quite unable to rule
the clean lines of a plan or to produce clear and attractive lettering.
Here we need an artist in the more orthodox and creative sense of the
term, and he is often one who scorns the more mechanical technique
of the architect’s draftsman. The artist, however, is inclined to impose
his own personality upon the motifs of another age, and the objective
accuracy of his rendering is sometimes questionable. He needs watch-
ing. The choice of the expressive angle, the extent to which his picture
calls for a diagrammatic element or supplement, are matters for the
director’s consideration, and the director must, by training and
experience, know his part.
   Mention may be added of a draftsman’s trick which I have on occa-
sion found extremely useful — the tracing of fragile objects on to glass
before their removal from the soil. Iron objects in particular are some-
times found in so friable a condition that they have to be waxed or
plastered (p. 197) before they can be lifted. When that need arises, an
immediate record is essential, and the simplest method is to place a
sheet of glass (e.g. an old photographic plate which has been cleaned
and sponged with a lump of cotton-wool dipped in alcohol) over the
object and to trace the latter in Indian ink on to the glass. Negative
contact prints can then be made from the inked glass, and in due
course further positive tracings made from them, whilst the glass can
be again cleaned and re-used. The method is both speedy and accurate.
   Lastly, there is the very important question of pottery-drawing.
This is in some aspects the easiest task of the three, but likewise
involves careful training, Accuracy is allimportant, and can be aided
by a variety of devices — notably, graduated horizontal and vertical
rules with a graduated arm that can be slid up and down the vertical
tule. The pot is placed upon the fixed horizontal rule against the
fixed vertical rule; the adjustable vertical rule is moved up to it, and
the adjustable horizontal rule is moved down to the top of it. The pot
is thus framed in a rectangle graduated on all sides in inches or centi-
metres, and offsets can be taken from them to the pot at appropriate
intervals.
  A sherd cannot, of course, be so treated. It must be wedged with
plasticine at the correct angle and measured from a vertical scale.
                                  171
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM    THE    EARTH

Great care is necessary to ensure the correctness of the angle, by
planting the rim (if such it be) firmly upside-down upon the board,
or by testing the horizontality of the wheel-marks on a wheel-turned
sherd. The diameter of a fragmentary rim is ascertained by matching
the rim against a chart of concentric circles prepared for the purpose.
   The standard practice now is to render half the pot in section and
half in elevation. All pots should be drawn life-size unless excessively
large; the usage sometimes adopted of drawing them half-size saves
paper but increases inaccuracy. Normally, no pot should be illus-
trated in a published report at less than one-quarter actual size (linear),
and a decorated pot (e.g. ornamented terra sigillata) should be repro-
duced half-size. Very large pots, and these only, should be reduced
to less than one-quarter by the block-maker.
   It is sometimes desirable, especially in hand-made pottery, to indi-
cate the texture of the ware by hatching the ‘elevation’ side of the
drawing. This involves artistry of the kind indicated in our second
category of draftsmanship, and must be well done. Above all, both
in the outline and in the hatching of the drawing, care must be taken
to avoid giving an excessively mechanical aspect to a hand-made pot.
Lines such as those of base and rim should generally, in such pottery,
be drawn freehand, not ruled.
   One more point: make sure that the draftsman appends to each of
his drawings of pottery and other ‘finds’ a transcription of the
appropriate label.

                              LABOURERS

Digging is a skilled craft, and many years ago I began a note on this
subject with the words ‘Abjure voluntary labour’. To-day, in 1955,
voluntary labour is Hobson’s choice. The old-fashioned British
labourer survives only in a few odd corners of the land; indeed, so
rare is he that one is sometimes inclined to class him with the mythical
Mrs Harris. A note, therefore, which before the war might have run
to some length may now be compressed into a few paragraphs, most
of which are applicable to labour in general and are not confined
merely to the (former) home-product.
  Let me say at once that my experience as an employer in Great
Britain is based on England and Wales; as an archaeologist, to my

                                   172
                                  STAFF

great loss, I have never attempted, like the Roman legion, to ‘curb the
fierce Scot’. On the Continent, I have employed Bretons and Nor-
mans, and in India a great variety of races, ranging from the tall, regal
Punjabi Musulman to the tiny, volatile Madrasi. With Arabs I have
never worked, although I have often enough watched them with a
critical eye upon archaeological excavations. They do not appear to
be a very different problem from the north Indian Muslims. In fact,
I would hazard a guess that, from Carnarvon to Calcutta, the basic
factors of labour-control or, in the quaint terminology of the army,
“Man-management’ are very much the same. Impartial dealing, a
readiness to share discomfort, provision of such comfort as may be
feasible without ostentation, and above all an occasional gleam of
elementary humour (never sarcasm), summarize the qualities required
everywhere of the director by his workmen. Something more will be
said about these qualities, but first let us consider the technical accom-
plishments required of the workmen themselves.
   The local tools used by the labourer will differ considerably from
place to place, and a separate section will be devoted to them (p. 178).
But it stands to reason that the workman shall thoroughly under-
stand their usage, and that his mind and muscle shall be accustomed
to them. A drawback to the kind of labour that usually comes to the
field-archaeologist to-day in Great Britain is that it is often unac-
quainted with pick and shovel and has to be taught ab initio; it con-
sists of unemployed or unemployable invalids, garage-hands, drapers’
assistants, university students and the like, to whom picks and shovels
are encumbrances rather than instruments. On the other hand in
certain parts of Asia — Palestine, Syria, Iraq, some districts of India —
are men whose fathers and grandfathers have worked for British,
German, or other archaeological expeditions, and who have inherited
a useful understanding of the matter. And indeed, to be just, the uni-
versity student, if he is of the right sort, can usually be trained without
undue delay to a fair measure of technical competence; only, he could
usually be better employed in more detailed and specialized work and
is largely wasted in the basic task of digging.
   Tidy excavation implies a skilled knowledge of this basic task.
Without tidiness, all is lost. A trench such as that ingenuously illus-
tratedinPI. could not safely be interpreted or recorded even by an ex-
perienced interpreter. The proposed cutting must be laid out carefully
                                    173
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

by pegged strings at the outset, and must be clearly and vertically
cut ~ as vertically as the nature of the material will permit. The gener-
al tendency is to cut a trench with too much outward slope or ‘batter’ -
on the sides, with the double result that the stratification is distorted
and the cutting becomes excessively narrow as the digging proceeds
downwards. This tendency must be watched constantly by the
supervisor and corrected immediately. If the batter be allowed to
accumulate, the subsequent cleaning down to a vertical face will
almost inevitably result in a mixture of material from different levels
and a confusion of evidence. A further tendency is to leave blunt
angles at the ends and base of a cutting, thus again obscuring the
stratification and inducing muddle. Precision must be the order, and
precision and tidiness are synonymous.
   Another common error of the unskilled digger is to cut down too
much material at one time. Picking is generally easier than shovelling,
and the pick-man is liable to show an excessive zeal. The result is that
the floor of the cutting is encumbered with loose material which is
liable to conceal stratification and to get trodden into alien strata.
Usually, the less earth loosened at any one time the better; keep the
cutting clear so far as the controlled progress of the work will permit,
   A corollary of this is: avoid crowding your workmen. A scene
such as that illustrated in Pl. 4a implies every sort of disorder.
 Material is inevitably mixed on the floor of the trench, there is a
‘constant risk of ‘finds’ being placed in the wrong box or basket, the
 supervisor cannot sce what is happening, and chatter amongst the
men swells to an uproar. Noise on an excavation generally implies
inefliciency; always with the proviso that the Oriental is a born
chatterer and is unhappy without a considerable measure of noise
about him. In the East, therefore, noise, as distinct from concentrated
conversation, is merely local colour and may be a symptom of happi-
ness. I have stood upon an Eastern site and marvelled at the miscel-
laneous noise welling up around me from men, women, and children
all busily and effectively engaged upon their tasks. But noise amongst
British workmen is a bad sign. Almost every gang of them contains
at least one addle-pated gossip, who must be isolated and extinguished
at once, or the good men will rapidly deteriorate. On the other hand,
during off-hours, perhaps when sheltering from rain, the English
workman will chatter merrily with the best of them, and a gang of

                                  174
                                STAFF

Welshmen will sing like an angel-choir, in such fashion as to make a
virtue of discomfort.
   The word ‘discomfort’ raises another point. The director who
looks after the reasonable comfort of his men, for example by the
provision of shelter from rain or sun or by ensuring an efficient water-
supply - occasionally by a bucket of hot tea on a wet day ~ is merely
doing his duty. But a word of warning is necessary. An over-solicitous
attention to ‘welfare’ may easily result in dissatisfaction. Such is the
perverseness of human nature that excess often begets an unreasoned
desire for more; in other words, breeds a new kind of discontent. A
horse will always nose as of right a pocket from which it has received
sugar. Translated into human nature, this expectancy becomes a form
of irritation, which is dry fuel to any petty spark of discontent which
may happen to be near. The disconcerting result is that ill will arises
out of charity; and indeed perhaps the word ‘charity’ sums up the
weakness at the base of the trouble. Charity has no inevitable limit
and is therefore susceptible to exploitation. In other words, the
charitably minded director suddenly finds that he is being exploited,
and, if remedy be not immediately and tactfully applied, the path to
hell has been well and truly paved.
   One’s workmen, then, must be carefully teamed, to prevent the
bad from corrupting the good; the fool and the chatterer must be
relegated to jobs where they can meditate in solitude upon their (or
their director’s) folly; the gangs must be spaced to ensure adequate
Lebensraum; and a proper care for their well-being must not degener-
ate into an over-anxious solicitude. To all this must be added an alert
readiness on the part of the director or supervisor to share any special
hardship, such as working in water or mud, or in excessive heat or
cold. Furthermore, if, as on very rare occasions, there is some slight
element of risk, that risk must be shared or even wholly undertaken
by the senior staff. Such active co-operation is essential and is worth
more than an infinitude of charitable petting. And at any moment of
difficulty or fatigue, the casual jest may be the anodyne. I have seen,
towards the end of the day, the lines of young native basket-carriers,
upon whose speed and regularity depends in great measure the general
tempo of an Eastern excavation, falter and chatter and play truant in
spite of the despairing efforts of a strong-minded foreman. Basket-
carriers are never the most responsible members of the party, and
                                  175
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

they are necessarily numerous and elusive. A joke and the organiza-
tion of a basket-carriers’ competition were the immediate solution;
the whole gang leapt into life, and the foreman leaned upon his stick.
Solvitur jocando, and this applies throughout the world.
   Finally, there is another form of stimulus which has become habi-
tual in some countries: the allocation of bonuses or baksheesh (univer-
sal Oriental word!) to workmen distinguished by a special aptitude
or good fortune in the recovery of ‘finds’. This system has in the past
been normal in Great Britain, Egypt, and the Near East, although 1
understand that an attempt is being made to abolish it in Iraq, and
under modern economic conditions it has practically died out in
Britain. So far as I know, it has never been used in India. It is an un-
mitigated curse to the director or, rather, the deputy director; it com-
plicates accounting, it adds materially to cost, and, unless administered
with a rare combination of honesty and cunning, does almost as much
harm as good. It has been found or thought necessary in countries
where dealers and collectors stand menacingly at the workman’s
elbow, ready to tempt with inflated values. Indeed the problem is not
an easy one. There can be no doubt that in the past much has been
salved for science in the East by the baksheesh system. Even in Great
Britain, objects, notably coins, have probably been saved in similar
fashion from disposal at the local public house (though amongst
Britons it is to the ‘national sporting instinct’ that the bonus is
presumed to appeal). But the real answer to all this is not ‘bribed
honesty’, which is what the baksheesh system amounts to, but ade-
quate supervision. After all, the director’s best guarantee of the
honesty of his workmen is, in the words of the French Prehistoric
Society’s Excavation Manual, ‘de ne pas les quitter une minute’. The
 baksheesh system was in fact adopted in the ill-controlled mass-excava-
tions which have long ~ far too long — been characteristic of Eastern
archaeology, as a substitute for adequate supervision. On a properly
supervised excavation, nearly all the diggers are constantly under the
eye of the site-supervisor, and theft would in any event be difficult.
  But there is a little more in the matter than that. Apart altogether
from the question of monetary gain to the workman by the sale of
objects of marketable worth, the archaeologist has to remember that
the requirements of science involve a complete change of values on
the part of the peasant, and the bonus-system, wisely applied, un-
                                  176
                                 STAFF

doubtedly helps to impress the new scale upon his mind. When the
workman begins to realize that what is to him a mere fragile crock
or a fragment of carved bone and nothing more may, to his super-
visor, be an historical ‘document’ of high importance, deserving of
a monetary bonus, he is on the way to a mental readjustment which
may ultimately turn him into something more than a mere dirt-
shifter. Nevertheless, my Indian experience shows me that, by com-
bined example and occasional commentary, the intelligent supervisor
can achieve this end without the embarrassments entailed in baksheesh:
For example, a workman finds an old horse-shoe; he is told that it
was made 2,000 years ago. He in turn remarks upon its general simi-
larity to the horse-shoes which his uncle, the local blacksmith, makes,
but proceeds to observe minor differences. The brief discussion — it
must not be protracted, or all work round about ceases — leads to
other historical or archaeological points, and the man becomes in-
telligently interested in his work. But let this discussion be of a casual
and particular nature. Don’t assume that your workmen are all
breathlessly awaiting general instruction in archaeology. I well re-
member an earnest antiquary inflicting an eloquent address upon the
workmen at an excavation (during the lunch-hour) on ‘prehistoric
man’, and turning at last, well pleased with his effort, to a patient
member of his audience with the question: ‘And now, my man,
what interests you most in your work here?’ - to which the navvy,
slowly removing his pipe and meditatively spitting, replied gruffly:
‘The five-o’clock whustle.’




                                   177
                              CHAPTER    12


                               Tools

INADEQUATE tools are not an excuse for bad work. No responsible
archaeologist will undertake an excavation without adequate staff
and equipment save in a rare emergency. The equipment falls into
two main categories: that of the directing staff, and that of the
labourers.
             (a) EQUIPMENT OF THE DIRECTING STAFF
     . Theodolite or simplified equivalent (see p. 168).
    . Plane-table.
    . Reinforced measuring tapes 100 feet (or metric equivalent) long.
    . 2-foot and 5-foot folding rules, or their metric equivalent.
    . Prismatic’oil-compass.
  ww. Drawing-boards, including several light boards of 3-ply wood
  f&wWDhND
  An

      for work on the site.
    . Plumb-bobs.
   on Bubble-levels.
    .
   9. Drawing paper, some of it squared (e.g. in 1-inch squares with
      eight subdivisions).
  Io. Architectural scales.
  II. Good pencils, and soft erasers.
  12. Broad-bladed knives (blade about 7 inches long) and/or pointed
      masons’ trowels.
  ee Good string.
  T4. Indian ink, pens, and paint-brushes.
  15. Circular celluloid protractors.
  16. Large celluloid set-squares.
  ye T-squares.
  18. Good drawing-pins.
  19. Paper-clips.
  20. Small pay-envelopes (for coins, &c.).
  hie Small tie-on labels.
  22k Notebooks.
  23% 3-inch and 6-inch nails,
  24. Scales of various kinds for photography, &c.

                                  178
                                 TOOLS

  Some of the above, such as the theodolite, the compass, and the
major drawing-instruments, will be stored centrally, But many of
them must be in the possession of every site-supervisor, who should
keep them in a tin box labelled with the code-name of the area for
which he is responsible and preferably also with his own name. This
box will contain a measuring-tape, 2-foot rule (or equivalent),
plumb-bob, bubble-level, pencil, eraser, string, ink, pens, paint-
brushes, paper-clips, envelopes, labels, nails, and, not least, notebook.
 The knife or trowel should accompany the supervisor everywhere, as
 an indispensable and inseparable instrument. Indeed, it is almost a
badge of rank; without it, the supervisor can scarcely begin upon his
task. Its uses in the detailed examination of a section are almost
infmite. It is used, for example, for cleaning and checking difficult
sections, and for testing by pressure, ‘feel’, or sound subtle differences
in the soil. It is essential in the final preparation of almost every sub-
ject for photography. It is a useful marker in survey. It has a hundred
uses and should be a treasured personal possession.

                 (b) THE LABOURERS’ EQUIPMENT
This will vary in detail with the locality, and the following is a
generalized list.
      . Picks.
      . Small picks or trenching-tools.
      . Large shovels.
        Small shovels or scoops.
        Spade.
        Turf-cutter or trimmer or edging-knife.
      . Baskets or pans (in the East, for the removal of soil).
   H.
   WN   Wheel-barrows (in the West).
   SIAWPR

   ve). Knives or trowels.
  10. Planks.
  11, Crow-bar.
  12. Sledge-hammer (particularly for driving in fencing-posts).
   Of these, the pick is the primary instrument in excavation, not
merely for the general loosening of the ground, but also, properly
controlled by a good workman, for comparatively delicate work, for
which its weight gives it a relatively effortless control. The tool is
                                   179
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

easily misused, and the pickman requires special watching and train-
ing. For example, the tendency to use the broad end must often be
checked - the pointed end does less accidental damage. And it is
frequently desirable to avoid hammering every scrap of earth with the
pick, but rather to use the instrument as a wedge with which to lever
off considerable lumps of earth, driving in the point well back from
the cutting-face for this purpose. Above all, except in strata known
to be of considerable depth, prevent the pickman from driving the
pick too deeply into the soil. ‘ Wholesale’ digging obscures the evi-
dence. Lastly, having loosened.a reasonable quantity of earth, the
pickman should stand aside and leave the spot free for clearance,
observation, and detailed work. A good pickman will think with the
end of his pick, observing not merely with his eyes but also by slight
differences in the “feel’ of the earth. The pick should be kept sharp.
   The small pick or trenching-tool is essentially the digging tool of the
foreman or supervisor, or of a specially experienced workman. The
lightness of this instrument makes it particularly sensitive to slight
changes of soil‘or even of sound — for example in working towards a
mud-brick wall (p. 104). With the knife, it is useful for disengaging
objects from the soil. It is the normal instrument for the digging of the
control-pit, (p. 84), where the supervisor is working in unknown
material. A word of warning: a lazy workman (in the East) will
always try to exchange his large pick for one of the small ones, so
that he may squat and peck idly at the surface with a minimum of
effort. The supervisor will soon learn to detect the difference between
the escapist and the honest man who is using the small pick for a good
and intelligent reason.
   The turf-cutter or trimmer or edging-knife is an essential instrument.
Its feature is a sharp crescentic blade in the same plane as the handle.
It is used for the very important task of trimming the sides of cuttings
to a clean, vertical face, without which proper examination and
record are difficult or impossible. It should not, however, be used for
substantive digging, partly because it is not strong enough for the
purpose but partly also because of necessity it cuts clean through any
fragile object that comes its way. Upon its proper use in suitable soils
depends in no small measure the cleanliness and effectiveness of an
excavation in detail.
   The basket or iron pan is used on Eastern sites (a) for the removal of
                                  180
                                 TOOLS

spoil-earth, and (b), when properly labelled with atie-on label indica-
ting site and stratum, for collecting pottery in the field. The life of a
basket can be extended by reinforcing with wire. For the removal of
dusty soil, the inside can be coated with mud or lined with a rag. It
should incidentally be a matter of routine to ensure that no clod of
unbroken (i.e. unexamined) earth is ever included with the dust.
   In PI. 18 is illustrated a fairly complete set of tools from an Indian
excavation. The only notable absentees are a sharp-edged spade and
shears or scissors. The objects shown are:
   1. 2. Large and small picks.
   3. Small pick with shovel-end.
   4. Hand-shovel.
   S . Shovel.
   6 . Turf-cutter or trimmer (a much worn example), very useful for
       trimming down sections.
     . Basket for removing earth, usually carried on the head.
       Superviser’s knife.
     . 2-foot scale.
     . 4-foot pole (6-foot and 8-foot poles should be added).
     . Graduated triangle, with bubble-levels affixed. For use, see p. 89.
     . 2-foot rule.
     . 100-foot reinforced tape.
     . Notebook with alternate pages squared (1-inch squares sub-
       divided into }-inch squares).
     . Bubble-level.
     . Plumb-bob.
     . Brushes of various sizes and shapes. Brooms, hard and soft,
      should be added.




                                   18k
