                              CHAPTER 4

                          Stratigraphy

In the last chapter reference was made to a number of ways, some of
them very familiar ones, whereby an approximation to absolute
chronology can sometimes be extracted from undocumented archae-
ological material. Such absolute chronology is essential alike to the
appreciation of the varying tempo of human achievement, and, above
all, to the establishment of the cultural inter-relationships which help
to rationalize human ‘progress’. But in much of our archaeology
fixed time-points are intermittent and chancy. More usually, the
archaeologist must be content to establish the relative sequence of his
evidence, to ensure that, however ill-focused, his perspective is essen-
tially correct. Therein lies his primary duty: to secure beyond doubt
the orderly succession of the vestiges with which he deals, even
though, in any given phase of research, he may be compelled to leave
finer adjustment and interpretation to his successors. To come at
once to the core of the matter, his first task as an excavator is with
stratification.
  In picturesque fashion, Mrs Jacquetta Hawkes has had something
to say of the Law of Stratification. It is as simple, she remarks, as
gravity, as falling down stairs, and is indeed rather like that. There
follows a little fantasy which I abstract from her text.

   If[she says] instead of one apple falling on the head of Sir Isaac Newton
a heavenly orchard had let tumble a rain of fruit, one of the greatest of
men would have been overwhelmed and then buried. Anyone examin-
ing the situation afterwards in a properly scientific spirit, clearing the
apples layer by layer, would be able to deduce certain facts. He would
be able to prove that the man was there before the apples. Furthermore,
that the blushing Beauty of Bath found immediately over and round Sir
Isaac fell longer ago than the small swarthy russets that lay above them.
If, on top of all this, snow had fallen, then the observer, even if he came
from Mars where they are not familiar with these things, would know
that the apple time came before the snow time. Relative ages are not
enough [Mrs Hawkes adds], the observer would want an absolute date,

                                    56
                            STRATIGRAPHY

and that is where Sir Isaac comes in again. An examination of his clothes,
the longskirted coat, the loose breeches and the negligent cut of his
linen, the long square-toes pointing so forlornly up to the sky, would
date the man to the seventeenth century. Here would be a clue to the
age of the apples and the snow.
   In more prosaic sense, this term stratification has already appeared
here and there in the previous chapters and will remain a recurrent
theme. It was long understood by geologists before it became the
commonplace of archaeology. The protagonist in the geological use
of the term was William (‘Strata’) Smith who, in 1816, began the
issue of a work entitled ‘Strata Identified by Organized Fossils’, and
thereby opened up new geological profundities and successions.
With so long and familiar a history behind it, it is unnecessary to
enter here into any detailed exposition of the stratigraphical principle,
but, for completeness’s sake, I will briefly recall the nature of its
application to archaeology.
   In this context, its principles are — in theory, at any rate — simple
enough. The human occupation of a site normally results in the
accumulation of material of one kind or another on and about the
area occupied. Objects are lost or discarded and become embedded
in the earth. Floors are renewed and old ones buried. Buildings
crumble and new ones are built upon the ruins. A flood may destroy
a building or a town and deposit a layer of alluvium upon its debris;
and later, when the flood has subsided, the levelled site may be re-
occupied. Sometimes, the process is in the reverse direction: evidences
of occupation may be removed, as in the deepening of an unsurfaced
street by traffic, or the digging ofa pit for the disposal of rubbish or for
burial. At Sabratha in Tripolitania, a Roman temple was found in
1948 to have been rebuilt at a lower level than its predecessor on the
same site, through an intentional lowering of the whole temenos at
the time of rebuilding. In one way or another, the surface of an
ancient town or village is constantly altering in response to human
effort or neglect; and it is by interpreting rightly these evidences of
alteration that we may hope to reconstruct something of the vicissi-
tudes of the site and its occupants.
   As it happens, the first recorded instance, so far as I am aware,
of the observation of archaeological stratification related not to an
                     1. A Land (London, 1951), p. 26.

                                    Di/
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE    EARTH

occupation-site but to a burial-mound. At the time when the episode
occurred, the word stratification, in the sense in which I have just used
it, was not yet in circulation, but the elements of the matter were
precociously appreciated by that remarkable man, Thomas Jefferson,
whose major title to fame is, I suppose, that he was third President
of the United States and an author of the Declaration of American
Independence. For us he may rank in the lesser but not negligible
role of the first scientific digger. His sociological interests were wide;
in particular, as governor of Virginia, he concerned himself with the
problems of the Red Man and the Negro, and in the course of his
studies he became interested incidentally in certain ‘barrows of which
many are to be found all over in this country’ (i.e. Virginia). One of
them, situated ‘on the low grounds of the Rivanna, about two miles
above its principal fork, and opposite to some hills, on which had been
an Indian town’, he opened in order to satisfy himself of the correct-
ness of opinions and traditions relating to these mounds. His report is
a testimony to his careful observation:
   Appearances certainly indicate that it [the mound] has derived both
origin and growth from the accustomary collection of bones, and the
deposition of them together; that the first collection had been deposited
on the common surface of the earth, a few stones put over it, and then
a covering of earth, that the second had been laid on this, had covered
more or less of it in proportion to the number of bones, and was then
also covered with earth, and so on.
  These facts caused him to reject two notions: first, that the mound
covered only bones of those slain in battle (not a single weapon-
wound was found); and secondly ‘that it was the common sepulchre
of a town, in which the bodies were placed upright, and touching
each other’. He remarked that a few stones found in the mound were
“brought from a cliff a quarter of a mile off, and from the river, one-
eighth of a mile off’. He also recorded that infants were buried there,
since a rib of an infant, part of the jaw of a child which had not cut
its teeth (the right half of the under jaw), etc., were discovered.
   All that, be it noted, was in 1784, and I have therefore thought it
worth while to relate the episode at some length. Let us consider the
   1. T. Jefferson, Notes on Virginia (8th ed., 1801), pp. 142~7; account here
derived from A. F, Chamberlain in The American Anthropologist, ix (1907),
499 f.
                                     58
                          STRATIGRAPHY

contents of Jefferson’s clear and concise report. He describes the situa-
tion of the mound in relation to natural features and evidences of
human occupation. He detects components of geological interest in
its materials and traces their sources. He indicates the stratigraphical
stages in the construction of the mound. He records certain significant
features of the skeletal remains. And he relates his evidence objec-
tively to current theories. No mean achievement for a busy statesman
in 1784!
    Unfortunately, this seed of a new scientific skill fell upon infertile
 soil. For a century after Jefferson, mass-excavation remained the rule
 of the day. In Chapter 2 the successive layers in the soil, in other words
 stratification, were compared to the successive pages of a book. The
 analogy is essentially a true one, and includes the corollary: a prime _
 condition of intelligibility is that the layers, like the pages, shall be
 brought to our eyes reasonably intact and in proper sequence. Of
 course, mass-excavation has not always been devoid of all merit. In a
“rudimentary stage of research, it may help to point the way and stimu-
 late advance along it. We may be grateful to Schliemann for plunging
 his spade into Troy, Tiryns, and Mycenae in the seventies of the last
 century, because he showed us what a splendid book had in fact been
 buried there; but he tore it to pieces in snatching it from the earth,
 and it took us upwards of three-quarters of a century to stick it more
 or less together again and to read it aright, with the help of cribs from
  other places. On a smaller plane, I remember my gratitude in 1944 to
 certain ardent but highly unskilled French antiquaries at Pondicherry
 in south India for scraping up a heterogeneous mass of material from
 an ancient site because, although they knew it not, their spoliation
 showed that the site contained imported (and dated) Arretine pottery
which subsequently, by more        orthodox methods, enabled us to
determine the first archaeological datum-line in pre-medieval south
India. But the accidental benefits conferred on us by our Pondicherry
friends, or even by Schliemann himself, are no longer a valid excuse
for archaeological illiteracy. To-day, the digger must learn to read his
sections, or he should be constrained from digging.
   In practice, the identification and correlation of the strata or layers
which represent the successive phases in the archaeological ‘history’
of a site is one of the principal tasks of the excavator and will occupy
the major portion of his time. So important is this task that, at the tisk
                                    59
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE    EARTH

of wearying the reader either with the excessively unfamiliar or,
more likely, with the excessively familiar, it would be wrong to
forbear from certain rather arid technical details. The task is one
which involves clear and logical thinking reinforced by experience
and infinite patience. Normally, the strata are differentiated by
variations in colour or material or content. Not infrequently, how-
ever, these variations, particularly under the bleaching influences of
an African or Asian sun, present difficulty even to the experienced eye:
so much so that more than one archaeologist who ought to know
better has denied the presence of stratigraphy (in the Western sense of
the term) on Eastern sites. “Thete was no clear stratification’, writes a
well-known American archaeologist with reference to a Palestinian
site, “during a good part of the period covered because there was no
complete destruction and rebuilding at any one time.” This, of
course, is nonsense; by ‘stratification’ the writer quoted means merely
“continuous building-levels’, oblivious of the no less important layers
which on any site may be expected to supplement and interrelate
phases of actual construction. The fact is that the observer had simply
failed to obsetve. There are in practice various ways and means of
dealing with the reluctant, sun-baked section of the Orient, or indeed
with many sections in the West. Damping, and careful scraping with
a knife or turf-cutter, will often provide the remedy by bringing out
the more subtle variations of colour or material. Observation in
different lights at different times of the day may help. In a difficult and
important section, observation may be continued over a period of
days before certainty is reached. And finally an attempt must be made
to ‘read’ the section — to discriminate, without prejudice, between
the more significant and the less significant differentiations of strata:
for example, between a mere ‘tip-line’ in a continuous accumulation
on the one hand and a substantive and emphatic occupation-level
on the other. It is not enough to identify layers, although that is, of
course, the essential first step; it is the task of the archaeologist to
interpret.them, to understand the sentence as well as to transliterate it.
   On this all-important question of interpretation something more
must be said, always with the proviso that the written word is no
sort of substitute for field-experience. The most that the professor
   1. C. C. McCown, Tell en-Nasbeh, excavated under the direction of the late
William Frederic Bade (Am, Sch. of Or. Res., 1947), i. 10.

                                     60
                            STRATIGRAPHY

can do is to offer such hints or warnings as shall create in the mind of
the student a healthy wariness and a proper regard for trifles. Let us
take once more as our theme the first and universal question. of which
something was said in the preceding chapter: What is the time-value
of archaeological strata: How long did it take, say, 4 feet of stratified
deposit to accumulate? A very searching and important question, well
worthy of the most careful consideration: if we could always answer
it, half our battle would be won.
  Reference has already been made to a famous lead which geology
has given us by the recognition of the varved clavs of Sweden (and
elsewhere) as the annual deposits of the retreating ice, and as the
time-table, therefore, of a related human phase. But it is rarely, in all
conscience, that geology deals with us so straightforwardly; whilst
man-made strata are capable of every sort of perversity. Some of
them, indeed, are of no chronological import whatsoever, and, as in-
structive disturbers of all faith, these nonentities shal] be considered first.
   It has been my practice, from time to time, to persuade my students
towards the end of the day’s work to cut a section through the dump
which is the outcome of their digging. They normally discover, as is
 to be expected, that the section thus cut is replete with stratification —
tip-lines, streaks of variant soil, a miscellany of the materials through
which they have been working in the course of the day. Nothing is
‘more calculated to disturb their faith in the time-significance of
stratification. Here, in front of them, is the variegated accumulation
of a few hours; how is that to be reconciled with the interpretation
of the adjacent strata below ground in terms of centuries?
   In theory the answer is difficult, in practice it is usually easy. It will
often be found that certain of the strata cease towards one end or both,
in such a fashion that the underlying and overlying layers unite to
clasp them and hold them within a uniform mass, as it were in
suspension — a sufficient proof of contemporaneity. A succession of
layers may join up laterally, like fingers extended from the palm of
the hand, essentially integral therefore with one another in substance
and date. Very rarely do deposits of this sort consistently ape a pro-
longed and systematic accumulation. On the other hand, they present
a warning: a selected portion of them may be found to simulate a
consistent and logical sequence, and so serve to point the danger of
argument from small sections. Fig. 8 shows a problem of this kind,
                                      6I
                    ARCHAEOLOGY                               FROM          THE        EARTH

solved on the right by an extension of the section. It should in any
event be axiomatic that no chronological sequence can be regarded
as established securely on the basis of a single section.
   A good archaeological instance of the insignificance of stratification
is provided by many of the storage-pits cut by Early Iron Age farmers
round about their dwellings, particularly on the chalk-lands. After
being used for a time for the storage of farm-produce, these pits were
liable to ‘turn sour’ and were summarily filled up with any material



                                                                                                 "                Oat
                    o           ST            NAS       See        Wy       &          Se                afte.            ws
wis, Sy                   Win            oD                                       o             —_                  Me
               Aw                         x                                                                           =



aa              a,              ie                  =                   S         Ah       Qa   airs    =        Se aaa
                    We   oF                   . We.                Ss   we        z    r        Re     e OW
af,       GS
                                     =            PLelts           pe
                    zs                        .


MMMM                             SAL
VATED     LLL            LEE         (6)
                                              eS
                                               se

Riker          ens Oe ee) Ss                                        UE          Bs33 7 eS an
SCT                       EEA                                 OW AA                                  NVABAw
pees erent nese atok a                                              a
Fig. 8. Section illustrating (a-B) an apparent succession of strata (3-7), shown
by an extension of the cutting (B-c) to have been deposited simultaneously

which happened to be nearby. The result is often a strikingly varie-
gated filling, of which the stratification bears no relation to time-
sequence. In other words, the first rule about stratification is that there
is no invariable rule.
   The opposite danger to the over-emphasis of what may be called
‘accidental’ and contemporary features is the under-emphasis of time-
values: the assumption that a succession of strata have accumulated
continuously whereas in fact they represent an intermittent growth,
with one or more time-gaps. Thus the original excavator of Gezer in
Palestine in 1902-9 hopelessly telescoped the Iron Age chronology of
Palestine through a failure to recognize a gap of some five centuries
in the occupation of his site. The mistake was gradually rectified,
years later, by the evidence of other excavations, but for a time it

                                                              62
                           STRATIGRAPHY

completely upset the dating of these centuries in Palestinian archae-
ology. How is a misjudgement of this sort to be prevented? This
question is manifestly important and deserves careful consideration.
   There is no single answer to the question, but at least two criteria
are feasible, and either or both must be considered in the interpreta-
tion of a section illustrating more than one cultural phase.
   The first criterion is the nature of the soil at the point of junction
between two cultures. An interruption in the occupation may here
be represented by a layer of wind-blown or water-borne sand, or by
the debris of turf or other vegetation. On a Dorset site, a dark layer
separated the Early Bronze Age from the Early Iron Age, and this
dark stratum was diagnosed on analysis as ‘brown-earth soil devel-
oped on a subsoil rich in chalk. It evidently means a gap in the occu-
Sation and a covering of the hill with woods’ - in fact, a gap of a
thousand years or more. A mere 4 or 5 inches of brown soil, com-
pressed for more than twenty centuries beneath a rising canopy of
trampled earth tell us all that, and hint at changes of climate and water-
table which for a thousand years diverted family-life to more homely
lowlands. A subtler example comes from Hadrian’s Wall, from the
filling found by Mr Gerald Simpson and Professor Ian Richmond
in the ditch of the Vallum where it was locally superseded by the
Roman fort at Birdoswald, in Cumberland. The problem was to
ascertain how long the Vallum ditch was open at this point before
the fort was built over it, and investigation was therefore made on a
vertical section of the material now filling the ditch. The result, as
reported by Dr Kathleen Blackburn, of the Department of Botany
in King’s College, Newcastle upon Tyne, settled the matter and is
worth quoting. It is as follows:
  Above the yellow silt of which the bottom (of the filling) was com-
posed were deposits of peat, which varied in thickness in different sec-
tions and were obviously composed of lumps of peat put in by hand...,
An investigation of the material from the floor of the ditch showed little
organic matter, and no traces of the dark coloration which is the usual
product of organic decay. What little remains were present consisted
very largely of weed seeds: the majority of these were of the Knot-grass
Polyponum aviculera), but examples were also found of Chickweed
Stella media) and of a buttercup, which was probably Ranunculus acris.
These seeds were in perfect preservation, probably due to the preserving
                                   63
              ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE   EARTH

action of the water draining from the peat immediately above. Such a
flora as these seeds suggest is one which would only be found on newly-
disturbed ground. From this, and from the absence of organic remains,
I think we may assume that the ditch could only have been open a year
or two before the re-filling with the peat.?

The ditch of the Vallum was therefore deliberately blotted out of
existence here (for the accommodation or extension of the fort)
almost immediately after its creation - a conclusion of revealing
lucidity and of a notable importance in the historical diagnosis of
the frontier-system. Similar evidence was recovered nearby from the
ditch of the Turf Wall where it underlay the fort, showing that the
fort was built across it with no appreciable intervening period — again
a ‘historical’ inference of the highest value.
   Even without analysis, careful observation under favourable con-
ditions may reduce stratification to terms of a precise chronology,
occasionally comparable with that of the famous varved clays. Two
examples, one from England and one from Iraq, have been cited
above (p. 45); and time-gaps and even time-spans may thus on occa-
sion be identified in a number of ways, provided by the close observa-
tion of weather-worn or overgrown surfaces and, above all, by soil-
analysis. But suitable phenomena or facilities are not always present —
though the latter at least should be available to a modern excavation.
There is, in any event, another approach to the problem, and the
best way to describe it is by illustration.
   In 1947 I was digging a town-site on the Mysore plateau in south
India, in the vicinity of an undated Iron Age megalithic cemetery,
with a view to the correlation of the culture of the cemetery with one
or other of the phases of the town. In fact, the sections through the
town-site revealed three successive and quite different cultures, of |
which the middle one was that of the cemetery. For the understanding
of the sequel I must burden you with names. The topmost culture
was known as ‘Andhra’, from the name of a local kingdom, the
middle culture as ‘Megalithic’, since it was also that of the local mega-
lithic tombs, and the lowest as ‘Stone Axe’, from its characteristic
product. Of the three, the only datable culture was the Andhra, which
  1. Trans. Cumberland and Westmorland Ant. Soc. (N.S.), xxix (Kendal, 1929),
308.

                                    64
                           STRATIGRAPHY

could be ascribed mainly to the first century A.D. The problem was to
relate the other two cultures to this and so, for the first time, to obtain
some sort of chronology for them.
   For this purpose it was obviously of cardinal importance to ascer-
tain whether the three cultures formed a continuous succession or
whether they were divided from one another by time-gaps. Examina-
tion of the sections failed to reveal any intervening weathered or
exposed. surfaces; and indeed, had there been such surfaces, laboratory
 facilities for their analysis were not available in India. Accordingly,
recourse was had to other types of data. In one instance, chance
played happily into our hands: a pot-burial of the distinctive Stone
Axe type was found inserted into the lowest overlying stratum of the
megalithic culture, implying a co-occupation by the two cultures at
this point. But even without so incontrovertible a demonstration of
continuity, the matter was set at rest by what I may call the actuarial
analysis of our sections. Such actuarial analyses should, in my view,
be made more frequently than they are, and the Mysore example may
therefore be described in some detail. Briefly, the method was this.
  In an extensive cutting, chosen as free from complication in the
form of intrusive pits or structures, a careful register was kept, layer
by layer, of every potsherd found, and the results were tabulated
(Figs. 9-10 and Pl. 3). Fortunately the fabric and technique used by
‘the three cultures were so distinctive from one another that their
 classification was beyond doubt; the pottery of the Stone Axe people
 being coarse, hand-made stuff, that of the Megalithic folk being a
 polished and beautiful black and brown and turned slowly if at all,
 that of the Andhra at the top being turned more mechanically on a
 fast wheel and otherwise elaborated with glaze and patterning. Now
 the table shows a substantial overlap, running through three succes-
  sive layers, between the Stone Axe and the Megalithic series, fol-
 lowed by a similar overlap between the Megalithic and the Andhra
 series. In estimating the significance of these very substantial overlaps,
 due allowance must be made for the fact that, from a variety of causes,
 the subsoil is always in a state of less or greater movement. Animal
 and vegetable life, and climate, are constantly at work in it. Relics of
 one stratum are always liable to find their way sporadically into
 another and to confuse our exact minds. But the thrusting-upwards
 respectively of 239 and 219 sherds from one culture into the next
    Cc                                65
                 ARCHAEOLOGY                    FROM    THE   EARTH

above it in this single section is not to be thus lightly dismissed. The
only acceptable explanation is that on neither occasion did the arrival
of the newer culture on the site involve the immediate extinction of

                                                                              SOUTH-BEST


                  NORTH-EAST


                           we   wg     Wh 3 <
                                  wm



  ANDHRA
    CULTURE


                  1

. MEGALITHIC      {                             —
    CULTU! RE     H                    STONE-COURSE Ay    +       ee          ee
                  }      7 aeae aoa    =   mM            wy ee
                                                    + ws Ly  I               Sisal
                                                                       YSTIE i
                 le  IN aoe ae                                 Sad ee              Tre!
                  oe KG bos                                     Uf is
                                                                Bou
                                                                  gL
                                                                   Y;
                                                                    aus
                                                                      2”
                  SKAS



                            ee
1B. STONE-AXE     &Ow
     CULTURE =     xX y
    (LATER)




                                                                              -3
                                                                              y oe
1A. STONE-AXE     Se                                                           co
    CULTURE       MGao >                                                           TINGS
    eal) |ce      i WA
                     aGRcE        NWAAl




Fig.9.Section from Brahmiagiti, Mysore State, India, showing three cultural
                           phases with overlaps

the older: in other words, that the cultural sequence was continuous
and, in our estimate of its chronology in relation to the fixed point
at the top, we can ignore the possibility of unknown factors arising
                                                66                        :
                                     STRATIGRAPHY
RS

              I.          Il.                                   _It.
 Layer | Stone Axe | Megalithic                                Andhra
     ae ,                                 .    52, mecadine I‘yellow-painted sherd
     |                                         384, including
                                                       ro yellow-painted sherds
      |                                       /480,  including 68yellow-painted and
                                                 1 rouletted sherd
      3a                                       67
      4       |                      36        269, including $1 yellow-painted sherds
      5                              68        219, including to yellow-painted sherds*
      6            26               115        405, including 7 yellow-painted sherds

      7            B3)   dy!       LACT
      8           Igo               199?

      8a           36          |

      8b      | 89

      9           aly
      9a          196

     10            46                                                                   =

     II            33
     2            23
     13            26
     I4            48
     14a           15
     15           198                                                                Toa

     16             i                                    "                           ine

     17            45                                                                   ie
es 8          &    25          |

     19       | 328°.          |
1.        In adjacent cuttings, layers equating with 5 and 6 of Br. 21, i.e. the lowest
‘Andhra’ levels, produced 7 sherds of rouletted wate.                     f
  2. In an adjacent cutting, the layer equating with this contained an urn-
burial of the ‘Stone Axe’ culture:       pid’                                 :
   3. Including 18 ‘Early Painted’ and 6 incised sherds of the IA culture, which
this layer represents.
  Fig. 10. Tabulation of sherds representing the three cultures at Brahmagiri
                                  (See Fig. 9)
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

from interruptions in the occupation. We are here in no danget of
repeating the disastrous oversight of the excavator of Gezer (p. 62).
Details of this specific Mysore example do not concern us; it will
suffice to observe that the overlap thus demonstrated between the
megalithic culture and the overlying first-century culture proved that
the megalithic tombs were there in use until the first century, and so
provided the first firm date for this very abundant category of south
Indian structures.
   Well, there are examples of various kinds of stratigraphical evi-
dence: of layers that are contemporary with one another, layers that
are separated by greater or lesser time-intervals, layers that have
accumulated in unbroken succession. The reading of a section is the
reading of a language that can only be learned by demonstration and
experience. A word of advice to the student. However practised, do
not read too hastily. Be your own devil’s advocate before passing
judgement. And, wherever possible, discuss your diagnosis with others
— with colleagues, with pupils, with your foreman. (“The testimony
of one person is no testimony’, declares Hywel Dda, the wise Welsh
law-giver.) Be humble. Do not ignore the opinion of the uninstructed.
‘Everyone knows as much as the savant. The walls of rude minds are
scrawled all over with facts, with thoughts.’ Emerson said so, and he
‘was right. Even if you do not accept the views of those you question,
the mere act of questioning is at the same time a restraint and a
stimulus.
   We turn now from interpretation to record. But first reference
must be made to a method of recording that not long ago was wide-
‘spread in the East and may in fact still survive there. If so, it is the
‘survival of a fantastic and monstrous device evolved in the alluvial
plains of the great river valleys of Egypt and Mesopotamia as a sub-
“stitute for exact observation in ill-controlled ‘mass excavations’. Its'
origin is probably to be found in Petrie’s belief that on an Egyptian
-town-site it was possible to equate the accumulation of material with
a specific time-scale (p. 45). The validity of this ‘principle’ was
-doubtful and dangerous enough in its original specialized context;
it has no place whatsoever in the general technique of modern field-
archaeology. Yet in India, for example, as recently as 1944 it was still
zthe only method known.                                              |
   Briefly, it consisted of the mechanical recording of every object
                                    68
                           STRATIGRAPHY

and structure in relation to a fixed bench-level. Thus in the excava-
tions at the great prehistoric city of Mohenjo-daro in the Indus valley,
In 1927-31, the records were prepared from bench-levels, in one
area ‘178-7 ft. above mean sea-level’ and in another ‘1809 ft. above
sea-level’, the assumption being that all objects and structures at the
same level below (or above) datum line were in the same ‘stratum’,
i.e. contemporary with one another! I have described this system as
‘incredible’ and I repeat the description. So incredible is it, and yet so
widespread, that the excavator’s own proud account of it may be
repeated. He says:
   In order that our deep digging might be satisfactorily carried out, an
extensive system of levelling was necessary. The levels of every building
and of every wall were therefore taken, especial attention being paid to
door-sills and pavements as being for purposes of stratification the most
important parts of a building. In addition, both the locus and level of
every object found, whether it was regarded at the time as important or
not, were noted in order not only to correlate each object with the build-
ing in which it was found, but also to facilitate the study of the develop-
ment of art and technique. As some thousands of objects were unearthed
in the sections that we excavated, it may be thought that this procedure
was unnecessarily laborious. This, however, was not the case. The level-
ling instruments were set up early in the morning and remained in
position all day; and it was quite a simple matter to take the level of
each object directly it appeared.

  It was, however, admitted that this method was not wholly free
from complexity; that there were
limitations to the deductions to be drawn from the levels at which
objects are found. For instance, if a jar or a seal lies either below or at
some distance above a pavement or door-sill, it is difficult to decide to
what period it belongs. We, therefore adopted the rule that all objects
found in or near the foundations of a building be assigned to the period
of that building rather than to the previous phase, unless they actually
rested on the remains of a pavement of earlier date; for it is more than
probable that they were dropped or left behind when the foundations
were being made.

The chapters on the pottery and other finds in the excavator’s subse-
juent report include page after page of elaborate but insignificant
ables based on this procedure.
                                   69
                ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

   In other words, be it repeated, the so-called ‘stratification’ of the
 Indus valley civilization, one of the major civilizations of the ancient
 world, was dominated, not by local observation, but by the level
 of the sea nearly 300 miles away! This mechanical classification can
 only be categorized as the very parody of scientific method. It bears
 little more relationship to scientific archaeology than astrology bears
 to astronomy.
    To appreciate its utter absurdity, we need only recall that, except
 perhaps at the earliest level of a site (hardly ever adequately explored),
 an ancient city in the East is never level. Very rarely is a city com-
 pletely destroyed and completely rebuilt at one moment and at one
 horizon, Normally, a house is reconstructed or replaced as it decays,
 or at the whim of its owner. The town as 2 whole is constantly in a
 state of differential destruction and construction. Individual building-
‘sites rise above their neighbours; the town-site itself rises and assumes
 the contour of a hill; buildings on its slopes are contemporary with
 buildings on its summit. A doorway or a potsherd may be found at
 one spot 10 feet below a doorway or a potsherd of precisely the same
date at another spot. Such differences, of vital importance to the
scientific interpretation of the site, are ironed out and obliterated by
the bench-level. If it be necessary to illustrate further the grievous
fallacy of this method, two diagrams (Fig. 11) may serve. They are
self-explanatory.
   Yet, for all the obvious absurdity of the datum-line system just
described, the substitution of so-called ‘levels’ - whether abstract
building levels or purely arbitrary depth-lines — for factual stratifica-
tion dies hard. It recurs, for example, in a revised edition (1950) of A
Manual ofArchaeological Field Methods prepared by a leading American
university. There, as sturdily as ever, thrives the old outworn system,
with its mechanical ‘unit-levels’, governed not by changes of soil but
by ‘the length of the shovel-blade (6 to 12 inches)’.1 True the word
‘stratification’ is not unknown to the authors. It represents a pheno-
menon, they admit, which ‘may be visible in the walls of the excava-
tion’; but, we are assured, “any stratigraphy of artifact types and
   1. It may be noted in passing that mechanical “foot-levels’ were used as long
 ago as 1865 by W. Pengelly, F.R.S., in the excavation of Kent’s Cavern at
 Torquay. See his interesting MS. Journal in the possession of the Royal Society.
 But it is sad to find the same outworn method advocated by a distinguished
 university in 1950.
                                       7O
                              STRATIGRAPHY

animal bones will appear after a study has been made and need not
bother the excavator in the field’ [sic]. The notion of peeling off the
successive strata in conformity with their proper bed-lines, and thus
ensuring the accurate isolation of structural phases and relevant arti-
facts, is not even considered.
  Enough of criticism; let us turn to a more positive aspect of the
matter. The preparation for the record of the section begins with
the first spadeful dug. From the outset, the strata are carefully ob-
served, distinguished, and labelled as the work proceeds. It is, of
                                                       E x AMPLE      OF       4
                                                  FALSE “STRATIFICATION
                                                      BY LEVELLING




                                                                   PRECINCT WALL
                                                                   OF BUDDHIST
                                                                   MONASTERY




       3RD MILLENIUM   B.C.          1910 A.D.            282 CENTURY       A.D.


 Fig. 11. Diagrams illustrating the stratification of a city-mound (below) and
             the fallacy of recording by mechanical levels (above)

course, as the work proceeds that ‘finds’ are isolated and recorded,
and their record is necessarily integral with that of the strata from
which they are derived. The supervisor must therefore make up his
mind clearly from moment to moment as to the limits and nomen-
clature of his strata; and his decisions, whether ultimately approved
or modified, must be susceptible to accurate delineation, if only for
                                      71
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

 the subsequent correlation of his ‘finds’. In other words, both he and
 the spectator or the future reader must know exactly what he thinks
 he is doing.
    I have found in practice that there is only one foolproof method of
 ensuring this. The successive layers must be defined and clearly
 labelled as they come to light. By labelling I meant the actual pinning
 of a label by a nail or peg into the side of the trench in (preferably on
 the top edge of) each layer. The label bears the number of the layer
 within a circle (I reserve encircled numbers for this purpose, to avoid
 all risk of confusion with numbers having other connotations), sup-
 plemented by a name: for example ‘lower brown’, ‘red clay’,
 ‘porridge’ — it matters not what, so long as a distinctive word or
 phrase is used to emphasize and cross-check the differentiation.
 Numbers may on occasion be erroneously duplicated, but the addi-
‘tion of a name avoids risk of confusion. And incidentally the use of a
 name tends to give individuality to a layer and helps the mind in a
 pictorial reconstruction of the section.
    Accordingly, I like to see my sections plastered from head to foot
 with orderly arrays of labels (PI. 3), which serve three main purposes:
 they demand clear and decisive thought on the part of the supervisor
 who invents them, they show on the ground and on the drawing
 precisely what his small-find labels mean, and they make it possible
 for the director or a substitute-supervisor to understand at once the
 diagnosis up to date. Incidentally, they enable that diagnosis to be
 checked —- always with the proviso that any material alteration in it
 will probably mean either a relabelling of the relevant ‘finds’ or at
 least a recording of the original as well as the corrected diagnosis.
 As a general guide to the young, it is wiser to insist upon the over-
 stratification than the under-stratification of a section in the first
 instance: it is easy subsequently to group layers and their contents”
 but it will never be safe to subdivide them.                              |
    Now a word as to systems of numbering. Layers or strata it is
 obviously necessary to number downwards from the top of a cutting,
 so that the numbers are mostly in the reverse order of accumulation,
  the latest (topmost) layer being layer 1. This somewhat illogical
  procedure is unavoidable since it is necessary to give layer-numbers
  to small-finds as they come to light, without waiting for the com-
  pletion of the section. The same disability does not apply to cultures,
                                    72
                          STRATIGRAPHY

which emerge as recognizable entities at a later stage of the work and
are not used for labelling purposes. Here the logical system can, and
certainly should, be followed: namely, to number the earliest culture
or phase as number I, with I, II, etc., in sequence above them.
Unfortunately, usage in this matter is chaotic. A number of Meso-
potamian and Iranian sites (Arpachiyah, Uruk, Uquair, Gawra, Giyan)
have been numbered from top to bottom, so that, for example,
Giyan V and Gawra XX are early, and Giyan I and GawraI are late.
On the other hand, Sialk VI is late, and so with Nineveh, Hissar,
Susa (new classification) and other rationally classified sites. It should
unquestionably be laid down as standard that cultures or cultural
phases are numbered (with Roman numerals) from the earliest to the
latest (Fig. 9). The only circumstances which may present difficulty to
this method is failure to reach the bottom of a site. Where this hap-
pens, the earliest phase uncovered may not in fact be the earliest on
the site, and therefore not truly its number I. Chanhu-daro in Sind
is an instance of this kind, where the excavator might justify the top-
downwards numeration, which he in fact adopted, on the plea that
the water-table stopped him from reaching and diagnosing the lower
levels. Interim reports on unfinished excavations may provide another
excuse for this procedure. But in general, the answer to the difficulty
is clear: no site should be dug unless it is sectioned and diagnosed to
the lowest level and a complete culture-sequence recovered. Water
should not normally be accepted as a bar; at Arikamedu in 1945 we
had to dig 11 feet below sea-level, and this depth we achieved, with
some difficulty it is true, but without elaborate equipment, whilst at
Mohenjo-daro in 1950 we penetrated with the help of pumps to a
depth of 10 feet below the water-level under peculiarly difficult con-
ditions, and with more time could certainly have dug lower still.
   The purist may complain that two contrary systems have here been
recommended: the numbering of layers from top to bottom, and of
cultural phases from bottom to top. In fact, there is no conflict what-
soever between the two. They are both logical and practical for their
several purposes. A nominal inconsistency is their only demerit, and
it is of a kind that only a pedant could carp at. “Do I contradict
myself?’ cries Walt Whitman; ‘Very well, then, I contradict myself!’
Or recall the words of a less blustering fellow-countryman of Whit-
man’s: ‘A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds’; and
                                    73
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE    EARTH

 when the magisterial Ralph Waldo Emerson opes his mouth let no
 dog bark.
   Our section, then, has been dug, diagnosed, and labelled. The task
 remains to record it on paper accurately and expressively. The mech-
 anism is simple enough. Categorically, the materials required are:
 squared paper, a light drawing-board (three-ply wood is useful for
 this), drawing-pins, a good HB pencil, an india-rubber, a scale-rule,
 good thin string for the datum-line, surveying-pins (‘arrows’) or
 6-inch nails, a measuring-tape, clips for fixing the tape, a 5-foot rod,
 and a plumb-bob.
   At a convenient point, generally at the top, the string is stretched
 firmly across the section and levelled either by means of a bubble-
 level or by a surveyor’s level laid on the terminal points. As usual,
 details are important. String of the best quality should be used;
‘inferior string breaks or, worse still, stretches and sags. In any case, the
 string should be supported on carefully levelled pegs at horizontal
 intervals of ten feet. Moreover, to avoid errors from stretching or
other causes, the level of the string should be checked once or twice
during the day.
   This string should be marked off in feet or metres or, better still, a
measuring-tape should be stretched (not too tightly) alongside it.
Then, at every foot or at other selected points, vertical measurements
are taken with a weighted measuring-tape above or below the datum
and are transferred by the draftsman, on the spot, to suitably squared
paper.
   As to scale, the smallest scale at which the detail of an average
section can be adequately recorded is $ inch = 1 foot (alternatively,
5 cm, = 1 m.), and this may be regarded as standard for large sections.
Whenever possible, however, the larger scale of 1 inch = 1 foot
(alternatively, 10 cm. = 1 m.) is preferable; it is more accurate, and
better lends itself to annotation.
   In the process of drawing the section, there is a common tendency _
on the part of the inexperienced draftsman to exaggerate inequalities
in the surface of a stratum, so as to obscure its general contour and           —
character. He should be reminded that, on the normal scale of 4 inch
= I foot, the picture will be one-twenty-fourth of the size of the —
original. An inequality, therefore, rising actually 2 inches above the —
average level of a stratum will, in a normal scale-drawing, vary by
                                     74.
                                                                                a
                                                                                Sutmesrp-uoyoas Jo anbruypey, *c1 “Sty
GALVILNAUsdsId                      =ATLNAOITIZLINI
                                         “D
                                         NOILDAS
                                           MOS
                                           IVWANLYN

                                                                                               he    een
                                                                                                              10S
                                                                                                              TVUN.LVvN
                                                                                                 A
                                                              PLEAD
          VL              A
                                                                                                            BWZWil;

                          MELLTIT
                                                                                                      WMD




                                               IEEE    TET
                                    ELL
          APAFOM
                                      a
                                    LEMS
                                                                                      WG
                                                                                res
                                    181d
                                                                           A
                                                                           Mf
                                                                           to
                                                                          WM/
                                                                                      Za
           “ww                                        aw                  2
           Fl o W                                     wil a           W
   rent
    STULRS Usd$2
            FS
                   OSZs
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

 only one-twelfth of an inch above the level, and so will form a nearly
 negligible break in the surface. Almost invariably the draftsman, see-
 ing the trees rather than the wood, will over-emphasize the obstacle,
 albeit that the feature is exceptional and misrepresents the general
 meaning of the layer.
    Furthermore, there is the question, not merely of the over-empha-
sis of accidental features, but of the over-emphasis or under-emphasis
of whole layers; resulting, in fact, in a permanent misinterpretation
of the section. I can best demonstrate this by. three diagrams (Fig. 12).
In diagram A, the draftsman.is assumed to have delineated the
individual strata correctly and fairly, with reference to his horizontal
datum-line. But this delineation, although indicating the presence of
strata, does little or nothing to indicate their varying character and
significance. It is an almost meaningless collection of lines - a proces-
sion of letters not yet divided into words. A more ambitious drafts-
 man may attempt to indicate something of the individuality and
 diversity of the strata, and diagram B illustrates such an attempt. This
fails in two main respects. First, the general evenness of tone through-
 out the section produces the unmeaning monotony of a sentence
spoken without inflection, and so fails largely to convey the intended
impression. The draftsman has not realized the varying significance
of the facts which he is recording; he has again failed to see the wood
for the trees. Secondly, he has not realized that his rendering is not,
or should not be, merely a transcription of accurately measured or
even accurately emphasized lines: it is, or should be, also an accurate
picture of what he sees. Not only should lines of demarcation be
transcribed from measurement, but also the size, shape, and position
of brick-bats, bones, sherds or other materials which, by their char-
acter and quantity and by their ‘angle of rest’ in the soil, combine to
indicate the nature of a stratum and the method of its accumulation.
An intelligently drawn section is far more than a diagram; it is, as I
say, a picture, representing not merely the skeleton but also something
of the vital flesh and blood of its subject. Diagram C is diagram B
corrected in this sense.
   It must be confessed that a well-drawn, i.e. intelligently recorded,
section is relatively a rarity. But it is nevertheless a basic necessity of
modern field-work. The published sections are the readiest index of
the value of an excavation-report
                                    76
                                STRATIGRAPHY

   In these diagrams, and elsewhere, I have used certain symbols for
the easy conventional representation of different types of soil or
deposit. They have no special merit but are reasonably expressive.
Some measure of standardization in the choice of symbols would be
useful but has not yet been attempted in Britain. (See, however,
Fig. 13.)

                          SYMBOLS
                   Be Reso                   TONS

EURNT BRICKS
                                                               YELLS yy
                                                               MLLLLLILSED
                                           ASH                 UM iiss
                                                               VA

MUD     BRICKS                             MUDDY BANDS




Loose EARTH        % WA W%                 POTSHERDS           3S
with GRAVEL ete. Iy FIZ
LOOSE    EARTH     =      ~                GRAVEL              os
                       ths SM                                  eo




                   Y             WY
COMPACT    EARTH                           SAND
                                  ——




LOOSE     CLAY                             BRICKBATS    etc.




                                                                    |Hi
                                                               I
COMPACT     CLAY                           SURFACE HUMUS |
                                                                            aeRae



  Fig. 13. Chart of symbols adopted by the Archaeological Survey of India
               ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM           THE   EARTH

   Before leaving the delineation of sections, reference must be made
to an alternative method which was occasionally (though not nor-
mally) used long ago by Pitt Rivers, and has from time to time found
favour with others, amongst whom Dr Gerhard Bersu is notable
(Fig. 14). This may be called the ‘pictorial’ method in a sense some~-
what different from that in which I have used “picture’ in preceding
paragraphs. The strata are not outlined (as in Fig. 12) but are, to a
greater or less extent, differentiated from one another by what may

      W               P59                               P40         E




                                                     lelt: i
                                                   : a
                                           iy 1a: 1
                       eeCA        Aaw
                               ENS ha es      feiden
                ed SERS
                  be          RET
                                      I) Rr Beats

       Fig. 14. ‘Pictorial’? method of section-drawing. After G. Bersu

be called a sort of chromatic shading. The result is an impression of the
section, more akin to a photograph than to a diagram. The different
“tones’ are not consistently framed or demarcated, nor are they
numbered.
  Granted that, in the hands of an artist, this impressionistic tech-
nique has merits, it is equally plain that in the hands of one who is a
mere delineator rather than an artist chaos will prevail. A technique
which is beyond the reach of most excavators is, on that ground
alone, ruled out where a workable alternative exists. The impres-
sionistic technique cannot be defended on the grounds that it is “less
conventional’; in its own fashion, it is no less conventional than the
linear technique, only, it is a different convention. And it has this
crowning disadvantage: it lends itself to nebulousness, to a blurring
of detail and a lack of precision in diagnosis. Even some of Dr Bersu’s
skilful drawings show this, and a less skilful performer is liable to be
utterly lost. This is a grave defect. If I have tried to emphasize one
thing more than another it is the need for considered precision in our
                                      78
                           STRATIGRAPHY

work. Any medium or convention which is likely to encourage
woolly thinking is to be deprecated: and, save at its rare best, the
impressionistic technique is woolly. I do not commend it to the
average worker.
   One more detail. It is useful, in the drawing of a large section, to
include a human figure as well as a linear scale. The figure provides
an effortless indication of approximate size, and the saving of effort
on the part-of the reader is worth a little extra effort on the part of the
draftsman.
                             CHAPTER      §

          The Layout of an Excavation

An ill-considered excavation is liable to develop into a chaos of pits
and trenches, difficult to supervise and record, and often embarrassed
by intrusive spoil-tips that eventually either control the work or are
in a constant and costly process of secondary removal. On approaching
an excavation, the trained observer can at a glance evaluate its effici-
ency. It is an axiom that an untidy excavation is a bad one, whether
the untidiness reside in the general layout or in detailed execution.
The guiding principles are not difficult: they are ‘Have a plan’, a
carefully thought-out scheme, and execute it in orderly fashion.
   Two contrasted examples will illustrate this. The first (Pl. 4a) is an
official photograph of a well-known excavation in the East, conducted
by an archaeologist of considerable repute and long field-experience.
Nevertheless,   a mere novice might guess, and guess correctly, that
chaos reigns. Look at the crowded workmen, picking and shovelling
tumultuously in all directions; the absence of a supervisor or indeed
of any possibility of supervision; the absence also of ‘small-find’ or
pottery receptacles; and of course a complete lack of any systematic
identification of strata. Needless to say, the subsequent report faith-
fully reflected this concentrated confusion.
  The second illustration (Pl. 4b), from the same subcontinent, un-
blushingly represents an excavation of my own, on the principle that
the professor may properly be expected to practise. It shows a site
neatly parcelled out in readily controllable areas; small groups of
workmen are directed by supervisors (distinguishable in the photo-
graph by their sun-helmets); the basket-carriers are working in
orderly procession along clear pathways; and in the middle distance
on the right, the survey-party is conveniently at work at a table
shaded by an essential umbrella. The subsequent analysis and detailed
publication of this excavation was a relatively easy task. For it is not
the least of the merits of orderly field-work that it is easy. Every man
knows what he is doing, and records are almost inevitably clear and
sensible, the considered product of several pairs of critical eyes,
                                   80
              THE    LAYOUT      OF        AN   EXCAVATION

   Plan your work, then, and methodically pursue your plan. True,
there must always be an element of chance and of opportunism in an
excavation, however carefully planned. But scientific digging is not
on that account a gamble. The experienced excavator, who thinks
before he digs, succeeds in reaching his objective in a majority of
cases.
   The nature of the plan necessarily depends upon the character and
needs of the site. For purposes of discussion, we may here classify our
problem under three categories: trial-trenching or sondages, area-
excavation, and what I shall call substantive trenching. The excava-
tion of burials will be considered separately (p. 113), and caves, in
view of the slightness of my experience in their exploration, I propose
to omit altogether; they require a monograph by one who knows.

             (i) TRIAL-TRENCHING OR “SONDAGES’
The old practice of cutting trial-trenches, of making sondages, as a
preliminary to, or even in lieu of, area-excavation was frequently a
substitute for intelligent thinking and clear aiming. It was to a large
extent ‘shooting into the brown’ on the off-chance of bringing down
a bird. Trial-trenches rarely prove anything, save of the most general
kind. I have in mind a long and wide trial-trench cut by an eminent
archaeologist across a famous town-site without apparent result;
whilst subsequent systematic excavation, initiated on an altogether
different basis,proved that the trench had in fact passed through and
utterly failed to reveal a building of unique character. The answer on
a site of that kind is, not a trial-trench, but a methodical area-excava-
tion, which can always be discontinued if unproductive but at least
reveals coherently within the area selected.
   Trenches in general, save of the somewhat special ‘substantive’
kind described below (p. 86), are bad for more than one reason. They
‘mess up’ a site. Unless very wide (when they are, in effect, cumber-
some area-excavations) they are liable at any considerable depth to
become excessively confined and difficult to work in, their stratifica-
tion cannot be viewed comprehensively and at adequate range, and,
above all, lateral enlargement complicates the record to an extent
which endangers its accuracy. At Maiden Castle in Dorset I dug the
northern portal of the eastern entrance in 1935 by trenching, and can
                                      81
                  ARCHAEOLOGY      FROM    THE    EARTH

still recall the appalling complexity of my record as the work pro-
ceeded and my trenches widened. In the following year I dug the
southern portal as an area by the ‘square’ method, to be described
below, and both excavation and record developed easily side by side,
without risk of error and without headache.
   On the other hand, prejudice against trenching cannot be extended
to sites where the preliminary problem is solely and simply to search
for a superficially invisible structure. If a line of ancient entrench-
ments, for example, is thought to have passed somewhere through
a certain field, a trial-trench across the field is the obvious method of
proving or disproving the theory, and it would be pedantry to
protest. The example of Napoleon III’s Colonel Stoffel in this respect
has already been cited (p. 23). The principle here advocated is that
trenching should be employed, not as a normal method, but only
when very special circumstances demand it. Too often does it form
the basis of an excavation to which other methods are more suitable.

                       (ii) AREA-EXCAVATION
Ifa site is known to have been occupied, an area-excavation, not a trial-
trench, is usually the effective answer. But let us first consider the
pre-requisites.
  An area-excavation must be:
  (a) conveniently and clearly subdivisible for record and control;
  (b) capable of easy, progressive expansion in any direction without
      breaking down or impairing the preliminary datum-lines;
  (c) capable of preserving for constant reference at a maximum
      number of points complete vertical sections until the last phase
      of the excavation;
  (d) capable, ultimately, of easy integration into a continuously ex-
      posed regional excavation;
  (e) readily accessible to all points for the removal of soil, without
      hindrance from intervening cuttings or traffic across excavated
       surfaces; and
  (f) sufficiently open to the sky to ensure the easy inspection of
      well-lighted sections at all required depths.
                                   82
               THE   LAYOUT      OF     AN   EXCAVATION

   Only one type of layout normally supplies all these needs: namely,
a layout based upon a square (PI. 5). A series of squares, a grid, dug so
that a balk is left between each pair of adjacent squares until the ex-
treme end of the work, supplies all the six pre-requisites. The indi-
vidual square is a clearly defined sub-unit for record and supervision;
supplementary squares can be added in any direction in accordance
with developing needs, without affecting any previous datum; the
supervisor retains in each square (until the end of the work) a com-
plete section on all four sides of him, together with such additional
sections or part-sections as he may care to add within the compass of
the square; the stratification of adjacent squares, and therefore accu-
mulatively of the whole site, can easily be correlated and recorded
along a number of arterial lines, so that ultimately the barriers be-
tween the squares can be removed without loss of vertical evidence
and the whole plan laid bare, level by level; the barriers or balks pro-
vide ready paths of access to the various squares, and from them to
the spoil-dumps; and the squares, unlike most trenches, are suffici-
ently spacious to let in ample light and to provide elbow-room for
interpretation and record.
   Experience shows that in soils of average stability the horizontal
dimensions of a square should approximately equal its anticipated
maximum depth. Thus, if it is intended to dig to a depth approaching
20 feet, the square should be laid out with 20-foot sides. This ratio
allows for the necessary stairs and balks. Similarly, a 30-foot square
can be dug to a depth of 30 feet, whilst a depth of 10 feet or less (the
normal range in Great Britain) demands only a 10-foot square. The
smaller the superficial area of the square in relation to its depth the
better, provided always that there is ample light and working-room.
With a due regard to these factors, a 10-foot square may be regarded
as the minimum sub-unit.
   These measurements include provision for the balks between
squares. In most soils a balk 3 feet wide will carry any amount of
traffic, and that width may therefore be regarded as standard on all
but the shallowest sites. (For 10-foot squares a 2-foot balk is usually
adequate.) The 3-foot balk implies that the string marking the top
edge of the actual cutting is 13 feet within the perimeter of each
square as pegged out; for example, the actual cutting of a 20-foot
square will be 17 feet square, and of a 30-foot square it will be 27 feet.
                                   83
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

Similarly a 1o-foot square with 2-foot balks will be cut with 8-foot
sides.
  The pegged squares will form the basis of record and survey, and
the supervisor must ensure their initial exactitude; otherwise, all sorts
of complications and errors will arise. At each corner of the square
a strong peg, not less than 14 inches square in scantling and 1 foot
3 inches long, with one end pointed, is firmly driven into the ground,
its faces set diagonally to the proposed square; but the exact corner-
point is marked by a 2-inch nail driven vertically into the top of the
peg and left projecting about an inch for the occasional affixture of
string or measuring-tape in connexion with survey. On one occasion,
where the surface-soil was too soft to hold the corner pegs with com-
plete security, I found it worth while to have them set in concrete,
so important are they to the accuracy of the work.
   From these fixed points, the marking out of the actual cutting
with string as a guide to the diggers, allowing for the necessary balk
(see above), is a simple secondary operation.
   The squares‘thus pegged out are conveniently named by means of
letters in one direction (say, east to west) and by numbers in the other
direction (say, north to south). They will thus be known individually
as A, A2, A3, etc.; Br, Bz, etc. The appropriate designation must be
painted clearly on the nearest face of each of the four corner-pegs,
which for this purpose have been set diagonally in the ground. Thus
a peg set at the junction of four squares will have a different designa-
tion on each face; e.g. Ar, A2, Br, B2. The need for clear and abun-
dant labelling cannot be over-emphasized if error is to be eliminated
from the records, particularly on a large excavation.
   In the actual digging of a square, a principle of universal application
in archaeological excavation may be stressed: namely, the use of the
control-pit. This is the supervisor’s own special charge, and upon it the
accuracy of the general digging in large measure depends. It is a small
cutting, about 2} feet square, cut by the supervisor himself or by a
trained man under his eye, to a depth of 14-2 feet lower than the
average level of the work. Its purpose is to enable the supervisor, with
a minimum disturbance of the strata, to anticipate the nature and
probable vertical extent of the layers which are being cleared by his
main gang. It is a glimpse into the future of his stratigraphical work.
Without it, neither the supervisor nor his diggers, working blindly
                                    84
                THE    LAYOUT       OF     AN   EXCAVATION

- from the top, can avoid the confusion of the lower part of one stratum
  with the upper part of the next below it. In other words, stratification
  must, by its nature, always be controlled from the side, i.e. from the
 side of the control pit, since it obviously cannot be controlled pro-
 phetically from the top: vertical digging first, horizontal digging afterwards,
 must be the rule. Control-pits must be sufficiently numerous to min-
 imize risks arising from the unevenness or interruption of strata, and
 sufficiently small in area to restrict the confusion of evidence which is
 inherent in their exploratory nature. The control-pit is indeed a means
 of concentrating errors which would otherwise be spread over the
 whole area. Its evidence in detail must be used with proportionate
 circumspection.
   And, above all, constant reference must be made to the stratifica-
 tion revealed by the sides of the square as the digging proceeds. The
 four sides must be constantly correlated with one another. Any
 marked discrepancy between them, or between the equivalent sections
 in adjacent squares, must be considered and an explanation sought.
 During the search for an explanation, the supervisor may find it
 desirable to suspend or restrict the actual digging.
   This raises a further point, again of universal application. In view
of the occasional necessity for a temporary suspension of digging in
one square or another, the director of an excavation must always have
in readiness a sufficiency of “reserve-jobs’ to mect contingencies of
this kind. Such reserve-jobs may include the removal of unimportant
top-soil from a new square, or the reinforcement of a gang engaged
elsewhere upon the digging of a deep stratum. Remember that, when
a gang stops digging, from two to six workpeople - pick-man,
shovel-man     and, in the East, probably four basket-carriers - are
thrown out of action. And idleness is both costly and infectious.
   In the last three paragraphs matters have been dealt with which are
not peculiar to the ‘square’, although they are liable to present them-
selves on a busy area-dig in an acute form. I turn now to the actual
recording of the square.
   Be it repeated that a great merit of the ‘square’ method is that it
localizes both control and record. The supervisor’s responsibilities
are clearly defined, and the area covered by his field note-book is
precise. The basis of his record is the careful identification, embodied
in an accurate measured drawing, of the stratigraphy of each of the
                                      85
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE    EARTH

four sides of his square and of such supplementary sections as may be
required. As in all excavations, the layers are demarcated and labelled
with a serial number whilst the excavation proceeds (see p. 72). Each
side of the square is also labelled with its compass-point, which is
added to the index-number of the square: ¢.g. B3N indicates the
northern side of square B3. And each side is carefully measured and
drawn to a minimum scale of } inch to 1 foot, or to a maximum scale
of r inch to 1 foot, or the metric equivalents (see p. 74). A sketch (or
even measured) section should also be included in the notebook; and
reference should be made to relevant sections not so included.
   In the process of excavation, it may be found convenient sometimes
to work diagonally across the square; for instance, if diagonal walls
are found, since sections at right angles to the line of a wall are neces-
sary to avoid a distortion of the relevant strata. An example is illus-
trated in Pl. 4b, where diagonal balks can be seen within the grid~
squares. In such cases, the diagonal section must of course be corre-
lated with the side-sections and, if necessary, drawn separately.
   All ‘finds’ will be recorded by strata with reference to the nearest
recorded section, normally with the nearest side of the square. Struc-
tures, pits, or important objects, together with the position of all -
measured sections, will be planned carefully in the supervisor's note-
book in relation to the four surveyed corner-pegs of the square.
‘Finds’ will be classified in the notebook by serial numbers, section-
label, stratum, and sketch (see below).


                   (iii) SUBSTANTIVE TRENCHES
The epithet ‘substantive’ is here applied to trenches which are not
merely tentative cuttings made in search of some ill-defined objective
but are in themselves a definite objective. In the category is included
the cross-trenching of a line of fortifications, to establish their struc-
tural sequence and to link it up with the sequence of occupations
within the enclosure. Examples are illustrated in Pls. 6 and 7a, one of
them a tevealing section which, in 1944-5, related the stone defences
of the third city of Taxila (Sirkap) in the Punjab with a dated “palace’
in the vicinity and so threw a new light on the chronology of this
important site! A further use of the substantive trench is shown in
            1. Ancient India, no. 4 (New Delhi, 1948), pp. 41 ff.

                                    86
               THE    LAYOUT         OF    AN   EXCAVATION

Pl. 7b, where the method was employed to establish the stratigraphical
relationship of two cemeteries, representing different cultures, on
the famous prehistoric site at Harappa, in the Punjab. In 1946 the two
cemeteries were linked by a carefully cut and surveyed trench nearly
450 feet long, and the resultant section (which has been published)
was conclusive. In the photograph, one of the cemeteries is beside
the figures in the foreground, the other lies amongst the trees in the
background, and the lines of datum-pegs, together with a regular
series of cross-balks designed to equate the sections on the two sides
of the trench, are seen.
  In all these examples, the principle is the same. The lateral extent
of the trench is defined at the outset, and the flanking datum-lines are
accordingly fixed once and for all. There is no risk of their obliter-
ation by any lateral, crab-like movement of the cutting, and the
recorder’s task is predictable from start to finish.
   The established method of recording objects found in a trench
which it is not intended to enlarge laterally is represented by the
following extracts from a recorder’s notebook:


 No.       Measurements    |          Layer           Object     Remarks

was,    INV. 62x. 3°57 67 Ks) Brown sand__|         Iron knife | (Sketch)
                                                    blade 5”
                                                    long

LN      OY rt 4°62” °5"— ® Loose reddish | Spherical | In a local
          6’ 2”           earth with occa- | agate bead | patch of
                          sional patches of               wood-ash
                               ash              '

   The figure in the first column is the serial number of the find. I make
the practice of enclosing it in a triangle to avoid any possibility of con-
fusion with layer-numbers, etc. It is immediately written on the
envelope containing the object and /or on the label attached to the
object, and subsequently on the object itself; also on an index-card in
duplicate (one for the site-index and one for the index of objects classi-
fied by categories), which will include likewise all the other particu-
lars of the record.
  The figures in the second column are the essence of the record, and

                                          87
                                ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM      THE        EARTH

    are derived as follows. Before the digging of the trench is begun, two
    parallel lines of pegs are laid out, each at a distance of 1 foot from one
    of the intended edges of the trench. Thus, if the trench is (for example)
    to be 10 feet wide, the two lines of pegs will be 12 feet apart. The pegs
    themselves are not less than 14 inches square in scantling and 1 foot
    3 inches long, with one end pointed. They are driven firmly into the
    ground — firmly enough to avoid any risk of accidental dislodgement
    — and are set diagonally with reference to the proposed trench, i.e.
    with one angle facing the latter. In each line they are placed with
    these edges 3 feet apart, measured horizontally, not along the actual
    contour of the ground (unless that be level); and an imaginary cross-
    line joining opposite pairs of pegs in the two main lines must be at
    right angles with the latter. See Fig. 15.
     _ Every peg is then numbered clearly on each of the two faces nearest
    to the proposed trench with a serial-number in black paint. With the
    addition of the Arabic zero, Roman numerals (I, IL, Il, etc.) are used


       PEG O                    Be   PEG I                   PEG D                   PEG
              Se   ao ee       Se
                                      ce)te   ae   Oe   a    a
                                                               ©         a         er
                                                                                      o
         i}
         i]
         1
         1
         1                                                             EDGE OF TRENCH
         1



                                              TRENCH
         es
         hiss
          |          =x                                          A fOGE OF TRENCH
                           \
            RIGHT              \     y
          j ANGLE               \    f
              Solas ye               afer =s==== ae
                                                  ee                         See   es      STRING

{      PEG fe)0”                       cr
                                     PEGI                    PEG 0 d                 PEG     5

                   Fig. 15. Layout of a trench for three-dimensional recording

for the double reason: (a) that they are easier to paint than Arabic
numerals, and (b) that there is no risk of confusing them with the
actual measurements of the record. The figures on one of the lines
of pegs are distinguished by a dash (O’, I’, II’, III’, etc.). Ifsubse-
quently it is desired to extend the trench backwards from zero (e.g.
down the reverse slope of a rampart), capital letters (A, B, C, etc.) are
                                                        88
                THE    LAYOUT       OF   AN   EXCAVATION

 used for the successive pegs of the extension, the letters on one of the »
 lines being similarly distinguished by a dash (A’, B’, C’, etc.).
    Along the front edges of each line of pegs a string is then tightly
 stretched, and is pegged down where this is necessitated by the con=
 tour of the ground. These strings are the base-lines from which
 measurements are subsequently taken.
    So much for the preliminary layout of the trench. The supervisor
 must now be provided with an angle-measure, made lightly but
  strongly of two 3-foot or preferably 4-foot arms graduated in feet and
  inches and fixed firmly to each other at right angles (PI. 18, rr). On
  each arm is fixed a bubble-level. The other normal measuring-instru-
  ments — tape, 5-foot rule, and plumb-bob — complete the equipment.
     When the digging of the trench is in progress, theposition of every
  significant find is measured in the following sequence:
     (A) Longitudinal measurement. The point at which a line at right-angles
  from the main datum-string to the object cuts the former is measured
  along that line from the last preceding peg. The point in question is ob-
  tained by means of the angle-measure, with such extension of the out-
  ward arm as may be required and with the assistance of a plumb-bob.
  Thus if the point be at 10 feet 4 inches from the zero peg, it will actually
  be measured from peg III (9 feet) and will be recorded as III 1’ 4”.
    (B) Outward measurement. The distance outwards, at right-angles to
  the datum-string, to a point vertically (by plumb-bob) above the object
  is measured with the angle-measure, levelled by its bubble-level and
  extended by means of the 5-foot rule if necessary. Note that the measure-
  ment is recorded from the datum-string, not from the actual side of the
  trench. Thus, if the measurement is 2 feet 5 inches, the distance of the
  object from the side of the trench will be about 1 foot 5 inches. The re-
  corded measurement is affixed to the longitudinal measurement with a
  multiplication sign: thus in the present example the measurements so
  far will be III 1’ 4” x 1’ 5”.
    (C) Downward measurement. This represents the vertical depth ofthe
  object below the level of the datum-string at the intersection established
  under (A) above. It is obtained by tape (or rule) and plumb-bob from
  the levelled armof the angle-measure, and it is added to the record with
  a minus sign. If the depth is 6 feet 2 inches, the total record will now
  read IIT 1’ 4” x 1/7 5” —'6’ 2”.
   In the third column is noted the number allotted to the layer -anum-
ber best shown in a circle, a symbol which is in practice useful for
                                         89
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

distinguishing layer-numbers from other figures —and the descrip-
tive word or phrase by which the layer is named. These facts are of
importance, since the material in which an object is found is usually
certain and provides a check upon the measurements, which may
sometimes mislead in irregular strata or near the junction of two
strata.
   The fourth column is self-explanatory. The fifth column is useful for
additional information and, above all, for a sketch of the object.
Even a bad sketch is better than none at all.
  It is scarcely necessary to add that the utility of such a record — or
indeed of any stratigraphical record - is proportionate to the accur-
acy of the measured section or sections with which the record is sub- _
sequently to be equated. The two sides of a trench are rarely identical,
and it will nearly always be desirable to prepare an accurate drawing
of both, together with occasional cross-sections. Moreover, during
the actual digging it is sometimes useful to project certain categories
of objects (from the three-dimensional record) on to the actual sides
of the trench by means of labelled or coloured pegs. I have known
occasions upon which such a visual representation of a distribution
in the actual trench has been illuminating and convincing.




                                   9O0
                             CHAPTER      6


        The Excavation of a Structure

FROM the more general questions of technique we turn to specific
problems. How would you excavate the buried remains of an ancient
building? ‘Find a wall and follow it’ might be the obvious answer.
But the previous chapters have been written in vain if the novice who
has read thus far is prepared to accept the answer without protest. He
will by now appreciate that to follow a wall in all literalness would be
to destroy the related evidence upon which its interest in large meas-
ure depends. Let us consider in some detail the nature of that related
evidence.
   Unless a structure is'dated by a contemporary inscription or by un-
impeachable documentary evidence or (exceptionally) by its intrinsic
character, our knowledge of its date or cultural context must be
derived from the stratigraphical association of objects of recognizable
types. Furthermore, the specific character of the strata themselves —
whether resulting from construction, destruction, decay, or other
causes — will throw light upon the vicissitudes through which the
building has passed. Only the most careful excavation and observa-
tion can recover such evidence with sufficient exactitude for use. The
dating or cultural setting of a building is based ideally on three cate-
gories of objects: (i) those supplied by strata which accumulated
before the building was constructed; (ii) those supplied by strata
contemporary with the construction; and (iii) those supplied by strata
subsequent to the construction. Categories (i) and (iii) bracket the
structure chronologically or culturally, whilst category (ii) defines
the point within the brackets.
  To understand the full meaning of a building in decay, it is neces-
sary to understand how it was originally constructed. I have accord-
ingly urged elsewhere (p. 157), for this and other reasons, that a know~
ledge of building-construction be included amongst the qualifications
of an excavator. In its simplest form, a masonry wall is built normally
as follows. A trench, known as the ‘foundation-trench’, is cut along
the line of the proposed wall in order that the foundations of the
                                   Ot
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE   EARTH

latter may rest upon the solid sub-soil rather than upon the relatively
unstable soil that is commonly found on the surface - whether natural
humus or disturbed ‘occupation-earth’. Rarely, when the surface-
soil is itself solid, or when the building is a slight one, or when the
building is jerry-built (an abnormal crime in ancient times), the
foundation-trench may be absent; on the other hand, a foundation-
trench may actually be cut even into the live rock, in order to give a
level seating for the wall. The preliminary assumption in all instances
must be that a foundation-trench is present.
   This feature is of great importance, and all care must be taken in
its identification. Obviously, layers into which it is cut antedate it,
and must be distinguished beyond all doubt from layers which
accumulated against the structure and therefore post-date or are con-
temporary with it. In loose sandy soil, the foundation-trench will be
V-shaped, with an appreciable space between its sides and those of the
initial wall built in it. But in a stiff clay sub-soil*the sides of the trench
may be vertical and may have been completely filled with the founda-
tions of the wall. Much may depend then upon the character of the
wall-facing when cleared of the soil; a trench-built wall will neces-
sarily have an untrimmed, relatively rough face, whilst a wall built
‘free’, and therefore accessible to the mason, will generally show a
more careful coursing and trimming. Needless to say, a wall with
any sort of plaster ‘rendering’ or facing, or with ‘struck’ or neatly
finished mortar jointing must have been built free, cannot have been
laid in a foundation-trench. A wide experience of different materials
is necessary for the identification of a foundation-trench, and the
result of the investigation must always be noted carefully, with
diagrams, in the notebook.
   After the building of the wall to a suitable height, the sides of the
foundation-trench (if V-shaped) will be packed and the adjacent
surface levelled, if necessary, to carry the floor. Subsequently, the
utilization of the floor will result in wear-and-tear, possibly patching
or renewal, and probably the accumulation upon it of an ‘occupation-
layer’, consisting of extraneous material - hearth-ash, mud, food-
debris, broken pottery, lost ornaments or coinage - which may help
to date the period or periods of usage. Later again, disaster or decay
may cover the occupation-layer with building-debris (indicating,
incidentally, something of the character of the superstructure),
                                    Q2
             THE   EXCAVATION        OF   A   STRUCTURE

 and eventually the whole site may be carpeted with vegetable-
 mould.
   Let us take an example. Fig. 16a illustrates the accumulation of
 strata under, around, and over the wall of an ancient structure. On
 the right-hand side of the wall-section, over the natural soil, two
 layers (9 and 10) represent village-occupation of Culture A, with post-
 holes indicating wooden huts and associated with potsherds, spindle-
 whorls, etc. Into these layers is cut a shallow foundation-trench to
 take the footings of Wall Y, and the flanks of this trench are filled
 with layer 8, which is also spread (on the right) as a basis of Floor 1.
 Layer 8 contains only relics of Culture A, but one or two telics of
 Culture B are imbedded in Floor 1; and the superimposed layer 7,
 resulting from the occupation of the building, represents Culture
 B exclusively. Over this occupation-layer, a new rammed floor
 (Floor 2) is laid, and on it is a further occupation-layer (6) of lesser
 extent, still containing objects of Culture B but in a somewhat
 evolved form. On this occupation-layer, a cascade of bricks mixed
 with burnt timber and clay (layer $) indicates the destruction of the
 building by fire. Thereafter the stump of the wall is used as the foun-
 dation for a mud-brick wall (X) of lighter construction, associated
  with an earthen floor (layer 3) containing relics mostly of Culture C.
  This new structure represents an intrusive culture of inferior quality,
  immediately preceded by the violent destruction of Culture B, and
~ may (if the evidence is found to be typical) be interpreted perhaps as
  a semi-barbarian supersession of Culture B in an evolved phase of
  the latter.
     On the left-hand side of the wall-section, the same two pre-wall
  strata (9 and 10) are continued, but are superseded at the wall-level
  by a well-metalled street (Road 1). This metalling is renewed at
  intervals (Roads 2 and 3), the upper metalling being inferior to the
  lower and suggesting a decline in municipal standards. Finally, in
  association with the mud-brick wall (X) of Culture C, metalling
  ceases, and traffic gradually wears the street into a hollow, removing
  earlier strata in the process. This process of road-deepening may be
  seen in many Eastern villages of the present day, and serves to remind
  us that the passing of time may be represented stratigraphically by
  denudation no less than by aggradation.
                                                                      e
     Fig. 16b shows the unhappy consequence of the wholesale clearanc
                                    93
                                                                                                                                 SOUTH

                                                                          PTT
                                                                          Gey)                                   aed aa               dt
      NORTH             .     a            mee Ma
        yl gdag

      aSey                                                                                      TLE                  LL/ 702
                                                                                            LiMn
       Hi,          =                                                                           D2               N




ee                 eae eT:                                            THO                                    OKA                     ZR
                             conics
                                                                     MW                                  5                            ~         te



S18                ere DQ               marl tert             SA     ee
ISS
|
    SRO MA care   ansene
           viaarassreon=s
                                                                          AHH:
                                                                          o
                                                                                                             CONAN
                                                                                                                                              li
                                                                                            ~            POST-HOLE
                                       UNDATION
                                      FOUNDATION      NATURAL, SOIL,
                                                          y

             A. RELATIONSHIP OF STRATIFICATION. TO                                                           STRUCTURES
                         RETAINED BY CROSS-SECTION


 RSA no EANS outedNeDStap
                                                                                    PSips Ser eiOliuy
                                                                                                                                aq        r          tt


       NORTH                            om
      ir                                frwssetie Jere)                   E
      og | altel” Bed ier |ee od ee
                                                                                                                           ele) bps
               /                        fe                                    .-f                            a       od,         ~    fo@s    Pes

                                        | ERSASES (25                         EZ, EHR                                            SY
                                                                                                                                               NS
                                                                                                Ww           4             n(4)2                      }
                                                                                    :                :                     '         34       wf



                                                                              9 sizca   F            L
                                                                                                                               HHH              id


       if                                                                     Ce
       Naz                                                                              LBs a8) KoWAENGR
                                                                                                     S
       \W Us                                                                            ann        OT ON
                                        .tactyocapet
      VAC se                                                                                                               ik
                                                                                                                                          1


                                                              LLL
                                                                                                                               MOL
                                                                              Zs



                                  teen
                                      SL      om     Ly


                   PTT
‘al X71 URSA            wo    <


       {
                                                   NATURAL    SOIL
                   B. THE         SAME RELATIONSHIP OBLITERATED                                                                 BY
                                     CONTINUOUS, TRENCHING
             Fig. 16, Sections illustrating the relationship of strata to a wall, and their
                                           removal by summary excavation
             THE    EXCAVATION            OF   A STRUCTURE

of the wall along its two faces. The relationship of the wall with
the adjacent strata has been lost beyond recall, and the sequence indi-
cated above is irrecoverable. Excavation has devolved into irrepar-
able destruction.
   So important is this matter of section-interpretation, that I will give
another example, dug out of an old report on the excavation of the
Roman amphitheatre at Caerleon in Monmouthshire. In the early
stages of this excavation, conclusive evidence as to the date of con-
struction was hard to find, for the good reason that an amphitheatre,
being a place merely of visitation, was largely devoid of the sort of
material which may be expected to produce dated ‘finds’. As the
work proceeded, this deficiency was gradually compensated for in a
variety of ways, and Fig. 17 illustrates one of them.
   In this illustration, the wall in séction on the left is the external wall
of the amphitheatre. It is built on deep footings, the upper part of
which is mortared whilst the lower part is dry-built. The footings
occupy a foundation-trench, partly vertical and party V-shaped, cut
through three dark occupation-layers which therefore antedate the
construction. We then come to the faced walling, the base of which
is in contact with a road-surface that had clearly been laid down in
connexion with it. The section goes on to show that this road was
subsequently renewed on at least four occasions. Now logically, the
date of the construction of the amphitheatre plus the earliest road
should have been bracketed by the dates of the material from the
three pre-road occupation-layers and from the subsequent road-
repairs. The pre-road occupation-layers fulfilled their function admir-
ably by producing material of ¢. A.D. 75, indicating that the amphi-
theatre was not earlier than that date; but the road-repairs were
unproductive, and the later endof the bracket therefore remained open.
The section did not on that account fail us; it will be observed that
to the right of the amphitheatre-wall is a culvert (in section) built in
a trench which has been cut through the same three strata as the wall-
trench and has been covered by the same make-up and road surface
that covers the wall-trench and equates with the wall. It is therefore
exactly contemporary with the amphitheatre. But further exploration
in the vicinity showed that the culvert was structurally connected
with a neighbouring bath-building dating from the last two decades
of the first century A.D. To that date therefore belongs the construction
                                     95
           OGL ‘aITYsYNOTMUOYY ‘UOspIERD Je sao   Ydure ueMoY oy Jo [eM [ews9IX9 oy} 0) UONLpEI UT uoNLoENS “LI ‘Sty
                                          a           ee                 2   I TTS
920 SAVITUAM-HSUM FA
                                                                                                 ee
                                                                                                                                RAS
                                                                                                                   SAN FALOLLWORI
                                                                                                                   pean # DTT a
                                                                                                           apres     STTHISD aa
  Gp     0    30 <= ‘co ee        eS
  (4)   TILL NDIONT? ONLI—
                         SUNWOK
                         —>
                                                       LUAL   ALL
                                                                    vy
             THE   EXCAVATION          OF   A STRUCTURE

of the amphitheatre - an inference subsequently confirmed from
other sources, but in itself sufficiently well founded.
    The moral of all this is clear: the identification and interpretation
 of the stratigraphical evidence associated with a building are of car-
-dinal importance, and are rendered possible only by the preservation
 of extensive cross-sections in the process of excavation. In other
 words, the preliminary excavation of a wall consists, not in clearing
 it continuously, but in cross-sectioning it at frequent intervals, each
 cross-section being closely examined and correlated with its neigh-
 bours. Only when an agreed interpretation of these cross-sections is
achieved and recorded can they properly be removed, stratum by
 stratum. Even s0, it is wise to keep a typical cross-section in position
 for reference until the close of the excavation.
    If we turn from general principles to their practical application,
there is less room for dogma. In all cases the ‘square’ method which
‘I have recommended for area-excavations (p. 83) is suitable, and on
 sites where buildings of varying plans are piled one on top of the
 other, as on many Eastern sites, no other method lends itself so readily
 to clear systematic record. But on a shallow site, where the excavator
 is confronted with an essentially unitary structure, as on some
 Romano-British sites, it may be found convenient to take the indi-
 vidual rooms of a building as the basis of record. Even so, it is safer to
 begin on the grid plan until the dimensions of the problem are appar-
 ent; and having begun on the grid I should myself hesitate to change
 horses.
    Two or three other points may be dealt with briefly.

                             ‘GHOST’ WALLS

 The excavator may have the misfortune to light upon a site where the
 walls have been completely destroyed by stone- or brick-robbers in
 ancient or modern times. A notable example of this is provided by the
 Romano-British site of Verulamium where Matthew Paris records
                                                              the
 that, amongst others, an eleventh-century abbot ‘turned over
  soil to a considerable depth that he might find masonry structures’
                                                                         the
  which he ‘reserved for the fabric of his church’. The excavator of
 ‘site found, in fact, evidence everywhe re  of systemati c brick-rob bing,
  and learned to recover the plans of buildings by carefully following
    D                                97
                  ARCHAEOLOGY      FROM     THE   EARTH

the robbers’ trenches (leaving intermittent cross-sections as described
above). For the most part, the robbing had been so skilful and econ-
omical that the trench was scarcely wider than the wall that it had
contained; so that when, after the removal of the wall, the unwanted
debris was thrown back and the site levelled for cultivation, the mixed
filling provided a perfect negative of the plan (Pl. 8a). By cutting
across the debris-filled trench at frequent intervals, it was often pos-
sible to recover the lines of the former building with accuracy, and
even, in favourable instances, to equate some of the stratification with
them. Perhaps the most remarkable example of the recovery of a plan
from ‘ghost’ walls of this kind was afforded by the north-west gate-
way of Verulamium where, in 1931, Miss Kathleen Kenyon found
that a great part of the structure had been almost completely removed
but was able, by the careful clearing of the debris from the former
wall trenches, to reveal the whole layout in negative whilst preserving
the stratified floors intact (Pl. 8b).
              Y

                          STRAIGHT      JOINTS

The junction of two walls is often a key-point in the interpretation of
a plan. If the walls are well and truly bonded together, with identical
masonry and coursing, they are obviously of the same build and date.
There is, however, a ‘catch’ for which it behoves the excavator to
keep a vigilant watch. By the removal of some of the facing-stones
of an older wall it is possible to ‘tooth-in’ a younger branch-wall
with some semblance of bonding; but the difference in structural
period is usually betrayed by differences in material or coursing, or
by the incompleteness of the bonding.
   On the other hand, the absence of bonding - a ‘straight joint’ -
does not necessarily imply a difference of date. The medieval builder,
it is true, was usually concerned to see that all his walls were properly
bonded; the close integration of a Gothic building, the interplay of
stresses and strains, demanded this. Accordingly, in a medieval struc-
ture a straight joint is normally significant chronologically. But in
the more static architecture of earlier periods a straight joint may be
a matter of indifference or even of choice. Where two adjacent walls
carry very different vertical loads, it may not be inadvisable to leave
them to some extent free of one another. Or, in the days when the
                                   98
             THE    EXCAVATION            OF   A STRUCTURE

plan of a building consisted, not of a blue-print, but of the actual
foundations planted on the ground under the direction of the architect
or master-mason, the main lines may have been laid down first and
subsidiary features added as the work proceeded. One or other of
these explanations may be sought for the fact that the towers of the
Roman fortress known as Burgh Castle in Suffolk show a straight
joint with the fortress-wall up to a certain height, above which they
are bonded in; or, similarly, that the towers of Verulamium are built
free up to a height of 6 feet and are thereafter of one build with the
town-wall. In both instances, towers and wall are essentially parts of
the same design. A more remarkable instance is the systematic use
of the straight joint in Nebuchadnezzar’s great Ishtar Gate at Babylon
(sixth century B.c.). The foundations of the structure are of a varying
depth, and to quote Koldewey:
It is conceivable that those parts of the wall where the foundations are
specially deep do not sink so much in the course of time as those of
shallower foundations, and settlement is unavoidable even with these,
standing as they do upon earth and mud. Thus where the foundations
are dissimilar there must be cleavages in the walls, which would seri-
ously endanger the stability of the building. The Babylonians foresaw
this and guarded against it. They devised the expansion joint, which we
also make use of under similar circumstances. By this means walls that
adjoin each other but which are on foundations of different depths are
not built in one piece. A narrow vertical space is left from top to bottom
of the wall, leaving the two parts standing independent of each other.
In order to prevent any possibility of their leaning either backwards or
forwards, in Babylon a vertical fillet was frequently built on to the less
deeply rooted wall, which slid in a groove in the main wall. The two
blocks run in a guide, as an engineer would call it.


                              TIMBERWORK

In airtight peat or clay or alluvium, or on the other hand in a very dry
climate, timber will retain its form and something of its substance for
thousands of years. On the other hand, a solid timber such asa railway-
sleeper begins to deteriorate in the British climate after about ten
   1. R. Koldewey, The Excavations at Babylon, trans. by A. S. Johns (London,
1914), pp. 36-8.

                                     99
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

years. Ancient woodwork found in Egypt or in the deserts of Central
Asia is dated in millennia, and the rough timbering which Dr
Grahame Clark uncovered with great skill in the peat at Seamer in
Fast Yorkshire in 1949-51 may be as much as 9,000 years old. Dr van
Giffen, a master of timber-excavation in the sympathetic soils of the
Low Countries, found remarkable vestiges of wooden buildings -
posts and wattle walls — of structures of the first century A.D. in the
Roman forts at Valkenburg near Leiden (south Holland).t But for the
most part, the excavator of ancient timber structures must content
himself with less tangible results. When carbonized, their vestiges
may last indefinitely; otherwise they are generally a mere stain or a
more or less loosely filled hollow in the earth, and have to be treated
substantially like the ‘ghost’ walls of which I have spoken above. On
the whole, they are not an easy problem. The stains and hollows may
sometimes be missed even by the expert eye, and a timber-structure
should never be explored by the novice without the closest supervision.
   We may set aside carbonized timber as a relatively straightforward
matter. An example of the more subtle kind is provided by the first-
century sheds uncovered within the Roman fortress at Richborough
about 1930 by MrJ. P. Bushe-Fox. The sheds had been built on
sleeper-beams, some of which had been laid on uprights, and Mr
Bushe-Fox first recognized them in the faintly discoloured lines and
pits which began to show up in the light-coloured sand of the site
when the ground was cleared under suitable weather conditions. The
coloured lines were formed by the earth which had occupied the
matrices of the vanished timbering, and vertical hollows, similarly
filled, showed the former presence of the posts (Pl. 9a). By care-
fully scraping and sectioning the site, the excavator was eventually
able to uncover a series of these buildings and to reconstruct them (on
paper) with a substantial measure of certainty.
  The same method, with variations, must normally be followed in
work of this kind. Certain soils, notably gravel, are more reluctant
than others to yield their evidence. A sandy sub-soil is usually the
most responsive, and at Harappa in the Punjab, in a cemetery dating
from -+ 2000 B.c., not only was the outline of a coffin visible as a
brown outline, but Dr K. A. Choudury, of the Indian Forest Research
  I. 2s-28 Jaarverslag van de Vereeniging voor Terpenonderzoek (Groningen,
 1948), with English summary.

                                   100

                                   t
              THE    EXCAVATION             OF   A STRUCTURE

 Institute, was able to photograph and identify with complete certainty
 the impressions of a specific timber (deodar) in the matrix of sand. The
 coffin (Pl. 9b) was found first as a dark stain in section and was then
 carefully cleared from above, the final clearance being effected by
 gentle scraping and lightly brushing with a small, soft brush. The
 somewhat similar outline of a coffin was traceable round a late
 Roman burial at Verulamium,! and other examples are recorded from
 Britain.
    It would, however, be difficult to find more brilliant expositions of
 timber-excavation than those afforded by the work of Mr C. W.
 Phillips at the Skendleby long-barrow in Lincolnshire and the famous
 Sutton Hoo ship-burial in Suffolk. The general method adopted in
 the excavation of the long-barrow will be cited in a later chapter (p.
 122). Here we are concerned only with the hurdle-work which was
 incorporated in the mound and was revealed in a trench dug close to
 and parallel with its longitudinal axis. In the excavator’s words,
  the trench was § ft. in width, and an examination of its sides soon showed
  a series of what were called for the sake of convenience ‘verticalities’ at
  irregular intervals. These vague vertical breaks in the substance of the
  barrow could only be interpreted as the traces of decayed barriers of
  some kind, presumably of wood. A heavy rain fell on the night after
  these were noted, and brought away a thickness of between 6 in. and
_ 1 ft. of material from the side of the trench towards the upper side of the
  barrow. This fall had taken place along a definite division in the material
  of the barrow along its middle line, and it was at once apparent, from
  the impressions of upright posts and pieces of wood fixed between
  them, that some sort of a fence had been set up here before the barrow
 had been built, and then had been buried in it... . The reason for the
 ‘verticalities’ became clear at once, for they were traces of similar fences
 setting off at about right-angles from the central fence in the direction
 of the lower side of the barrow (PI. 10).?

 All this evidence was of course in ‘negative’; the soil was totally un-
 favourable to the preservation of the actual woodwork.
    Accident helped in this discovery but in no way detracts from the
 astuteness of the excavator’s observation. The feature thus revealed
 was substantially an addition to knowledge and will doubtless fit, in
          1. Wheeler, Verulamium Report (London, 1936), pl. cxv A.
          2. Archaeologia, lxxxv (London, 1936), 60.

                                     Io1I
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM      THE       EARTH

due course, into a new structural and ritual pattern of the neolithic
age. But at Sutton Hoo accident can claim no share of the credit. The
general circumstances of this astonishing discovery are well known:
about the middle of the seventh century A.D. a man of high rank had
been interred with ‘the richest treasure ever dug from British soil’ in
a ship some 80 feet long, which had been buried under a mound in
a great trench cut into the sand.
   Since the whole ship and its contents had been involved in sand for
some 1,300 years, it is not surprising that there were virtually no re-
mains of wood except for small fragments which were found here and
there preserving their form if not their character through contact with
rusted iron. ... Traces of the existence of wood could frequently be
seen in the form of thin layers of discoloured sand, associated with bands
of more or less the same material leached white by the action of the
acids liberated in the decay of the wood. The normal colour of the sand
on the site was yellow, except where it was the product of the decay
of turf or had been under decaying wood. ... No difficulty was found
in distinguishing the filling of the trench from the undisturbed sand
even where the colour was the same in each case. The filling dropped
away easily from the sides of the trench and following it was merely
mechanical.*

   In these circumstances, the excavation of the hull was a particularly
delicate operation, and extracts from Mr Phillips’s account of it may
be quoted. The work which had been done before he took over
direction
showed that none of the wood of the ship remained, though all the
numerous clench-nails which had held its planking together were ex-
actly in place, the ship having been completely filled up with as much of
the sand excavated from the trench as could be got in again. These con-
ditions were ideal for the preservation of its form, and it was clear that
the only way to carry out the work was to cut a very wide trench right
through the mound which would give ample walks on each side of the
burial-trench. The faces of the cutting were stepped backwards in ter-
races and their faces timbered up, and the boat was carefully emptied of
all content, beginning with the burial chamber. ...
   Since all but the burial chamber area had been filled in directly with
sand while the ship was still whole, none of the clench-nails which held
                        I, Antiquity, xiv (1940), Io.

                                     102
             [THE   EXCAVATION            OF   A STRUCTURE

 the ship together could move from their place even when the wood
 which they secured had disappeared. By careful work from the inside
 it was possible to remove all the content of the boat without displacing
any of the nails, which remained in their places on the sides of the exca-
 vations. This process was aided by a change in the consistency of the sand
 which was to be found where the boat’s timbers had once been. A dusty
blackish layer, accompanied by some leached sand, could be felt for
 carefully by slowly shaving down the sand, and warning was given of
 its approach by the appearance of the bright red patches signalling the
 near presence of clench-nails. In this way all the boat which survived
 ‘was emptied so that the face of the excavation everywhere was the sand
which had pressed against the timbers of the boat from the outside, and
which sometimes still bore in recognizable form the imprint of the grain
of wood. ...[PI. 15.]
    The ship had twenty-six ribs. . . . The preservation of the ribs was
bad. All that remained .. . was a dirty line of sand running across the ship
 from gunwale to gunwale keeping close to the hull, and frequently still
retaining a marked rectangular cross-section. In some cases the sand had
formed a rough cast of the decayed wood so that, if this was breached,
discoloured sand tended to pour out of the hole leaving a rectangular-
sectioned cavity. In excavating the ship these rib traces were left en-
closed in strips of sand.1
   These examples of timber-excavation must suffice. The tools most
generally useful are a broad-bladed knife, a small spike of some sort,
and a soft paint-brush. In the clearance of the Sutton Hoo burial-
chamber, a stout shovel mounted on the end of a long ash handle was
used for shaving down and removing the sand on a horizontal plane
in a search for the significant changes of colour.

                              MUD-BRICK

 In the dry climate of parts of Africa and Asia, bricks of unbaked
mud, often integrated by an admixture of straw, have long been used
for building, and may present some difficulty to the excavator, though
   1. Ant. Journ. xx (1940), 158, 183, 188, etc. See also the account of the
 excavation of the burial chamber, ibid., p. 158. A simpler but nonetheless
instructive set of problems attended the excavation of the Oseberg ship in
Sweden. The student is referred to the account of these (in English) in
A. W. Brogger, Hj. Falk, and Haakon Schetelig, Osebergfundet, i (Kristiania,
1917), 369 ff.
                                    103
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

generally of a less formidable nature than that presented by vanished
timberwork. A writer on archaeological technique has written:
   The principal difficulty faced by an archaeologist in dealing with mud-
bricks lies in the fact that the material used in their construction is not
unlike that of the earth in which they have been buried for centuries.
Asa result there have been a number of cases where long narrow rooms
turned out to be heavy walls; in other words, the excavators recognized
a slight change in colour or consistency of the ground during the digging
but removed the walls and left the rooms unexcavated !

I need hardly add that this unhappy experience was derived mainly
from that land of archaeological sin, Palestine, and reopens a vista of
incompetence which is by now sufficiently familiar to us.
 The problem once more is that of intelligent supervision; though
the trained workman is here an asset of almost equal worth. ‘The tex-
ture of the earth, the feel of it, the sound of it as the pick or shovel
strikes it, are all factors which, almost equally with direct visual
evidence, tell the experienced digger when he is or is not on a mud-
brick wall. The instructed peasant learns to think through the point
of his pick or the blade of his knife. Decayed mud-brickwork may
fill the interior of a room and present on plan an undifferentiated
surface where it and a mud-brick wall-top abut upon each other.
But tapping carefully and obliquely with a small pick will often
produce a distinguishable hard note when the point, penetrating the
filling, strikes the face of the actual wall. Scraping the surface carefully
with a knife, sometimes aided by damping, may reveal a slight but
significant line where filling and wall meet, or between individual
bricks. The composition of the mud wall will sometimes indicate
whether it represents brick or filling; flecks of charcoal and scraps of
pottery rarely occur in bricks but are not infrequent in filling, and I
have sometimes found them in the coarser mud which may be used
as the equivalent of mortar. Their presence, therefore, is a useful
guide, though their absence proves nothing. Petrie adds that ‘in the last
resource the stuff should be searched with a magnifier to see the hol-
lows left by decomposed straw: in kneaded brick these hollows lie in
every direction; in blown dust and wash they lie nearly all horizontal’.
   The initial tracing of a mud-brick wall may thus be a fairly lengthy
process, involving careful inspection and digging in different lights
                                    104
             THE    EXCAVATION           OF   A STRUCTURE

 and different degrees of dampness or dryness of soil. When the wall-
 face has been definitely located, further care must be taken to ascer-
 tain whether it was anciently ‘rendered’ with a mud or plaster facing.
 Ifnot, it can be gently brushed horizontally or scraped with a knife.
 When thus newly cleaned, the individual bricks will frequently show
up clearly, and they must then be completely recorded (size, bond,
 quality, jointing); for the chances are that, as the wall dries out and
 bleaches in the sun, much of the detail will be lost. In order to retain
 the general picture, it is sometimes possible to reduce the mud-joints
 slightly by gentle brushing or scraping, and so to leave the separate
 bricks in shallow relief. On the other hand, if the joints are of harder,
 coarser material, as they sometimes are, it may be preferable to scrape
 the smoother surface of the bricks, thus leaving the joints in relief
 (Pl. rz). In either case, this work should normally be done after record
 not before.
   In all other respects, a mud-brick wall should be dug exactly as a
 masonry wall, with a similar system of cross-sections through the
 attendant strata.




                                   105
                             CHAPTER      7

              On Digging ‘Town-sites

THE natural sequel to a chapter on structures is the consideration of
the structural complex of a town-site. (The problems of a military
site are technically similar.)
   The site of an ancient town.may to-day be a tolerably level tract
of countryside, or it may have piled itselfinthe course of ages into
the form of an artificial mound or tell up to 100 feet or more in height.
Something has been said of the latter process elsewhere (p. 57). Here
the question is one of tactical approach to the problem of excavation.
   Let us consider what information we want. Our primary need is to
ascertain the chronology and cultural setting of the site. Without
these two basic facts, its structural layout will mean little. But they
in turn will mean little without a knowledge of the plan of the town,
of its domestic economy from period to period, and the social and
political condition of itsinhabitants. These problems are necessarily
interlocked, but they can to some extent be separated for the purpose
of preliminary investigation.
   On a level site, the technical approach is relatively straightforward.
There the cultural and chronological sequence can be recovered in
introductory fashion by one method only: by a restricted area-
excavation in the interior of the town, preferably somewhere near
its centre. Although the rule is by no means invariable, cities com-
monly grow in a reasonably symmetrical fashion; the original civic
centre is likely to remain the focus and to represent therefore the
maximum depth of accumulated occupation. This accumulated
occupation must be probed carefully to the bottom, preferably by
means of one or more squares — a group of four adjacent squares is
often a useful unit - in accordance with the method described on
p. 83. But on no account should this procedure be repeated at random.
Petrie cannot be gainsaid when he protests against the multiplication
of trial-pits. Such pits, ‘if they hit anything of importance,’ he
remarks, ‘are likely to injure it, and certain to destroy its connexion
with other things. French explorers have a love for faire quelques
                                   106
                   ON   DIGGING      TOWN-SITES

sondages, a proceeding which often ruins a site for systematic work,
and which never shows the meaning of the positions or the nature of
the plan’. On the other hand, a restricted probe, carried out by
methods more subtle and thorough than Petrie’s, is a necessary
preliminary stage on a ‘flat’ site of unknown potentiality.
   A secondary if not simultaneous stage is the investigation of the
system of fortifications which normally characterizes an ancient
town. The moments at which a town built or rebuilt its defences
were manifestly of special importance in its life-history. The con-
struction of a fortification may indicate the newcomer in a strange
land, as in the mottes of Norman England; or it may mark the
achievement of full city status, and may reflect a period of peaceful
consolidation rather than of military duress, as in the walled towns of
Augustan Gaul or late second-century Britain. Or it may reflect the
advent or threat of a formidable rival or of political anarchy; as when
anxious edicts of Honorius urged cities to build or repair their walls
and authorized them to use statues, altars, and temples for the purpose.
It may have been designed to defend the populace, or to control it;
as, perhaps, in the almost feudal citadels which dominated the Indus
cities of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro in the third millennium B.c., or
certainly in William the Conqueror’s Tower of London. Fortifica-
tions thus not merely outline the town-plan (or some part of it) but
may focus and express the city’s vicissitudes and something of its
sociology. Further, the character of their brickwork or masonry is
a fair reflection of the economic condition of the city at the time of
construction, of wealthy and leisurely civic pride or of more slovenly
necessity. And to what extent were the defences maintained? — were
there long periods of immunity during which maintenance was
allowed to lapse? Finally, were they riven by an attacker, as were the
mined and counter-mined walls of Dura-Europos on the Euphrates?
- or did they crumble into decay as a counterpart to economic
decline? All these and other questions are of the first importance to
the inquiring antiquary or historian. It is along the lines of the
defences rather than in the buried relics of the bazaar that the excava-
tor may expect first to recognize the major moments, the frame-
work, of the story of the site.
  Let him therefore, early in his work, cut across the line of the forti-
fications at selected points where it seems likely that the evidence will
                                   107
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM   THE   EARTH

be most comprehensive. And let his cross-trenches be both wide and
deep, no mere otter’s bites - wide enough to escape accidental features
and to provide ample room and light for observation; deep enough
to reach down into the natural soil and so to ensure that the story is
complete. Furthermore, let the trenches be carried far enough into
the town to relate the defensive system in its various phases with the
successive occupations of the town itself.
   The accepted three-dimensional method of recording such a
trench is described on pp. 87-90.
  To the sectioning of the defences should be added the careful
excavation of a gateway, where successive road-levels and guard-
room floors may be expected to amplify the architectural evidence
and to lend it precision.
_ The completion of these works — the examination of the defences
and the central area~excavation — may be assumed to have given us
a reasonable conspectus of the site. The next stage is less predictable
in detail, although its general purpose is clear enough: namely, to
recover a representative part of the town-plan at various periods or,
at any rate, at the topmost period, and to ascertain the character and
economy of its various types of building. The best course will prob-
ably be to extend the original area-dig at the level of some specific
stratum, to link it up with the excavated gateway, and to recover the
intervening layout of buildings and streets at the selected level or
levels. Thereby an orderly, coherent development of the work is
ensured, and future excavators will know readily where they stand
in relation to it. This was approximately the method adopted by Sir _
John Marshall at Taxila (Sirkap) in the Punjab, with the most reveal-
ing results (Pl. 12). The extent to which such work can or should be
carried subsequently downwards depends on the funds available and
the current state of knowledge. Although I would not accept Mar-
shall’s methods of excavation and record, my view is that he was
perfectly right in uncovering, and preserving uncovered, only the
 two uppermost strata of Sirkap in the area tackled by him. He was
 dealing with an entirely unknown culture and polity. On the other
 hand, in a Romano-British town I should to-day normally advocate
 the complete clearance of the available area in depth, even at the ex-
 pense of extensive destruction. As so often, no general rule can be
postulated; each instance must be considered on its merits.
                                    108
“a
                         ON   DIGGING          TOWNSSITES

        If we turn from a “flat’ site to a tell, say, 50 feet high (PI. 13), com-
     plications confront us. Probing from top to bottom in a mound of
     this depth becomes a major engineering feat and involves a dispro-
     portionately large opening at the top. Moreover, there is not infre-
     quently the risk that such a probe will over-emphasize the latest and
     possibly best-known phases at the expense of the earlier and less-
     known. Let me give two examples.
        Some 18 miles north-east of Peshawar in the North-west Frontier
     Province of Pakistan, near the village of Charsada, is a famous group
     of mounds which represents the ancient capital city of Puskalavati,
     set athwart one of the great trade-routes of ancient Asia. Its strength
     was such that even the veteran army of Alexander the Great took
     30 days to capture it in 326 B.c., and such was its prestige that Alex-
     ander went out of his way to receive its surrender in person. In the
     seventh century A.D., when the Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsang visited
     it, it was yet ‘well peopled’. To-day the vast site is derelict, bitten
     into and divided by the streams of the Swat river, but its largest
     mound, the Bala Hisar or High Fort, still stands to a maximum height
     of about roo feet. Here in 1902-3 the then recently reconstituted
     Archaeological Survey of India carried out its first excavation. The
     summit of the highest mound was selected for the work, and trenches
     were dug into it to a depth of 20 feet. The result was the discovery of
     scraps of medieval and later buildings of familiar Sikh and Islamic
     types and a few possible fragments of somewhat earlier historic dates.
     Nothing that was not predictable was brought to light, and the real
     problems of (potentially) one of the most important sites of Asia were
     not touched. The young director, fresh from Athens, his mind
     doubtless obsessed with the prestige of a towering acropolis, had
     carried out the excavation in the one spot where a maximum accu-
     mulation of relatively modern material could have been foreseen.
        Similarly at another site, far away on the steppe of Afghan Tur-
     kestan, there lie the great mounds which represent the ancient Bactra,
     ‘Mother of Cities’, carfax of trans-Asian trade-routes and outpost of
     Hellenism in partibus. Bactra was already a city in the fourth century
     B.C., and it suffered from the savagery of Chingiz Khan in the thir-
     teenth century a.p. To-day only the tiny village of Balkh lies within
     the immense circuit of its derelict walls, and several square miles of
     the buried history of Asia, indeed of the world, lie accessible to the
                                         109
              ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE      EARTH

adventurous explorer. Accordingly, in 1924-5, Monsieur A. Foucher,
to whose memory all honour is due as a student of Buddhist art, was
deputed to carry out a series of excavations on behalf of the French
Archaeological Mission to Afghanistan. The results were, as he freely
and naively admits, disappointing to a degree. Why? He chose for
his operation the highest point of the towering tell which represents
the citadel of this vast city, and dug down metre after metre into the
ruins of - a relatively modern mosque and a ‘Turkish’ bath! True, in
a city with a walled circuit of 7 miles there was room enough for
error: Foucher himself exclaims, ‘We compared ourselves, my wife
and I, to two ants sent into the depths of the jungle to carry out an
autopsy on the corpse of an elephant.’ But why, from so wide a
possible choice, did he choose of all things the ultimate summit of
the citadel: In a letter to his Paris correspondent, he tells us: “Because’,
he writes, ‘one cannot escape the magic power of names, and you your-
self, if I could have consulted you from afar and had asked, as in
Hernani: “Where should I begin?”, would incontestably have
replied: “On the Acropolis.”’! The inescapable magic of names!
What a superbly Gallic reason for plunging into the one spot in the
whole of Bactra that a less charmingly sentimental investigator would
unhesitatingly have shunned: the one dominant spot which could
have been prophesied to bear upon its heights the latest and most
familiar of medieval buildings.
  No, a little cold-blooded deliberation at these two sites would
easily have pointed the proper way. I happen to know them both,
and am prepared without undue rashness to prescribe. The premisses
are that both sites stretch back into a remote but undefined antiquity;
that both have also been wholly or partially occupied in Islamic times;
but that, since our extensive knowledge of Muslim architecture is
unlikely to be enhanced appreciably by the costly excavation of the
buried fragments of a medieval citadel, this phase may profitably be
by-passed. The outstanding importance alike of Charsada and Balkh
lies in their earlier phases, when they were metropolitan centres of
Asiatic trade and meeting-places of oriental and occidental cultures.
To reach these earlier strata the approach is not in fact difficult. At
Chirsada the attacks of man, weather, and water have, over a large
  1. A. Foucher, La Vieille Route de Inde de Bactra a Taxila (Mém. de la Délég.
Arch, Frangaise en Afghanistan, Paris, 1942), p. 98.

                                     IIo
                    ON   DIGGING        TOWNS-=SITES

part of the principal mound, removed the higher strata to a depth of
some 40 feet. In other words, Sikh and Muslim may safely be pre-
sumed to have vanished here, leaving the pre-medieval strata exposed
to immediate attack. There, at the eastern foot of the High Fort, is
the obvious spot for an area-excavation designed to reach the ancient
Puskalavati and to achieve - who knows? ~ another Mohenjo-daro
at its base? At Balkh also it is not difficult, by an examination of the
sides of gullies and other cuttings, to find a number of places where
the familiar top-stuff is absent, and where penetration to the earlier
levels can be reasonably assured. But at Balkh there is one obvious
and immediate goal. Nearly half of the defensive system shows only
Islamic workmanship and may for our purpose be ruled out, at any
rate in the initial stages (later, it too should be fully recorded); but a
part of the remainder is of composite character and obviously incor-
porates earlier work. In particular, along the southern side the Islamic
wall is carried by a huge rampart which is itself, to judge from slight
indications, a complex structure. Here is a major problem for settle-
ment. Until the excavator of Balkh has dug a great trench, recorded
in three dimensions, through these southern fortifications and linked
their successive phases to occupation-levels in the adjacent interior,
he has not got to grips with his problem.
   To turn from these two examples to the general run of tells is to
turn to variable phenomena, susceptible to no fixed rule. Much de-
pends upon the height of the mound and the extent of its erosion.
As a general practice, however, it is desirable to bite boldly into the
periphery at some carefully selected point, penetrate the inevitable
scree, and establish the successive cultures with, if possible, the suc-
cessive systems of fortification. This -desideratum is commonly
realized by tell-excavators, but there is an unhappy habit of nibbling
sporadically at the flanks of the mound instead of contemplating a
methodical, coherent cutting which will, with ordinary luck, link up
and sort out many important factors once and for all. An established
method of cutting such a section is to step it from top to bottom, so
that the gangs have convenient working-platforms at intervals and,
above all, so that the lower stages of the cutting are not unconscion-
ably deep. Nevertheless, there are few published tells where a section
of this kind has been completed. Pl. 11 shows a complete section
through the margin of the highest tell of the chalcolithic Indus city at
                                  III
              ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

Harappa in the Punjab. Its total depth is 50 feet but, owing to the
compactness of its material, I was able to cut it vertically, without
stepping. Incidentally, the recorder and draftsman completed their
work in detail, foot by foot, as the working-platform was gradually
lowered, so that, when natural soil was eventually reached, the
digging and the recording ended almost simultancously. As usual,
the log-book record was three-dimensional (cf. p. 87).
  Apart from the marginal bite, as on a ‘flat’ site, the clearance of a
gateway is highly desirable, combined with an area-dig in the
adjacent interior on a sufficiently Jarge scale to establish firmly the
cultural context of successive gateways and fortifications. Further in
the interior, an elevation may indicate the position of a citadel or
temple and may also be subjected to an ‘area-excavation, which
should subsequently be linked up systematically with that adjoining
the gateway, and thereafter continued to the designed limits of the
enterprise.
   The ultimate goals of a tell-excavation should be (a) to establish its
cultural or chronological range by the marginal sections indicated
above, and (b) to uncover completely a specific phase or phases of its
occupation. I emphasize this point after seeing many incredibly messy
tell-excavations where everything has been attempted at once, with
cuttings and soundings at varying depths and the whole site perma-
nently wrecked or obscured by tip-heaps. Let the rule be to finish a
clear-cut scheme which can be transmitted lucidly, on paper and on
the ground, to future generations of investigators. Leave your tell for
others as you would wish to find it. Too many excavated tells of Asia
are, to adapt Petrie’s phrase, ‘ghastly charnel houses of murdered
evidence’. Fortunately, there are still some thousands of intact ones
awaiting a more human and legitimate execution.




                                   I1i2

                                                                            ae
