SIR     MORTIMER          WHEELER




 Archaeology
from the Earth

           ‘It is necessary to
       emphasize the importance
      of this book not only for its
       content,   but also for the
        excellence of its form.’”
           The Times Literary
               Supplement




                                      85c
 ARCHAEOLOGY
PROM -THE          EARTH

SIR    MORTIMER    WHEELER




      PENGUIN     BOOKS
          Penguin Books Ltd, Harmondsworth, Middlesex
v.s.A.: Penguin Books Inc., 3300 Clipper Mill Road, Baltimore rr, Md
     CANADA:   Penguin Books (Canada) Ltd, 47 Green Street,
                  Saint Lambert, Montreal, P.Q.
   AUSTRALIA: Penguin Books Pty Ltd, 762 Whitehorse Road,
                     Mitcham, Victoria
SOUTH AFRICA: Penguin Books (S.A.) Pty Ltd, Gibraltar House,
            Regent Road, Sea Point, Cape Town



                       First published 1954
                 Published in Penguin Books 1956




                Made and printed in Great Britain
                      by Wyman & Sons Ltd
                 London, Reading and Fakenham
                                                  Py




                                                           '




    y   2      ;      s

‘Quand le sol aura été interrogé, il répondra’.
;             L’ ABBA COCHET




                                                       a

                                                   _
                                                       Seen




                                                  .
                    CONTENTS


   LIST OF PLATES                                    9
   LIST OF FIGURES                                  II
 I. INTRODUCTORY                                    15
 2. HISTORICAL                                      20
 3. CHRONOLOGY                                      38
 4. STRATIGRAPHY                                    56
5. THE LAYOUT       OF AN BXCAVATION                89
 6. THE EXCAVATION         OF A STRUCTURE           91
 7. ON DIGGING      TOWN-SITES                     106
 8. BURIALS                                        13
 9. WATCH-MAKERS’ JOBS                             125
IO. TACTICS   AND    STRATEGY                      135
II. STAFF                                          153
12. TOOLS                                          178

I3. THE POTTERY-SHED                               182

I4. THE FIELD-LABORATORY                           195
I5. PHOTOGRAPHY                                    200

I6. PUBLICATION      AND   PUBLICITY               209

I7. WHAT    ARE WE DIGGING       UP, AND    WHY?   228

    SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY                            247

    INDEX                                          249
                           PLATES


1. Excavation of a barrow, 1844. Gentleman’s Magazine, 1852
2 (a). An Early Iron Age pit at Scarborough, Yorkshire cut to show
       three interrupted phases of the filling. Photograph by F. G.
      Simpson
 (b). Section showing sixteen successive layers of plastering on the
      wall of the temple of the moon-god Sin at Khafajah, Iraq.
      Photograph by The Oriental Institute, University of Chicago

3. Stratification at Brahmagiri, Mysore State, India
4 (a). Chaos: excavation in the East, 1935
  (b). Discipline: excavation at Arikamedu, South India, 1945
5. Layout of an area-excavation (Taxila~Bhir Mound, 1944)
6. Section pegged for three-dimensional recording (Maiden Castle,
   1935). From R. E. M. Wheeler, Maiden Castle, Dorset (Society of
   Antiquaries of London, 1943)
7 (a). Section pegged for three-dimensional recording (Taxila-
      Sirkap, 1945)
  (b). Similar section linking two cemetery-areas (Harappi, Punjab,
  1946)
8 (a). ‘Ghost’ wall at Verulamium, Hertfordshire, 1931
  (b). Verulamium, north-west gate: part of the plan recovered
       by clearing trenches made by wall-robbers. From R. E. M.
       and T. V. Wheeler, Verulamium (Society of Antiquaries of
       London, 1936)
g (a). Roman timber-building at Richborough, Kent, traced by
      coloration of the soil. From J. P. Bushe-Fox, Fourth Report on
      the Excavations of the Roman Fort at Richborough (Society of
      Antiquaries of London, 1949)
                                                            g
  (b). Burial of about 2000 B.c. at Harappa, Punjab, showin
       outline of wooden coffin
                               PLATES

10. Traces of hurdle-construction in the neolithic long-barrow at
    Skendleby, Lincolnshire. From a photograph by O. G. S. Craw-
    ford reproduced in Archaeologia, vol. lxaxxv (Society of Anti-
    quaries of London, 1936)
11. Section through the mud-brick defences of the Harappi citadel,
    Punjab, built before 2000 B.c.
12. Air-photograph of part of the Parthian city of Taxila, Punjab,
    the first century A.D.
13. A typical tell (Tepe Sialk, central Iran)                            |
14. Excavation of a burial-pit(first or second century B.c.) at Brahma-_
    giri, Mysore State, India, showing the ‘quadrant’ method of
    excavation
15. Traces of the Sutton Hoo ship, Suffolk. Photograph, British
    Museum
 6 (a). Silver coin of Tiberius, dated a.p. 26-37, from Chandravalli,
        Mysore State
   (b). Arikamedu: fragments of Roman amphorae
17. Rouletted ware of the first century a.D. from Arikamedu, South
    India                                                          |
18. Selection of tools from an Eastern excavation
19. Part of section through the ‘Fosse’ earthwork at Verulamium,
    showing turf wall imbedded in earth and gravel but emphasized ©
    by careful lighting                                            :
20. Pottery-grid, for use in dry climates
21. Tower for high-angle photography
22. Overloaded photographs of unprepared subjects. From The
    Antiquaries Journal, vol. xvii (Society of Antiquaries of London,
    1937)                                                               |
23. Reconstruction of an Early Iron Age homestead at Little Wood-_
    bury, Wiltshire. Photograph by the Ministry of Information
24 (a). “Sir Flinders Petrie in the courtyard of the School in
        Jerusalem’. From The Biblical Archaeologist, vol. v, no. 3°
        (1942)
   (b). ¢ ae jar no. 277”. From M. S. Vats, Harappa (Delhi,
        1940                                                            4
                                   Io
                      TEXT        FIGURES


 . Section through a megalithic grave in Hyderabad State,
   India. After Meadows Taylor, 1851                                 24
 . Section by Pitt Rivers across the ditch of Wor Barrow,
   Dorset, 1898, showing relics projected from a three-dimen-
   sional record                                                     27
 . Part of a section through Tell el Ajjil, Palestine, 1938          31
 . Section through part of the site of Bethel, Palestine, 1939       32
 . Section through part of the mound of Sialk, Iran, 1938            33
 . Section of part of Harappa, Pakistan, 1940                        35
WwW
>
An
 N . Section through part of a cemetery at Harappa, Pakistan,
   1940                                                              36
 . Section illustrating (left) an apparent succession of strata,
   shown by an extension of the cutting (right) to have been
   deposited simultaneously                                          62
 . Section from Brahmagiri, Mysore State, India, showing
   three cultural phases with overlaps                               66
 . Tabulation of sherds representing the three cultures at Brah-
                                                                     67
 . Diagrams illustrating the stratification of a city-mound and
   the fallacy of recording by mechanical levels                     71
 . Technique of section-drawing                                      75
 . Symbols used in sectional drawings by the Archaeological
   Survey of India, 1944-8                                           77
 . ‘Pictorial’ method of section-drawing. After G. Bersu             78

 . Layout of a trench for three-dimensional recording                88

 . Sections illustrating the relationship of strata to a wall, and
   their removal by summary excavation                               94
 . Stratification in relation to the external wall of the Roman
   amphitheatre at Caerleon, Monmouthshire, 1926                     96

                                   II
                              TEXT       FIGURES

18.    The Ysceifiog barrow, Flintshire, showing the layout for
       excavation. After Cyril Fox                                  116

19. Selected sections across the Ysceifiog barrow (nos. 5 and 6
       omitted). After Cyril Fox                                    I17

20.    Successive sites of pre-Roman and Roman Verulamium.
       (From Verulamium Report, 1936, p. 2, fig. 1)                 137
21.    Map of the earthworks of Wheathampstead and Verula-
       mium, with intervening dykes. From R. E. M. and T. V.
       Wheeler, Verulamium (Society of Antiquaries of London,
       1936)                                                        140 |
      . Map of India showing sites which have produced ‘rouletted
       ware’ of the first century A.D.                              145




                                         I2
                              PREPAGE


 Ir is something like a quarter of a century since I first undertook to
 write this book. I now know less than I did then, and will probably
 in the following pages more often recommend what not to do than
 what to do. That is perhaps as it should be. It cannot be affirmed too
 often that bad scholarship in the field generally involves the fruitless
  and final obliteration of evidence, and bad scholarship is still all too
_ prevalent there. On the positive side, Ihave described certain methods
  and principles, which, on the basis of trial and much-error, I have
 found less harmful than others that have been employed. Many of
 the selected methods and principles are derived from those of the
 greatest of all archaeological excavators, General Pitt Rivers. Others
 I have learned from colleagues and from the workmen whom I have
 employed in various parts of the world. A few may be of my own
  devising. They are offered, not as laws, but as the notes and remin-
  iscences of a lengthy and varied archaeological experience. For the
  most part I have refrained from discussing aspects of field-archaeology
  of which I myself have no considerable first-hand knowledge. The
  repeated use of the first personal pronoun is a reminder to the reader
  that some at least of the limitations of this essay are appreciated by
  the author.
     If there be a connecting theme in the following pages, it is this: an
  insistence that the archaeologist is digging up, not things, but people.
  Unless the bits and pieces with which he deals be alive to him, unless
  he have himself the common touch, he had better seck out other
  disciplines for his exercise. Of this more-will be said in the first and
  last chapters, but I would make it clear at once that here is an earthy
_ book, inapt to clerkly hands. Not for an instant, of course, is it pre-
  tended that the spade is mightier than the pen; they are twin instru-
  ments; but, in this matter of digging, the controlling mind must have
  in a developed degree that robust three-dimensional quality which is
  less immediately essential to some other inquiries. In a simple direct
  sense, archaeology is a science that must be lived, must be ‘seasoned
  with humanity’. Dead archaeology is the driest dust that blows.
    The substance of this book constituted the Rhind Lectures for 195.
                                      13
                              PREFACE

In its preparation I must isolate two acknowledgements: to Miss
Kathleen Kenyon, my colleague and merciless critic for many years,
and to Miss Theodora Newbould who has relentlessly urged me from
chapter to chapter and cannot disown all responsibility for the result.
For permission to reproduce illustrations thanks are due to the Society
of Antiquaries of London, the Louvre Museum,           the Prehistoric
Society, the editor of Antiquity, the British School of Egyptian
Archaeology, the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago,
and the American Schools of Oriental Research.
                                                       R. E. M. W.
  INSTITUTE OF ARCHAEOLOGY
  UNIVERSITY OF LONDON
   1956




                                  14
                                                                          ee
                                                                          Re
                                                                          ee
                                                                          eS
                                                                           e
                             CHAPTER       I


                         Introductory

THERE is no right way of digging, but there are many wrong ways.
Amongst the latter our successors will no doubt include ways which
we regard to-day as relatively right, in accordance with the natural
principle whereby every generation is liable to belittle the achieve-
ment of its predecessors. This attitude is often enough unjust. Before
heaping scorn too promiscuously upon our untutored forebears, it is
at least only fair to classify their shortcomings and to differentiate be-
tween culpability and immaturity. It is unprofitable to blame Xerxes
for omitting to deploy torpedo-boats at Salamis, or Napoleon for
attacking the British squares with cavalry instead of machine-guns.
Nor, by the same token, can we honourably blame an Early Victorian
barrow-digger for omitting to record by the three-dimensional
method. But there is much, far too much, in more recent archaeologi-
cal excavation that falls short of the highest available standards and
therefore deserves the lash. At the best, excavation is destruction; and
destruction unmitigated by all the resources of contemporary know-
ledge and accumulated experience cannot be too rigorously im-
pugned. In the following pages attention will be drawn from time
to time to the crimes no less than to the virtues of contemporaries and
forebears, in the full awareness that, as a fellow-practitioner, the
author is himself avulnerable target.
  And when in these pages certain methods are suggested as prefer~
able to others in certain contexts, I would at once make it clear that
I am indulging in reminiscence, not laying down laws. For thirty
years it has been my occupation to dig up antiquity in a variety of
countries and circumstances, and I have sought to profit from experi-
ence and criticism. But there is no term to either, and I have no doubt
that, as I write, further experience and criticism are building up or
eliminating what I have written. Who would have it otherwise:
mayta pel. We cannot twice descend into the same stream, said the
philosopher.
   To-day it is indeed no easy matter to preserve a just balance
                                    T5
              ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

between aim and method in this business of digging up the past. De-
veloping technique is liable to obscure the objective; at the best a sort
of leap-frog progress ensues. Attempts of a semi-philosophic kind
to adjust the priorities are not always very helpful. What in fact is
Archaeology? I do not myself really know. Theses have been written
to demonstrate that it is This or That or not the Other Thing; for
example, I may refer the reader, if he will, to a laborious analysis with
a bibliography of 612 works which was produced in 1948 by an
American exponent.! It may be doubted whether all this matters
very much to us in our daily application. We may be content to see
that the grass is green without understanding the mysteries of chloro-
phyll or attempting to distinguish too cleverly between botany and
chemistry; we may appreciate the Unfinished Symphony without a
profound knowledge of the physics of the vibratory disturbance
which we call sound. I do not even know whether Archaeology is to
be described as an art or as a science; more will be said of this in the
concluding chapter. But it is at least abundantly clear that Archae-
ology is increasingly dependent on a multitude of sciences and is itself
increasingly adopting the methodology of a natural science. It draws
to-day upon physics, chemistry, geology, biology, economics, politi-
cal science, sociology, climatology, botany, and I know not what else.
Asa science, it is pre-eminently a synthetic process; and if we prefer to
regard it as an art, or even as a philosophy, we must still affirm that it
is an integration of scientifically observed and dissected phenomena
relating to man; it is still a synthesis. These are not definitions,
they are merely description, and incomplete at that. It will not”
help us forward      to our main      objective,    the study of human
cultures, to spend time and ingenuity upon the academic niceties of
definition.
   But there is one guiding condition of our work which I would
emphasize at the outset. We belong, some of us, to a generation which
has been involved actively in two wars. Military similes are therefore
not entirely alien to us. And I would accordingly urge that in one vital —
respect at least there is an analogy between archaeological and military ~
field-work that is recurrent and illuminating. The analogy rests -
strangely enough as between the dead and the deadly — in the under-
  1. Walter W. Taylor, ‘A Study of Archaeology’, American Anthropologist, 1,
Memoir no. 69 (Indiana University, 1948).                                    “4

                                     16
                          INTRODUCTORY

lying humanity of both disciplines. The soldier, for his part, is fighting
not against a block of coloured squares on a war-map; he is fighting
against a fellow-being, with different but discoverable idiosyncrasies
which must be understood and allowed for in every reaction and
manoeuvre. Equally, as has been urged in the preface, the archae-
ological excavator is not digging up things, he is digging up people;
however much he may analyse and tabulate and desiccate his dis-
coveries in the laboratory, the ultimate appeal across the ages, whether
the time-interval be 500 or 500,000 years, is from mind to intelligent
mind, from man to sentient man. Our graphs and schedules mean
nothing if they do not ultimately mean that. Of our scraps and pieces
we may say, with Mark Antony in the market-place, ‘You are not
wood, you are not stones, but men’. It is a truism of which I con-
stantly find it necessary to remind the student and indeed myself:
that the life of the past and the present are diverse but indivisible;
that Archaeology, in so far as it is a science, is a science which must
be extended into the living and must indeed itself be lived if it is to
partake of a proper vitality.
   Let me for a moment amplify this matter. I have said that we
cannot properly understand the past unless we have a living sym-
pathy with the human stuff which its relics represent. We cannot
understand, for example, the structural mechanism of an ancient
burial-mound unless we can bring to bear upon its details a rational
imagination capable of comprehending and vitalizing them. If we
fail to do that, we are not humanists but mere collectors of disjected
minutiae, signifying almost nothing. We would be better employed
collecting bus-tickets, an occupation which at least involves no damage
to scientific evidence. And since I have mentioned burial-mounds,
let me carry my example a stage further. No one has done more to
vivify the mumbo-jumbo of our Bronze Age burials than has Sir
Cyril Fox during a long series of excavations as Director of the
National Museum of Wales. One example in particular recurs to my
mind. Many years ago, Fox and I were trudging across a desolate
Welsh moorland and came upon a small barrow set within an earthen
                                                                  and
circle. Offa’s Dyke came steadfastly up to the lip of the circle
                               off again with equal determination  on
then on the other side started
a new alignment. The whole scene stirred Fox’s ready enthusiasm,
and a week or two later he had dug himself well into the landscape.
                                    17
                ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

The mound had by now vanished, and Fox stood, in the spirit,
amongst its makers. He was almost physically present at the living
ritual, the actual procedure of burial. I quote his own words:
   Under the centre of the mound was a deep and large grave-pit on the
floor of which lay the skeleton of a full-grown man. To enable this
grave to be entered with ease and dignity a sloping passage from ground-
level had been cut on the north side. Surrounding the grave-area was
a circular trench, which also had a sloping entrance, and on the same
side. But it had no exit: the area round the grave was isolated. The con-
clusions drawn from these facts were that the dead man’s home was on
the north side of the site chosen for his burial; that he had been cere-
monially borne by friends or kinsfolk up to, and into, the trench: that
those who carried him were not allowed to enter the consecrated area
round the grave, but that the persons charged with the performance of
the burial rites were awaiting the bearers beyond the trench. The body
was handed over, and these persons descended with it into the grave.

  What matters to us here and now is not, of course, the particular
episode whichI have cited but the creative act of reasoned imagina-
tion that has gone to the making or remaking of it. Fox’s interpreta-
tion may not be correct in all its details; in any event the objective         —
facts upon which it is based are fully recorded, and the interpretation
of them can be reshaped in the light of fuller knowledge. The great
thing is that those facts are infused with a rational intelligence; they
emerge from Fox’s brain as three-dimensional entities. Contrast the
ordinary excavation-report. Year after year, individual after indi-
vidual, learned society after learned society, we are prosaically reveal-          —
ing and cataloguing our discoveries. Too often we dig up mere
things, unrepentantly forgetful that our proper aim is to dig up
people.
   So too with ancient fortifications. It is no accident that leaders in
their interpretation have so often been soldiers: General Roy, for
example, in the eighteenth century; General Pitt Rivers, Napoleon
IIl’s colleagues, and the distinguished officers who manned the Ger-
man Limes Commission in the nineteenth. Our hill-forts, as Leland -
long ago remarked, are the works of ‘men of warre’; and their study
demands the virile spark of the mind militant. It is no mere by-
  1. C. Fox and Bruce Dickins, The Early Cultures of North-west Europe (Cam-
bridge, 1950), p. 54.

                                     18
                         INTRODUCTORY

product of the study of culture-creeps and ceramic crosswords: both,
be it added, admirable and indeed essential preoccupations, and
lovable after their fashion.
  Enough, now, of these general matters of approach. Some pains
have been taken to emphasize initially the vital principle because so
much of the substance of the following chapters is concerned with the
dry bones, with procedures, with the extraction of evidence rather
than with its interpretation. It is to be hoped that, even so, their con-
tents may be of some slight interest beyond the limited range of
archaeological practitioners. To-day, we can scarcely touch history
without touching archaeology; and for the greater part of human
existence we cannot touch history at all. Prehistory is a hundred times
as long as history, in the isolationist usage of the terms. The proper
study of mankind involves therefore a disproportionate amount of
archaeology; and, unless the reader have more faith in the professors
than I have, he will demand, and very properly demand, to know
something of their credentials. How does archaeology work: We
know that the historian goes to his documents and his epigraphs. On
what does the prehistorian depend? An attempt will be made in these
chapters to indicate, mainly from personal experience, some part of
the rather complicated machinery with which he wrings his evidence
from the earth.




                                    19
                             CHAPTER      2


                           Historical

First it may be useful to see something of the upgrowth of the tech-
nique of archaeological excavation during the past century, and so to
establish, however summarily, a perspective for our subject. It would
be of little profit to carry the matter further back behind the Victorian
era, and to follow others in a general discussion of the evolution of
conscious antiquarian thought from the time of the Renaissance or
earlier. We are concerned here with methodical digging for system-
atic information, not with the upturning of earth in a hunt for the
bones of saints and giants or the armoury of heroes, or just plainly for
treasure. It is of no importance to us that, as long ago as the twelfth
century, the monks of St Albans were digging up, recording, and
sanctifying the remains of some poor Saxon in Hertfordshire; nor
even are the early probings of the curious into sites such as Pompeii or
Herculaneum strictly relevant to the theme, although they no doubt
played their part as a stimulus to subterranean research in partibus.
True — a truth stranger than fiction — as early as 1784 a future Presi-
dent of the United States of America, of all people, was already carry-
ing out an excavation on surprisingly modern lines in Virginia — the
first scientific excavation in the history of archaeology. This astonish-
ing episode will be described in a future chapter (p. 58). It was
unique, not only in its age but for long afterwards, and it were better
to begin here with an incident of more normal kind.
   The chosen incident occurred in those forties of the nineteenth cen=
tury which were more fruitful than any other decade, whether in
Britain or abroad, in the foundation of new institutions for the fur-
therance of our science. On all hands new antiquarian societies were _
being established in England and Wales. The close of the decade was
marked by the transfer of the collections of the Society of Antiquar-
ies of Scotland to the Crown, and by the establishment of a separate
section of British and Medieval Antiquities in the British Museum.
“Within no very distant period’, wrote a contemporary observer,
‘the study of antiquities has passed, in popular esteem, from contempt
                                   20
                              HISTORICAL

to comparative honour.’! And it was in accordance with the new
spirit of the times that on an August day of 1844, on an obscure hill in
Kent above the vale of Maidstone, there assembled a top-hatted
gathering of the local nobility and gentry, reinforced by some twelve
or fourteen labourers who proceeded to hew a great gash through a
tall Romano-British barrow.
   It was the labour of four long days [the contemporary account in-
forms us] to cut entirely through the barrow, but we who were not
absolutely diggers contrived to pass our time to the full satisfaction of
all the party. . . . A plentiful supply of provisions had been procured for
picnicking on the hill, and we remained by the barrow all day, watching
and directing the operations. . .. We contrived to pass our time, at in-
tervals between digging and picnicking, in games of various descriptions
... and in other amusements. The season was fortunately exquisitely
fine, and it was only once or twice that we were visited with a
heavy shower from the south-west, when the only shelter was
afforded by the hole we had ourselves dug . . . in which we managed
to interlace parasols and umbrellas — much as the Roman soldiers
are said to have joined together their shields when advancing to the
attack of a fortress — so as to form a tolerably impenetrable roof over
our heads. .. .2
  The woodcuts (Pl. 1) speak for themselves.
   Such was the sense of light-hearted adventure that stirred our great-
grandparents in the dawn of a popular interest in archaeological field-
work. That spirit is not to be scorned. These gentry were, of course,
thé veriest amateurs (blessed word!) or merely curious spectators.
But their curiosity was the chrysalis of cultivated opinion from which,
                                                              take
in the fullness of time, modern archaeology was to emerge and
wing. Of the same ilk were the ladies and gentlemen who a little
later flocked in their carriages to watch Canon Greenwell dig a bar-
row on the Yorkshire wolds. A very notable man, the Canon; at the
                                                                          the
age of 97 he could still land his salmon, and those of us who have
good sense to be fishermen are careless of our best interests if we
cannot find a ‘Greenwell’s Glory’ somewhere in our fly-books. But
it is as the author of British Barrows that for the moment he recurs
                                                                    ogical In-
   1. ‘Introductory Address’ by E. Oldfield to the (Royal) Archaeol
stitute (itself founded in 1844), Arch. Journ. ix (1852, 1).
  2. Gentleman’s Magazine, Dec. 1852, p. 569.

                                     21
              ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

to us. The apocryphal history has it that on one occasion an elegant
and admiring assembly clustered round him whilst, with the intuition
of the inspired connoisseur, he chose his barrow from a series within
range and turned his labourers on to it. In due course, a handsome
burial-urn began to emerge from the excoriation, amidst the manly
gasps and ladylike cries of the spectators. As always, the dear and
wonderful Canon was infallible! The workmen gingerly lifted the
urn — exposing beneath it a copy of the previous day’s Times!
   Such were the methods of a less finicky age. Nevertheless, a proce-
dure which was stil] justifiable in Kent in 1844 or on the wolds a few
years later was in fact rendered obsolete by a young army officer
working in his spare moments in central India as long ago as 1851.
These dates are worth emphasizing because the work of Captain
Meadows Taylor, though limited in scope and scarcely noticed at
the time, marked or should have marked the beginning of a new
epoch in technical method and scientific observation. It did not, of
course, stop or even check picnic-party excavation. But the fact
remains that, after 1851, digging such as that described above, or
such as normally indeed persisted until far more recent times, was
for ever obsolete and culpable. Let us pause for a moment to examine
this innovation more nearly.
   The basis of scientific excavation is the accurately observed and
adequately recorded section. More will be said of this matter in a
later chapter. Here it will suffice to premise that the successive accu-
mulations of construction and debris on a buried occupation-site
have much the same validity as the successive pages of a book, and, to
be understood, must be comprehended in their proper sequence,
like the pages of a book. In a haphazard excavation such as that of
 the Kentish barrow it is scarcely necessary to observe that such accu-
mulations or strata as may have been present are not merely torn
 ruthlessly from their context but are not even postulated by the
 carefree excavator. The whole mechanism of the ‘book’ is ignored
 or misunderstood. If we set aside the eighteenth-century American
statesman of whom mention has been made, Meadows Taylor was
the first man, so far as I know, to hint implicitly at the true function
of the excavator and recorder in this vital matter. He was an officer
and highly successful administrator in the relatively obscure service
of the Nizam of Hyderabad State. He is known to fame, if at all, as _
                                   22
                             HISTORICAL

the author of The Confessions of a Thug; but of his work as an amateur
archaeologist the Dictionary of National Biography says nothing. For
that we have to turn to three papers published in the Journal of the
Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, iii (1851), 179-93, and iv
(1852), 380-429; and, unexpectedly, in the Transactions of the Royal
Trish Academy, xxiv, pt. iii, Antiquities (1862), 329-62. These three
papers show an acuteness of perception and a technical competence
far in advance of the time. Meadows Taylor dug into a number of the
megalithic tombs characteristic of central and southern India, and
drew and described sections which preserve an informative and con-
vincing record of what he found, with differentiated strata (Fig. 1).
When one recalls that only seven or eight years divide the work of
the Kentish party from that of the lone fever-stricken Englishman in
native India, the latter’s achievement stands out as a landmark in the
annals of archaeology. Unfortunately, British archaeology in India
was not destined to maintain this pre-eminence.
   During the following decades much pick-and-shovel work of a
spectacular kind drew increasing attention to the possibilities of the
craft. Troy and Mycenae set Homer and Schliemann firmly upon
their feet. In France, under the eagle of Napoleon III, the admirable
Colonel Stoffel ran Julius Caesar to earth with a considerable measure
of success, combining military manoeuvre with a certain rudimentary
technical skill. He realized, for example, the significant fact that soil,
once disturbed, rarely quite resumes its original compactness, and
that in particular the ditches of Caesar’s camps, now utterly levelled,
could still be detected in section. His method of search, reasonably
enough, was to attack his buried fortifications with massed formation
of trial-trenches.
   I placed the workmen [he wrote] with picks and shovels in several
files, in a direction perpendicular to one of the presumed sides of the
[buried] camp, the workmen in each file 20 or 30 metres from one an-
other. Each of them was ordered to remove the layer of humus to a width
of 2 feet. If, after having removed this layer to a depth of 70 centimetres,
they felt that their picks were striking a resistant soil, the inference was
that this soil had never been removed and that there was no Roman
ditch. The workmen then continued to advance so long as nothing
different was encountered. But when they arrived, beyond doubt, at the
ditch, the difference was at once apparent.

                                     23
                                                 SNOZDVITNOLY
                                                        JIVHS




                        ENS UABef9        (QUEUES
        *z   eoedg poapy YIM Asis ‘qizvapue         suojo[oys
              Sor ApIepN UMOIY)
                              “Ur
        *        soueUY‘souoys      ouosoury7
                                          ‘sqeys “33 ‘qaede                                                   ‘VW “y        squis
                                                                                                                                FO                      DUOJsoUIT]
                                                                                                                                                            IOF    *‘IOOP
        °      pIsinod[DIID *S3U0}$                                                                          “gf “g                wySudcq,
                                                                                                                                         squisJog “Opts
        *    as007T sauojspure *yjive
mtrno   °    eoedg paypy TIIM [[tuIs ‘sun
        °     apSutg yNysuo do} Jo ‘sun                                                                       ‘C      “CG
                                                                                                                            OMT,
        °    sSutg T[Nysuo do} Jo        ‘suojoTays
        °     oSurg[[Nysuo    ISpoy
                                  Jo BeYs I9AO "suIN
                                                                                                     PFT
                                                                                                     PUL
                                                                                                     “OD
                                                                                                     ‘D
                                                                                                     JOOF
                                                                                                     “SqeTS “A
                                                                                                            sr
                                                                                                            Poy
                                                                                                            TIM
                                                                                                             ‘SUIN
BRON                                                                 uNeD
                                                                        *q   punorg
                                                                                 UT JO    3SI-                                             “suojZ[OYs

                         “SLY"I      woTs0g   ySnory3
                                                &             orpTeSow
                                                                   oaeI3
                                                                      ut     peqesopAP]
                                                                                   ‘o7e1g “erpuyAg                   smopeoyw‘JojAvy,
                                                                                                                                   ISgi
                             HISTORICAL

   It may be added that the Colonel’s regimented enthusiasm was
shared by his Emperor who, at Gergovia, “was so wonder-struck on
seeing the profiles [of the Caesarian ditches thus revealed in section]
that he thought of buying the hill to preserve them. He abandoned
this idea when he learned that the inhabitants did not desire to be
dispossessed, and he ordered me to fill in my trenches and to restore
everything to its former state.’! The path of science never did run
smooth!
  But it was left to another soldier, a Briton, to make the first sub-
stantive advance in the technique of excavation and recording. In the
year 1880, General Lane Fox by a surprising series of chances suc-
ceeded to the Rivers estate situated in Wiltshire and eastern Dorset,
and under the terms of the will assumed the name Pitt Rivers. He had
already varied a military career by a study of artifacts along evolu-
tionary lines, and had been admitted to the Royal Society for his
anthropological work. The principle of the evolution of human insti-
tutions was no new concept. It had indeed found expression as far
back as 1786, when Sir William Jones in Calcutta had enunciated the
evolutionary relationship of certain languages — Sanskrit, Greek,
Latin, Persian, Celtic, and ‘Gothick’ - another example of British
pioneer scholarship in partibus. But the dramatic development of that
principle in relation to natural species during the fifth and sixth
decades of the nineteenth century had given a new impetus to its
application in the humanistic field. And now the General, in the
course of his musketry, had found the same basic principle in the
development of fire-arms, and had extended it to other human
instruments. His whole approach to archaeology was thus from
a modern angle, and for twenty years. he explored the ancient
sites on or adjoining his estate with a science and scholarship that
half a century of subsequent work has supplemented rather than
superseded.
   Above all, the General’s constant plea was for ‘greater precision
and detail in excavation’.?
   It will, perhaps, be thought by some [he remarks] that I have recorded
the excavations... with unnecessary fullness, and I am sure that I have
                                                                        as
done it in greater detail than has been customary, but my experience
                                                                   xxv ff.
  1. T. Rice Holmes, Caesar’s Conquest of Gaul (Oxford, 1911), pp.
  2. Excavation s in Cranborne Chase, i (1887), pp. Xvi-xvii.

                                     25
                                                              usaf                                                                                                               BIv>s
                                                                                                                                                                                    40|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OLNI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SIHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OZL9E°0Hd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    "NOILIES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ayuVv



                                                                                      6         e        a          9                 +       &        sf           ‘    oe
                                                                                                                                                                        449-85 WOLLOG     ZOVURAV
                                                                                   40
                                                                                   HL
                                                                                   YOs‘HILIO
                                                                                   DILVWVUOVIA
                                                                                   *SESOSUNE
                                                                          JUV
                                                                           JIIML
                                                                           SOTSe
                                                                           FL
                                                                           NAVE
                                                                           HL

                                                                                   GYIHL-4NO
                                                                                   BITVS
                                                                                   FHL
                                                                                   SNOLZ
                                                                                   JHL
                                                                                   TINS
                                                                                   AO
                                                                                   JO
                                                                                   FHL
                                                                                   FIVIS
                                                                                   ONW'HILIC
                                                                                   IZIS
                                                                                                                                                                         HILIG    ONNOM
                                                                                                                                                                                      HL       SITE GNNOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ITV   BHL
            wna nnane nanan ne LIE IDAW--n2-=-nenennnny




                                                                                     f                                    sao corey           oe ew
                                                                                                                                  oY
                                                                                                                           é Zarmas ’
                                                                                                             SINOW BOVAUNS IHL 0 NIDMVW Yo!           sOvunAY
                                                                                                                                                  i
                                                          SNOLIIIe
                                                           “gon
                                                                                                             010
                                                                                     =—             wo                          Cc)
[ecee
  2
              “ed
            TE,                                  ‘        #          06                oo 5
                                                                                      pin aes
                                                                                          a                        ONO’    sunsONY sunt
                                                                                                                                          me wh
                                                                                                                                          z    Cosme
                                                                                                                                                Be
                                                                                                                                                                8        bo we
                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                         $10
                                                                                                                                                                                 6h       %
                                                                                                                                                                                              sO
                                                                                                                                                                                                     s
                                                                                                                                                                                                    vr
   =                                             6        =
       a                                                                                             *HLONZ1         NI L334 02+ LNOGV            HOLIG
       tf
p1o0se1 [euorsustuIp-sery} & WoT poyofosd a Surmoys ‘g6gi “Yastog] ‘MOTI JOM\ “Jo Yop oy} sore sr9aNy Wg Aq WoNdeg “zt “BLY
                                                                                       ‘y 3-0 yydap ‘peoy-reods tozy “91
        *(qouIp Jo o]e9s 07 UMeIp) yIdop oyeuT                                                                  “wadop oyeurrxosdde ‘sueysu0D Jo uIOD “qSI
-rxoidde ‘ur10j orpprjooreg jo yuourozdun yurpy *$€                                                          “yidep oyeumrxoidde ‘snyususepy Jo UIOD “PST
                                                                 SLNHOWATIWI




                                        Ys                                                                           ‘4 1 Mydop ‘{ suNUEsUOD Jo MIOD ‘SI
yadep ‘g “ON :JO4S JO squt ul peoy-Morse yup *6z                                                                     "3g 1 apdop ‘[ ouNUEIsUOD jo WIOD ‘FI
                                                                               HNOLS
                  ‘yb yydop ‘peoy-moure yur] “gz                                                                           "y 1 ydop ‘snommey, Jo uloD “£1
                 "Y 8-¥ Gadop ‘a[20 3UTY poystfod “Lz                                                                   *Y T-1 Wydap ‘snore, Jo uroD   “cI
                            "y ¥ yadop ‘3[99 UML “97                                                                                 *e ‘ON WOIPYS
                              "yy I qadop ‘mes yup    *Sz                                            cyHys reo “yy L.o yydep ‘q] ounuesuoD Jo uIOD                        ‘II
                                                                                                                       “yy $-1 qydap ‘snuaryed Jo uloD                    ‘or
                                                                                                                                                                                    NYWOU

                                            ‘Yy F.7
                                                                               HZNOUG

wadap ‘suorstour yItAA poyuourvuio ‘ayejd ozuosg,     “bz
                                                                 HOV                                                    ‘snomjay,
                                                                                                                               midep
                                                                                                                                   g-0 *Y                 uIODJo         *6
                        “yy 1 ydop ‘1ozer ozuoIg,     “£7                                                                      ‘yy tI uydap reu ozuoIg                        °g
                             "y S.1 09 YI s~doq       ‘zz                                                              "1 yadop ‘ureyo Jo yur] ozuorg                         *L
                                                            0}                                                                ‘yy 1 wadop ‘apjonq ozuoig                      *9
                       ‘Kroyod jo stroqa-sppurds “gr                                                                           "4 8-0 tidop ‘Surz ozuorg                      °*S
“43 £.1 yydop ‘o3po snonurs yI1AA ‘soys-asi10y Uo “pLI
                                                                 NVYWOU

                                                                                                                       "Y 8-0 tadop ‘enqy porepd-soais                        “F
                                                                                                                                            uoxes-ojsuy


   *pfnout oovgins ‘asn uMouyUN Jo yolqo uo “ILI                                                                               “y I tadap ‘emnqy azuoig                       *f
                                                                                        Atqeqoard)                     “uoureaso
                                                                                                                                                               “(mores
                           4g: 1 yydop ‘sreu wor “9qL1                                                              “plnour sovjins “Iouvepo-[reu ozuoIg “c
                                                                                                                                   oppriq
                                                            ‘PLT
                                                            9-0
                                                            or
                                                            ‘ayruy
                                                            yidap
                                                            ‘y
                                                                                                          -y
                                                                                                          L.1
                         yy b.1 yadop ‘oxrery ory “LI                                                     yydop                                                          “1
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM      THE    EARTH

an excavator has led me to think that investigations of this nature are not
generally sufficiently searching, and that much valuable evidence is lost
by omitting to record them carefully. . . . Excavators, as a rule, record
only those things which appear to them important at the time, but fresh
problems in Archaeology and Anthropology are constantly arising, and
it can hardly fail to have escaped the notice of anthropologists . . . that,
on turning back to old accounts in search of evidence, the points which
would have been most valuable have been passed over from being
thought uninteresting at the time. Every detail should, therefore, be re-
corded in the manner most conducive to facility of reference, and it
ought at all times to be the chief object of an excavator to reduce his
own personal equation to a minimum.
   In practice, Pitt Rivers’s method was to record every object in such
a manner that it could be replaced accurately in its findspot on the
recorded plan and section. That is the essence of three-dimensional
recording, and three-dimensional recording is the essence of modern
excavation. Since the time of Pitt Rivers we have in some respects
elaborated his technical processes, and there is no doubt that the best
records of the present day surpass the General’s. It is salutary to reflect,
however, what he might himself have done with another fifty years
of experience behind him!
   Let us glance for a further moment at the master’s working prin-
ciples. From the outset, he grasped the vital need of an adequate staff,
a need which has since his time been too often neglected, with deplor-
able consequences. He at once
 determined to organize a regular staff of assistants, and to train them to
their respective functions after establishing a proper division of work.
.-. The work of superintending the digging — though I never allowed
it to be carried on in my absence, always visiting the excavations at
least three times a day and arranging to be sent for whenever anything
of importance was found—was more than I could undertake single- -
handed .. . and I had by ample experience been taught that no excava-
tion ought ever to be permitted except under the immediate eye of a
responsible and trustworthy superintendent.
Or again:
   The excavations in Winkelbury [a Wiltshire ‘camp’] having been
carried on before my assistants were sufficiently trained, I never left the
                1. Excavations in Cranborne Chase, i, p. xviii.

                                      28
                              HISTORICAL

ground during any great part of them. One or more of the assistants was
always engaged in superintending the workmen upon the ground or in
drawing the objects, in repairs to the skulls and the pots, and in forming
the relic tables, by which means the records have been kept up to date,
and it has been found important that, as far as possible, everything
should be recorded whilst it was fresh in memory.
The fruits of this irreproachable system are shown in the classic
sections across the Dorset dykes or the ditches of Wor Barrow (Fig. 2),
where every object found is projected carefully on to stratified sec-
tions in a fashion which has stood the test of constant back-reference
by two generations of archaeologists.
  I pass on to 1904, four years after the General’s death. In that year,
Flinders Petrie, whose genius will long outlive the occasional gibes of
his successors, described his aims and methods in a classic monograph
which is itselfacuriosity. Typical, for example, both of the man and
of the age in which he worked is his advocacy of the payment of
labourers on a piece-work basis rather than by the day. “Working by
the piece saves all this trouble [i.e. of constant supervision], and if the
men are well-trained, and the work is simple, it goes on automatically
and takes the smallest amount of attention. In detached small sites men
may even be left unvisited for two or three days, merely reporting each
evening how they have worked.’? My pen melts as I transcribe those
words. The almost complete absence of measured sections from
Petrie’s reports is the inevitable corollary of his ‘method’. His great
problem was to keep his labourers at work. An air of vigilant sur-
prises had to be sustained. He devised sunken approaches to the scene
of operations, so that he could come upon his diggers unawares and
catch them out; and he supplemented this device by long-range
snooping through a telescope, with results which he triumphantly
retails. The same spirit, with an alternative remedy, survived a
quarter of a century later in a manual on field-work issued in 1929 by
no less exalted a body than the French Prehistoric Society. There also
it is the congenital ‘dishonesty’ of the workman rather than the
scientific need for constant skilled supervision that constitutes the
major problem; but the remedy, printed in italics and praiseworthy
       1. Excavations in Cranborne Chase, ii (1888), p. xiv.
                                                                 p. 29.
       2. W.M. Flinders Petrie, Methods and Aims in Archaeology,
       3. Ibid., p. 28.

                                       29
                ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

enough in itself, is: The best way to ensure the honesty ofyour workmen
is not to leave them a minute. That is by the way; to return to Petrie, it
is only fair to add that I knew him well, and, like all who knew him,
profoundly admired his untiring search for truth by such means as
he understood. But it is abundantly apparent that, between the
technical standards of Petrie and those of his older contemporary Pitt
Rivers, there yawned a gulf into which two generations of Near
Eastern archaeologists have in fact plunged to destruction. Petrie
worked for more than the normal span and with more than the
normal energy in a particularly spectacular field. His pupils were
legion and his hold upon them was manifested in an unquestioning
fidelity that was sufficiently intelligible and creditable but was itself
a bar to progress. When I last visited him, on his deathbed inJerusalem
at the beginning of 1942, his restless brain was still hovering over a
multitude of problems and possibilities which extended the smaller
minds of his listeners, and I left him for the last time with a renewed
sense of that devotion which he inspired in the hearts of his pupils
and friends. It is almost with a feeling of guilt that I now, after con-
siderable experience of his work and of the tradition which he
established widely over the East, find myself compelled to deplore an
influence which in much of its technique so long outlasted its scientific
usefulness.
   Thirty years after Petrie’s ingenuous self-revelation, another
archaeologist, arguing from experience in Palestine (where more sins
have probably been committed in the name of archaeology than on
any commensurate portion of the earth’s surface), could still write
as follows:
{the foreman] receives general instructions from tne director for each
day’s work, picks men for special tasks, . . . sees to it that regulations are
carried out, . . . [and] usually stands on some high point from which he
can oversee the excavations. ... Of course, it would be very unwise for a
director to leave him or any overseers of gangs to their own devices for long,
since their understanding ofmethods is mechanical? [italics mine].
The glimmerings of conscience are visible in that sentence,
                                                         but the
   1. Manuel de recherches préhistoriques, published by the Société Préhistorique
Frangaise (Paris, 1929), p. 23.
   2. W. F. Badé, A Manual of Excavation in the Near East (Univ. of California      —
Press, 1934), p. 20.                                     ‘

                                       30
                              gf6r ‘ounsoreg ‘inffy Jo Tor, YSnomp oNses t jo ye *€ “Sty
                                                                                                                                                                     oot-SaNQNI
                                                                3               ‘oso.:        ngs         «ad            Zao             Dee          eals
              nents Tee
                                                                                                                                                             woiva
                                                                                                                                                             SN
                              nC          BOSHIX ENAV
                                                            BiZovauns
                                                                 40 TIL                  a   ES
                                                                                                     Re                  |
                                                                                                                                                ©
                                                                                                                                                      SBH      OME
                                                                                                       ATH OGH AE   et   “wvWw   G38uAAsIGNA    | |
     fo         BM- a vo                   uvo      a                 hy   ve       i    ,         a earns
                                                                                                  Ve                     cs 7      : ;                  :
          —    -—      —              —    -              e     Sv)
                                                                                                                                                       QHD
                    Wega eam eke ae   OW D         sates) -FVO_.MONAVAV2xE BMOMET i       B>vawNS
                                                                                  WIBL wo ee
OL        el Fel”                           Fite
                                                                                                                                               Bg
                                                                      =n
          uo
                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                            i.
                                                                                                                                                            mmm
                                                                                                                                                            ‘=
                                                                                                                                                            re,
                                                                                                                                                            ote
                                                                                                                                                            ani
                                                                                                                                                            oe
                                                                                                                                                             mee
                                                                                                                                                             ese
                                                                                                                                                             06
                                                                                                                                                             tes
               ARCHAEOLOGY               FROM     THE     EARTH

old sin shows through. There is still no real understanding of the
primary principle of all excavation, that no shovelful of earth shall
be cut save under direct and skilled supervision. And those who have
witnessed Palestinian excavation with a critical eye know all too well
how widespread and enduring has been the technical irresponsibility
of much of its direction throughout an active half-century.
   Let us transfer our cautionary tale from precept to practice: not to
stir more mud but to point the lesson, however negative it be. The
sections (from Tell el Ajjil in Palestine) reproduced in Fig. 3 represent
a long and hard-worn tradition which dies hard and still awaits a
coup de grace. They were drawn in 1938 and published in 1952, so
that they may be regarded as of comparatively modern date. Never-
theless, they belong technically to the infancy of archaeology and
were, in fact, obsolete more than a century ago. Regard the absence
of associated strata, the omission even of symbolical levels, so that
the walls are suspended in section as in a vacuum. And that this sort of
technical atavism is still international in its vogue is shown by a




                  ZZ BYZANTINE            5     ION I
                  RGSS PERSIAN
                          GHELLENISTIC    [IN LATE   BRONZE
                  (Rg TRON                ERY MIDDLE    BRONZE


      Fig. 4. Section through part of the site of Bethel, Palestine, 1939

section from another Palestinian site (Bethel), reproduced here from
an authoritative American commentary published in 1939 (Fig. 4).
Better far is a section through one of the mounds of Sialk, in central
Iran, published in 1938 (Fig. 5): yet, even here, observation and record
are sctappy, strata are unlabelled and are left incomplete and in mid-
ait, detailed reconstruction of the picture is impossible and the
                                     32
                          gl6r ‘uey ‘yYeIS Jo punour oy} Jo yzed YSnoy UoNdeg *S “Sty
          ce
                     7°                                                HLUYa G2Y gen         = —       =e) ecto
                   My r                'aoldad                     SIHSV   39 HLYV]   §GES    ang                  JVUNLVN
                     rs      i           1311s                        Hluva AIUD      EB      Brae           hit
                   of               Tial HIMON                      hiuya AAoTIaA CI          eeos| ost
           Vi
           dordd
                     {
                                                                                                      oA
                                                                                        WME   Ue cE   | ve
gomad
   t)
  ‘|   GOWAd
dOMWad
   Su
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

accurate projection of finds on to the section would be impracticable
even were the necessary data tabulated. But for downright technical
incompetence, the largest archaeological department in the world —
the old Archaeological Survey of India - was unbeatable. Here the
primary blame rests not with the Indians, who are quick and ready to
learn, but with the successive British staffs responsible for the estab-
lishment and initial running of the department. It is almost beyond
belief that as recently as 1940 the Survey could publish in monumen-
tal form ‘sections’ such as those here illustrated (Figs. 6 and 7): the
one showing walls suspended, like those of Bethel, in a featureless
profile of the site, with neither building-lines nor occupation strata,
varied only by indications of the completely unmeaning piles of
earth on which the excavator left some of his walls standing; the
other showing the burials of two variant cultures floating like a rather
disorderly balloon-barrage, without hint of the strata and the grave-
lines which would have indicated their scientific inter-relationship.
It is sad to compare these caricatures of science with the admirable
sketch-records of Meadows Taylor, nearly a century earlier.
   This circumstance is the more remarkable in that the average stand-
ard of field-archaeology in Great Britain itself during the past half
century has been unsurpassed, if approached, by that of any other
country. That statement is made with no insular prejudice. In Hol-
land, Dr van Giffen and others have evolved methods of excavation
which mark a new standard of finesse, and certain of the German
excavators, notably Dr Gerhard Bersu, need no commendation from
me. Since its inauguration in 1890, the German Limes Commission,           ;
though often technically below the General Pitt Rivers standard, has
produced admirably co-ordinated work, particularly valuable in its
attention to small finds. But in the very limited area of the British
Isles, rich in remains of differentiated cultures, with the General’s          —
example behind them, field-archaeologists have worked within               —
close range of one another and under the fire of constant and even
fierce mutual criticism. Bad work has been done, but rarely with
impunity. Experience has been readily shared and a steady progress
assured, from the days of J. P. Bushe-Fox in the first quarter of the
century to those of Ian Richmond and Grahame Clark in the second. _
   In the face of this achievement at home, what has gone wrong with
Eastern or Near Eastern field-archaeology? The question is worth —
                                  34
                             HISTORICAL

asking if a remedy is to be found. The answer is not in fact difficult,
and the remedy follows. The error has lain not in quantity but in
quality. In the first place, few excavators who have gone East have in
the past received adequate preliminary training under closely critical
observation such as has been noted above from Britain. They have
generally gone East as class-room or museum orientalists, with the
bare knowledge of an ancient language or of more-or-less classified



                 aa
                    LL Tees        TTT]
                    ALT TN




             Fig. 6. Section of part of Harappa, Pakistan, 1940

 exhibits and disjecta but without practical experience of the field-
problem. And, once there, they are generally lost. An excavator may
work for years on a remote Asiatic site without being able to discuss
 his methods and results on the spot with competent critics. In the
 second place, Eastern excavation has in the past tended to attract
 relatively liberal endowment, either through the natural lure of a
 Biblical context, or of association with famous and impressive civiliza-
tions, or of the general ‘romance’ of the Orient, or even of the East
as a winter-tourist objective to wealthy Western benefactors. This
liberal endowment, coupled with the relatively cheap cost of native
labour, has encouraged wholesale mass-excavation,             rewarded   by
extensive building-plans and ample finds which gratify the patron
but are far beyond the capacity of anything approaching exact record.
Indeed, cheap oriental labour has in the past been a constant snare
(compare PI. 4a). ‘The maximum number of labourers employed at
any one time was something over thirteen hundred’, states the report
of the excavation (in 1912-13) of an outstandingly important Eastern
site where only one supervisor was present. In the third place, the
‘common use of mud-brick for building and the impact of extreme
                                      35
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE   EARTH

weather-conditions have often (though not always) combined to
deepen the strata on an Eastern site, so that their over-all depth may be
at least five times as great as on a closely interleaved British site. It is
understandable that these deep strata encourage proportionately
drastic methods of excavation which tend to outpace supervision. A
ruined mud-brick building will dissolve into several feet of almost
uniform deposit; desert winds will cover it with a thick mantle of
undifferentiated sand; torrential rains will transfer material in bulk
and may artificially intermix and level it. 1 have indeed heard it




   Fig. 7. Section through part of a cemetery at Harappa, Pakistan, 1940

stated that there is often no appreciable stratification on a sun-
bleached, monsoon-swept Eastern site. The allegation is quite untrue. —
There is no method proper to the excavation of a British site which is not
applicable — nay, must be applied ~ to a site in Africa or Asia.
                                    36
                             HISTORICAL

   The remedy therefore is that the oriental field-worker shall, as a
matter of routine, have a preliminary and thorough grounding in the
West, where critical control is at hand, and where strata are liable to
be more concise and so to provide a more concentrated experience
than an Eastern site can be expected to furnish. There is scarcely any-
thing, be it repeated, in the work of Pitt Rivers or his accredited
 British successors that is not relevant to the excavation of a tell in
 Turkestan or a tomb in Syria. It is the more astonishing that those
 standards have so rarely penetrated to the further shores of the Medi-
 terranean; east of Suez, they were until very recent years almost
 unknown.
    It will thus, I hope, be appreciated that these remarks thinly veil an
 appeal — an appeal above all to the younger generation of archaeolo-
 gists. I have, from experience, recommended elsewhere? the use of
 Roman Britain as a suitable basic training-ground for excavators of
 all periods and regions, by reason of its structural variety, its abundant
 stratigraphy, its productiveness, and its ready availability. There are
 many alternatives but the principle is the same: always that of precise
 and detailed training. We must give our recruits their Aldershot dis-
 cipline before sending them out on to the battlefields of the world.
 In the past we have been unwisely casual in this matter.
    In the present chapter an attempt has been made by way of intro-
 duction to do two things: first to sketch, very summarily, the main
 phases of technical development during the past century, and secondly
 to hint at a sustained and dangerous cleavage in technical standards
 between East and West. This cleavage will be reconsidered at a later
 stage; meanwhile, in the next two chapters something ofa more posi-
‘tive and constructive kind must be said of the ordering of our field-
evidence, and of its interpretation in terms of an absolute or relative
chronology.
   1. ‘The Archaeology of the Roman Provinces, and Beyond’, Fifth Annual
Report of the London University Institute of Archaeology, 1948.




                                     37
                              CHAPTER       3

                          Chronology

It is a truism that the backbone of history is an agreed chronology.
Yet it sometimes seems that to-day chronology of the old rigid type
is a trifle out of fashion in the routine of historical studies. To an older
generation the mathematics of the business were important; the treas-
ure-house could only be unlocked by combinations of integers pain-
fully remembered often long after the treasure itself had passed into
limbo. Now that is in some measure changed, doubtless on the whole
for the better. Archaeology, not as a rule clogged with overmuch
‘arithmetic, may be in part responsible for the shifting bias. It has
begun to percolate through our universities to our schools, and some-
times forms innocuous pools of somewhat colourless knowledge —
mostly a refined Darwinism — in which our kindergartens are encour-
aged to paddle. Ships and sealing-wax are beginning to rank almost
with kings, dateless everyday things with calendared State secrets.
The recentness and incompleteness of this emergence of archae-
ological as distinct from historical education is hard to realize until
we recall, for example, that it is still possible to take a First in Greats
at Oxford without even glancing at a Parthenon sculpture or an Attic
vase. To-day, when the traditional precision of history has nevertheless
been extensively supplemented by broadly based cultural studies, it
may seem reactionary and perverse to reaffirm, as I do, at the be-
ginning of a book on archaeology in the field that mere dates are still
of primary and ultimate and unrelenting importance. And by dates
I mean not simply those nebulous phases and sequences, those date-
substitutes, with which archaeologists often enough try to bluff us.
I mean time in hard figures. I mean Bradshaw.
   The need for re-establishing the relative sequence of ancient cultures
or cultural episodes, if we are to begin to understand their interactions
and values, is self-evident, and stratigraphical excavation, of which
more will be said in the next chapter, is a primary means to that end.
The old comparison between the successive strata in the soil and the
successive leaves in a book holds good: and is emphasized negatively
                                     38
                           CHRONOLOGY

by the fact that displacement in either case involves a non sequitur
which confuses and frustrates and, in excavation, cannot be rectified.
To that matter I shall recur. But even the most careful maintenance
of correct succession and the postulation of a convincing culture-
sequence are not in themselves enough. And for two reasons. First,
without an absolute chronology cultures of different regions cannot
accurately be compared, their inter-relationship cannot be assessed:
in other words, the vital causative factors of human ‘progress’ cannot
be authoritatively reconstructed, and may be widely misunderstood.
Secondly, the fluctuating tempo of human achievement — itself an
integral quality of that achievement - cannot be estimated: the
lightning flash, for example, of Periclean Athens, or the glow of the
slow-moving riverine civilizations. It is important but not enough to
know that in the twentieth century A.D. an aeroplane flew from Lon-
don to Singapore. It is almost equally important, in our estimate of
human achievement, to know that in 1950 the aeroplane took 50
hours for the journey, and in 1999 only 50 minutes. Do not let us
forget the significance of tempo; and that implies a time-table in the
most literal sense, nothing less.
   This question of tempo is worth a further moment’s thought. It is
at least as deserving of the attention of the archaeologist who is con-
cerned with the evolution of human institutions as it is of the biolo-
gist who is concerned with the formal evolution of natural species and
genera. In the language of the biologist, phases of ‘increase’, phases —
expressive term— of ‘explosive’ evolution, ‘stationary’ or ‘decline’
phases, the whole rhythm of human as of animal life is itselfanabsorb-
ing phenomenon, full of meaning, often full of mystery. I happen
recently to have been making some slight study of one of the great
civilizations of the ancient East, the Indus Valley Civilization of the
third and second millennia B.c. in what used to be called India but is
now Pakistan, and, though it is true that at present we know all too
little about the beginnings of that civilization, the indications are that
it lowered with an almost dramatic celerity, the sudden offspring of
opportunity and genius. It was preceded by a miscellany of upland
villages and cultures, set in the tumultuous eastern borderland of the
great Iranian plateau. Such villages, grouped and confined by precipi-
tous ranges, provide the optimum conditions for the earlier essays in
communal life within the boundaries of a parochial self-sufficiency.
                                    39
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

But for wider political horizons wider geographical horizons are a
prior condition. Tentative moves from the highland zone down on
to the great riverine plain must have drawn an immediate and com-
pelling challenge. On the plain, the dangerous annual flood can only
be constrained or utilized by combined effort on a large scale. On the
plain, fertile soil resulting from that same flood is as abundant as
mineral and other resources are scarce. With the added urgency of
one cause and another, the river itself and its flanking lowlands facili-
tate and stimulate traffic, commercial or military, and at once enlarge
human relations far beyond the precedent of the upland valley. The
opportunities and difficulties implicit in civilization, in the full sense
of the term, are at once present and insistent. The remaining postulate
is that of a creative imagination sufficient to grasp the occasion. And
without that creative imagination, no stretch of time could provide
a substitute. A phase of increase, amounting even to ‘explosive’ evolu-
tion, may be assumed.
  Many other significant examples of rapid evolution might readily
be cited: an obvious one is the invention of the great windows, barred
with a simplified perpendicular grid of tracery, wherewith the medie-
val builders illuminated the dim interiors of English churches in the
latter part of the fourteenth century — sudden and triumphant answer
to an insistent problem of engineering towards which earlier builders
had merely groped. And on the other hand the patient ‘stationary’
evolution of Byzantine art is sufficiently familiar and significant to
need no elaboration in the present context. Speed is a mighty factor
in our evaluation of human achievement, and it is a mere truism to
affirm that our appreciation of speed is contingent upon a nice
chronology.
  How then are we archaeologists, we fumblers in the earth, to attain
this difficult degree of precision? For something like one-hundredth
of the vast period with which modern archaeology is concerned, the
historians have given us a framework in the Old World. Let us be
grateful to them and take them into the fullest partnership. In a region
which has a history, the archaeologist must know the framework of
that history from A to Z (not merely the miserable fraction of it in
which he happens to be interested) before ever he enters the field.
The day is gone by when the Egyptologist, intent upon the Pharaonic ©
period, may cast the Greek and the Roman, the Arab and the China-
                                   40
                           CHRONOLOGY

man, carelessly upon his tip-heap. But that is by the way. The import-
ant thing is that the archaeologist must know his dates and how to use
them: recorded dates where they are valid, and unwritten dates where
geological or physical or chemical or botanical science can win them
fromthe earth. And year by year the objective sciences are coming more
and more to the rescue of that subjective science, the study of man.
   Chronology was once a simple enough matter. In a notorious pro-
nouncement, Archbishop Ussher, properly styled ad miraculum doctus,
affirmed that the world was created in the year 4004 B.c. A more
sceptical age has been content, until quite recently, to postulate 4241
B.C. as the earliest calendar-date. It was believed — and the textbooks
still have it — that the Egyptians, having observed the approximate
coincidence of the reappearance(just before dawn) of Sirius or Sothis,
the Dog Star, after a period of invisibility, with the beginning of the
Nile flood, chose the date on which this phenomenon occurred in that
year (July roth of the Julian Calendar) as their calendrical New Year’s
Day. The initial date was inferred backwards from a.D. 139, when the
synchronization again occurred, by a logical computation which was
generally accepted. The Egyptian calendar, recognizing the incom-
patibility of the lunar months with the solar year, divided the latter
into artificial calendar-months each of thirty days, and added five
feast-days in an attempt to make up the required total. These inter-
calary periods, however, still fell short of the Sothic year (approxim-
ately the same length as the solar year) by one day in four years (hence
our Leap Year); with the result that the synchronization was exact
only once in 1,460 years. But it seemed likely that the calendar was
already in use in the time of the Pyramid-builders of the Egyptian
IVth dynasty, who were computed on the basis of native annals to
have lived before 2775 B.c.; which took the calendar back to an
initial Sothic synchronism not later than 2781 B.C. and more probably
not later than 4241 B.c. So much for the long-established view. In
recent years this view has been modified; on cultural grounds (the
absence of writing) so early a date as 4241 is now regarded as impos-
sible. It is now argued that, although the Egyptians at an early period
were able by their observations of the heliacal rising of Sothis to
check the position of their 365-day calendar in the Solar year, they
never had a Sothic calendar. But on the generally accepted assump-
tion that the 365-day calendar operated continuously from early
                                   4I
               ARCHAEOLOGY               FROM   THE   EARTH

Dynastic times, combined with the contemporary records which
have survived of heliacal risings of Sothis in terms of that calendar and
the lengths of reigns given in ancient King Lists, Egyptian history —
the oldest history in the world — can still be carried back continuously,
if not to 4241 B.C., at least to the last centuries of the fourth millen-
nium B.C.
   It would be irrelevant here to develop the far-reaching implications
of this Egyptian calendar. It underlies the whole of our pre-classical
chronology in so far as that stands on a historical basis. Slightly modi-
fied, we still use it. But it is more to our purpose to consider parallel
and supplementary methods of calculation, and, by way of transition, —
reference may first be made to an ingenious theory propounded in
1949 by Dr Claude Schaeffer.
  At Ras Shamra, on the coast of Syria, Dr Schaeffer has for many
years excavated the Bronze Age metropolis of Ugarit, and has there
determined five main successive layers. Of these the last, marking the
end of the Late Bronze Age, shows evidence of destruction by a vio-
lent earthquake which dislocated the buildings at ground-level. Con-
temporary sites in Syria, Palestine, and Asia Minor have yielded simi-
lar evidence of violence; on dating now superseded, the fallen walls
of Jericho were witness to it; and Dr Schaeffer ascribes the wide-
spread disaster to ¢. 1365 B.c. when, according to a Tell el Amarna
letter, “Ugarit has been destroyed by fire; half the city has been burnt, -
the other half has ceased to be’. Ifthis basis be accepted — and it is not
perhaps quite as clear as Schaeffer maintains — a definite phase in all the
cities in question is dated with an insignificant margin of error. Nor —
need this line of research end there. Another catastrophic earthquake
seems to have centred upon Asia Minor at the beginning of the Middle
Bronze Age, between 2100 and 2000 B.c., and may be thought to tie
together the whole or partial destruction of Troy and Tarsus, Alaja
Hiyik on the Anatolian plateau, Chagar Bazar and Tel Brak, Tepe
Gawra north-east of Mosul, and a series of Syro-Palestine cities, once
more including Ugarit itself. And yet other earthquakes, between                   —
2400 and 2300 B.c. and about 1730 B.c., provide further chronological              —
bonds. It all seems too good to be true, but is not on that ground —
false. Schaeffer was not indeed the first to recognize something of the —
  1. C. F. A. Schaeffer, Stratigraphie comparée et chronologie de 1Asie occidental —
(IH* et 1° millénaires), Oxford, 1948.

                                         42
                             CHRONOLOGY

 archaeological potentiality of earthquakes. In 1926 Sir Arthur Evans
 wrote a description of a violent earthquake shock which he had just
 experienced at Knossos in Crete, and added:
    The archaeological sequitur of this is very important. When in the
 great Palace of Knossos, we find evidence of a series of overthrows,
  some of them on a scale that could hardly be the work of man, there
  seems real reason for tracing the cause to the same seismic agencies that
  we have certainly to deal with in the case described above. It may be
- possible even to fix approximately the date of seven earthquakes, four
  of them of great severity, between the last century of the third millen-
  nium and the beginning of the 14th century B.c.!
 Therein lies a germ of the Schaeffer scheme, though not the scheme
 itself. The general suggestion is indeed a serious one, and archaeology
 may take a cautious cognizance of it, with the neutralizing proviso
 that the earthquake synthesis is used only where other evidence has
 already established contemporaneity. In other words, we must in
 fact regretfully admit that earthquakes, in view of our limited know-
 ledge of their incidence and frequency in ancient times, are a shaky
 basis on which to build a precise chronology. But the theory is of
  interest.
     In another context, geology has given us a surer and now very
- familiar footing. The recognition of the clearly stratified varved or
  laminated clays of Sweden (and elsewhere) as the annual deposits of
  the retreating ice, and as the time-table therefore of a related human
  phase, is aow notorious. By counting these annual deposits in a series
- of sections from the south of Sweden to recent deposits in north-
  central Sweden, the Swedish geologist de Geer and some of his
  colleagues calculated 6839 3.c. as the beginning of the post-glacial
  period in their country and as the beginning, therefore, of potential
  human life there.? Others prefer a slightly earlier date, but the prin-
  ciple is the same. On this basis, a series of changes in the Scandinavian
  coast-line, climate and vegetation have been given approximate dates
  which can now claim a value approaching the absolute and are funda
  mental for the mesolithic of northern and north-western Europe.’
                                                            p- 382.
    1. Cited by Joan Evans, Time and Chance (London, 1943),
                                                                  1950), pp-
    2. Summary by F. E. Zeuner, Dating the Past (2nd ed., London,
  20 ff.
    3. Ibid., pp. 46 ff.

                                      43
              ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

Incidentally, it follows that a proportionate chronological value is
thereby attached to the identification of pollen and the reconstruc-
tion of vegetation on mesolithic sites.?
   Geological stratification further plays an important part in the
chronology of the palaeolithic cultures. Artifacts belonging to the
Old Stone Age are frequently found in the gravels of river terraces,
in brick-earths, in cave sediments and so forth, under conditions
which enable the Pleistocene geologist to determine the age of these
artifacts relative to the sequence of climate-fluctuations that make up
what is commonly called the Quaternary Ice Age. In particular the
wind-borne loess deposits and-solifluction layers formed in the cold
phases and the fossil soils resulting from the weathering of ancient
land-surfaces have contributed to the establishment of a relative
chronology in an area ranging from northern France through Ger-
many, Austria, Bohemia, and Hungary to the Ukraine. But there is
more in it than that; for the attempt has repeatedly been made to
convert this relative into an absolute time-scale. ‘Time-gauges’ are
provided by the rates of weathering, of denudation and of sedimenta-
tion, calculated upon such evidence as that provided by varved clays
and, more recently, for restricted periods by C14 (see below); so that
if the geological results obtained by Penck and others are applied to
the sequence of palaeolithic industries, the Abbevillian would appear
to be about half a million years old, the middle Acheulian about a
quarter of a million, and the Mousterian about a hundred thousand
years.
   When we leave geological stratification and turn to stratification
derived mainly from human occupation, inference is less certain. It
is impossible to lay down any law for the equation of man-made
strata with an absolute time-scale. For example, at a site (Chandravalli)
which I excavated in India, coins that were not, apparently, earlier
than $0 B.c. or much later than a.D. 200 ranged through a vertical
accumulation of 5 feet; the period thus represented was probably in
fact not more than two centuries. In what is now Pakistan, at the
famous site of Taxila (Sirkap), excavations in 1944-5 indicated that
6-9 feet of floors and debris were deposited during some two cen- —
turies of very intensive occupation. In an earlier phase of the same
city, Taxila (Bhir Mound), an untidy site, 14-15 feet were ascribed to
              1. Dating the Past, pp. 56 ff. and bibliography.

                                    44
                             CHRONOLOGY

 three centuries or a little more; but the masonry and building-
 methods were here of so unstable a character that the accumulation
 may well have been exceptionally rapid. In every instance a multitude
  of unknown and variable factors is involved, and objective calcula-
  tion on the basis of depth is virtually impossible. Nevertheless, forti-
  fied by the seasonal regularity of the Nile valley, Petrie was greatly
  daring. ‘Generally’, he maintained, ‘it is possible to date the latest
  date of a town by the potsherds lying on the surface; and to allow a
  rate of growth of 20 inches a century down to the visible level; if that
_ gives a long period we may further carry down the certainly artificial
  level by 4 inches in a century for the Nile deposits when in cultivated
  ground’ ~and so on.! Such calculations have, if any, a purely academic
  or abstract interest. They make no allowance for the intermittencies
  and vagaries which, alike in human and in geological history, defy
  the confines of mathematical formulae.
     Only on rare occasions can a chronological connotation in terms
  of calendar-years be attributed with plausibility to man-made strata.
  I will give two examples. My first comes from Scarborough in York-
  shire where, during the excavation of prehistoric pits of the fifth
  century B.c. underlying the Roman signal-station, Mr F. G. Simp-
  son, always most scrupulous of excavators, observed that the human
  debris — sherds, bones, ash, etc. — in the pits was interleaved with
  layers of clean soil (PI. 2a). He further observed, on returning to the
  site after a winter’s absence, that an identical clean layer had accumu-
  lated in the re-excavated pits as a result of the rains and frosts of the
  preceding winter months. From this observation, two inferences were
  deducible: first, that each of the pits had only been used by the
  prehistoric inhabitants for some three or four years (represented by
  three successive ancient rainwash layers with interposed occupation-
  debris); and, secondly, that the site, on a stormy headland over-
  looking the North Sea, had been abandoned during the winter
  months, when the deposition of occupation-debris had ceased, and
  that the place was used only as a summer station.” Both these infer-
  ences are of importance in the chronological and sociological evalua-
  tion of the settlement.
     1. Aims and Methods in Archaeology, pp. 10-11.
                                                                       32, and
     2. A. Rowntree, History of Scarborough (London, 1931), pp- 20 and
  fig. 6.

                                       45
               ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

  My second example comes from Iraq. At Khafajah, in the Diyala
region north of Baghdad, a temple dedicated to the moon-god Sin
was built and rebuilt ten times on the same site in the fourth and third
millennia, and an elaborate attempt was made to construct an absolute
chronology for the building, and hence for its dynastic or cultural
background, upon certain structural evidences. It is not necessary here
to reproduce the argument in all its more theoretical ramifications,*
but its root is of interest. The seventh Sin temple showed two phases,
with two floor-levels for the second (later) phase. Between these two
secondary floor-levels, the temple-wall had been mud-plastered
sixteen times, each plaster coat being applied to the surface of its
predecessor (PI. 2b). Now, to-day it is the custom in the Near East
to plaster the surface of adobe (or mud) walls, such as those of the
temple, every summer in preparation for the winter rains; and, since
circumstances have not materially changed, it is a fair assumption
that the sixteen plasterings represent in fact a lapse of sixteen years.
But during that inferred sixteen years the ground-level at the entrance
to the temple rose 12 cm. — the vertical distance between the two
floors. Applying this ratio to the accumulation on the floor of the
first phase, namely 75 cm., we may calculate the time represented by
that accumulation at 16 X 73 = 100 years. To this we must add the
16 years already calculated for the interval between the two floors of
the later phase, and we get a total of 116 years for the time-interval
between the first and last floors or made-levels of Sin temple VIL.
There we will leave the computation, at a point beyond which infer-
ence becomes increasingly conjectural. But as far as we have carried
it, the argument has considerable weight, and well represents the type
of evidence for which the excavator in search of precision may use-
fully keep an open eye.
  From vertical stratification we may turn for a moment to what is in
effect horizontal stratification: a method of computation, simple in
theory but full of pitfalls in practice, which has been disguised under
the term Dendrochronology. The principles of Dendrochronology
have been widely advertised, and a convenient summary will be
  1. They will be found in Pinhas Delougaz and Seton Lloyd, Pre-Sargonid
Temples in the Diyala Region (Univ. of Chicago Orient. Inst. Publications,
lviii, 1942), pp. 125 ff. I am indebted to Professor M. E. L. Mallowan for
drawing my attention to this.

                                   46


                                                                             e
                           CHRONOLOGY
                                  |

found in Professor Zeuner’s handbook." It is a sufficiently familiar fact
that a section across a tree grown in a climate with seasonal variations
reveals more or less concentric growth-rings, usually representing
annual accretions, which will differ with the age of the tree and the
climate of the particular year. In years of drought the growth will
naturally be less than in wet years, but a tendency for the rings to
group in 11-year cycles, in conformity with the 11-year sun-spot
cycle, has suggested that solar radiation is a further and independent
factor. On the basis of the ring-sequence of long-lived trees in
California, Dr A. E. Douglass and his associates were able to work
out climatic curves for that part of North America for the last 3,000
years; but it is more important to us that variant features of individual
tings or their grouping can be plotted and compared from long-lived
trees to timbers cut in the same region as the type-specimens in ancient
times. Thus in Arizona tree-ring analysis has been brought to the
rescue of American prehistory with astonishing results. Here the
correlation of the tree-rings of timbers from prehistoric (i.e. pre-six-
teenth century) Indian houses with dated sequences enabled Douglass
to determine, with a minute margin of error, dates at which the
ancient timbers had been cut as far back as his material could take him,
in fact to the eighth century a.D. and earlier. There always remains,
of course, the imponderable factor of the date of construction relative
to the date at which the component timbers were actually cut. Tim-
bers were liable to be reused from building to successive building, and
a particular structure may thus be as much as some centuries later
than the tree-ring dating of one or more of its timbers would alone
suggest. In other words, tree-ring analysis can only provide a terminus
postquem.
   Attempts have been made to apply the tree-ring method to
material from Europe, but so far with limited success, although some
value has been claimed on insecure evidence for tree-ring graphs pre-
pared in this country from Roman and medieval timbers.* The
absence of very ancient trees, however, and the much greater remote-
ness of European prehistory combine with a (usually) less discrimin-
ating climate to militate against success. Nor have attempts to project
  1. Dating the Past, pp. 6 ff.
  2. A. W.G. Lowther, ‘Dendrochronology’, The Arch. News Letter (London),
March 1949.

                                      47
                 ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM     THE    EARTH

  American data across the Atlantic (‘teleconnexion’”) met with wide
  acceptance. On the other hand Africa and Asia have not yet been
  adequately exploited by dendrochronologists and may in future add
  new laurels to a technique which has certainly been dramatically
  successful in the land of its origin.
     The mention of solar radiation opens up wide vistas in the com-
  putation of geological time and the dating of remote men in their
  geological setting. It is not for a layman like myselftopretend to more
~ than the most general understanding of the methods employed. It is,
  however, comforting to be told that ancient climatic fluctuations, de-
 duced from the examination of loess-deposits and the analysis of river-
 gravels, agree closely with certain fluctuations of the intensity of solar
 radiation calculated on an astronomical basis; with the corollary that
 these fluctuations, with their related human phenomena, are approx-
 imately dated objectively. Thus it is calculated that in the open spaces
 of north-western Europe palaeolithic man began his Sisyphean task
 some $00,000 years ago, without any pedantic limitation within
  30,000 or 40,900 years on either side: a date which is found to be in
  excellent agreement with that which I have already mentioned as’
  obtained from the rates of weathering and denudation.! It may there-
  fore be regarded for some time to come as sufficiently absolute in
  relation to an epoch when fashions in craftsmanship may have lasted
  for anything up to, or even beyond, a quarter of a million years. —
     I mention these calculations, merely to hurry on; like the measure-
  ment of geological time on the premise that the time-rate at which the
  disintegration of a radioactive mineral proceeds is constant and deter-
  minable,? I accept them calmly with other marvels of the age. But it is
  important to know what the geochronologists want for their al-
  chemy, and to see that they get it. It is the duty of the field-archae-
  ologist to supply them, for example, with classified gravel and loess
  and with related artifacts. They are gradually bringing order into
  our remoter prehistory, transforming the jellyfish of its chronology
  into something vertebrate. Their work is integral with ours, both in
  the laboratory and in the field.
     The marvels of science as applied to archaeology would not be
    1. F. E. Zeuner in Proc. Linn. Soc. Lond., 162 (2), p. 125.
     2. Again I refer to reader to Zeuner, Dating the Past (2nd ed., 1950), with
  bibliography,

                                         48
                              CHRONOLOGY

fully catalogued, however, without a reference to two developments
of another kind. The first is the so-called Fluorine Test. Since 1844 it
 has been recognized that buried bone absorbs an element known as
 fluorine from the moisture of the sand or gravel in which it lies.
 The process is a very slow one, and it varies quantitatively with the
 amount of fluorine which happens to be present in the ground-water
 of a particular site. This variability obviously robs fluorine-content
 of any value as an absolute time-indicator. On the other hand, as
 Dr Kenneth Oakley and his colleagues have demonstrated, it may
 be of use within very wide limits as an indicator of the approximate
 contemporaneity or otherwise of bones from the same locality, and
 one notable instance of this utility is already on record. A brief glance
 at it will suffice to indicate the potentialities of the method.t
    The example relates to the much-discussed skeleton found in 1888
in the Galley Hill (north) gravel-pit at Swanscombe in Kent, 8 feet
  below the surface. The gravel in which the skeleton was found is of
  middle pleistocene or early palaeolithic age, and controversy has
 raged as to whether the skeleton, unmineralized and modern in
 character as it is, was (say) a quarter of a million years old or of rela-
 tively modern date. If the former it is obviously a remarkable proof
 of the antiquity of a modern skeletal type. The general problem has
 now been set at rest. A number of fossil bones, including the famous
 Swanscombe skull, has been collected from the same early palaeolithic
 gravel, and others from later palacolithic deposits in neighbouring
 gravel-pits, together with some from local recent deposits, including
 part of an Anglo-Saxon skeleton. Analysis showed that the Swans-
 combe skull and other early palaeolithic bones contained about 2 per
 cent fluorine, the later palacolithic about 1 per cent, and the recent
 bones 0-3 to 0-05 per cent. The Galley Hill skeleton was found to
 contain only 0-3 per cent, and its relatively modern date is thus
 apparent. It passes finally and inescapably out of the textbooks into
 limbo.
                                                              Test’, The
    1. See Kenneth Oakley, ‘Some Applications of the Fluorine
                                                           K. P. Oakley and M. F.
  Archaeological News Letter, Nov.—Dec. 1949, pp. 101 ff.;
                                                                  , Bulletin o,
  Ashley Montagu, ‘A Reconsideration of the Galley Hill Skeleton’
                                                                  ‘Relative Dating
  the British Museum (Nat. Hist.), i, no. 2 (1949); K. P. Oakley,
                                                          no. 24 (1950); K. P.
  of the Piltdown Skull’, The Advancement of Science, vi,
                                                                    y of Piltdown
  Oakley and C. Randall Hoskins, ‘New Evidence on the Antiquit
  Man’, Nature, clxv (11 Mar. 1950), 379-

                                         49
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE   EARTH

  Similar fluorine tests have been applied to the much-discussed
human or simian bones from the gravels of Piltdown in Sussex. The
results, confirmed whilst this book was in the press, are dramatic in
the extreme. The jaw and canine tooth, found subsequently to the
 skull-cap, are now demonstrably of modern date, altered and col-
oured by a forger and carefully ‘planted’ for discovery by distin-
guished visitors. The cranium found nearby by gravel-diggers, on
the other hand, is genuine and of Upper Pleistocene date. In itself it
presents no special problem, but the removal of all temptation to
associate it with the jaw removes also a potential anomaly from the
complex problem of skull-evolution. See Bull. of the British Museum
(Nat. Hist.), vol. 2, no. 3 (1953), and J. S. Weiner, The Piltdown
Forgery (Oxford, 1955).
   At the best, however, the local and relative value of the fluorine
test must not be forgotten; at the best, as Dr Oakley emphasizes,
it does not provide a means of close relative dating. A given bone or
group of bones shows a certain range in fluorine content. Unless the
difference in age between the bones which are being compared is con-
siderable (e.g. 10,000 years), there is usually an overlap in the range of
their fluorine-contents. For this reason it would probably be impossible —
by this method to differentiate clearly between say a Saxon and a neo-
lithic skeleton; whereas it should enable one, for example, to distinguish
bones of neolithic or later age from others of Acheulian age, when both
occur under similar conditions at the same locality.
   Potentially more sensitive is anew method of dating organic mater-
ial by means of its radiocarbon content. This method, a by-product of
atomic research, was announced in 1949 from America and, though
still in the experimental stage, may eventually enable specimens up to
40,000 years old to be dated objectively. The method, known sum-
marily as the ‘Carbon 14’ method, has been described by Professor
W.F. Libby, DrE.C. Anderson, and Dr R. J. Arnold, of the Insti-
tute of Nuclear Studies in the University of Chicago, who have tested
it upon wood-samples from Egyptian tombs.! The possible error is at
present appreciable but will probably be reduced, and it seems likely
that for the mesolithic at any rate the new method, if made sufficiently
accessible, will produce useful results.
   1. Science, cix, no. 2827, 227-8 (4 Mar. 1949); Science Today, v, no. 125
(24 Mar. 1949); Antiquity, xxiii (1949), 113-14 and 229. See also Hallam L.

                                    50
                                                                               T
                              CHRONOLOGY

   The principle of the method, if not its practice, is simple and logical
enough and may be stated categorically and very summarily:
   (i) Cosmic rays, which arrive from the outer space, produce radio-
active carbon atoms of atomic weight 14 in the atmosphere. The C14
thus formed is an isotope of ordinary carbon of atomic weight 12
(C12); and both are contained in the carbon dioxide of the atmosphere
in a proportion which is stable and corresponds with the rates of
production and disintegration of C14.
   (ii) Now this carbon dioxide is taken in by plants, and, since all
animals derive their body-material ultimately from plants, it is univer-
sally incorporated in living organic matter. Therefore, the proportion
of C14 to C12 in all living organic matter is the same as in the
atmosphere.
   (iii) But once an organism is dead (e.g. when a tree is cut down), it
ceases to take up carbon from the atmosphere. On the contrary, the
C14 content slowly diminishes, reverting to nitrogen at such a rate
that after about 5,600 years (termed the “half-life’) only half the orig-
inal amount of C14 is left. After twice that period, only half the resi-
due —i.e. a quarter of the original quantity — is left, and so forth until
all the C14 has disappeared.
   (iv) In dead organic matter, therefore, the ratio of C14 to C12
decreases with time at a known rate. The proportion of C14 to C12
in a given organic specimen can be determined in the laboratory, and
from it the time elapsed since the ‘death’ of this organic matter can
be calculated.
   That is the principle. The chief practical difficulty is that, at the
best, the initial ratio of C14 to C12 is exceedingly small and therefore
difficult to measure with precision. Some organic substances are
 indeed relatively easier than others to deal with; such are wood or
 charcoal, which contain much carbon. Bones, on the other hand, con-
 tain only small amounts of carbon, and it seems doubtful whether even
 Movius   ibid. xxiv. (1950), 99-101;     report of Brit. Assoc.   discussion in
                                                                                 ;
 Nature, clxvi (4 Nov. 1950), 756(J. V. P. Long, F. E. Zeuner, and K. P. Oakley)
 F. E. Zeuner in Science Progress, no. 154 (London, April 1951) pp. 225-38 (with
 bibliography); G. H. S. Bushnell inAntiquity, xxv (195 1), 145-9; and especially
 ‘Radiocarbon Dating’ assembled by Frederick Johnson in American Antiquity,
 xvii (Soc. for Amer. Arch., Salt Lake City, Utah; July 1951), and W. F. Libby,
- Radiocarbon Dating (Univ. of Chicago, 19 52).

                                        SE
                                                           4


                ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

very large quantities of them, with special “boosting” superadded,
will in fact yield the necessary concentration.! As a whole, the
technique is still (1955) in the experimental stage, and a number of
unresolved difficulties remain. For example, a specimen of ancient
charcoal may have been contaminated by the absorption of sub-
stances containing charcoal of younger age; a particularly dangerous
source of contamination is fungal and bacterial growth which, even
when removed from the specimen, may have falsified (reduced) its
apparent age. But, in spite of these and other complications, there is
 reason to hope that it may be possible to achieve an average accuracy
of ---200 years in the dating of charcoal and certain other categories of
organic material ranging in date from the late palaeolithic to the begin-
 ning of the present era. Consistent accuracy within those limits would
 mark a formidable advance in the pursuit of prehistoric chronology.
 . Anumber of examples of the application of C14 analysis have now
been released. Thus it has been announced that the last (Mankato) ad-
vance of the Wisconsin glaciation of North America passed over tree-
trunks the average age of which by the Carbon 14 method is about
11,400 years from the present day, less than half the age expected by
geologists. It is shortly after that time that man is believed to have
first appeared in North America. The oldest artifacts determined in
America are several pairs of rope sandals covered by volcanic deposits
in Oregon; the age indicated was about 9,050 years, i.e. about 7000
B.C. In the eastern United States, the earliest cultures are proving so
far to be later than in the west. Carbon 14 dates suggest that man
spread there under 5,000 years ago, but much verification is needed.
Other C14 determinations are reported to confirm the beginning of |
the First Dynasty of Egypt at about 3000 B.c., and that primitive
agriculture was already being practised in the Kurdish hills at about
4700 B.C, — charcoal and shells of land-mollusca from a village-site
excavated by Mr R. J. Braidwood at Jarmo in northern Iraq have
given the remarkably consistent C14 dates of 4757 B.c.-320 years,
4654 B.C. 330 years, and 4743 B.c.-+360 years. Nearer home, Dr

   1. In order to obtain the quantity of pure carbon required for a satisfactory
determination based on several test runs, the following minimum quantities are
recommended: 65 grammes of charcoal, 200 grammes of other types of vege-
table remains (wood, grain, basket-work, &c.), and 700 grammes of molluscan
shells. H. L. Movius in Antiquity, xxiv (1950), 99—I0r.

                                      §2
                             CHRONOLOGY

Grahame Clark’s already-famous village of mesolithic food-gatherers
at Seamer in east Yorkshire seems, by this method of diagnosis, to
have flourished at about the acceptable date of 7000 8.c. But it is fair
to repeat the emphatic affirmation of Dr Libby and his associates that
all such results are at present tentative.
   In this chapter nothing has been said of typology as a basis for
chronology, nor do I propose to enter generally upon this thorny
subject. The study of the systematic development of types or forms
was long normal to biological studies before it became a recognized
method in archaeology; indeed it scarcely entered into our discipline
until Petrie based the relative chronology of his famous Diospolis
Parva cemetery upon it in 1901.1 Its virtues and its vices* now consti-
tute a standard question in archaeological examination-papers, and it
is not necessary here to attempt a model answer. But there are two
points upon which a word may be said. Much work — and much able
work — has been done in the European and in the Asiatic fields upon
the comparative typology of industries, particularly of pottery. In this
valuable endeavour may be observed the recurrence of two sources of
doubt. The first is a tendency to give a diagnostic significance to types
of pattern which are cither insufficiently specialized or are at any rate
repeated, without likelihood of contact, in widely disparate times
and places. The second tendency, not unrelated to the first, is to
devolve the comparative study of pottery into a pursuit more akin to
philately than to archaeology: to compare line-illustrations of pattern
with insufficient reference to other factors such as paste, method of
manufacture, and firing. For a reductio ad absurdum of this abstract and
theoretical procedure I may refer once more to that unfailing source
of cautionary examples, Palestine. In a monumental report on Tell
en-Nasbeh, the date of a series of tombs has been ‘calculated’ by an
astonishing statistical method.
   All parallels in form to a pot-type have been traced, including Middle
                                                                            being
Bronze ones, to a clearly Early Iron pot (differences in technique
   1. Diospolis Parva (Egypt Exploration Fund, 1901), pp. 4 ff.
                                                                     the Christian
   2. For example, see G. Coffey, Guide to the Celtic Antiquities of
                                                                        ve forms
Period ..., p. 4: ‘It is not to be supposed that a series of progressi
                                                               has been reached,
always correspond to a series of dates. After the final form
                                                               of ornament from
earlier steps may re-appear; the whole series forming a stock
which the artificer could draw.’

                                        53
                ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM     THE    EARTH

ignored). The result, as a graph of frequency, is plotted for the tomb, in
combination with the frequency graphs of other forms (from the same
tomb). This yields a series of peaks which more or less coincide, but
gives the ludicrous result that the extremes of the graph stretch from the
seventeenth to the second centuries B.c. !On the other hand, no account
is taken of the appearance or non-appearance of diagnostic forms or
techniques. ...}
In other words, we have here a crude example of the impact of two-
dimensional diagnosis upon three-dimensional material.
   The other point which may be stressed is the risk inherent in the
broadcast application of typological criteria which may in a majority
of instances be perfectly sound in themselves within their proper and
restricted context. For example, those antiquaries who are accustomed
to deal with ancient building-construction are familiar enough with
the potential time-values of evolving structural or ornamental feat-
ures. Thus, students of medieval mouldings, of ancient styles of
masonry, of ancient brickwork, of ancient staircases, window-frames,
roof-constructions, have evolved criteria of a rule-of-thumb charac-
ter which are more often correct than not, if cautiously used. “Rusti-
cated’ masonry — ashlar with rough surface and drafted margins — is
A.D. I-50 in Rome.? Roman bricks and brick-joints vary in absolute
and relative thickness in accordance with a time-scale.? Deeply invol-
uted Gothic mouldings of the thirteenth century contrast with the
plump mouldings of the fourteenth and the flatter mouldings of the
fifteenth century. Queen-post roof-trusses begin in the time of Henry
VIII. And so on. But in all these rules lurk hidden dangers. Thus out-
side Rome, in Palestine for example, rusticated masonry may be at
least as early as the ninth century B.c.;4 the smooth chronology of
Roman bricks has been established only for Rome itself, and there
perhaps only for certain categories of building; the Gothic mouldings
of Britain do not apply to Gothic France; most British queen-post
roof-trusses are of the sixteenth century, but they occur occasionally
  1. K. M. Kenyon in Antiquity, xxiv (1950), 200, commenting upon C. C.
McCown,    Tell en-Nasbeh, i (1947), with special reference to pp. 146-7.
   2. G. T. Rivoira, Roman Architecture (Oxford, 1925), p. 70, ascribes it especi-
ally to the Claudian period, but notes its earlier occurrence in Etruscan tombs.
  3. Esther B. van Deeman, American Journ. ofArchaeology, 2S., xvi (1912); &c.
  4. G. A. Reisner and others, Harvard Excavations at Samaria (Harvard, 1924),
p- 104 and pl. 27.

                                       54
                                CHRONOLOGY

as early as the fourteenth.1 Taken alone, therefore, almost any one
of these and comparable criteria may trap the unwary. Their values
are liable to be local rather than universal, and must be established
afresh and objectively for every fresh locality. With that proviso, they
may be of great use, but the proviso is an important one.
  So much, then, for some of the principles or practices underlying
archaeological chronology. Their importance is manifest; so much
so that it is perhaps advisable to end on a note of warning. We must
not allow chronology to monopolize our discipline. It is a means to
an end, not an end in itself. Those of us who know the deep-seated
satisfaction which accrues from the settlement of the chronology of a
site know also something of the danger imminent in that satisfaction.
What are we really out for? I began this chapter by describing chron-
ology as the backbone of archaeology; and so it is, but the backbone
is not the whole skeleton, still less is it the flesh and blood and spirit
of our subject. Our objective is a reconstruction of human cultural
achievement in all those aspects of life which are susceptible to
material evidence. A chronologist is not an archaeologist. As an
American writer has put it, “Chronology is admittedly an important
factor in any archaeological research, and the earliest and. surest
method of establishingit is to be commended. But after a sequence
of periods has been established, if then the very culture of those
periods is unknown, we may justifiably ask “so what?””’? Something
will be said about ‘so what2’ in Chapter 17. Meanwhile, we must
proceed to consider how in practice our cultural material may best
be equated with our time-scale both in the digging and in our records
of it.
  1. Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (Eng.), Essex, ii, Central
and SW. (1921), p. 76, Gatehouse Farm.
   2. W. W.Taylor,     ‘A Study of Archaeology’,   American Anthropologist,
(Indiana Univ., 1948), p. 62.                 :




                                     55
                              CHAPTER 4

                          Stratigraphy

In the last chapter reference was made to a number of ways, some of
them very familiar ones, whereby an approximation to absolute
chronology can sometimes be extracted from undocumented archae-
ological material. Such absolute chronology is essential alike to the
appreciation of the varying tempo of human achievement, and, above
all, to the establishment of the cultural inter-relationships which help
to rationalize human ‘progress’. But in much of our archaeology
fixed time-points are intermittent and chancy. More usually, the
archaeologist must be content to establish the relative sequence of his
evidence, to ensure that, however ill-focused, his perspective is essen-
tially correct. Therein lies his primary duty: to secure beyond doubt
the orderly succession of the vestiges with which he deals, even
though, in any given phase of research, he may be compelled to leave
finer adjustment and interpretation to his successors. To come at
once to the core of the matter, his first task as an excavator is with
stratification.
  In picturesque fashion, Mrs Jacquetta Hawkes has had something
to say of the Law of Stratification. It is as simple, she remarks, as
gravity, as falling down stairs, and is indeed rather like that. There
follows a little fantasy which I abstract from her text.

   If[she says] instead of one apple falling on the head of Sir Isaac Newton
a heavenly orchard had let tumble a rain of fruit, one of the greatest of
men would have been overwhelmed and then buried. Anyone examin-
ing the situation afterwards in a properly scientific spirit, clearing the
apples layer by layer, would be able to deduce certain facts. He would
be able to prove that the man was there before the apples. Furthermore,
that the blushing Beauty of Bath found immediately over and round Sir
Isaac fell longer ago than the small swarthy russets that lay above them.
If, on top of all this, snow had fallen, then the observer, even if he came
from Mars where they are not familiar with these things, would know
that the apple time came before the snow time. Relative ages are not
enough [Mrs Hawkes adds], the observer would want an absolute date,

                                    56
                            STRATIGRAPHY

and that is where Sir Isaac comes in again. An examination of his clothes,
the longskirted coat, the loose breeches and the negligent cut of his
linen, the long square-toes pointing so forlornly up to the sky, would
date the man to the seventeenth century. Here would be a clue to the
age of the apples and the snow.
   In more prosaic sense, this term stratification has already appeared
here and there in the previous chapters and will remain a recurrent
theme. It was long understood by geologists before it became the
commonplace of archaeology. The protagonist in the geological use
of the term was William (‘Strata’) Smith who, in 1816, began the
issue of a work entitled ‘Strata Identified by Organized Fossils’, and
thereby opened up new geological profundities and successions.
With so long and familiar a history behind it, it is unnecessary to
enter here into any detailed exposition of the stratigraphical principle,
but, for completeness’s sake, I will briefly recall the nature of its
application to archaeology.
   In this context, its principles are — in theory, at any rate — simple
enough. The human occupation of a site normally results in the
accumulation of material of one kind or another on and about the
area occupied. Objects are lost or discarded and become embedded
in the earth. Floors are renewed and old ones buried. Buildings
crumble and new ones are built upon the ruins. A flood may destroy
a building or a town and deposit a layer of alluvium upon its debris;
and later, when the flood has subsided, the levelled site may be re-
occupied. Sometimes, the process is in the reverse direction: evidences
of occupation may be removed, as in the deepening of an unsurfaced
street by traffic, or the digging ofa pit for the disposal of rubbish or for
burial. At Sabratha in Tripolitania, a Roman temple was found in
1948 to have been rebuilt at a lower level than its predecessor on the
same site, through an intentional lowering of the whole temenos at
the time of rebuilding. In one way or another, the surface of an
ancient town or village is constantly altering in response to human
effort or neglect; and it is by interpreting rightly these evidences of
alteration that we may hope to reconstruct something of the vicissi-
tudes of the site and its occupants.
   As it happens, the first recorded instance, so far as I am aware,
of the observation of archaeological stratification related not to an
                     1. A Land (London, 1951), p. 26.

                                    Di/
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE    EARTH

occupation-site but to a burial-mound. At the time when the episode
occurred, the word stratification, in the sense in which I have just used
it, was not yet in circulation, but the elements of the matter were
precociously appreciated by that remarkable man, Thomas Jefferson,
whose major title to fame is, I suppose, that he was third President
of the United States and an author of the Declaration of American
Independence. For us he may rank in the lesser but not negligible
role of the first scientific digger. His sociological interests were wide;
in particular, as governor of Virginia, he concerned himself with the
problems of the Red Man and the Negro, and in the course of his
studies he became interested incidentally in certain ‘barrows of which
many are to be found all over in this country’ (i.e. Virginia). One of
them, situated ‘on the low grounds of the Rivanna, about two miles
above its principal fork, and opposite to some hills, on which had been
an Indian town’, he opened in order to satisfy himself of the correct-
ness of opinions and traditions relating to these mounds. His report is
a testimony to his careful observation:
   Appearances certainly indicate that it [the mound] has derived both
origin and growth from the accustomary collection of bones, and the
deposition of them together; that the first collection had been deposited
on the common surface of the earth, a few stones put over it, and then
a covering of earth, that the second had been laid on this, had covered
more or less of it in proportion to the number of bones, and was then
also covered with earth, and so on.
  These facts caused him to reject two notions: first, that the mound
covered only bones of those slain in battle (not a single weapon-
wound was found); and secondly ‘that it was the common sepulchre
of a town, in which the bodies were placed upright, and touching
each other’. He remarked that a few stones found in the mound were
“brought from a cliff a quarter of a mile off, and from the river, one-
eighth of a mile off’. He also recorded that infants were buried there,
since a rib of an infant, part of the jaw of a child which had not cut
its teeth (the right half of the under jaw), etc., were discovered.
   All that, be it noted, was in 1784, and I have therefore thought it
worth while to relate the episode at some length. Let us consider the
   1. T. Jefferson, Notes on Virginia (8th ed., 1801), pp. 142~7; account here
derived from A. F, Chamberlain in The American Anthropologist, ix (1907),
499 f.
                                     58
                          STRATIGRAPHY

contents of Jefferson’s clear and concise report. He describes the situa-
tion of the mound in relation to natural features and evidences of
human occupation. He detects components of geological interest in
its materials and traces their sources. He indicates the stratigraphical
stages in the construction of the mound. He records certain significant
features of the skeletal remains. And he relates his evidence objec-
tively to current theories. No mean achievement for a busy statesman
in 1784!
    Unfortunately, this seed of a new scientific skill fell upon infertile
 soil. For a century after Jefferson, mass-excavation remained the rule
 of the day. In Chapter 2 the successive layers in the soil, in other words
 stratification, were compared to the successive pages of a book. The
 analogy is essentially a true one, and includes the corollary: a prime _
 condition of intelligibility is that the layers, like the pages, shall be
 brought to our eyes reasonably intact and in proper sequence. Of
 course, mass-excavation has not always been devoid of all merit. In a
“rudimentary stage of research, it may help to point the way and stimu-
 late advance along it. We may be grateful to Schliemann for plunging
 his spade into Troy, Tiryns, and Mycenae in the seventies of the last
 century, because he showed us what a splendid book had in fact been
 buried there; but he tore it to pieces in snatching it from the earth,
 and it took us upwards of three-quarters of a century to stick it more
 or less together again and to read it aright, with the help of cribs from
  other places. On a smaller plane, I remember my gratitude in 1944 to
 certain ardent but highly unskilled French antiquaries at Pondicherry
 in south India for scraping up a heterogeneous mass of material from
 an ancient site because, although they knew it not, their spoliation
 showed that the site contained imported (and dated) Arretine pottery
which subsequently, by more        orthodox methods, enabled us to
determine the first archaeological datum-line in pre-medieval south
India. But the accidental benefits conferred on us by our Pondicherry
friends, or even by Schliemann himself, are no longer a valid excuse
for archaeological illiteracy. To-day, the digger must learn to read his
sections, or he should be constrained from digging.
   In practice, the identification and correlation of the strata or layers
which represent the successive phases in the archaeological ‘history’
of a site is one of the principal tasks of the excavator and will occupy
the major portion of his time. So important is this task that, at the tisk
                                    59
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE    EARTH

of wearying the reader either with the excessively unfamiliar or,
more likely, with the excessively familiar, it would be wrong to
forbear from certain rather arid technical details. The task is one
which involves clear and logical thinking reinforced by experience
and infinite patience. Normally, the strata are differentiated by
variations in colour or material or content. Not infrequently, how-
ever, these variations, particularly under the bleaching influences of
an African or Asian sun, present difficulty even to the experienced eye:
so much so that more than one archaeologist who ought to know
better has denied the presence of stratigraphy (in the Western sense of
the term) on Eastern sites. “Thete was no clear stratification’, writes a
well-known American archaeologist with reference to a Palestinian
site, “during a good part of the period covered because there was no
complete destruction and rebuilding at any one time.” This, of
course, is nonsense; by ‘stratification’ the writer quoted means merely
“continuous building-levels’, oblivious of the no less important layers
which on any site may be expected to supplement and interrelate
phases of actual construction. The fact is that the observer had simply
failed to obsetve. There are in practice various ways and means of
dealing with the reluctant, sun-baked section of the Orient, or indeed
with many sections in the West. Damping, and careful scraping with
a knife or turf-cutter, will often provide the remedy by bringing out
the more subtle variations of colour or material. Observation in
different lights at different times of the day may help. In a difficult and
important section, observation may be continued over a period of
days before certainty is reached. And finally an attempt must be made
to ‘read’ the section — to discriminate, without prejudice, between
the more significant and the less significant differentiations of strata:
for example, between a mere ‘tip-line’ in a continuous accumulation
on the one hand and a substantive and emphatic occupation-level
on the other. It is not enough to identify layers, although that is, of
course, the essential first step; it is the task of the archaeologist to
interpret.them, to understand the sentence as well as to transliterate it.
   On this all-important question of interpretation something more
must be said, always with the proviso that the written word is no
sort of substitute for field-experience. The most that the professor
   1. C. C. McCown, Tell en-Nasbeh, excavated under the direction of the late
William Frederic Bade (Am, Sch. of Or. Res., 1947), i. 10.

                                     60
                            STRATIGRAPHY

can do is to offer such hints or warnings as shall create in the mind of
the student a healthy wariness and a proper regard for trifles. Let us
take once more as our theme the first and universal question. of which
something was said in the preceding chapter: What is the time-value
of archaeological strata: How long did it take, say, 4 feet of stratified
deposit to accumulate? A very searching and important question, well
worthy of the most careful consideration: if we could always answer
it, half our battle would be won.
  Reference has already been made to a famous lead which geology
has given us by the recognition of the varved clavs of Sweden (and
elsewhere) as the annual deposits of the retreating ice, and as the
time-table, therefore, of a related human phase. But it is rarely, in all
conscience, that geology deals with us so straightforwardly; whilst
man-made strata are capable of every sort of perversity. Some of
them, indeed, are of no chronological import whatsoever, and, as in-
structive disturbers of all faith, these nonentities shal] be considered first.
   It has been my practice, from time to time, to persuade my students
towards the end of the day’s work to cut a section through the dump
which is the outcome of their digging. They normally discover, as is
 to be expected, that the section thus cut is replete with stratification —
tip-lines, streaks of variant soil, a miscellany of the materials through
which they have been working in the course of the day. Nothing is
‘more calculated to disturb their faith in the time-significance of
stratification. Here, in front of them, is the variegated accumulation
of a few hours; how is that to be reconciled with the interpretation
of the adjacent strata below ground in terms of centuries?
   In theory the answer is difficult, in practice it is usually easy. It will
often be found that certain of the strata cease towards one end or both,
in such a fashion that the underlying and overlying layers unite to
clasp them and hold them within a uniform mass, as it were in
suspension — a sufficient proof of contemporaneity. A succession of
layers may join up laterally, like fingers extended from the palm of
the hand, essentially integral therefore with one another in substance
and date. Very rarely do deposits of this sort consistently ape a pro-
longed and systematic accumulation. On the other hand, they present
a warning: a selected portion of them may be found to simulate a
consistent and logical sequence, and so serve to point the danger of
argument from small sections. Fig. 8 shows a problem of this kind,
                                      6I
                    ARCHAEOLOGY                               FROM          THE        EARTH

solved on the right by an extension of the section. It should in any
event be axiomatic that no chronological sequence can be regarded
as established securely on the basis of a single section.
   A good archaeological instance of the insignificance of stratification
is provided by many of the storage-pits cut by Early Iron Age farmers
round about their dwellings, particularly on the chalk-lands. After
being used for a time for the storage of farm-produce, these pits were
liable to ‘turn sour’ and were summarily filled up with any material



                                                                                                 "                Oat
                    o           ST            NAS       See        Wy       &          Se                afte.            ws
wis, Sy                   Win            oD                                       o             —_                  Me
               Aw                         x                                                                           =



aa              a,              ie                  =                   S         Ah       Qa   airs    =        Se aaa
                    We   oF                   . We.                Ss   we        z    r        Re     e OW
af,       GS
                                     =            PLelts           pe
                    zs                        .


MMMM                             SAL
VATED     LLL            LEE         (6)
                                              eS
                                               se

Riker          ens Oe ee) Ss                                        UE          Bs33 7 eS an
SCT                       EEA                                 OW AA                                  NVABAw
pees erent nese atok a                                              a
Fig. 8. Section illustrating (a-B) an apparent succession of strata (3-7), shown
by an extension of the cutting (B-c) to have been deposited simultaneously

which happened to be nearby. The result is often a strikingly varie-
gated filling, of which the stratification bears no relation to time-
sequence. In other words, the first rule about stratification is that there
is no invariable rule.
   The opposite danger to the over-emphasis of what may be called
‘accidental’ and contemporary features is the under-emphasis of time-
values: the assumption that a succession of strata have accumulated
continuously whereas in fact they represent an intermittent growth,
with one or more time-gaps. Thus the original excavator of Gezer in
Palestine in 1902-9 hopelessly telescoped the Iron Age chronology of
Palestine through a failure to recognize a gap of some five centuries
in the occupation of his site. The mistake was gradually rectified,
years later, by the evidence of other excavations, but for a time it

                                                              62
                           STRATIGRAPHY

completely upset the dating of these centuries in Palestinian archae-
ology. How is a misjudgement of this sort to be prevented? This
question is manifestly important and deserves careful consideration.
   There is no single answer to the question, but at least two criteria
are feasible, and either or both must be considered in the interpreta-
tion of a section illustrating more than one cultural phase.
   The first criterion is the nature of the soil at the point of junction
between two cultures. An interruption in the occupation may here
be represented by a layer of wind-blown or water-borne sand, or by
the debris of turf or other vegetation. On a Dorset site, a dark layer
separated the Early Bronze Age from the Early Iron Age, and this
dark stratum was diagnosed on analysis as ‘brown-earth soil devel-
oped on a subsoil rich in chalk. It evidently means a gap in the occu-
Sation and a covering of the hill with woods’ - in fact, a gap of a
thousand years or more. A mere 4 or 5 inches of brown soil, com-
pressed for more than twenty centuries beneath a rising canopy of
trampled earth tell us all that, and hint at changes of climate and water-
table which for a thousand years diverted family-life to more homely
lowlands. A subtler example comes from Hadrian’s Wall, from the
filling found by Mr Gerald Simpson and Professor Ian Richmond
in the ditch of the Vallum where it was locally superseded by the
Roman fort at Birdoswald, in Cumberland. The problem was to
ascertain how long the Vallum ditch was open at this point before
the fort was built over it, and investigation was therefore made on a
vertical section of the material now filling the ditch. The result, as
reported by Dr Kathleen Blackburn, of the Department of Botany
in King’s College, Newcastle upon Tyne, settled the matter and is
worth quoting. It is as follows:
  Above the yellow silt of which the bottom (of the filling) was com-
posed were deposits of peat, which varied in thickness in different sec-
tions and were obviously composed of lumps of peat put in by hand...,
An investigation of the material from the floor of the ditch showed little
organic matter, and no traces of the dark coloration which is the usual
product of organic decay. What little remains were present consisted
very largely of weed seeds: the majority of these were of the Knot-grass
Polyponum aviculera), but examples were also found of Chickweed
Stella media) and of a buttercup, which was probably Ranunculus acris.
These seeds were in perfect preservation, probably due to the preserving
                                   63
              ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE   EARTH

action of the water draining from the peat immediately above. Such a
flora as these seeds suggest is one which would only be found on newly-
disturbed ground. From this, and from the absence of organic remains,
I think we may assume that the ditch could only have been open a year
or two before the re-filling with the peat.?

The ditch of the Vallum was therefore deliberately blotted out of
existence here (for the accommodation or extension of the fort)
almost immediately after its creation - a conclusion of revealing
lucidity and of a notable importance in the historical diagnosis of
the frontier-system. Similar evidence was recovered nearby from the
ditch of the Turf Wall where it underlay the fort, showing that the
fort was built across it with no appreciable intervening period — again
a ‘historical’ inference of the highest value.
   Even without analysis, careful observation under favourable con-
ditions may reduce stratification to terms of a precise chronology,
occasionally comparable with that of the famous varved clays. Two
examples, one from England and one from Iraq, have been cited
above (p. 45); and time-gaps and even time-spans may thus on occa-
sion be identified in a number of ways, provided by the close observa-
tion of weather-worn or overgrown surfaces and, above all, by soil-
analysis. But suitable phenomena or facilities are not always present —
though the latter at least should be available to a modern excavation.
There is, in any event, another approach to the problem, and the
best way to describe it is by illustration.
   In 1947 I was digging a town-site on the Mysore plateau in south
India, in the vicinity of an undated Iron Age megalithic cemetery,
with a view to the correlation of the culture of the cemetery with one
or other of the phases of the town. In fact, the sections through the
town-site revealed three successive and quite different cultures, of |
which the middle one was that of the cemetery. For the understanding
of the sequel I must burden you with names. The topmost culture
was known as ‘Andhra’, from the name of a local kingdom, the
middle culture as ‘Megalithic’, since it was also that of the local mega-
lithic tombs, and the lowest as ‘Stone Axe’, from its characteristic
product. Of the three, the only datable culture was the Andhra, which
  1. Trans. Cumberland and Westmorland Ant. Soc. (N.S.), xxix (Kendal, 1929),
308.

                                    64
                           STRATIGRAPHY

could be ascribed mainly to the first century A.D. The problem was to
relate the other two cultures to this and so, for the first time, to obtain
some sort of chronology for them.
   For this purpose it was obviously of cardinal importance to ascer-
tain whether the three cultures formed a continuous succession or
whether they were divided from one another by time-gaps. Examina-
tion of the sections failed to reveal any intervening weathered or
exposed. surfaces; and indeed, had there been such surfaces, laboratory
 facilities for their analysis were not available in India. Accordingly,
recourse was had to other types of data. In one instance, chance
played happily into our hands: a pot-burial of the distinctive Stone
Axe type was found inserted into the lowest overlying stratum of the
megalithic culture, implying a co-occupation by the two cultures at
this point. But even without so incontrovertible a demonstration of
continuity, the matter was set at rest by what I may call the actuarial
analysis of our sections. Such actuarial analyses should, in my view,
be made more frequently than they are, and the Mysore example may
therefore be described in some detail. Briefly, the method was this.
  In an extensive cutting, chosen as free from complication in the
form of intrusive pits or structures, a careful register was kept, layer
by layer, of every potsherd found, and the results were tabulated
(Figs. 9-10 and Pl. 3). Fortunately the fabric and technique used by
‘the three cultures were so distinctive from one another that their
 classification was beyond doubt; the pottery of the Stone Axe people
 being coarse, hand-made stuff, that of the Megalithic folk being a
 polished and beautiful black and brown and turned slowly if at all,
 that of the Andhra at the top being turned more mechanically on a
 fast wheel and otherwise elaborated with glaze and patterning. Now
 the table shows a substantial overlap, running through three succes-
  sive layers, between the Stone Axe and the Megalithic series, fol-
 lowed by a similar overlap between the Megalithic and the Andhra
 series. In estimating the significance of these very substantial overlaps,
 due allowance must be made for the fact that, from a variety of causes,
 the subsoil is always in a state of less or greater movement. Animal
 and vegetable life, and climate, are constantly at work in it. Relics of
 one stratum are always liable to find their way sporadically into
 another and to confuse our exact minds. But the thrusting-upwards
 respectively of 239 and 219 sherds from one culture into the next
    Cc                                65
                 ARCHAEOLOGY                    FROM    THE   EARTH

above it in this single section is not to be thus lightly dismissed. The
only acceptable explanation is that on neither occasion did the arrival
of the newer culture on the site involve the immediate extinction of

                                                                              SOUTH-BEST


                  NORTH-EAST


                           we   wg     Wh 3 <
                                  wm



  ANDHRA
    CULTURE


                  1

. MEGALITHIC      {                             —
    CULTU! RE     H                    STONE-COURSE Ay    +       ee          ee
                  }      7 aeae aoa    =   mM            wy ee
                                                    + ws Ly  I               Sisal
                                                                       YSTIE i
                 le  IN aoe ae                                 Sad ee              Tre!
                  oe KG bos                                     Uf is
                                                                Bou
                                                                  gL
                                                                   Y;
                                                                    aus
                                                                      2”
                  SKAS



                            ee
1B. STONE-AXE     &Ow
     CULTURE =     xX y
    (LATER)




                                                                              -3
                                                                              y oe
1A. STONE-AXE     Se                                                           co
    CULTURE       MGao >                                                           TINGS
    eal) |ce      i WA
                     aGRcE        NWAAl




Fig.9.Section from Brahmiagiti, Mysore State, India, showing three cultural
                           phases with overlaps

the older: in other words, that the cultural sequence was continuous
and, in our estimate of its chronology in relation to the fixed point
at the top, we can ignore the possibility of unknown factors arising
                                                66                        :
                                     STRATIGRAPHY
RS

              I.          Il.                                   _It.
 Layer | Stone Axe | Megalithic                                Andhra
     ae ,                                 .    52, mecadine I‘yellow-painted sherd
     |                                         384, including
                                                       ro yellow-painted sherds
      |                                       /480,  including 68yellow-painted and
                                                 1 rouletted sherd
      3a                                       67
      4       |                      36        269, including $1 yellow-painted sherds
      5                              68        219, including to yellow-painted sherds*
      6            26               115        405, including 7 yellow-painted sherds

      7            B3)   dy!       LACT
      8           Igo               199?

      8a           36          |

      8b      | 89

      9           aly
      9a          196

     10            46                                                                   =

     II            33
     2            23
     13            26
     I4            48
     14a           15
     15           198                                                                Toa

     16             i                                    "                           ine

     17            45                                                                   ie
es 8          &    25          |

     19       | 328°.          |
1.        In adjacent cuttings, layers equating with 5 and 6 of Br. 21, i.e. the lowest
‘Andhra’ levels, produced 7 sherds of rouletted wate.                     f
  2. In an adjacent cutting, the layer equating with this contained an urn-
burial of the ‘Stone Axe’ culture:       pid’                                 :
   3. Including 18 ‘Early Painted’ and 6 incised sherds of the IA culture, which
this layer represents.
  Fig. 10. Tabulation of sherds representing the three cultures at Brahmagiri
                                  (See Fig. 9)
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

from interruptions in the occupation. We are here in no danget of
repeating the disastrous oversight of the excavator of Gezer (p. 62).
Details of this specific Mysore example do not concern us; it will
suffice to observe that the overlap thus demonstrated between the
megalithic culture and the overlying first-century culture proved that
the megalithic tombs were there in use until the first century, and so
provided the first firm date for this very abundant category of south
Indian structures.
   Well, there are examples of various kinds of stratigraphical evi-
dence: of layers that are contemporary with one another, layers that
are separated by greater or lesser time-intervals, layers that have
accumulated in unbroken succession. The reading of a section is the
reading of a language that can only be learned by demonstration and
experience. A word of advice to the student. However practised, do
not read too hastily. Be your own devil’s advocate before passing
judgement. And, wherever possible, discuss your diagnosis with others
— with colleagues, with pupils, with your foreman. (“The testimony
of one person is no testimony’, declares Hywel Dda, the wise Welsh
law-giver.) Be humble. Do not ignore the opinion of the uninstructed.
‘Everyone knows as much as the savant. The walls of rude minds are
scrawled all over with facts, with thoughts.’ Emerson said so, and he
‘was right. Even if you do not accept the views of those you question,
the mere act of questioning is at the same time a restraint and a
stimulus.
   We turn now from interpretation to record. But first reference
must be made to a method of recording that not long ago was wide-
‘spread in the East and may in fact still survive there. If so, it is the
‘survival of a fantastic and monstrous device evolved in the alluvial
plains of the great river valleys of Egypt and Mesopotamia as a sub-
“stitute for exact observation in ill-controlled ‘mass excavations’. Its'
origin is probably to be found in Petrie’s belief that on an Egyptian
-town-site it was possible to equate the accumulation of material with
a specific time-scale (p. 45). The validity of this ‘principle’ was
-doubtful and dangerous enough in its original specialized context;
it has no place whatsoever in the general technique of modern field-
archaeology. Yet in India, for example, as recently as 1944 it was still
zthe only method known.                                              |
   Briefly, it consisted of the mechanical recording of every object
                                    68
                           STRATIGRAPHY

and structure in relation to a fixed bench-level. Thus in the excava-
tions at the great prehistoric city of Mohenjo-daro in the Indus valley,
In 1927-31, the records were prepared from bench-levels, in one
area ‘178-7 ft. above mean sea-level’ and in another ‘1809 ft. above
sea-level’, the assumption being that all objects and structures at the
same level below (or above) datum line were in the same ‘stratum’,
i.e. contemporary with one another! I have described this system as
‘incredible’ and I repeat the description. So incredible is it, and yet so
widespread, that the excavator’s own proud account of it may be
repeated. He says:
   In order that our deep digging might be satisfactorily carried out, an
extensive system of levelling was necessary. The levels of every building
and of every wall were therefore taken, especial attention being paid to
door-sills and pavements as being for purposes of stratification the most
important parts of a building. In addition, both the locus and level of
every object found, whether it was regarded at the time as important or
not, were noted in order not only to correlate each object with the build-
ing in which it was found, but also to facilitate the study of the develop-
ment of art and technique. As some thousands of objects were unearthed
in the sections that we excavated, it may be thought that this procedure
was unnecessarily laborious. This, however, was not the case. The level-
ling instruments were set up early in the morning and remained in
position all day; and it was quite a simple matter to take the level of
each object directly it appeared.

  It was, however, admitted that this method was not wholly free
from complexity; that there were
limitations to the deductions to be drawn from the levels at which
objects are found. For instance, if a jar or a seal lies either below or at
some distance above a pavement or door-sill, it is difficult to decide to
what period it belongs. We, therefore adopted the rule that all objects
found in or near the foundations of a building be assigned to the period
of that building rather than to the previous phase, unless they actually
rested on the remains of a pavement of earlier date; for it is more than
probable that they were dropped or left behind when the foundations
were being made.

The chapters on the pottery and other finds in the excavator’s subse-
juent report include page after page of elaborate but insignificant
ables based on this procedure.
                                   69
                ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

   In other words, be it repeated, the so-called ‘stratification’ of the
 Indus valley civilization, one of the major civilizations of the ancient
 world, was dominated, not by local observation, but by the level
 of the sea nearly 300 miles away! This mechanical classification can
 only be categorized as the very parody of scientific method. It bears
 little more relationship to scientific archaeology than astrology bears
 to astronomy.
    To appreciate its utter absurdity, we need only recall that, except
 perhaps at the earliest level of a site (hardly ever adequately explored),
 an ancient city in the East is never level. Very rarely is a city com-
 pletely destroyed and completely rebuilt at one moment and at one
 horizon, Normally, a house is reconstructed or replaced as it decays,
 or at the whim of its owner. The town as 2 whole is constantly in a
 state of differential destruction and construction. Individual building-
‘sites rise above their neighbours; the town-site itself rises and assumes
 the contour of a hill; buildings on its slopes are contemporary with
 buildings on its summit. A doorway or a potsherd may be found at
 one spot 10 feet below a doorway or a potsherd of precisely the same
date at another spot. Such differences, of vital importance to the
scientific interpretation of the site, are ironed out and obliterated by
the bench-level. If it be necessary to illustrate further the grievous
fallacy of this method, two diagrams (Fig. 11) may serve. They are
self-explanatory.
   Yet, for all the obvious absurdity of the datum-line system just
described, the substitution of so-called ‘levels’ - whether abstract
building levels or purely arbitrary depth-lines — for factual stratifica-
tion dies hard. It recurs, for example, in a revised edition (1950) of A
Manual ofArchaeological Field Methods prepared by a leading American
university. There, as sturdily as ever, thrives the old outworn system,
with its mechanical ‘unit-levels’, governed not by changes of soil but
by ‘the length of the shovel-blade (6 to 12 inches)’.1 True the word
‘stratification’ is not unknown to the authors. It represents a pheno-
menon, they admit, which ‘may be visible in the walls of the excava-
tion’; but, we are assured, “any stratigraphy of artifact types and
   1. It may be noted in passing that mechanical “foot-levels’ were used as long
 ago as 1865 by W. Pengelly, F.R.S., in the excavation of Kent’s Cavern at
 Torquay. See his interesting MS. Journal in the possession of the Royal Society.
 But it is sad to find the same outworn method advocated by a distinguished
 university in 1950.
                                       7O
                              STRATIGRAPHY

animal bones will appear after a study has been made and need not
bother the excavator in the field’ [sic]. The notion of peeling off the
successive strata in conformity with their proper bed-lines, and thus
ensuring the accurate isolation of structural phases and relevant arti-
facts, is not even considered.
  Enough of criticism; let us turn to a more positive aspect of the
matter. The preparation for the record of the section begins with
the first spadeful dug. From the outset, the strata are carefully ob-
served, distinguished, and labelled as the work proceeds. It is, of
                                                       E x AMPLE      OF       4
                                                  FALSE “STRATIFICATION
                                                      BY LEVELLING




                                                                   PRECINCT WALL
                                                                   OF BUDDHIST
                                                                   MONASTERY




       3RD MILLENIUM   B.C.          1910 A.D.            282 CENTURY       A.D.


 Fig. 11. Diagrams illustrating the stratification of a city-mound (below) and
             the fallacy of recording by mechanical levels (above)

course, as the work proceeds that ‘finds’ are isolated and recorded,
and their record is necessarily integral with that of the strata from
which they are derived. The supervisor must therefore make up his
mind clearly from moment to moment as to the limits and nomen-
clature of his strata; and his decisions, whether ultimately approved
or modified, must be susceptible to accurate delineation, if only for
                                      71
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

 the subsequent correlation of his ‘finds’. In other words, both he and
 the spectator or the future reader must know exactly what he thinks
 he is doing.
    I have found in practice that there is only one foolproof method of
 ensuring this. The successive layers must be defined and clearly
 labelled as they come to light. By labelling I meant the actual pinning
 of a label by a nail or peg into the side of the trench in (preferably on
 the top edge of) each layer. The label bears the number of the layer
 within a circle (I reserve encircled numbers for this purpose, to avoid
 all risk of confusion with numbers having other connotations), sup-
 plemented by a name: for example ‘lower brown’, ‘red clay’,
 ‘porridge’ — it matters not what, so long as a distinctive word or
 phrase is used to emphasize and cross-check the differentiation.
 Numbers may on occasion be erroneously duplicated, but the addi-
‘tion of a name avoids risk of confusion. And incidentally the use of a
 name tends to give individuality to a layer and helps the mind in a
 pictorial reconstruction of the section.
    Accordingly, I like to see my sections plastered from head to foot
 with orderly arrays of labels (PI. 3), which serve three main purposes:
 they demand clear and decisive thought on the part of the supervisor
 who invents them, they show on the ground and on the drawing
 precisely what his small-find labels mean, and they make it possible
 for the director or a substitute-supervisor to understand at once the
 diagnosis up to date. Incidentally, they enable that diagnosis to be
 checked —- always with the proviso that any material alteration in it
 will probably mean either a relabelling of the relevant ‘finds’ or at
 least a recording of the original as well as the corrected diagnosis.
 As a general guide to the young, it is wiser to insist upon the over-
 stratification than the under-stratification of a section in the first
 instance: it is easy subsequently to group layers and their contents”
 but it will never be safe to subdivide them.                              |
    Now a word as to systems of numbering. Layers or strata it is
 obviously necessary to number downwards from the top of a cutting,
 so that the numbers are mostly in the reverse order of accumulation,
  the latest (topmost) layer being layer 1. This somewhat illogical
  procedure is unavoidable since it is necessary to give layer-numbers
  to small-finds as they come to light, without waiting for the com-
  pletion of the section. The same disability does not apply to cultures,
                                    72
                          STRATIGRAPHY

which emerge as recognizable entities at a later stage of the work and
are not used for labelling purposes. Here the logical system can, and
certainly should, be followed: namely, to number the earliest culture
or phase as number I, with I, II, etc., in sequence above them.
Unfortunately, usage in this matter is chaotic. A number of Meso-
potamian and Iranian sites (Arpachiyah, Uruk, Uquair, Gawra, Giyan)
have been numbered from top to bottom, so that, for example,
Giyan V and Gawra XX are early, and Giyan I and GawraI are late.
On the other hand, Sialk VI is late, and so with Nineveh, Hissar,
Susa (new classification) and other rationally classified sites. It should
unquestionably be laid down as standard that cultures or cultural
phases are numbered (with Roman numerals) from the earliest to the
latest (Fig. 9). The only circumstances which may present difficulty to
this method is failure to reach the bottom of a site. Where this hap-
pens, the earliest phase uncovered may not in fact be the earliest on
the site, and therefore not truly its number I. Chanhu-daro in Sind
is an instance of this kind, where the excavator might justify the top-
downwards numeration, which he in fact adopted, on the plea that
the water-table stopped him from reaching and diagnosing the lower
levels. Interim reports on unfinished excavations may provide another
excuse for this procedure. But in general, the answer to the difficulty
is clear: no site should be dug unless it is sectioned and diagnosed to
the lowest level and a complete culture-sequence recovered. Water
should not normally be accepted as a bar; at Arikamedu in 1945 we
had to dig 11 feet below sea-level, and this depth we achieved, with
some difficulty it is true, but without elaborate equipment, whilst at
Mohenjo-daro in 1950 we penetrated with the help of pumps to a
depth of 10 feet below the water-level under peculiarly difficult con-
ditions, and with more time could certainly have dug lower still.
   The purist may complain that two contrary systems have here been
recommended: the numbering of layers from top to bottom, and of
cultural phases from bottom to top. In fact, there is no conflict what-
soever between the two. They are both logical and practical for their
several purposes. A nominal inconsistency is their only demerit, and
it is of a kind that only a pedant could carp at. “Do I contradict
myself?’ cries Walt Whitman; ‘Very well, then, I contradict myself!’
Or recall the words of a less blustering fellow-countryman of Whit-
man’s: ‘A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds’; and
                                    73
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE    EARTH

 when the magisterial Ralph Waldo Emerson opes his mouth let no
 dog bark.
   Our section, then, has been dug, diagnosed, and labelled. The task
 remains to record it on paper accurately and expressively. The mech-
 anism is simple enough. Categorically, the materials required are:
 squared paper, a light drawing-board (three-ply wood is useful for
 this), drawing-pins, a good HB pencil, an india-rubber, a scale-rule,
 good thin string for the datum-line, surveying-pins (‘arrows’) or
 6-inch nails, a measuring-tape, clips for fixing the tape, a 5-foot rod,
 and a plumb-bob.
   At a convenient point, generally at the top, the string is stretched
 firmly across the section and levelled either by means of a bubble-
 level or by a surveyor’s level laid on the terminal points. As usual,
 details are important. String of the best quality should be used;
‘inferior string breaks or, worse still, stretches and sags. In any case, the
 string should be supported on carefully levelled pegs at horizontal
 intervals of ten feet. Moreover, to avoid errors from stretching or
other causes, the level of the string should be checked once or twice
during the day.
   This string should be marked off in feet or metres or, better still, a
measuring-tape should be stretched (not too tightly) alongside it.
Then, at every foot or at other selected points, vertical measurements
are taken with a weighted measuring-tape above or below the datum
and are transferred by the draftsman, on the spot, to suitably squared
paper.
   As to scale, the smallest scale at which the detail of an average
section can be adequately recorded is $ inch = 1 foot (alternatively,
5 cm, = 1 m.), and this may be regarded as standard for large sections.
Whenever possible, however, the larger scale of 1 inch = 1 foot
(alternatively, 10 cm. = 1 m.) is preferable; it is more accurate, and
better lends itself to annotation.
   In the process of drawing the section, there is a common tendency _
on the part of the inexperienced draftsman to exaggerate inequalities
in the surface of a stratum, so as to obscure its general contour and           —
character. He should be reminded that, on the normal scale of 4 inch
= I foot, the picture will be one-twenty-fourth of the size of the —
original. An inequality, therefore, rising actually 2 inches above the —
average level of a stratum will, in a normal scale-drawing, vary by
                                     74.
                                                                                a
                                                                                Sutmesrp-uoyoas Jo anbruypey, *c1 “Sty
GALVILNAUsdsId                      =ATLNAOITIZLINI
                                         “D
                                         NOILDAS
                                           MOS
                                           IVWANLYN

                                                                                               he    een
                                                                                                              10S
                                                                                                              TVUN.LVvN
                                                                                                 A
                                                              PLEAD
          VL              A
                                                                                                            BWZWil;

                          MELLTIT
                                                                                                      WMD




                                               IEEE    TET
                                    ELL
          APAFOM
                                      a
                                    LEMS
                                                                                      WG
                                                                                res
                                    181d
                                                                           A
                                                                           Mf
                                                                           to
                                                                          WM/
                                                                                      Za
           “ww                                        aw                  2
           Fl o W                                     wil a           W
   rent
    STULRS Usd$2
            FS
                   OSZs
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

 only one-twelfth of an inch above the level, and so will form a nearly
 negligible break in the surface. Almost invariably the draftsman, see-
 ing the trees rather than the wood, will over-emphasize the obstacle,
 albeit that the feature is exceptional and misrepresents the general
 meaning of the layer.
    Furthermore, there is the question, not merely of the over-empha-
sis of accidental features, but of the over-emphasis or under-emphasis
of whole layers; resulting, in fact, in a permanent misinterpretation
of the section. I can best demonstrate this by. three diagrams (Fig. 12).
In diagram A, the draftsman.is assumed to have delineated the
individual strata correctly and fairly, with reference to his horizontal
datum-line. But this delineation, although indicating the presence of
strata, does little or nothing to indicate their varying character and
significance. It is an almost meaningless collection of lines - a proces-
sion of letters not yet divided into words. A more ambitious drafts-
 man may attempt to indicate something of the individuality and
 diversity of the strata, and diagram B illustrates such an attempt. This
fails in two main respects. First, the general evenness of tone through-
 out the section produces the unmeaning monotony of a sentence
spoken without inflection, and so fails largely to convey the intended
impression. The draftsman has not realized the varying significance
of the facts which he is recording; he has again failed to see the wood
for the trees. Secondly, he has not realized that his rendering is not,
or should not be, merely a transcription of accurately measured or
even accurately emphasized lines: it is, or should be, also an accurate
picture of what he sees. Not only should lines of demarcation be
transcribed from measurement, but also the size, shape, and position
of brick-bats, bones, sherds or other materials which, by their char-
acter and quantity and by their ‘angle of rest’ in the soil, combine to
indicate the nature of a stratum and the method of its accumulation.
An intelligently drawn section is far more than a diagram; it is, as I
say, a picture, representing not merely the skeleton but also something
of the vital flesh and blood of its subject. Diagram C is diagram B
corrected in this sense.
   It must be confessed that a well-drawn, i.e. intelligently recorded,
section is relatively a rarity. But it is nevertheless a basic necessity of
modern field-work. The published sections are the readiest index of
the value of an excavation-report
                                    76
                                STRATIGRAPHY

   In these diagrams, and elsewhere, I have used certain symbols for
the easy conventional representation of different types of soil or
deposit. They have no special merit but are reasonably expressive.
Some measure of standardization in the choice of symbols would be
useful but has not yet been attempted in Britain. (See, however,
Fig. 13.)

                          SYMBOLS
                   Be Reso                   TONS

EURNT BRICKS
                                                               YELLS yy
                                                               MLLLLLILSED
                                           ASH                 UM iiss
                                                               VA

MUD     BRICKS                             MUDDY BANDS




Loose EARTH        % WA W%                 POTSHERDS           3S
with GRAVEL ete. Iy FIZ
LOOSE    EARTH     =      ~                GRAVEL              os
                       ths SM                                  eo




                   Y             WY
COMPACT    EARTH                           SAND
                                  ——




LOOSE     CLAY                             BRICKBATS    etc.




                                                                    |Hi
                                                               I
COMPACT     CLAY                           SURFACE HUMUS |
                                                                            aeRae



  Fig. 13. Chart of symbols adopted by the Archaeological Survey of India
               ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM           THE   EARTH

   Before leaving the delineation of sections, reference must be made
to an alternative method which was occasionally (though not nor-
mally) used long ago by Pitt Rivers, and has from time to time found
favour with others, amongst whom Dr Gerhard Bersu is notable
(Fig. 14). This may be called the ‘pictorial’ method in a sense some~-
what different from that in which I have used “picture’ in preceding
paragraphs. The strata are not outlined (as in Fig. 12) but are, to a
greater or less extent, differentiated from one another by what may

      W               P59                               P40         E




                                                     lelt: i
                                                   : a
                                           iy 1a: 1
                       eeCA        Aaw
                               ENS ha es      feiden
                ed SERS
                  be          RET
                                      I) Rr Beats

       Fig. 14. ‘Pictorial’? method of section-drawing. After G. Bersu

be called a sort of chromatic shading. The result is an impression of the
section, more akin to a photograph than to a diagram. The different
“tones’ are not consistently framed or demarcated, nor are they
numbered.
  Granted that, in the hands of an artist, this impressionistic tech-
nique has merits, it is equally plain that in the hands of one who is a
mere delineator rather than an artist chaos will prevail. A technique
which is beyond the reach of most excavators is, on that ground
alone, ruled out where a workable alternative exists. The impres-
sionistic technique cannot be defended on the grounds that it is “less
conventional’; in its own fashion, it is no less conventional than the
linear technique, only, it is a different convention. And it has this
crowning disadvantage: it lends itself to nebulousness, to a blurring
of detail and a lack of precision in diagnosis. Even some of Dr Bersu’s
skilful drawings show this, and a less skilful performer is liable to be
utterly lost. This is a grave defect. If I have tried to emphasize one
thing more than another it is the need for considered precision in our
                                      78
                           STRATIGRAPHY

work. Any medium or convention which is likely to encourage
woolly thinking is to be deprecated: and, save at its rare best, the
impressionistic technique is woolly. I do not commend it to the
average worker.
   One more detail. It is useful, in the drawing of a large section, to
include a human figure as well as a linear scale. The figure provides
an effortless indication of approximate size, and the saving of effort
on the part-of the reader is worth a little extra effort on the part of the
draftsman.
                             CHAPTER      §

          The Layout of an Excavation

An ill-considered excavation is liable to develop into a chaos of pits
and trenches, difficult to supervise and record, and often embarrassed
by intrusive spoil-tips that eventually either control the work or are
in a constant and costly process of secondary removal. On approaching
an excavation, the trained observer can at a glance evaluate its effici-
ency. It is an axiom that an untidy excavation is a bad one, whether
the untidiness reside in the general layout or in detailed execution.
The guiding principles are not difficult: they are ‘Have a plan’, a
carefully thought-out scheme, and execute it in orderly fashion.
   Two contrasted examples will illustrate this. The first (Pl. 4a) is an
official photograph of a well-known excavation in the East, conducted
by an archaeologist of considerable repute and long field-experience.
Nevertheless,   a mere novice might guess, and guess correctly, that
chaos reigns. Look at the crowded workmen, picking and shovelling
tumultuously in all directions; the absence of a supervisor or indeed
of any possibility of supervision; the absence also of ‘small-find’ or
pottery receptacles; and of course a complete lack of any systematic
identification of strata. Needless to say, the subsequent report faith-
fully reflected this concentrated confusion.
  The second illustration (Pl. 4b), from the same subcontinent, un-
blushingly represents an excavation of my own, on the principle that
the professor may properly be expected to practise. It shows a site
neatly parcelled out in readily controllable areas; small groups of
workmen are directed by supervisors (distinguishable in the photo-
graph by their sun-helmets); the basket-carriers are working in
orderly procession along clear pathways; and in the middle distance
on the right, the survey-party is conveniently at work at a table
shaded by an essential umbrella. The subsequent analysis and detailed
publication of this excavation was a relatively easy task. For it is not
the least of the merits of orderly field-work that it is easy. Every man
knows what he is doing, and records are almost inevitably clear and
sensible, the considered product of several pairs of critical eyes,
                                   80
              THE    LAYOUT      OF        AN   EXCAVATION

   Plan your work, then, and methodically pursue your plan. True,
there must always be an element of chance and of opportunism in an
excavation, however carefully planned. But scientific digging is not
on that account a gamble. The experienced excavator, who thinks
before he digs, succeeds in reaching his objective in a majority of
cases.
   The nature of the plan necessarily depends upon the character and
needs of the site. For purposes of discussion, we may here classify our
problem under three categories: trial-trenching or sondages, area-
excavation, and what I shall call substantive trenching. The excava-
tion of burials will be considered separately (p. 113), and caves, in
view of the slightness of my experience in their exploration, I propose
to omit altogether; they require a monograph by one who knows.

             (i) TRIAL-TRENCHING OR “SONDAGES’
The old practice of cutting trial-trenches, of making sondages, as a
preliminary to, or even in lieu of, area-excavation was frequently a
substitute for intelligent thinking and clear aiming. It was to a large
extent ‘shooting into the brown’ on the off-chance of bringing down
a bird. Trial-trenches rarely prove anything, save of the most general
kind. I have in mind a long and wide trial-trench cut by an eminent
archaeologist across a famous town-site without apparent result;
whilst subsequent systematic excavation, initiated on an altogether
different basis,proved that the trench had in fact passed through and
utterly failed to reveal a building of unique character. The answer on
a site of that kind is, not a trial-trench, but a methodical area-excava-
tion, which can always be discontinued if unproductive but at least
reveals coherently within the area selected.
   Trenches in general, save of the somewhat special ‘substantive’
kind described below (p. 86), are bad for more than one reason. They
‘mess up’ a site. Unless very wide (when they are, in effect, cumber-
some area-excavations) they are liable at any considerable depth to
become excessively confined and difficult to work in, their stratifica-
tion cannot be viewed comprehensively and at adequate range, and,
above all, lateral enlargement complicates the record to an extent
which endangers its accuracy. At Maiden Castle in Dorset I dug the
northern portal of the eastern entrance in 1935 by trenching, and can
                                      81
                  ARCHAEOLOGY      FROM    THE    EARTH

still recall the appalling complexity of my record as the work pro-
ceeded and my trenches widened. In the following year I dug the
southern portal as an area by the ‘square’ method, to be described
below, and both excavation and record developed easily side by side,
without risk of error and without headache.
   On the other hand, prejudice against trenching cannot be extended
to sites where the preliminary problem is solely and simply to search
for a superficially invisible structure. If a line of ancient entrench-
ments, for example, is thought to have passed somewhere through
a certain field, a trial-trench across the field is the obvious method of
proving or disproving the theory, and it would be pedantry to
protest. The example of Napoleon III’s Colonel Stoffel in this respect
has already been cited (p. 23). The principle here advocated is that
trenching should be employed, not as a normal method, but only
when very special circumstances demand it. Too often does it form
the basis of an excavation to which other methods are more suitable.

                       (ii) AREA-EXCAVATION
Ifa site is known to have been occupied, an area-excavation, not a trial-
trench, is usually the effective answer. But let us first consider the
pre-requisites.
  An area-excavation must be:
  (a) conveniently and clearly subdivisible for record and control;
  (b) capable of easy, progressive expansion in any direction without
      breaking down or impairing the preliminary datum-lines;
  (c) capable of preserving for constant reference at a maximum
      number of points complete vertical sections until the last phase
      of the excavation;
  (d) capable, ultimately, of easy integration into a continuously ex-
      posed regional excavation;
  (e) readily accessible to all points for the removal of soil, without
      hindrance from intervening cuttings or traffic across excavated
       surfaces; and
  (f) sufficiently open to the sky to ensure the easy inspection of
      well-lighted sections at all required depths.
                                   82
               THE   LAYOUT      OF     AN   EXCAVATION

   Only one type of layout normally supplies all these needs: namely,
a layout based upon a square (PI. 5). A series of squares, a grid, dug so
that a balk is left between each pair of adjacent squares until the ex-
treme end of the work, supplies all the six pre-requisites. The indi-
vidual square is a clearly defined sub-unit for record and supervision;
supplementary squares can be added in any direction in accordance
with developing needs, without affecting any previous datum; the
supervisor retains in each square (until the end of the work) a com-
plete section on all four sides of him, together with such additional
sections or part-sections as he may care to add within the compass of
the square; the stratification of adjacent squares, and therefore accu-
mulatively of the whole site, can easily be correlated and recorded
along a number of arterial lines, so that ultimately the barriers be-
tween the squares can be removed without loss of vertical evidence
and the whole plan laid bare, level by level; the barriers or balks pro-
vide ready paths of access to the various squares, and from them to
the spoil-dumps; and the squares, unlike most trenches, are suffici-
ently spacious to let in ample light and to provide elbow-room for
interpretation and record.
   Experience shows that in soils of average stability the horizontal
dimensions of a square should approximately equal its anticipated
maximum depth. Thus, if it is intended to dig to a depth approaching
20 feet, the square should be laid out with 20-foot sides. This ratio
allows for the necessary stairs and balks. Similarly, a 30-foot square
can be dug to a depth of 30 feet, whilst a depth of 10 feet or less (the
normal range in Great Britain) demands only a 10-foot square. The
smaller the superficial area of the square in relation to its depth the
better, provided always that there is ample light and working-room.
With a due regard to these factors, a 10-foot square may be regarded
as the minimum sub-unit.
   These measurements include provision for the balks between
squares. In most soils a balk 3 feet wide will carry any amount of
traffic, and that width may therefore be regarded as standard on all
but the shallowest sites. (For 10-foot squares a 2-foot balk is usually
adequate.) The 3-foot balk implies that the string marking the top
edge of the actual cutting is 13 feet within the perimeter of each
square as pegged out; for example, the actual cutting of a 20-foot
square will be 17 feet square, and of a 30-foot square it will be 27 feet.
                                   83
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

Similarly a 1o-foot square with 2-foot balks will be cut with 8-foot
sides.
  The pegged squares will form the basis of record and survey, and
the supervisor must ensure their initial exactitude; otherwise, all sorts
of complications and errors will arise. At each corner of the square
a strong peg, not less than 14 inches square in scantling and 1 foot
3 inches long, with one end pointed, is firmly driven into the ground,
its faces set diagonally to the proposed square; but the exact corner-
point is marked by a 2-inch nail driven vertically into the top of the
peg and left projecting about an inch for the occasional affixture of
string or measuring-tape in connexion with survey. On one occasion,
where the surface-soil was too soft to hold the corner pegs with com-
plete security, I found it worth while to have them set in concrete,
so important are they to the accuracy of the work.
   From these fixed points, the marking out of the actual cutting
with string as a guide to the diggers, allowing for the necessary balk
(see above), is a simple secondary operation.
   The squares‘thus pegged out are conveniently named by means of
letters in one direction (say, east to west) and by numbers in the other
direction (say, north to south). They will thus be known individually
as A, A2, A3, etc.; Br, Bz, etc. The appropriate designation must be
painted clearly on the nearest face of each of the four corner-pegs,
which for this purpose have been set diagonally in the ground. Thus
a peg set at the junction of four squares will have a different designa-
tion on each face; e.g. Ar, A2, Br, B2. The need for clear and abun-
dant labelling cannot be over-emphasized if error is to be eliminated
from the records, particularly on a large excavation.
   In the actual digging of a square, a principle of universal application
in archaeological excavation may be stressed: namely, the use of the
control-pit. This is the supervisor’s own special charge, and upon it the
accuracy of the general digging in large measure depends. It is a small
cutting, about 2} feet square, cut by the supervisor himself or by a
trained man under his eye, to a depth of 14-2 feet lower than the
average level of the work. Its purpose is to enable the supervisor, with
a minimum disturbance of the strata, to anticipate the nature and
probable vertical extent of the layers which are being cleared by his
main gang. It is a glimpse into the future of his stratigraphical work.
Without it, neither the supervisor nor his diggers, working blindly
                                    84
                THE    LAYOUT       OF     AN   EXCAVATION

- from the top, can avoid the confusion of the lower part of one stratum
  with the upper part of the next below it. In other words, stratification
  must, by its nature, always be controlled from the side, i.e. from the
 side of the control pit, since it obviously cannot be controlled pro-
 phetically from the top: vertical digging first, horizontal digging afterwards,
 must be the rule. Control-pits must be sufficiently numerous to min-
 imize risks arising from the unevenness or interruption of strata, and
 sufficiently small in area to restrict the confusion of evidence which is
 inherent in their exploratory nature. The control-pit is indeed a means
 of concentrating errors which would otherwise be spread over the
 whole area. Its evidence in detail must be used with proportionate
 circumspection.
   And, above all, constant reference must be made to the stratifica-
 tion revealed by the sides of the square as the digging proceeds. The
 four sides must be constantly correlated with one another. Any
 marked discrepancy between them, or between the equivalent sections
 in adjacent squares, must be considered and an explanation sought.
 During the search for an explanation, the supervisor may find it
 desirable to suspend or restrict the actual digging.
   This raises a further point, again of universal application. In view
of the occasional necessity for a temporary suspension of digging in
one square or another, the director of an excavation must always have
in readiness a sufficiency of “reserve-jobs’ to mect contingencies of
this kind. Such reserve-jobs may include the removal of unimportant
top-soil from a new square, or the reinforcement of a gang engaged
elsewhere upon the digging of a deep stratum. Remember that, when
a gang stops digging, from two to six workpeople - pick-man,
shovel-man     and, in the East, probably four basket-carriers - are
thrown out of action. And idleness is both costly and infectious.
   In the last three paragraphs matters have been dealt with which are
not peculiar to the ‘square’, although they are liable to present them-
selves on a busy area-dig in an acute form. I turn now to the actual
recording of the square.
   Be it repeated that a great merit of the ‘square’ method is that it
localizes both control and record. The supervisor’s responsibilities
are clearly defined, and the area covered by his field note-book is
precise. The basis of his record is the careful identification, embodied
in an accurate measured drawing, of the stratigraphy of each of the
                                      85
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE    EARTH

four sides of his square and of such supplementary sections as may be
required. As in all excavations, the layers are demarcated and labelled
with a serial number whilst the excavation proceeds (see p. 72). Each
side of the square is also labelled with its compass-point, which is
added to the index-number of the square: ¢.g. B3N indicates the
northern side of square B3. And each side is carefully measured and
drawn to a minimum scale of } inch to 1 foot, or to a maximum scale
of r inch to 1 foot, or the metric equivalents (see p. 74). A sketch (or
even measured) section should also be included in the notebook; and
reference should be made to relevant sections not so included.
   In the process of excavation, it may be found convenient sometimes
to work diagonally across the square; for instance, if diagonal walls
are found, since sections at right angles to the line of a wall are neces-
sary to avoid a distortion of the relevant strata. An example is illus-
trated in Pl. 4b, where diagonal balks can be seen within the grid~
squares. In such cases, the diagonal section must of course be corre-
lated with the side-sections and, if necessary, drawn separately.
   All ‘finds’ will be recorded by strata with reference to the nearest
recorded section, normally with the nearest side of the square. Struc-
tures, pits, or important objects, together with the position of all -
measured sections, will be planned carefully in the supervisor's note-
book in relation to the four surveyed corner-pegs of the square.
‘Finds’ will be classified in the notebook by serial numbers, section-
label, stratum, and sketch (see below).


                   (iii) SUBSTANTIVE TRENCHES
The epithet ‘substantive’ is here applied to trenches which are not
merely tentative cuttings made in search of some ill-defined objective
but are in themselves a definite objective. In the category is included
the cross-trenching of a line of fortifications, to establish their struc-
tural sequence and to link it up with the sequence of occupations
within the enclosure. Examples are illustrated in Pls. 6 and 7a, one of
them a tevealing section which, in 1944-5, related the stone defences
of the third city of Taxila (Sirkap) in the Punjab with a dated “palace’
in the vicinity and so threw a new light on the chronology of this
important site! A further use of the substantive trench is shown in
            1. Ancient India, no. 4 (New Delhi, 1948), pp. 41 ff.

                                    86
               THE    LAYOUT         OF    AN   EXCAVATION

Pl. 7b, where the method was employed to establish the stratigraphical
relationship of two cemeteries, representing different cultures, on
the famous prehistoric site at Harappa, in the Punjab. In 1946 the two
cemeteries were linked by a carefully cut and surveyed trench nearly
450 feet long, and the resultant section (which has been published)
was conclusive. In the photograph, one of the cemeteries is beside
the figures in the foreground, the other lies amongst the trees in the
background, and the lines of datum-pegs, together with a regular
series of cross-balks designed to equate the sections on the two sides
of the trench, are seen.
  In all these examples, the principle is the same. The lateral extent
of the trench is defined at the outset, and the flanking datum-lines are
accordingly fixed once and for all. There is no risk of their obliter-
ation by any lateral, crab-like movement of the cutting, and the
recorder’s task is predictable from start to finish.
   The established method of recording objects found in a trench
which it is not intended to enlarge laterally is represented by the
following extracts from a recorder’s notebook:


 No.       Measurements    |          Layer           Object     Remarks

was,    INV. 62x. 3°57 67 Ks) Brown sand__|         Iron knife | (Sketch)
                                                    blade 5”
                                                    long

LN      OY rt 4°62” °5"— ® Loose reddish | Spherical | In a local
          6’ 2”           earth with occa- | agate bead | patch of
                          sional patches of               wood-ash
                               ash              '

   The figure in the first column is the serial number of the find. I make
the practice of enclosing it in a triangle to avoid any possibility of con-
fusion with layer-numbers, etc. It is immediately written on the
envelope containing the object and /or on the label attached to the
object, and subsequently on the object itself; also on an index-card in
duplicate (one for the site-index and one for the index of objects classi-
fied by categories), which will include likewise all the other particu-
lars of the record.
  The figures in the second column are the essence of the record, and

                                          87
                                ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM      THE        EARTH

    are derived as follows. Before the digging of the trench is begun, two
    parallel lines of pegs are laid out, each at a distance of 1 foot from one
    of the intended edges of the trench. Thus, if the trench is (for example)
    to be 10 feet wide, the two lines of pegs will be 12 feet apart. The pegs
    themselves are not less than 14 inches square in scantling and 1 foot
    3 inches long, with one end pointed. They are driven firmly into the
    ground — firmly enough to avoid any risk of accidental dislodgement
    — and are set diagonally with reference to the proposed trench, i.e.
    with one angle facing the latter. In each line they are placed with
    these edges 3 feet apart, measured horizontally, not along the actual
    contour of the ground (unless that be level); and an imaginary cross-
    line joining opposite pairs of pegs in the two main lines must be at
    right angles with the latter. See Fig. 15.
     _ Every peg is then numbered clearly on each of the two faces nearest
    to the proposed trench with a serial-number in black paint. With the
    addition of the Arabic zero, Roman numerals (I, IL, Il, etc.) are used


       PEG O                    Be   PEG I                   PEG D                   PEG
              Se   ao ee       Se
                                      ce)te   ae   Oe   a    a
                                                               ©         a         er
                                                                                      o
         i}
         i]
         1
         1
         1                                                             EDGE OF TRENCH
         1



                                              TRENCH
         es
         hiss
          |          =x                                          A fOGE OF TRENCH
                           \
            RIGHT              \     y
          j ANGLE               \    f
              Solas ye               afer =s==== ae
                                                  ee                         See   es      STRING

{      PEG fe)0”                       cr
                                     PEGI                    PEG 0 d                 PEG     5

                   Fig. 15. Layout of a trench for three-dimensional recording

for the double reason: (a) that they are easier to paint than Arabic
numerals, and (b) that there is no risk of confusing them with the
actual measurements of the record. The figures on one of the lines
of pegs are distinguished by a dash (O’, I’, II’, III’, etc.). Ifsubse-
quently it is desired to extend the trench backwards from zero (e.g.
down the reverse slope of a rampart), capital letters (A, B, C, etc.) are
                                                        88
                THE    LAYOUT       OF   AN   EXCAVATION

 used for the successive pegs of the extension, the letters on one of the »
 lines being similarly distinguished by a dash (A’, B’, C’, etc.).
    Along the front edges of each line of pegs a string is then tightly
 stretched, and is pegged down where this is necessitated by the con=
 tour of the ground. These strings are the base-lines from which
 measurements are subsequently taken.
    So much for the preliminary layout of the trench. The supervisor
 must now be provided with an angle-measure, made lightly but
  strongly of two 3-foot or preferably 4-foot arms graduated in feet and
  inches and fixed firmly to each other at right angles (PI. 18, rr). On
  each arm is fixed a bubble-level. The other normal measuring-instru-
  ments — tape, 5-foot rule, and plumb-bob — complete the equipment.
     When the digging of the trench is in progress, theposition of every
  significant find is measured in the following sequence:
     (A) Longitudinal measurement. The point at which a line at right-angles
  from the main datum-string to the object cuts the former is measured
  along that line from the last preceding peg. The point in question is ob-
  tained by means of the angle-measure, with such extension of the out-
  ward arm as may be required and with the assistance of a plumb-bob.
  Thus if the point be at 10 feet 4 inches from the zero peg, it will actually
  be measured from peg III (9 feet) and will be recorded as III 1’ 4”.
    (B) Outward measurement. The distance outwards, at right-angles to
  the datum-string, to a point vertically (by plumb-bob) above the object
  is measured with the angle-measure, levelled by its bubble-level and
  extended by means of the 5-foot rule if necessary. Note that the measure-
  ment is recorded from the datum-string, not from the actual side of the
  trench. Thus, if the measurement is 2 feet 5 inches, the distance of the
  object from the side of the trench will be about 1 foot 5 inches. The re-
  corded measurement is affixed to the longitudinal measurement with a
  multiplication sign: thus in the present example the measurements so
  far will be III 1’ 4” x 1’ 5”.
    (C) Downward measurement. This represents the vertical depth ofthe
  object below the level of the datum-string at the intersection established
  under (A) above. It is obtained by tape (or rule) and plumb-bob from
  the levelled armof the angle-measure, and it is added to the record with
  a minus sign. If the depth is 6 feet 2 inches, the total record will now
  read IIT 1’ 4” x 1/7 5” —'6’ 2”.
   In the third column is noted the number allotted to the layer -anum-
ber best shown in a circle, a symbol which is in practice useful for
                                         89
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

distinguishing layer-numbers from other figures —and the descrip-
tive word or phrase by which the layer is named. These facts are of
importance, since the material in which an object is found is usually
certain and provides a check upon the measurements, which may
sometimes mislead in irregular strata or near the junction of two
strata.
   The fourth column is self-explanatory. The fifth column is useful for
additional information and, above all, for a sketch of the object.
Even a bad sketch is better than none at all.
  It is scarcely necessary to add that the utility of such a record — or
indeed of any stratigraphical record - is proportionate to the accur-
acy of the measured section or sections with which the record is sub- _
sequently to be equated. The two sides of a trench are rarely identical,
and it will nearly always be desirable to prepare an accurate drawing
of both, together with occasional cross-sections. Moreover, during
the actual digging it is sometimes useful to project certain categories
of objects (from the three-dimensional record) on to the actual sides
of the trench by means of labelled or coloured pegs. I have known
occasions upon which such a visual representation of a distribution
in the actual trench has been illuminating and convincing.




                                   9O0
                             CHAPTER      6


        The Excavation of a Structure

FROM the more general questions of technique we turn to specific
problems. How would you excavate the buried remains of an ancient
building? ‘Find a wall and follow it’ might be the obvious answer.
But the previous chapters have been written in vain if the novice who
has read thus far is prepared to accept the answer without protest. He
will by now appreciate that to follow a wall in all literalness would be
to destroy the related evidence upon which its interest in large meas-
ure depends. Let us consider in some detail the nature of that related
evidence.
   Unless a structure is'dated by a contemporary inscription or by un-
impeachable documentary evidence or (exceptionally) by its intrinsic
character, our knowledge of its date or cultural context must be
derived from the stratigraphical association of objects of recognizable
types. Furthermore, the specific character of the strata themselves —
whether resulting from construction, destruction, decay, or other
causes — will throw light upon the vicissitudes through which the
building has passed. Only the most careful excavation and observa-
tion can recover such evidence with sufficient exactitude for use. The
dating or cultural setting of a building is based ideally on three cate-
gories of objects: (i) those supplied by strata which accumulated
before the building was constructed; (ii) those supplied by strata
contemporary with the construction; and (iii) those supplied by strata
subsequent to the construction. Categories (i) and (iii) bracket the
structure chronologically or culturally, whilst category (ii) defines
the point within the brackets.
  To understand the full meaning of a building in decay, it is neces-
sary to understand how it was originally constructed. I have accord-
ingly urged elsewhere (p. 157), for this and other reasons, that a know~
ledge of building-construction be included amongst the qualifications
of an excavator. In its simplest form, a masonry wall is built normally
as follows. A trench, known as the ‘foundation-trench’, is cut along
the line of the proposed wall in order that the foundations of the
                                   Ot
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE   EARTH

latter may rest upon the solid sub-soil rather than upon the relatively
unstable soil that is commonly found on the surface - whether natural
humus or disturbed ‘occupation-earth’. Rarely, when the surface-
soil is itself solid, or when the building is a slight one, or when the
building is jerry-built (an abnormal crime in ancient times), the
foundation-trench may be absent; on the other hand, a foundation-
trench may actually be cut even into the live rock, in order to give a
level seating for the wall. The preliminary assumption in all instances
must be that a foundation-trench is present.
   This feature is of great importance, and all care must be taken in
its identification. Obviously, layers into which it is cut antedate it,
and must be distinguished beyond all doubt from layers which
accumulated against the structure and therefore post-date or are con-
temporary with it. In loose sandy soil, the foundation-trench will be
V-shaped, with an appreciable space between its sides and those of the
initial wall built in it. But in a stiff clay sub-soil*the sides of the trench
may be vertical and may have been completely filled with the founda-
tions of the wall. Much may depend then upon the character of the
wall-facing when cleared of the soil; a trench-built wall will neces-
sarily have an untrimmed, relatively rough face, whilst a wall built
‘free’, and therefore accessible to the mason, will generally show a
more careful coursing and trimming. Needless to say, a wall with
any sort of plaster ‘rendering’ or facing, or with ‘struck’ or neatly
finished mortar jointing must have been built free, cannot have been
laid in a foundation-trench. A wide experience of different materials
is necessary for the identification of a foundation-trench, and the
result of the investigation must always be noted carefully, with
diagrams, in the notebook.
   After the building of the wall to a suitable height, the sides of the
foundation-trench (if V-shaped) will be packed and the adjacent
surface levelled, if necessary, to carry the floor. Subsequently, the
utilization of the floor will result in wear-and-tear, possibly patching
or renewal, and probably the accumulation upon it of an ‘occupation-
layer’, consisting of extraneous material - hearth-ash, mud, food-
debris, broken pottery, lost ornaments or coinage - which may help
to date the period or periods of usage. Later again, disaster or decay
may cover the occupation-layer with building-debris (indicating,
incidentally, something of the character of the superstructure),
                                    Q2
             THE   EXCAVATION        OF   A   STRUCTURE

 and eventually the whole site may be carpeted with vegetable-
 mould.
   Let us take an example. Fig. 16a illustrates the accumulation of
 strata under, around, and over the wall of an ancient structure. On
 the right-hand side of the wall-section, over the natural soil, two
 layers (9 and 10) represent village-occupation of Culture A, with post-
 holes indicating wooden huts and associated with potsherds, spindle-
 whorls, etc. Into these layers is cut a shallow foundation-trench to
 take the footings of Wall Y, and the flanks of this trench are filled
 with layer 8, which is also spread (on the right) as a basis of Floor 1.
 Layer 8 contains only relics of Culture A, but one or two telics of
 Culture B are imbedded in Floor 1; and the superimposed layer 7,
 resulting from the occupation of the building, represents Culture
 B exclusively. Over this occupation-layer, a new rammed floor
 (Floor 2) is laid, and on it is a further occupation-layer (6) of lesser
 extent, still containing objects of Culture B but in a somewhat
 evolved form. On this occupation-layer, a cascade of bricks mixed
 with burnt timber and clay (layer $) indicates the destruction of the
 building by fire. Thereafter the stump of the wall is used as the foun-
 dation for a mud-brick wall (X) of lighter construction, associated
  with an earthen floor (layer 3) containing relics mostly of Culture C.
  This new structure represents an intrusive culture of inferior quality,
  immediately preceded by the violent destruction of Culture B, and
~ may (if the evidence is found to be typical) be interpreted perhaps as
  a semi-barbarian supersession of Culture B in an evolved phase of
  the latter.
     On the left-hand side of the wall-section, the same two pre-wall
  strata (9 and 10) are continued, but are superseded at the wall-level
  by a well-metalled street (Road 1). This metalling is renewed at
  intervals (Roads 2 and 3), the upper metalling being inferior to the
  lower and suggesting a decline in municipal standards. Finally, in
  association with the mud-brick wall (X) of Culture C, metalling
  ceases, and traffic gradually wears the street into a hollow, removing
  earlier strata in the process. This process of road-deepening may be
  seen in many Eastern villages of the present day, and serves to remind
  us that the passing of time may be represented stratigraphically by
  denudation no less than by aggradation.
                                                                      e
     Fig. 16b shows the unhappy consequence of the wholesale clearanc
                                    93
                                                                                                                                 SOUTH

                                                                          PTT
                                                                          Gey)                                   aed aa               dt
      NORTH             .     a            mee Ma
        yl gdag

      aSey                                                                                      TLE                  LL/ 702
                                                                                            LiMn
       Hi,          =                                                                           D2               N




ee                 eae eT:                                            THO                                    OKA                     ZR
                             conics
                                                                     MW                                  5                            ~         te



S18                ere DQ               marl tert             SA     ee
ISS
|
    SRO MA care   ansene
           viaarassreon=s
                                                                          AHH:
                                                                          o
                                                                                                             CONAN
                                                                                                                                              li
                                                                                            ~            POST-HOLE
                                       UNDATION
                                      FOUNDATION      NATURAL, SOIL,
                                                          y

             A. RELATIONSHIP OF STRATIFICATION. TO                                                           STRUCTURES
                         RETAINED BY CROSS-SECTION


 RSA no EANS outedNeDStap
                                                                                    PSips Ser eiOliuy
                                                                                                                                aq        r          tt


       NORTH                            om
      ir                                frwssetie Jere)                   E
      og | altel” Bed ier |ee od ee
                                                                                                                           ele) bps
               /                        fe                                    .-f                            a       od,         ~    fo@s    Pes

                                        | ERSASES (25                         EZ, EHR                                            SY
                                                                                                                                               NS
                                                                                                Ww           4             n(4)2                      }
                                                                                    :                :                     '         34       wf



                                                                              9 sizca   F            L
                                                                                                                               HHH              id


       if                                                                     Ce
       Naz                                                                              LBs a8) KoWAENGR
                                                                                                     S
       \W Us                                                                            ann        OT ON
                                        .tactyocapet
      VAC se                                                                                                               ik
                                                                                                                                          1


                                                              LLL
                                                                                                                               MOL
                                                                              Zs



                                  teen
                                      SL      om     Ly


                   PTT
‘al X71 URSA            wo    <


       {
                                                   NATURAL    SOIL
                   B. THE         SAME RELATIONSHIP OBLITERATED                                                                 BY
                                     CONTINUOUS, TRENCHING
             Fig. 16, Sections illustrating the relationship of strata to a wall, and their
                                           removal by summary excavation
             THE    EXCAVATION            OF   A STRUCTURE

of the wall along its two faces. The relationship of the wall with
the adjacent strata has been lost beyond recall, and the sequence indi-
cated above is irrecoverable. Excavation has devolved into irrepar-
able destruction.
   So important is this matter of section-interpretation, that I will give
another example, dug out of an old report on the excavation of the
Roman amphitheatre at Caerleon in Monmouthshire. In the early
stages of this excavation, conclusive evidence as to the date of con-
struction was hard to find, for the good reason that an amphitheatre,
being a place merely of visitation, was largely devoid of the sort of
material which may be expected to produce dated ‘finds’. As the
work proceeded, this deficiency was gradually compensated for in a
variety of ways, and Fig. 17 illustrates one of them.
   In this illustration, the wall in séction on the left is the external wall
of the amphitheatre. It is built on deep footings, the upper part of
which is mortared whilst the lower part is dry-built. The footings
occupy a foundation-trench, partly vertical and party V-shaped, cut
through three dark occupation-layers which therefore antedate the
construction. We then come to the faced walling, the base of which
is in contact with a road-surface that had clearly been laid down in
connexion with it. The section goes on to show that this road was
subsequently renewed on at least four occasions. Now logically, the
date of the construction of the amphitheatre plus the earliest road
should have been bracketed by the dates of the material from the
three pre-road occupation-layers and from the subsequent road-
repairs. The pre-road occupation-layers fulfilled their function admir-
ably by producing material of ¢. A.D. 75, indicating that the amphi-
theatre was not earlier than that date; but the road-repairs were
unproductive, and the later endof the bracket therefore remained open.
The section did not on that account fail us; it will be observed that
to the right of the amphitheatre-wall is a culvert (in section) built in
a trench which has been cut through the same three strata as the wall-
trench and has been covered by the same make-up and road surface
that covers the wall-trench and equates with the wall. It is therefore
exactly contemporary with the amphitheatre. But further exploration
in the vicinity showed that the culvert was structurally connected
with a neighbouring bath-building dating from the last two decades
of the first century A.D. To that date therefore belongs the construction
                                     95
           OGL ‘aITYsYNOTMUOYY ‘UOspIERD Je sao   Ydure ueMoY oy Jo [eM [ews9IX9 oy} 0) UONLpEI UT uoNLoENS “LI ‘Sty
                                          a           ee                 2   I TTS
920 SAVITUAM-HSUM FA
                                                                                                 ee
                                                                                                                                RAS
                                                                                                                   SAN FALOLLWORI
                                                                                                                   pean # DTT a
                                                                                                           apres     STTHISD aa
  Gp     0    30 <= ‘co ee        eS
  (4)   TILL NDIONT? ONLI—
                         SUNWOK
                         —>
                                                       LUAL   ALL
                                                                    vy
             THE   EXCAVATION          OF   A STRUCTURE

of the amphitheatre - an inference subsequently confirmed from
other sources, but in itself sufficiently well founded.
    The moral of all this is clear: the identification and interpretation
 of the stratigraphical evidence associated with a building are of car-
-dinal importance, and are rendered possible only by the preservation
 of extensive cross-sections in the process of excavation. In other
 words, the preliminary excavation of a wall consists, not in clearing
 it continuously, but in cross-sectioning it at frequent intervals, each
 cross-section being closely examined and correlated with its neigh-
 bours. Only when an agreed interpretation of these cross-sections is
achieved and recorded can they properly be removed, stratum by
 stratum. Even s0, it is wise to keep a typical cross-section in position
 for reference until the close of the excavation.
    If we turn from general principles to their practical application,
there is less room for dogma. In all cases the ‘square’ method which
‘I have recommended for area-excavations (p. 83) is suitable, and on
 sites where buildings of varying plans are piled one on top of the
 other, as on many Eastern sites, no other method lends itself so readily
 to clear systematic record. But on a shallow site, where the excavator
 is confronted with an essentially unitary structure, as on some
 Romano-British sites, it may be found convenient to take the indi-
 vidual rooms of a building as the basis of record. Even so, it is safer to
 begin on the grid plan until the dimensions of the problem are appar-
 ent; and having begun on the grid I should myself hesitate to change
 horses.
    Two or three other points may be dealt with briefly.

                             ‘GHOST’ WALLS

 The excavator may have the misfortune to light upon a site where the
 walls have been completely destroyed by stone- or brick-robbers in
 ancient or modern times. A notable example of this is provided by the
 Romano-British site of Verulamium where Matthew Paris records
                                                              the
 that, amongst others, an eleventh-century abbot ‘turned over
  soil to a considerable depth that he might find masonry structures’
                                                                         the
  which he ‘reserved for the fabric of his church’. The excavator of
 ‘site found, in fact, evidence everywhe re  of systemati c brick-rob bing,
  and learned to recover the plans of buildings by carefully following
    D                                97
                  ARCHAEOLOGY      FROM     THE   EARTH

the robbers’ trenches (leaving intermittent cross-sections as described
above). For the most part, the robbing had been so skilful and econ-
omical that the trench was scarcely wider than the wall that it had
contained; so that when, after the removal of the wall, the unwanted
debris was thrown back and the site levelled for cultivation, the mixed
filling provided a perfect negative of the plan (Pl. 8a). By cutting
across the debris-filled trench at frequent intervals, it was often pos-
sible to recover the lines of the former building with accuracy, and
even, in favourable instances, to equate some of the stratification with
them. Perhaps the most remarkable example of the recovery of a plan
from ‘ghost’ walls of this kind was afforded by the north-west gate-
way of Verulamium where, in 1931, Miss Kathleen Kenyon found
that a great part of the structure had been almost completely removed
but was able, by the careful clearing of the debris from the former
wall trenches, to reveal the whole layout in negative whilst preserving
the stratified floors intact (Pl. 8b).
              Y

                          STRAIGHT      JOINTS

The junction of two walls is often a key-point in the interpretation of
a plan. If the walls are well and truly bonded together, with identical
masonry and coursing, they are obviously of the same build and date.
There is, however, a ‘catch’ for which it behoves the excavator to
keep a vigilant watch. By the removal of some of the facing-stones
of an older wall it is possible to ‘tooth-in’ a younger branch-wall
with some semblance of bonding; but the difference in structural
period is usually betrayed by differences in material or coursing, or
by the incompleteness of the bonding.
   On the other hand, the absence of bonding - a ‘straight joint’ -
does not necessarily imply a difference of date. The medieval builder,
it is true, was usually concerned to see that all his walls were properly
bonded; the close integration of a Gothic building, the interplay of
stresses and strains, demanded this. Accordingly, in a medieval struc-
ture a straight joint is normally significant chronologically. But in
the more static architecture of earlier periods a straight joint may be
a matter of indifference or even of choice. Where two adjacent walls
carry very different vertical loads, it may not be inadvisable to leave
them to some extent free of one another. Or, in the days when the
                                   98
             THE    EXCAVATION            OF   A STRUCTURE

plan of a building consisted, not of a blue-print, but of the actual
foundations planted on the ground under the direction of the architect
or master-mason, the main lines may have been laid down first and
subsidiary features added as the work proceeded. One or other of
these explanations may be sought for the fact that the towers of the
Roman fortress known as Burgh Castle in Suffolk show a straight
joint with the fortress-wall up to a certain height, above which they
are bonded in; or, similarly, that the towers of Verulamium are built
free up to a height of 6 feet and are thereafter of one build with the
town-wall. In both instances, towers and wall are essentially parts of
the same design. A more remarkable instance is the systematic use
of the straight joint in Nebuchadnezzar’s great Ishtar Gate at Babylon
(sixth century B.c.). The foundations of the structure are of a varying
depth, and to quote Koldewey:
It is conceivable that those parts of the wall where the foundations are
specially deep do not sink so much in the course of time as those of
shallower foundations, and settlement is unavoidable even with these,
standing as they do upon earth and mud. Thus where the foundations
are dissimilar there must be cleavages in the walls, which would seri-
ously endanger the stability of the building. The Babylonians foresaw
this and guarded against it. They devised the expansion joint, which we
also make use of under similar circumstances. By this means walls that
adjoin each other but which are on foundations of different depths are
not built in one piece. A narrow vertical space is left from top to bottom
of the wall, leaving the two parts standing independent of each other.
In order to prevent any possibility of their leaning either backwards or
forwards, in Babylon a vertical fillet was frequently built on to the less
deeply rooted wall, which slid in a groove in the main wall. The two
blocks run in a guide, as an engineer would call it.


                              TIMBERWORK

In airtight peat or clay or alluvium, or on the other hand in a very dry
climate, timber will retain its form and something of its substance for
thousands of years. On the other hand, a solid timber such asa railway-
sleeper begins to deteriorate in the British climate after about ten
   1. R. Koldewey, The Excavations at Babylon, trans. by A. S. Johns (London,
1914), pp. 36-8.

                                     99
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

years. Ancient woodwork found in Egypt or in the deserts of Central
Asia is dated in millennia, and the rough timbering which Dr
Grahame Clark uncovered with great skill in the peat at Seamer in
Fast Yorkshire in 1949-51 may be as much as 9,000 years old. Dr van
Giffen, a master of timber-excavation in the sympathetic soils of the
Low Countries, found remarkable vestiges of wooden buildings -
posts and wattle walls — of structures of the first century A.D. in the
Roman forts at Valkenburg near Leiden (south Holland).t But for the
most part, the excavator of ancient timber structures must content
himself with less tangible results. When carbonized, their vestiges
may last indefinitely; otherwise they are generally a mere stain or a
more or less loosely filled hollow in the earth, and have to be treated
substantially like the ‘ghost’ walls of which I have spoken above. On
the whole, they are not an easy problem. The stains and hollows may
sometimes be missed even by the expert eye, and a timber-structure
should never be explored by the novice without the closest supervision.
   We may set aside carbonized timber as a relatively straightforward
matter. An example of the more subtle kind is provided by the first-
century sheds uncovered within the Roman fortress at Richborough
about 1930 by MrJ. P. Bushe-Fox. The sheds had been built on
sleeper-beams, some of which had been laid on uprights, and Mr
Bushe-Fox first recognized them in the faintly discoloured lines and
pits which began to show up in the light-coloured sand of the site
when the ground was cleared under suitable weather conditions. The
coloured lines were formed by the earth which had occupied the
matrices of the vanished timbering, and vertical hollows, similarly
filled, showed the former presence of the posts (Pl. 9a). By care-
fully scraping and sectioning the site, the excavator was eventually
able to uncover a series of these buildings and to reconstruct them (on
paper) with a substantial measure of certainty.
  The same method, with variations, must normally be followed in
work of this kind. Certain soils, notably gravel, are more reluctant
than others to yield their evidence. A sandy sub-soil is usually the
most responsive, and at Harappa in the Punjab, in a cemetery dating
from -+ 2000 B.c., not only was the outline of a coffin visible as a
brown outline, but Dr K. A. Choudury, of the Indian Forest Research
  I. 2s-28 Jaarverslag van de Vereeniging voor Terpenonderzoek (Groningen,
 1948), with English summary.

                                   100

                                   t
              THE    EXCAVATION             OF   A STRUCTURE

 Institute, was able to photograph and identify with complete certainty
 the impressions of a specific timber (deodar) in the matrix of sand. The
 coffin (Pl. 9b) was found first as a dark stain in section and was then
 carefully cleared from above, the final clearance being effected by
 gentle scraping and lightly brushing with a small, soft brush. The
 somewhat similar outline of a coffin was traceable round a late
 Roman burial at Verulamium,! and other examples are recorded from
 Britain.
    It would, however, be difficult to find more brilliant expositions of
 timber-excavation than those afforded by the work of Mr C. W.
 Phillips at the Skendleby long-barrow in Lincolnshire and the famous
 Sutton Hoo ship-burial in Suffolk. The general method adopted in
 the excavation of the long-barrow will be cited in a later chapter (p.
 122). Here we are concerned only with the hurdle-work which was
 incorporated in the mound and was revealed in a trench dug close to
 and parallel with its longitudinal axis. In the excavator’s words,
  the trench was § ft. in width, and an examination of its sides soon showed
  a series of what were called for the sake of convenience ‘verticalities’ at
  irregular intervals. These vague vertical breaks in the substance of the
  barrow could only be interpreted as the traces of decayed barriers of
  some kind, presumably of wood. A heavy rain fell on the night after
  these were noted, and brought away a thickness of between 6 in. and
_ 1 ft. of material from the side of the trench towards the upper side of the
  barrow. This fall had taken place along a definite division in the material
  of the barrow along its middle line, and it was at once apparent, from
  the impressions of upright posts and pieces of wood fixed between
  them, that some sort of a fence had been set up here before the barrow
 had been built, and then had been buried in it... . The reason for the
 ‘verticalities’ became clear at once, for they were traces of similar fences
 setting off at about right-angles from the central fence in the direction
 of the lower side of the barrow (PI. 10).?

 All this evidence was of course in ‘negative’; the soil was totally un-
 favourable to the preservation of the actual woodwork.
    Accident helped in this discovery but in no way detracts from the
 astuteness of the excavator’s observation. The feature thus revealed
 was substantially an addition to knowledge and will doubtless fit, in
          1. Wheeler, Verulamium Report (London, 1936), pl. cxv A.
          2. Archaeologia, lxxxv (London, 1936), 60.

                                     Io1I
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM      THE       EARTH

due course, into a new structural and ritual pattern of the neolithic
age. But at Sutton Hoo accident can claim no share of the credit. The
general circumstances of this astonishing discovery are well known:
about the middle of the seventh century A.D. a man of high rank had
been interred with ‘the richest treasure ever dug from British soil’ in
a ship some 80 feet long, which had been buried under a mound in
a great trench cut into the sand.
   Since the whole ship and its contents had been involved in sand for
some 1,300 years, it is not surprising that there were virtually no re-
mains of wood except for small fragments which were found here and
there preserving their form if not their character through contact with
rusted iron. ... Traces of the existence of wood could frequently be
seen in the form of thin layers of discoloured sand, associated with bands
of more or less the same material leached white by the action of the
acids liberated in the decay of the wood. The normal colour of the sand
on the site was yellow, except where it was the product of the decay
of turf or had been under decaying wood. ... No difficulty was found
in distinguishing the filling of the trench from the undisturbed sand
even where the colour was the same in each case. The filling dropped
away easily from the sides of the trench and following it was merely
mechanical.*

   In these circumstances, the excavation of the hull was a particularly
delicate operation, and extracts from Mr Phillips’s account of it may
be quoted. The work which had been done before he took over
direction
showed that none of the wood of the ship remained, though all the
numerous clench-nails which had held its planking together were ex-
actly in place, the ship having been completely filled up with as much of
the sand excavated from the trench as could be got in again. These con-
ditions were ideal for the preservation of its form, and it was clear that
the only way to carry out the work was to cut a very wide trench right
through the mound which would give ample walks on each side of the
burial-trench. The faces of the cutting were stepped backwards in ter-
races and their faces timbered up, and the boat was carefully emptied of
all content, beginning with the burial chamber. ...
   Since all but the burial chamber area had been filled in directly with
sand while the ship was still whole, none of the clench-nails which held
                        I, Antiquity, xiv (1940), Io.

                                     102
             [THE   EXCAVATION            OF   A STRUCTURE

 the ship together could move from their place even when the wood
 which they secured had disappeared. By careful work from the inside
 it was possible to remove all the content of the boat without displacing
any of the nails, which remained in their places on the sides of the exca-
 vations. This process was aided by a change in the consistency of the sand
 which was to be found where the boat’s timbers had once been. A dusty
blackish layer, accompanied by some leached sand, could be felt for
 carefully by slowly shaving down the sand, and warning was given of
 its approach by the appearance of the bright red patches signalling the
 near presence of clench-nails. In this way all the boat which survived
 ‘was emptied so that the face of the excavation everywhere was the sand
which had pressed against the timbers of the boat from the outside, and
which sometimes still bore in recognizable form the imprint of the grain
of wood. ...[PI. 15.]
    The ship had twenty-six ribs. . . . The preservation of the ribs was
bad. All that remained .. . was a dirty line of sand running across the ship
 from gunwale to gunwale keeping close to the hull, and frequently still
retaining a marked rectangular cross-section. In some cases the sand had
formed a rough cast of the decayed wood so that, if this was breached,
discoloured sand tended to pour out of the hole leaving a rectangular-
sectioned cavity. In excavating the ship these rib traces were left en-
closed in strips of sand.1
   These examples of timber-excavation must suffice. The tools most
generally useful are a broad-bladed knife, a small spike of some sort,
and a soft paint-brush. In the clearance of the Sutton Hoo burial-
chamber, a stout shovel mounted on the end of a long ash handle was
used for shaving down and removing the sand on a horizontal plane
in a search for the significant changes of colour.

                              MUD-BRICK

 In the dry climate of parts of Africa and Asia, bricks of unbaked
mud, often integrated by an admixture of straw, have long been used
for building, and may present some difficulty to the excavator, though
   1. Ant. Journ. xx (1940), 158, 183, 188, etc. See also the account of the
 excavation of the burial chamber, ibid., p. 158. A simpler but nonetheless
instructive set of problems attended the excavation of the Oseberg ship in
Sweden. The student is referred to the account of these (in English) in
A. W. Brogger, Hj. Falk, and Haakon Schetelig, Osebergfundet, i (Kristiania,
1917), 369 ff.
                                    103
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

generally of a less formidable nature than that presented by vanished
timberwork. A writer on archaeological technique has written:
   The principal difficulty faced by an archaeologist in dealing with mud-
bricks lies in the fact that the material used in their construction is not
unlike that of the earth in which they have been buried for centuries.
Asa result there have been a number of cases where long narrow rooms
turned out to be heavy walls; in other words, the excavators recognized
a slight change in colour or consistency of the ground during the digging
but removed the walls and left the rooms unexcavated !

I need hardly add that this unhappy experience was derived mainly
from that land of archaeological sin, Palestine, and reopens a vista of
incompetence which is by now sufficiently familiar to us.
 The problem once more is that of intelligent supervision; though
the trained workman is here an asset of almost equal worth. ‘The tex-
ture of the earth, the feel of it, the sound of it as the pick or shovel
strikes it, are all factors which, almost equally with direct visual
evidence, tell the experienced digger when he is or is not on a mud-
brick wall. The instructed peasant learns to think through the point
of his pick or the blade of his knife. Decayed mud-brickwork may
fill the interior of a room and present on plan an undifferentiated
surface where it and a mud-brick wall-top abut upon each other.
But tapping carefully and obliquely with a small pick will often
produce a distinguishable hard note when the point, penetrating the
filling, strikes the face of the actual wall. Scraping the surface carefully
with a knife, sometimes aided by damping, may reveal a slight but
significant line where filling and wall meet, or between individual
bricks. The composition of the mud wall will sometimes indicate
whether it represents brick or filling; flecks of charcoal and scraps of
pottery rarely occur in bricks but are not infrequent in filling, and I
have sometimes found them in the coarser mud which may be used
as the equivalent of mortar. Their presence, therefore, is a useful
guide, though their absence proves nothing. Petrie adds that ‘in the last
resource the stuff should be searched with a magnifier to see the hol-
lows left by decomposed straw: in kneaded brick these hollows lie in
every direction; in blown dust and wash they lie nearly all horizontal’.
   The initial tracing of a mud-brick wall may thus be a fairly lengthy
process, involving careful inspection and digging in different lights
                                    104
             THE    EXCAVATION           OF   A STRUCTURE

 and different degrees of dampness or dryness of soil. When the wall-
 face has been definitely located, further care must be taken to ascer-
 tain whether it was anciently ‘rendered’ with a mud or plaster facing.
 Ifnot, it can be gently brushed horizontally or scraped with a knife.
 When thus newly cleaned, the individual bricks will frequently show
up clearly, and they must then be completely recorded (size, bond,
 quality, jointing); for the chances are that, as the wall dries out and
 bleaches in the sun, much of the detail will be lost. In order to retain
 the general picture, it is sometimes possible to reduce the mud-joints
 slightly by gentle brushing or scraping, and so to leave the separate
 bricks in shallow relief. On the other hand, if the joints are of harder,
 coarser material, as they sometimes are, it may be preferable to scrape
 the smoother surface of the bricks, thus leaving the joints in relief
 (Pl. rz). In either case, this work should normally be done after record
 not before.
   In all other respects, a mud-brick wall should be dug exactly as a
 masonry wall, with a similar system of cross-sections through the
 attendant strata.




                                   105
                             CHAPTER      7

              On Digging ‘Town-sites

THE natural sequel to a chapter on structures is the consideration of
the structural complex of a town-site. (The problems of a military
site are technically similar.)
   The site of an ancient town.may to-day be a tolerably level tract
of countryside, or it may have piled itselfinthe course of ages into
the form of an artificial mound or tell up to 100 feet or more in height.
Something has been said of the latter process elsewhere (p. 57). Here
the question is one of tactical approach to the problem of excavation.
   Let us consider what information we want. Our primary need is to
ascertain the chronology and cultural setting of the site. Without
these two basic facts, its structural layout will mean little. But they
in turn will mean little without a knowledge of the plan of the town,
of its domestic economy from period to period, and the social and
political condition of itsinhabitants. These problems are necessarily
interlocked, but they can to some extent be separated for the purpose
of preliminary investigation.
   On a level site, the technical approach is relatively straightforward.
There the cultural and chronological sequence can be recovered in
introductory fashion by one method only: by a restricted area-
excavation in the interior of the town, preferably somewhere near
its centre. Although the rule is by no means invariable, cities com-
monly grow in a reasonably symmetrical fashion; the original civic
centre is likely to remain the focus and to represent therefore the
maximum depth of accumulated occupation. This accumulated
occupation must be probed carefully to the bottom, preferably by
means of one or more squares — a group of four adjacent squares is
often a useful unit - in accordance with the method described on
p. 83. But on no account should this procedure be repeated at random.
Petrie cannot be gainsaid when he protests against the multiplication
of trial-pits. Such pits, ‘if they hit anything of importance,’ he
remarks, ‘are likely to injure it, and certain to destroy its connexion
with other things. French explorers have a love for faire quelques
                                   106
                   ON   DIGGING      TOWN-SITES

sondages, a proceeding which often ruins a site for systematic work,
and which never shows the meaning of the positions or the nature of
the plan’. On the other hand, a restricted probe, carried out by
methods more subtle and thorough than Petrie’s, is a necessary
preliminary stage on a ‘flat’ site of unknown potentiality.
   A secondary if not simultaneous stage is the investigation of the
system of fortifications which normally characterizes an ancient
town. The moments at which a town built or rebuilt its defences
were manifestly of special importance in its life-history. The con-
struction of a fortification may indicate the newcomer in a strange
land, as in the mottes of Norman England; or it may mark the
achievement of full city status, and may reflect a period of peaceful
consolidation rather than of military duress, as in the walled towns of
Augustan Gaul or late second-century Britain. Or it may reflect the
advent or threat of a formidable rival or of political anarchy; as when
anxious edicts of Honorius urged cities to build or repair their walls
and authorized them to use statues, altars, and temples for the purpose.
It may have been designed to defend the populace, or to control it;
as, perhaps, in the almost feudal citadels which dominated the Indus
cities of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro in the third millennium B.c., or
certainly in William the Conqueror’s Tower of London. Fortifica-
tions thus not merely outline the town-plan (or some part of it) but
may focus and express the city’s vicissitudes and something of its
sociology. Further, the character of their brickwork or masonry is
a fair reflection of the economic condition of the city at the time of
construction, of wealthy and leisurely civic pride or of more slovenly
necessity. And to what extent were the defences maintained? — were
there long periods of immunity during which maintenance was
allowed to lapse? Finally, were they riven by an attacker, as were the
mined and counter-mined walls of Dura-Europos on the Euphrates?
- or did they crumble into decay as a counterpart to economic
decline? All these and other questions are of the first importance to
the inquiring antiquary or historian. It is along the lines of the
defences rather than in the buried relics of the bazaar that the excava-
tor may expect first to recognize the major moments, the frame-
work, of the story of the site.
  Let him therefore, early in his work, cut across the line of the forti-
fications at selected points where it seems likely that the evidence will
                                   107
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM   THE   EARTH

be most comprehensive. And let his cross-trenches be both wide and
deep, no mere otter’s bites - wide enough to escape accidental features
and to provide ample room and light for observation; deep enough
to reach down into the natural soil and so to ensure that the story is
complete. Furthermore, let the trenches be carried far enough into
the town to relate the defensive system in its various phases with the
successive occupations of the town itself.
   The accepted three-dimensional method of recording such a
trench is described on pp. 87-90.
  To the sectioning of the defences should be added the careful
excavation of a gateway, where successive road-levels and guard-
room floors may be expected to amplify the architectural evidence
and to lend it precision.
_ The completion of these works — the examination of the defences
and the central area~excavation — may be assumed to have given us
a reasonable conspectus of the site. The next stage is less predictable
in detail, although its general purpose is clear enough: namely, to
recover a representative part of the town-plan at various periods or,
at any rate, at the topmost period, and to ascertain the character and
economy of its various types of building. The best course will prob-
ably be to extend the original area-dig at the level of some specific
stratum, to link it up with the excavated gateway, and to recover the
intervening layout of buildings and streets at the selected level or
levels. Thereby an orderly, coherent development of the work is
ensured, and future excavators will know readily where they stand
in relation to it. This was approximately the method adopted by Sir _
John Marshall at Taxila (Sirkap) in the Punjab, with the most reveal-
ing results (Pl. 12). The extent to which such work can or should be
carried subsequently downwards depends on the funds available and
the current state of knowledge. Although I would not accept Mar-
shall’s methods of excavation and record, my view is that he was
perfectly right in uncovering, and preserving uncovered, only the
 two uppermost strata of Sirkap in the area tackled by him. He was
 dealing with an entirely unknown culture and polity. On the other
 hand, in a Romano-British town I should to-day normally advocate
 the complete clearance of the available area in depth, even at the ex-
 pense of extensive destruction. As so often, no general rule can be
postulated; each instance must be considered on its merits.
                                    108
“a
                         ON   DIGGING          TOWNSSITES

        If we turn from a “flat’ site to a tell, say, 50 feet high (PI. 13), com-
     plications confront us. Probing from top to bottom in a mound of
     this depth becomes a major engineering feat and involves a dispro-
     portionately large opening at the top. Moreover, there is not infre-
     quently the risk that such a probe will over-emphasize the latest and
     possibly best-known phases at the expense of the earlier and less-
     known. Let me give two examples.
        Some 18 miles north-east of Peshawar in the North-west Frontier
     Province of Pakistan, near the village of Charsada, is a famous group
     of mounds which represents the ancient capital city of Puskalavati,
     set athwart one of the great trade-routes of ancient Asia. Its strength
     was such that even the veteran army of Alexander the Great took
     30 days to capture it in 326 B.c., and such was its prestige that Alex-
     ander went out of his way to receive its surrender in person. In the
     seventh century A.D., when the Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsang visited
     it, it was yet ‘well peopled’. To-day the vast site is derelict, bitten
     into and divided by the streams of the Swat river, but its largest
     mound, the Bala Hisar or High Fort, still stands to a maximum height
     of about roo feet. Here in 1902-3 the then recently reconstituted
     Archaeological Survey of India carried out its first excavation. The
     summit of the highest mound was selected for the work, and trenches
     were dug into it to a depth of 20 feet. The result was the discovery of
     scraps of medieval and later buildings of familiar Sikh and Islamic
     types and a few possible fragments of somewhat earlier historic dates.
     Nothing that was not predictable was brought to light, and the real
     problems of (potentially) one of the most important sites of Asia were
     not touched. The young director, fresh from Athens, his mind
     doubtless obsessed with the prestige of a towering acropolis, had
     carried out the excavation in the one spot where a maximum accu-
     mulation of relatively modern material could have been foreseen.
        Similarly at another site, far away on the steppe of Afghan Tur-
     kestan, there lie the great mounds which represent the ancient Bactra,
     ‘Mother of Cities’, carfax of trans-Asian trade-routes and outpost of
     Hellenism in partibus. Bactra was already a city in the fourth century
     B.C., and it suffered from the savagery of Chingiz Khan in the thir-
     teenth century a.p. To-day only the tiny village of Balkh lies within
     the immense circuit of its derelict walls, and several square miles of
     the buried history of Asia, indeed of the world, lie accessible to the
                                         109
              ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE      EARTH

adventurous explorer. Accordingly, in 1924-5, Monsieur A. Foucher,
to whose memory all honour is due as a student of Buddhist art, was
deputed to carry out a series of excavations on behalf of the French
Archaeological Mission to Afghanistan. The results were, as he freely
and naively admits, disappointing to a degree. Why? He chose for
his operation the highest point of the towering tell which represents
the citadel of this vast city, and dug down metre after metre into the
ruins of - a relatively modern mosque and a ‘Turkish’ bath! True, in
a city with a walled circuit of 7 miles there was room enough for
error: Foucher himself exclaims, ‘We compared ourselves, my wife
and I, to two ants sent into the depths of the jungle to carry out an
autopsy on the corpse of an elephant.’ But why, from so wide a
possible choice, did he choose of all things the ultimate summit of
the citadel: In a letter to his Paris correspondent, he tells us: “Because’,
he writes, ‘one cannot escape the magic power of names, and you your-
self, if I could have consulted you from afar and had asked, as in
Hernani: “Where should I begin?”, would incontestably have
replied: “On the Acropolis.”’! The inescapable magic of names!
What a superbly Gallic reason for plunging into the one spot in the
whole of Bactra that a less charmingly sentimental investigator would
unhesitatingly have shunned: the one dominant spot which could
have been prophesied to bear upon its heights the latest and most
familiar of medieval buildings.
  No, a little cold-blooded deliberation at these two sites would
easily have pointed the proper way. I happen to know them both,
and am prepared without undue rashness to prescribe. The premisses
are that both sites stretch back into a remote but undefined antiquity;
that both have also been wholly or partially occupied in Islamic times;
but that, since our extensive knowledge of Muslim architecture is
unlikely to be enhanced appreciably by the costly excavation of the
buried fragments of a medieval citadel, this phase may profitably be
by-passed. The outstanding importance alike of Charsada and Balkh
lies in their earlier phases, when they were metropolitan centres of
Asiatic trade and meeting-places of oriental and occidental cultures.
To reach these earlier strata the approach is not in fact difficult. At
Chirsada the attacks of man, weather, and water have, over a large
  1. A. Foucher, La Vieille Route de Inde de Bactra a Taxila (Mém. de la Délég.
Arch, Frangaise en Afghanistan, Paris, 1942), p. 98.

                                     IIo
                    ON   DIGGING        TOWNS-=SITES

part of the principal mound, removed the higher strata to a depth of
some 40 feet. In other words, Sikh and Muslim may safely be pre-
sumed to have vanished here, leaving the pre-medieval strata exposed
to immediate attack. There, at the eastern foot of the High Fort, is
the obvious spot for an area-excavation designed to reach the ancient
Puskalavati and to achieve - who knows? ~ another Mohenjo-daro
at its base? At Balkh also it is not difficult, by an examination of the
sides of gullies and other cuttings, to find a number of places where
the familiar top-stuff is absent, and where penetration to the earlier
levels can be reasonably assured. But at Balkh there is one obvious
and immediate goal. Nearly half of the defensive system shows only
Islamic workmanship and may for our purpose be ruled out, at any
rate in the initial stages (later, it too should be fully recorded); but a
part of the remainder is of composite character and obviously incor-
porates earlier work. In particular, along the southern side the Islamic
wall is carried by a huge rampart which is itself, to judge from slight
indications, a complex structure. Here is a major problem for settle-
ment. Until the excavator of Balkh has dug a great trench, recorded
in three dimensions, through these southern fortifications and linked
their successive phases to occupation-levels in the adjacent interior,
he has not got to grips with his problem.
   To turn from these two examples to the general run of tells is to
turn to variable phenomena, susceptible to no fixed rule. Much de-
pends upon the height of the mound and the extent of its erosion.
As a general practice, however, it is desirable to bite boldly into the
periphery at some carefully selected point, penetrate the inevitable
scree, and establish the successive cultures with, if possible, the suc-
cessive systems of fortification. This -desideratum is commonly
realized by tell-excavators, but there is an unhappy habit of nibbling
sporadically at the flanks of the mound instead of contemplating a
methodical, coherent cutting which will, with ordinary luck, link up
and sort out many important factors once and for all. An established
method of cutting such a section is to step it from top to bottom, so
that the gangs have convenient working-platforms at intervals and,
above all, so that the lower stages of the cutting are not unconscion-
ably deep. Nevertheless, there are few published tells where a section
of this kind has been completed. Pl. 11 shows a complete section
through the margin of the highest tell of the chalcolithic Indus city at
                                  III
              ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

Harappa in the Punjab. Its total depth is 50 feet but, owing to the
compactness of its material, I was able to cut it vertically, without
stepping. Incidentally, the recorder and draftsman completed their
work in detail, foot by foot, as the working-platform was gradually
lowered, so that, when natural soil was eventually reached, the
digging and the recording ended almost simultancously. As usual,
the log-book record was three-dimensional (cf. p. 87).
  Apart from the marginal bite, as on a ‘flat’ site, the clearance of a
gateway is highly desirable, combined with an area-dig in the
adjacent interior on a sufficiently Jarge scale to establish firmly the
cultural context of successive gateways and fortifications. Further in
the interior, an elevation may indicate the position of a citadel or
temple and may also be subjected to an ‘area-excavation, which
should subsequently be linked up systematically with that adjoining
the gateway, and thereafter continued to the designed limits of the
enterprise.
   The ultimate goals of a tell-excavation should be (a) to establish its
cultural or chronological range by the marginal sections indicated
above, and (b) to uncover completely a specific phase or phases of its
occupation. I emphasize this point after seeing many incredibly messy
tell-excavations where everything has been attempted at once, with
cuttings and soundings at varying depths and the whole site perma-
nently wrecked or obscured by tip-heaps. Let the rule be to finish a
clear-cut scheme which can be transmitted lucidly, on paper and on
the ground, to future generations of investigators. Leave your tell for
others as you would wish to find it. Too many excavated tells of Asia
are, to adapt Petrie’s phrase, ‘ghastly charnel houses of murdered
evidence’. Fortunately, there are still some thousands of intact ones
awaiting a more human and legitimate execution.




                                   I1i2

                                                                            ae
                              CHAPTER       8


                               Burials
       “Where necessary, the dolmens were blasted, the circles of
      stones were removed and the cistvaens constructed with large flat
      slabs were made available for study.’ Mysore State Archaeological
      Department, Annual Report for 1942.

From the living we turn to the dead. The varieties of burial-ritual
devised by man in his care alike for the departed and for their sur-
vivors are legion. The body may be buried intact or after cremation;
it may be left awhile to the weather, the kites, and the jackals, where-
after a few representative bones may be collected and piously interred.
Burials may be communal or individual. The dead may be thrust
with no durable equipment into the earth; they may be accompanied
by the treasury of Sutton Hoo, or by a sumptuous army of attendants
as at Ur; they may go naked to St Peter or with a harem to Paradise;
they may be enclosed in a humble pot or in relays of costly sarco-
phagi; their grave may be marked by no lasting monument or by ge
mound on the hill, high and broad, by wave-farers wide to be seen’;
or their ashes may be tipped into a river which will bear them happily
from our ken. Fear, habit, a little affection, and much affectation go
to the making of these things. It is fortunate for the prying archae-
ologist that his technical problem is often a relatively simple one. His
difficulty begins when he comes to reconstruct the ritual represented
by the particles of evidence uncovered by his skill (for an example,
see above, p. 18); and if he steps beyond ritual to its fancied signifi-
cance, he will scarcely find the answer in the cartload of books which,
says the Chinese proverb, contains all wisdom.
   Here is no place for the anthropology of this vast subject. From the
technical point of view only, I will deal in turn with certain broad
categories such as are known to me as an excavator or observer.

                  ROUND     BARROWS        AND    CAIRNS

Round barrows (of earth) or cairns (of rubble), ranging in Britain
from the end of the Stone Age to the Viking period and abundant at
                                     113
              ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

various periods in many other parts of the world, provide a useful
starting-point. They may be a few feet or more than 50 feet in dia-
meter, and their present altitude shows an equivalent variation. But,
whatever their size, their excavation can, in a majority of instances,
follow one of two alternative procedures. The best introduction to
them is to emphasize how not to proceed.
  The day is not long past when barrow-digging, or rather barrow-
hogging was a polite amusement on a summer’s day. Something has
been said about this in Chapter II (see also Pl. 1): and it will suffice
to recall how in 1849 Dean Merewether ‘opened’ thirty-one barrows
in twenty-six days in the Avebury district. This is probably a world
record, but there are several runners-up whom it would be waste of
time to catalogue. The method was to plunge downward into the
centre of the mound in the hope (often, alas, fulfilled) of finding a
primary or secondary burial, or both. The crime lay, not merely in
the neglect of all the structural and ritual minutiae which are a large
part of the interest of a barrow, but that, working downwards in a
central cavity upon the strata of successive structures or burials no
investigator, however experienced, could correlate them owing to
the simple fact that they were largely removed in the process. Not, of
course, that Merewether and his kin had any notion of stratification.
Nevertheless, even after stratification had begun to be dimly under-
stood, the practice of driving a narrow trench through the middle
of a barrow long continued. I remember seeing an excavation of this
kind which in fact revealed the primary burial but - so narrow and
dark and dirty was the trench — failed to discover a surrounding ritual
ditch 6 feet wide, although the trench passed over it at two points.
   The central pit and trench are therefore alike ruled out of court as
methods of excavation. Nothing in archaeological excavation can
be more definite than that.
   Now for the more positive side of the matter. The underlying
principle is that the whole barrow shall be removed and, whenever
 possible, subsequently replaced. This principle was laid down by
Pitt Rivers and cannot be gainsaid. At any point in or about the
mound, structural features or secondary burials are liable to occur,
and nothing short of a complete record can nowadays justify the
excavation of a type of monument which has in the past suffered so
grievously from piecemeal work.
                                  114
                                  BURIALS

  A satisfactory method to this end, adopted, for example, by Sir
Cyril Fox at Ysceifiog in Flintshire! and by myself on Dunstable
Downs in Bedfordshire? was as follows (I quote Fox):
   Two parallel rows of numbered pegs were driven in 1 ft. apart on
either side of the barrow, at right angles to the face on which it was
proposed to work. As the removal of the barrow advanced foot by
foot, the face was maintained in a straight line between pegs similarly
numbered, and on the discovery of a deposit its position was fixed —
firstly, by measuring its distance from the appropriate right-hand peg
along a line stretched to the equivalent peg, and secondly by measuring
its vertical position above or below the original ground-level. In prac-
tice it was found that positions could in this manner be fixed very
easily. The centre of the deposit marked CII on plan [Fig. 18], 1 ft. 6 in.
above the floor of the barrow, was thus quickly recorded as 25’:
18’ + 1’ 6”. The scale of feet on this plan indicates the position of one
row of pegs. . . . As the work proceeded the floor was tested at fre-
quent intervals and holes dug when any indication of disturbance
presented itself.
In this clear description it is of course implied that a carefully meas-
ured cross-section of the barrow is drawn along every face which
revealed any feature of interest. Fox in fact published seven sections
of the Ysceifiog barrow (Fig. 19).
   At the risk of repetition, I would add the following details. First,
the datum-pegs must be substantial and firmly driven in. They must
also be broad enough to bear a clear, painted numeral (I prefer
Roman numerals, both as distinctive and as easier to paint). Thirdly,
a two-inch nail must be driven into the top of the peg at the exact
point of measurement. Incidentally, this nail is useful for holding the
loop of a measuring tape, and the transverse string for each successive
cutting. Fourthly, a continuous string along each datum-line from
nail to nail is useful for intermediate measurements. Fifthly, it is
convenient to record in the fashion already recommended for three-
dimensional    recording (above, pp. 87-90), with ruled columns
arranged across two pages of the notebook.
The great merit of this system of excavation is that the excavator is
working throughout in the fullest possible light and comfort, and the
recording is rendered exceedingly easy. Its demerit is that, unless
  1. Arch: Cambrensis, 1926, pp. 48 ff.     2. Arch. Journ. lxxxviii (1931), 193 ff.

                                      IIS
                  ARCHAEOLOGY              FROM       THE        EARTH

special and rather cumbersome arrangements are made, the records
are exclusively parallel with one axis of the mound, and the other
axis is not adequately recorded. In a majority of instances, this par-
tiality does not matter, but it might.
   The alternative method in general use meets this objection. It

 GROUND-PLAN   OF YSCEIFIOG BARROW ,SHOWING THE CIRCULG2 TRENCH ANDTHE CENTRAL
 PIT-GRAVE WITH THEIR RESPECTIVE ENTRANCES.         Als ATTEMPT HASALSO BEEN MADE
 TO SHOW THE AREAS OF THE FLOOR OF THE GRAVE, Q OFTHE BURIAL DEPOSIT, AND OF THE CAIRN

                                              |                                             &
                                              igeu5
                                              a                                             <
                                             Ween                               M
                                              |
                                              |




      fe at                                                                         SCALE
                                                                                    OF      SPE
                                                                                            ROS
                                                                                    eer
  CI.CY,
       CI REPRESENT
                  To SCALE,                           Fi FW Fw   innicare HE
  THE [SECONDARY] CREMATION INTERMENTS                POSITIONS OF FUNT FLAXESRIMNEMENT]

fig. 18. The Ysceifiog barrow, Flintshire, showing the layout for excavation.
                              After Cyril Fox

is known as quartering or the quadrant method. The mound is marked
out into four quarters by two strings, laid preferably to the cardinal
points of the compass, and over the approximate centre. Opposite
quarters are then excavated in turn, a balk 14-3 feet wide being left
                                           I16

                                                                                                  SS
                                                                                                  a
SECTIONS Ne1 106 ARE PARALLEL. ; Ne 7 ISAT RIGHT ANGLES TO These
|.SECTIONAT 20 FEET AA—B oN PLAN




2..SECTION AT 26 Feer                                      C-~D on PLAN                                                 Ee,
                                                                                                    CREMATIONTE IS PROTECTED
                                                                                                                WNTO THIS PLANE




3. SECTIONAT 33 FEET                                       E~F ON PLAN                                                   Fer RANEFi
                                                                                                                         1S PROTECTED




4. SECTION AT 37 FeeT                                       G—H onPLaN                                                      IMPLEMENT
                                                 ea           Le                    Ekeng OF LIHESTONE DOU-DERS dedLette




                                                                                                                           nw
                                                                                                                           GRAVEL. AND SAND




(SECTION FROM SOUTHTO NorTH                                       P~Q ONPLAN                                        THE ENTRANCETO
                                                                                        caien,or Limestone           ‘THE BURIAL PIT {Ss
                                                                                   aE                                PROJECTED        INTO
                                                                                                                En              THIS PLANE




                                                                                                                                (cewer
                                                                                                                                 Filing
                                                                                                                                 onirrep)



                                      20            2        3o     35        40          45        So         55        60            Os
   =        10            15"                                       te
                                                                     ee et                      ee


   SCALE                  OF          FEET                                                     ee
                                                 eer                                           THE FILLING OF THE TRENCH CONSISTS of
                                                                           Perec. OC         OF MATERIALAIR ND ETOP
                                                                                     VARIETYBASE                            . TIS MOSTLY
                             =a                            eave SAND with Few STOW OAVEL          DHE
SYMBOLS       2ABOVE       aerein een
                                         -BANDED GREY SANDY CLAY
                                    —STogance                                                  CLAY WITH THE WITHOUT OFSTAVES
                                                                                                          OR,FILLING          ALSO
 W&ZD-
 —_——            LeveL.          —
                              (F'*>                                                            OCCUR                     THE BURIAL
                                                                    SHOWN   IN SECTIONS        Pit” 4S STIFF   CLAYEY    SAND    ON WEST
          UNDISTURBED/      (7,   7        7     }CLAYEY   SAND
                           He                  we CRAVEL            Fook AND SEVEN             SIDE, GRAVEL WITH CLAY BANDS
                                                                                                                         ON EAST
             suasolt) /                         |Fiste wHiTe SAND J one                        ae
                                                                                               ei                          GLP * bag gSvthe
                                                                                                                           Ye


                                                             § and 6 omitted).
Fig. 19. Selected sections across the Ysceifiog barrow (nos.
                                After Cyril Fox
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE   EARTH

between each quadrant in such a fashion as to give a complete trans-
verse section across the mound in both directions. The example here
illustrated (PI. 14) is, for convenience, taken from a level site (a burial-
pit at Brahmagiri, Mysore State), on which the system shows up
clearly. It will be observed that the balks are staggered so that the
two halves of each transverse section are in the same plane, although
one half of each is necessarily in reverse in relation to its fellow -
a detail easily adjusted in the final drawing.
   Recording by this method is rather less simple than by the other.
Each quadrant is numbered or lettered or named by compass-point,
and it is desirable to fix a line of pegs at 1-foot intervals along one of
the cardinal lines of the layout. From these pegs, the usual three-
dimensional measurements are taken in each quadrant until, in the
ultimate phase of the work, the balks are themselves cut away. In
the example illustrated, it was easy on the level site to lay out a meas-
uring-tape in lieu of pegs.
  Apart from these two standard methods of excavation, other
methods have, been improvised in recent years in emergency-work
carried out under a time-limit on doomed mounds. With skilful
handling, some of these improvisations have produced important
results, but they are not on that account justified save in emergency.
In particular, there has been some reversion to the axial trench, sub-
sequently expanded about the centre of the mound. With a builder’s
bulldozer in the offing, anything saved is better than everything lost;
but, though this obsolete method be then as inevitable as quarter-day, it
isjust about as desirable. The two standard methods are the best to date.
   Whilst no attempt can be made here to catalogue the varieties of
structural or stratigraphical problem which a burial-mound may
present, a few of the more common features may be noted as a guide
to the beginner. The primary burial is usually central under the
mound as originally formed but not necessarily as later enlarged.
It may bea hole in the ground, with or without a small mound or heap
of stones immediately covering it; it may be in a wooden (dug-out)
coffin or in a stone cist, which may be ‘large’ (3 feet or more in
length) or ‘small’ (under 3 feet) and buried beneath or standing upon
the natural surface. The stones should be examined for intentional
markings. Secondary burials may be inserted into the original mound,
or placed upon it and covered by added material, or even inserted
                                    118
                                  BURIALS

into the added material; the shape and extent of the cuttings contain-
ing secondary burials are therefore vital pieces of evidence, to be
looked for and recorded with the utmost care. The area containing
the original burial may lie within a circular ditch, which may either
 be covered by the original mound or lie alongside it, and may either
_be continuous or interrupted or, significantly, approached by a ramp.
 The shape and character of the ditch - whether flat-bottomed, and
 whether beaten and hardened as by ritual traffic - must be considered
 and discussed. And the bottom of the ditch must be searched for
 material which, on analysis, may show whether the ditch was exposed
 for any appreciable time, or whether it was covered immediately
 after the funeral (cf. p. 63). Alternatively, a “processional way’ round
 the primary interment may be built up above the natural surface, as,
apparently, in the Pond Cairn at Coity, Glamorgan, brilliantly
recorded by Sir Cyril Fox.1 Here, the burial and, as it seems, an
initial infant-sacrifice, were covered by a cylindrical stack of turves,
and around the stack a circular space about 5 feet wide was enclosed
by a surrounding stone wall 15-20 feet wide and perhaps 5 feet
high (a south-western feature in Britain). This interspace appears to
have been used for elaborate ritual, and the excavator’s discussion
 of the phenomena should be studied by all barrow-diggers in what-
 ever part of the world they be.
    The edge of a barrow or cairn may be retained by a stone kerb, or
 revetment or ring-wall, up to 18 inches high,? or may be anchored by
 earthfast buttress-stones.? How far, or in what manner, timber may
 have been used alternatively round British barrows we cannot say
 until many more of them have been completely excavated under
 modern conditions. The practice is known from Holland, where Dr
 van Giffen has excavated examples; and in Holland also timber
 circles were sometimes set up within the mound. Three barrows in
 Britain (on the Yorkshire Wolds, in Lancashire, and in Montgomery-
 shire) have produced analogous evidence,® but whether, as one
   1. Archaeologia, 1xxxvii (1937), 142 ff.
   2. Ibid. lxxxix (1943), 108, 110 (Llandow tumulus, Glamorgan, excavated
 by Fox); and Proc. Prehist. Soc. 1938, p. 112 (Breach Farm, Glamorgan, exca~
 vated by W. F. Grimes).
   3. Ibid. lxxxvii (1937), 134 (Simondstown cairn, excavated by Fox).
   4. A. E. van Giffen, Die Bauart der Einzelgraber.
   5. Grahame Clark in Proc. Prehist. Soc. 1936, pp. 30 ff.

                                       119
                ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM       THE   EARTH

excavator thought, they represent the dead man’s hut is mere spec-
ulation. The whole matter deserves further investigation in the field,
and timbering should be very carefully looked for, not merely at
ground-level, but also in the stuff of the mound itself, in all future
barrow excavation. The timber inside certain Indian Buddhist stupas,
which have been compared with round barrows, is an analogous.
problem.
                      LONG    BARROWS        AND    CAIRNS

Long barrows in Europe represent a group of burial-customs pre-
valent in certain regions approximately between 2500 and 1500 B.C.,
i.e. at the end of the Stone Age and the overlap with the early Bronze
Age. Like round barrows they vary widely in form, size, structure,
and usage, but in general they were intended for multiple burial,
normally by inhumation though occasionally by cremation. As their
name implies, they are distinguished by the fact that one axis is
longer than the other, but the difference may range from only a few
feet to a third of a mile.1 It follows that no uniform procedure can be
commended to the excavator.
   The first long barrow scientifically excavated — and one of the few -
  1. Thus a long barrow on Thickthorne Down, Dorset, was 90 feet wide and
only r10 feet long. On the other hand, the monstrous ‘bank barrow’ in Maiden
Castle, Dorset, was 60 feet wide and no less than 1,790 feet long. True, a writer
in Arch. Journ. civ, 11, has disputed the identification of the latter as a barrow
and prefers to call it (as indeed the excavators nicknamed it) a neolithic race-
course or cursus. But (a) more than $00 feet of it are still a mound and cannot
have been used as a cursus; (b) seemingly comparable long mounds in Dorset
(e.g. in Long Bredy and Broadmayne parishes) are still mounds from end to
end and were never ‘racecourses’; (c) the flattened portion of the Maiden Castle
structure coincides exactly with the extension of the Iron Age Camp and is
susceptible to explanation by that fact; and (d) the Pentridge cursus, which has
been cited as an analogy on the ground that a small long barrow is incorpor-
ated in one of its margins, bears no resemblance to the Maiden Castle plan.
The Pentridge cursus is over four times as broad, and to say that ‘if the Pentridge
cursus was reduced in scale and the offset long barrow placed between its ditches
centrally, the two structures would not differ materially one from the other’ is
to exceed the limits of legitimate hypothesis. To assume at Maiden Castle a
racecourse completely blocked for at least a third of its length is like assuming a
bottle of which one-third is cork! And in fact since this note was written further
excavation has shown beyond doubt that the work was originally a mound
from end to end. — Proc. Dorset Nat. Hist. and Arch. Soc., [xxiv (1953), 36.

                                       I20
                                  BURIALS

was the famous Wor Barrow on Handley Down, Dorset, excavated
by Pitt Rivers in 1893. The published photograph of the finished
work, in which ‘the figure standing at attention in the middle dis-
tance marks the site of the central interment’, is itself a monument
of the General’s scientific discipline. Save for four pyramids of chalk
and turf left to indicate the original height of the mound, the barrow
and the filling of its peripheral ditches have been completely removed.
The pyramids represented the axis of a broad trench, 45 feet wide,
which was cut at the outset centrally along the length of the mound,
jeaving the flanks for subsequent clearance. Objects found in the
ditch-filling were recorded three-dimensionally, and in the report
were projected diagrammatically on to two schematic sections of
the ditch (Fig. 2, pp. 26-27).
   It is no detraction from the outstanding merit of this classic excava-
tion to suggest improvements of method. In the first place, it is a
primary desideratum to record a complete longitudinal section of a
structure of this kind; i.e. along the original axis of approach into
the chamber (here of wood). This is particularly necessary in cham-
bered barrows, where the record of successive entries can best be
shown by a section from the entrance or forecourt inwards. (Supple-
mentary cross-sections are of course also necessary.) Secondly, under
the greatest height of the mound, i.e. along its longitudinal axis, in-
ternal structures (as at Skendleby, p. 101) are most likely to be best
preserved, again demanding a central longitudinal section. Thirdly,
                                                                                  be
it is likely that the two longitudinal halves of the mound will
                             al  in  structure,    and   hints   or   evidences   m
approximately symmetric
          half  dug  can  be followed   up   and   verified   in  the  second   half
the first
if the halves are dug in succession, not as at Wor Barrow simultane-
                                                                                   a
 ously. Fourthly, in an extremely irregular neolithic barrow-ditch
                              cross-secti ons  is  needed.    Pitt   Rivers’s  pro-
series of carefully drawn
                                                                          ditch and
jection of all the finds, some drawn twice the scale of the
                                                    to a  purely    diagramma   tic
 others only one-third the scale (Fig. 2), on
 section is useful but is no substitute  for  an  accurate    picture.
                                                                    Wor Barrow
  ‘There is indeed no reason why a mound such as
                                                                         nded for
 should not be dug by the quadrant-method already comme
                                                       barrow     greatl y exceeds
 round barrows. Only when the length of the
                                          becom   e   cumbe  rsome   .   Whate  ver
 its width does that method tend to
                                               out, and preferably
the method, however, the first step is to mark
                                        121
               ARCHAEOLOGY FROM THE EARTH
peg out, the barrow longitudinally into equal halves, and then to
tackle one half only at a time.                                      j
   As an example of the excavation of a longer barrow of this kind, I
may again refer to the very successful work carried out in 1933-4 by
Mr C.W. Phillips on the Giants’ Hills mound at Skendleby in Lin-
colnshire. Mr Phillips describes his method as follows:
  The first step taken was to lay out a rectangle 180 by 80 ft. round the
barrow and drive in a strong post at each of the corners. A line of levels
was run from the nearest Ordnance bench mark, and a local bench mark
was cut on one of the posts. A contour survey of the barrow was then
made.
   In the case of barrows with large ditches there are two main lines of
investigation which may be pursued. First, there is the actual barrow
with its primary interments and any original structural features it may
have. This gives information about its builders, its value depending on
the degree of preservation of the contents and the absence of distur-
bance. Secondly, there is the evidence of the part which the monument
has played in the life of the district since it was completed. Some of this
may be recovered in the form of stratified traces of casual human settle-
ment in the ditch before the shelter afforded by it was destroyed by
silting. In the case of a long barrow ditch of normal size this may usually
be relied upon to give evidence down to the close of prehistoric times.
There is the further possibility of intrusive secondary burials in the body
of the barrow or in the ditch.
  The season of 1933 was devoted to establishing the second of these
two points by digging a large section of the ditch on the upper side of
the barrow. In 1934 the barrow proper was excavated, and as much
more of the ditch as was necessary to prove its character all round the
barrow.
   In opening the barrow a central spine was left intact right down the
middle to show the original height, and this was carried across the ditch
at the east end. At the same time $-ft.-wide balks at right-angles to the
central spine were left at stated intervals.
   It was originally expected that the east end would contain the burials,
but, when a complete excavation of the eastern third of the barrow had
shown that this was not the case, a 5-ft.-wide trench was driven along
the central spine right through to the west end. In this way the burial
area was approached from the side, and, when found, fully opened out.
Also the remarkable hurdling in the western part of the barrow [see
above, p. 101] was revealed and studied, further cross-cuts over the whole

                                   I22
                                 BURIALS

of the barrow being made at various points to establish the section and
find out about the hurdling offsetting from the central ‘fence’. Another
investigation was the careful clearance of the revetment-trench found
across the eastern end on the old ground-surface. Trenches had also to
be run along the sides of the barrow to follow up the post-holes which
were found to flank it along the greater part of its length on both sides.
The whole of the extreme west end. was also excavated to find out as
oe as possible about the eight posts which were found to have stood
  ere.}
  In all this admirable work, the excavator would probably himself
be the first to admit an element of opportunism, due to the novelty
of the evidence revealed, the immensity of the task, and the conse-
quent necessity for selection as the excavation developed. But the
whole project was well and truly based upon the elements essential to
a long-barrow excavation, namely: (2) the provision of firmly fixed
datum-lines; (b) the preparation of a contoured survey before excava-
tion; (c) the maintenance of a longitudinal section or spine during
excavation; (d) the thorough exploration of the ditches; and (e) the
careful removal of the (greater part of the) mound. The structural
hurdles, first identified at Skendleby, and the marginal posts will now
be looked for in all long-barrow excavations, and the search for them
can therefore be legislated for in the primary layout.
   A further word in regard to the contoured survey of an unex-
cavated long barrow. The contours may not adequately indicate the
actual extent of the mound, particularly on a slope. It may therefore
be necessary to add a basal form-line, differentiated from the contour-
lines, to indicate the approximate line of junction between the struc-
ture and the natural surface of the ground.
   The two long barrows which I have chosen as examples are both
devoid of the stone structures — chambers, passages, peristaliths,
entrance-complexes — which characterize many of the kind. To these
the general principles apply: above all, the restriction of excavation
to one half ofa feature at a time, and, wherever possible, to work upon
                                                                            the
the longitudinal axis or ‘approach axis’ as the base. Thus, in
excavation of megalithic ‘port-hole’ cists       in India  ~  i.e. large   cists
                                                                      cist was
with a small circular entrance through an end-stone — half the
                     such   a fashion  that the section  bisected   the  port-
excavated first, in
                      1. Archaeologia, Ixxxv (1936), 42-4.
                                      123
               ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM   THE   EARTH

hole. By this means it was possible to ascertain exactly what portion
of the filling had been inserted through the port-hole, and so to recon-
struct a feature of the ceremonial usage of the tomb. The procedure
need not be further elaborated; nor need the method of digging and
recording the sections through the ditch, where a simple adaptation
of the three-dimensional method described elsewhere (p. 87) is
applicable.

                          ‘BLATT’ CEMETERIES

Where burials, for example in urn-fields, are not marked on the sur-
face of the ground, their investigation becomes an ordinary area-
excavation of the kind already described (p. 83). Within the squares
of the grid it will obviously be necessary to leave additional ‘keys’ or
cross-sections to interrelate certain of the burial-groups vertically.
Otherwise, the main problem will be that of isolating the individual
graves and planning their outlines by very careful horizontal digging,
often with a knife or trowel. In dealing with inhumations, the exca-
vator may advisedly look particularly for discolorations or impresses
which may indicate the former presence of coffins or shrouds. See Sir
Leonard Woolley’s account of the cemetery at Ur,1 or the reference
above to a coffin-burial of the Indus Civilization at Harappa (p. 100),
all or mostly dating from the third millennium ..c. It is manifestly
important to determine whether burials overlap (and so indicate per-
haps a culture-sequence) or have otherwise been disturbed anciently.
Care must also be taken to discriminate between authentic grave-
goods and objects which may happen to have reached the grave with
the infilling. No rule can be laid down for this; much must depend
upon the precise position of the objects in question, and upon the
general character of the infilling. Where any shadow of doubt exists,
it must be stated in the report.
  1. Ur Excavations II: the Royal Cemetery (London and Philadelphia, 1934),
Pp- 137, 165, 184, &c., and pl. 14.




                                      124
                                     CHAPTER 9

                       Watch-makers’ Jobs
 *“TuatT be a watch-maker’s job’, remarked the ancient, after long
 and meditative observation of an archaeologist on all fours, plying
 a pen-knife and a water-colour brush upon the reluctant soil. And
 watch-makers’ jobs are not the least amongst the employments of the
 director and his supervisors. ‘The archaeologist, who the moment
 before may have been writing notes in a different part of the field, has
  to take his turn with the pick, or more probably with a knife, and
_ may spend the next few hours crouched in the same hole, in the same
uncomfortable attitude, engrossed in the cleaning, recording and
 safe removal of some one particularly fragile object.’1 I do not alto-
 gether applaud the dispersal of effort and the shortage ofskilled assist-
 ance implied in that quotation; save in the direst emergency, the
 general does not have to lay his guns or repair a breech-block. But
 the principle is right enough; the extraction of delicate objects from
 the earth demands the highest skill, patience, and knowledge avail-
 able, and is not lightly delegated.
    First, however, a word or two of warning may be uttered. Avoid
any semblance of excitement when an object of some special dis-
 tinction first begins to emerge. I have seen a director of excavations
 leap excitedly into a trench on such an occasion, communicating a
 false and emotional atmosphere to the incident and interfering there-
 fore with cool, objective workmanship. It is essential to check any
 sort of excitement instantly, and to insist firmly on quiet routine.? In
 particular, let the adjacent gang get on with its allotted task without
 intermission. Nothing unusual has happened. Discipline is now more
    1. Sir Leonard Woolley, Digging up the Past (Pelican Books, 1940), p. 40.
    2. More charmingly expressed by a French writer on excavation: ‘Il faut
                                                                                   et con-
 laisser les vestiges en place aussi longtemps que possible, ne jamais se presser
                                                                                    grande
 server son calme. Le moment le plus dangereux est celui d’une vraie
                                                                                 la moitié
 découverte; l’exaltation risque de devenir telle que le fouilleur oublie
                                                                                     que sa
 des consignes, pousse des exclamations admiratives et s’apercoit trop tard
                                                                              de s’asseoir
 documentation est incomplete. Il est vraiment grand s’il a le courage
                                                                             Les Fouilles
 et d’allumer une cigarette pour réfléchir.’ A. Leroi-Gourhan,
 préhistoriqu es  (technique et méthodes)  (Paris, 1950), P- 7-

                                            125
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM      THE     EARTH

than ever necessary if proper values are to be maintained. And
secondly, the removal of some special object is very rarely an adequate
justification for an ugly untidy piece of excavation. The rules of
stratification must be adhered to; if possible, a part of the object
should first be uncovered in such fashion that the remainder is still
embedded in, and projects from, a clean-cut local section. Apart from
the importance of its relationship with environment, this section may
reveal unexpected information, such as the stain of a vanished casing
which on plan had evaded recognition. In other words, ordinary
rules may not be jettisoned without very exceptional cause. The
warning may seem unnecessary, but experience shows otherwise.
   Having said that, I turn from precept to example. And first I pro-
pose to turn to the ship-burial of Sutton Hoo (p. 102), where Mr
W. EF. Grimes has described the ‘exciting and exacting task’ of
removing the treasure from the burial-chamber.t The following ex-
tensive extracts are reproduced by permission.
  The bronze bowls . . . were standing one inside the other, with a num-
ber of iron objects in association. Three angons [long iron javelins] were
actually pushed through the drop handle of the larger bowl, with spear-
heads and other implements and weapons near at hand. ... Corrosion
was so far advanced that it was unlikely that any free metal could sur-
vive in any of them, ... The weapons were corroded not only to one
another but also to the side of the bronze bow] with which they were
now in contact.., . It was abundantly clear that they could not be me-
chanically separated on the spot, ... They were therefore cleaned up
with care and freed from sand —a task which took some time because
of the large amount of undercutting and the generally restricted condi-
tions—and the whole complex of bowls and iron objects was lifted
intact. ...
   Beneath [a silver dish] was an assortment of articles, most of them in
a fragile and parlous state, the recording, removal and packing of which
took the undivided attention of all working on the site. The most urgent
were the organic materials     — especially a number of small cups which
were thought at one hasty glance to be made of wood. But there were
also leather and other materials, all of which owed their preservation
to their having been more or less encased in fabrics and a flock-like
substance which had kept them in a state of perpetual dampness whilst
shutting out air. Delay here would have been fatal. The cups already
                       1. Antiquity, xiv (1940), 69 ff.

                                     126
                      WATCH-MAKERS’            JOBS
 showed signs of distortion and were damaged in other ways. And a hot
 drying sun poured into the bottom of the ship. If they were to be pre-
 served for future treatment it was obvious that quick measures were
 called for; equally obvious that the best hope for their preservation
 would lie in a reconstruction of the conditions which had already pre-
 served them for so many hundreds of years. The cups were therefore
 closely packed in damp moss in boxes with well-fitting lids to exclude
 as much air as possible, and stored in a cool place away from the sun,
 The leather and fabrics were put temporarily in bowls of water.
    There is little to be said about the removal of the remaining objects
 from beneath the dish. The small silver bow] was taken up with its con-
 tents untouched but protected with a thick layer of moss. ... The fine
leather bag in which the small dish lay was our despair. It had become
 ragged with decay, was cracked and fissured, with all its native tough-
 ness gone. The remnants were cleaned and photographed in situ; after
 that interest concentrated on the size of the largest piece that could be
 detached unbroken from the underlying wood of the trough in which
 all these objects had been deposited. ... The trough and the objects
 surrounding it were left until later; the wood was protected from the
 drying action of sun and air by a thick covering of damp cloths.
   In the western end of the burial-chamber, was revealed
 an iron object which proved to be of quite unexpected size and charac-
ter. As with cleaning its various features became clear we called it a
lamp-stand, It was much corroded but appeared to be fairly strong, and
in spite of its size was lifted quite easily. The surrounding sand was com-
pletely removed and the weight of the stand evenly supported by three
people. It was placed on a wide plank of a suitable length on which its
unsupported parts were propped with packing covered with cotton
wool.                                              :
   Near the lamp-stand was an iron-bound wooden bucket in an ad-
vanced state of decay. The iron binding was badly corroded; the wood
had become friable. The vessel had therefore collapsed upon itself and
become a more or less shapeless mass. Even so it seemed possible that
careful removal might enable some sort of reconstruction to be attemp-
ted later —and there was the further possibility that the bucket might
contain other material of interest.
   Surplus sand having been removed, the bucket was bound firmly
round with webbing, particular care being taken with the lower part,
                                                                        iron
upon which the greatest strain was to be placed. A piece of thin
plate of slightly larger     area than   the  bucket was  then obtained  and

                                    127
                                                                                  a



               ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

                                                             cleared away in
gradually introduced beneath its base, the sand being
                                                              With the plate
front of the forward edge of the plate with a trowel.
                                  was  ready  for lifting. But   the iron was
completely inserted the bucket
                                                                      without
too thin to sustain the quite considerable weight of the bucket
                           of  course  have  disturb ed  the  already  broken
buckling — which would
                                                                   which pre-
pieces. A flat spade was therefore inserted beneath the plate,
                                                                      provid-
vented any lateral pressure being inflicted on the bucket while
                                                                         lifted
ing a large surface for its support. Bucket and plate were then
together on the spade and     placed  on  strong  boards   so  that the  spade
                                                                             ly
could be withdrawn. In this way no part of the bucket was serious
disturbed.
  Mr Grimes remarks parenthetically that he has “used an almost
similar method in removing very fragile Bronze Age pottery. The
consolidation of two Bronze Age urns from Coity, Glamorgan, was
only possible because they were lifted intact in this way and the
crumbling pottery hardened and treated in the workshop before its
contents (which helped to reinforce it) were removed’. I may add
that in similar circumstances, in the removal of a considerable pre-
historic clay oven, I have likewise used the iron-plate method with
success. The preliminary binding of the fragile object — preferably
with an ordinary surgical bandage — is an important stage, and may
sometimes have to be supplemented by a surface-coating of plaster
or melted paraffin-wax to give additional solidity. The particularly
fragile clay oven was coated with a considerable jacket of wax, and
survived the operation of removal perfectly. It is now in the Dor-
chester (Dorset) Museum.
   Enough has been quoted from the Sutton Hoo account to indicate
the general methods used. Mr Grimes observes that the account
is not a story of new and elaborate technical methods, but rather of the
way in which simple readily available means were employed to deal
with an unexpected range of materials, each ... with its own set of
problems, In some cases one could visualize an instrument or method by
which the solutions would have been the more easily obtained. I longed
several times for a broad-bladed implement, a kind of fish-slice, which
(in various sizes) would have been ideal for lifting such things as the
horn mounts, the silver bowls, and even the wooden bucket. But only
a specially made tool could have combined all the necessary qualities:
strength to sustain weight and pressure, thinness and a sharp edge of a
suitable outline for easy insertion beneath the object to be removed.
                                      128
                                                                                  es
                                                                                  oO
                                                               p. 21)
Excavation of a barrow, 1844 (Gentleman’s Magazine, 1852) (See
       fe
 (a) An Early Iron Age pit at Scarborough, Yorkshire, cut to show three
                 interrupted phases of the filling (See p. 45)




(b) Section showing sixteen successive layers of plastering on the wall of the
           temple of the moon-god Sin at Khafajah, Iraq (See p. 46)
Stratification at Brahmagiri, Mysore State, India (See p. 65)
(b) Discipline: excavation at Arikamedu, South India, 1945 (See p. 80)
(Eg ‘d 99) (Pr6r ‘punoyy mYg-e[Ixe].) WoIeAvOXS-vorIe UL JO INOAeT
                                           ai




Section pegged for three-dimensional recording (Maiden Castle, 1935)
                             (See p. 86)
(a) Section pegged for three-dimensional recording (Tale Sittap, 1945)
                               (See p. 86)




                      aera               Se lata   ct ci   liao aa   dx
      ie ctwceeise RWIS By FT   oe: Oe
                                                  Punjab, 1946)
© Similar section linking two cemetery-areas exer
                                     (See p. 87)


                                          I
                                              es      cs

                                         fordshire, 1931 (See p. 98)




(6) Verulamium, north-west gate: part of the plan recovered by clearing
              trenches made by wall-robbers (See p. 98)
(a) Roman timber-buil   ing at Richborough, Kent, traced by coloration
                        of the soil (See p. 100)

                                              ai 8
                                              sas ES




             about 2000 B.C. at Harappa, Punjab, showing outline of
                      wooden coffin (See p. 101)
.




    Lincolnshire (See p. 101)




                to
Section through the mud-brick defences of the Harappa citadel, Punjab,
                  built before 2000 B.c. (See p. 105)
                                                                               aoe:
ydesSojoyd-ary
   Jo  y1edJo oyi   ueryazeg
                         Aq yo   ‘eprxe, ‘qeftng
                                              ysay   Arnqueo
                                                          ‘ary 9ag)‘d   (gor
13
                         (gr ‘d 99s) poqiour quezpenb, aya Sutrmoys
‘eipuy ‘aieig arosAyy ‘UISeuryeag ye (‘o’d Ammquad puodes IO qs) atd-ye1ing & j O   UOTEA 149)   ee
                                                                        74
                                                                                                      14
       ‘d 99g) ypouns ‘drys oofy aoqNg 243 jo sooedy,
(€or
(a) Silver coin of Tiberius, dated a.D. 26-37, from Chandravalli,
                     Mysore State (See p. 147)




 (b) Arikamedu : fragments of Roman amphorae (See p. 142)
                                16
Rouletted ware of the first century a.p. from Arikamedu,   South India
                             (See p. 144)




                                 I7
one
Access



         a




                                                                                LO




                                                                                ee DE A IA




                                                                          4.»   ST EC)
                     17    16   1819   20    2

             Selection of tools from an Eastern excavation (See p. 181)
Part of section through the ‘Fosse’ earthwork at Verulamium, showing turf
    wall embedded in earth and gravel but emphasized by careful lighting
                                  (See p. 201)
(€61 *d aag sayeumts Arp ut asn Oj ‘p
        )                               113-A10330
(Soz -d 995) AydeaZojoyd a]8ur-ySryq OJ JOMOT,
                                                 21
       of
       Informat
       Ministry




     Reconstruc
     of
     homestead
     Early
     Age
     (See
     Little
     Wiltshire
     Woodbury,
     243)
     Iron
      at
      an
      p.




23
              (a) ‘Sir Flinders Petrie in the court-
                 yard of the School in Jerusalem’




                     pete:             i    ee

                      (b) ‘Copper Jar no. 277°

How not to illustrate! Two examples, with captions, from well-known
                  publications (See pp. 202 and 217)
                                  24
                      WATCH-MAKERS’            JOBS
   The absence of some luxuries had to be countered by patience and
perseverance. Our tools were of the simplest kind. Here we were fortu-
nate in our soil: the sand yielded readily to treatment, and especially,
when dry, to brushing for the more delicate objects. For these the usual
procedure was a sequence of alternate phases of brushing and drying,
the surface sand being removed to expose a new damp sand which in
its turn was allowed to dry. Paint brushes were most useful for this pur-
pose. In actually carving sand away from heavy objects calling for no
special treatment of the surface —and also for much of the finer work
—I was very grateful for a curved bodkin or packer’s needle, especially
as long as its point remained sharp. The curve of the needle was par-
ticularly useful for negotiating hollows, angles, and undercutting; it
provided a sensitive ‘feeler’ for unexpected shapes; and since it was not
mounted in a handle it could be used in a restricted space.
    Of the general practice of cleaning it remains to be said that each
specimen, whatever its material and character, was freed as completely
as possible from its matrix: the importance of the first step cannot be too
 strongly emphasized. (Even sand when damp is strongly prehensile, and
the extra strain imposed by its adhesion even to a small area might well |
 result in damage to a fragile specimen.) Care in coaxing the sand away
 without damaging the surface and in lifting the object so that all the
weight was equally distributed, with no strain on any one part, com~
 pleted the process. Such precautions may appear to be obvious, but were
 especially important on a site where all except the most precious metal
 was badly decayed and corroded.
    In the circumstances, dealing as we were with a wide range of objects
 and ‘materials all calling for laboratory treatment, and not knowing
 what else we might have to face, it was sound policy to remove even
 the most unpromising of finds with as little interference as possible.
 Chemical and other methods have now replaced more direct mechani-
 cal treatment of antiquities; here mechanical treatment was reduced to
 the minimum necessary to remove the object from the ground. In addi-
 tion, even with much broken and apparently worthless objects, much
                                                                     various
 time and trouble were expended in attempts to maintain the
                        in their relative positions, as a very valuable  first
 parts and fragments
                                                                information
step in reconstructing the original or obtaining maximum
                                                            stage. This
from it by more leisured laboratory examination at a later
                                                            even from
was not always successful and sometimes was impossible,
                                                           no scrap of
the beginning. But every attempt was made to see that
         from  Sutton Hoo  was lost by lack of care and patience in the
evidence
field.

   B                                 129
               ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM     THE    EARTH

   By way of comment on this account of a difficult and successful
piece of work, I would reinforce Mr Grimes’s plea for a “broad-
bladed implement’. Independent experience has shown me the con-
stant necessity for a selection of implements of this kind. They can
be bought or made without undue difficulty and should be a routine
item in the excavator’s equipment, beginning with the broad-bladed
kitchen knife which every supervisor should carry (p. 179) and includ-
ing fish-slices and the unnamed flat instrument (‘turner’) with which
fried eggs are removed from the adhesive surface of the frying-pan.
  From Sutton Hoo we may travel to Ur of the Chaldees, where Sir
Leonard Woolley had much experience of the “watch-maker’s job’
and has something to tell of it. One of his masterpieces was the recov-
ery of the harp from Shub-ad’s tomb, and he shall tell the story in his
own words.

    The first thing to come to light was the gold cap of the upright, which
seemed to be loose in the soil and gave us no hint as to what lay below.
As the work went on there were found two or three gold-headed nails
and, searching for their possible connexion, we found a hole running
down into the earth across which could be seen the shafts of more nails
obviously in position, i.e. the hole represented some wooden object
which had decayed away altogether but the nails once fixed in it were
being kept in place by the soil against their heads. A stick was therefore
inserted into the hole for so far as it would go and plaster of paris was
poured in round it; when that had had time to set the digging continued
and there was found the lower part of the upright modelled in plaster
with the gold-headed nails in it; measurement of the soil and the calcu-
lation of the distance apart of the dislodged nails gave the full length of
the upright and enabled us to refix the gold cap at the original height.
Below, the plaster had expanded into the ‘shoe’ of the instrument and
its flow had then been stopped by the not altogether decayed bitumen
which had held the shoe to the base; this, with the line of shell and lapis
inlay which emphasized its curve, was at once hardened with paraffin
wax. This brought us to the sounding-box which, being of wood, had
completely perished, but the broad band of mosaic along its edges was
for the most part in position, though rather distorted, and could be
cleared little by little and secured as it appeared by waxed muslin. The
wood had apparently been painted black with a line of red paint running
  1. C.L, Woolley, Ur Excavations, II (London and Philadelphia, 1934), pp.
74 £.; and Digging up the Past (Pelican Books, 1940), pp. 85 ff.

                                      I30
                     WATCH-MAKERS’ JOBS
parallel to the edge a little inside the inlay border. The top edge was
first treated and then the side could be laid bare and the form of it
ascertained; the rectangle of the near side was complete (it was indeed
lifted in one piece) and the back of the inlay of the far side could also
be cleaned and secured. The gold and lapis-lazuli calf’s head which deco-
rated the front of the instrument seemed to be in rather bad condition,
for the whole of the top of the head, consisting of lapis tesserae repre-
senting hair, had fallen down into the hollow left by the decay of the
wooden core, and the metal was a good deal bent, but nothing was
missing; in the end it was restored without much difficulty.

  Thus the available evidence, some of it positive, some negative, was
preserved, and an acceptable reconstruction of the whole instrument
rendered possible. The whole success of the operation depended on
the recognition at the outset of the potential significance of a hole
running down into the earth. Similarly,
ene of our richest graves at Ur, that which contained the famous golden
helmet, was located by the discovery of a copper spear-head sticking
point upwards in the earth. The soil was cleared from round it, and
there came to light a length of thin gold tube which adorned the top of
the shaft; below this there was a hole in the ground left by the wooden
shaft itself when it turned to dust. We followed the hole downwards,
and it led us to the grave, against the corner of which it had been lean-
ing when the earth was thrown back into the pit; with this forewarning
we were able to trace the entire outline of the grave before we started
to lay bare its contents, and so could record in order all the offerings
heaped and crowded round the coffin.

  Where the actual woodwork is preserved, other methods must be
adopted in accordance with circumstances. Thus in 1951 a La Tétne
sword in its bronze-bound wooden scabbard was found in the water-
logged clay at the bottom of an ancient ditch at Stanwick in York-
shire. It was carefully cleared to a rough outline with trowel and pen-
knife, and sufficient mud was then washed from it with a small soft
brush to enable a photograph and an approximate life-size drawing
 to be made of it on the spot. Meanwhile a local carpenter was pre-
 paring a box to receive it, with an ample allowance for packing
 material. When the drawing was completed, a stiff 3-ply board was
 carefully inserted beneath the object, which was then immediately
placed without further cleaning in the box in a thick matrix of wet
                                   131
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM    THE    EARTH

newspaper. The package was then taken by the next train to the
British Museum laboratory, care being taken to maintain the damp-
ness of the packing. The subsequent treatment, applied with great
skill by Dr H. J. Plenderleith, lies outside the scope of the field-
worker.
   Lastly, it is fair to include amongst ‘watch-makers’ jobs’ the
removal of a Roman mosaic pavement, the condition of which usually
demands the utmost delicacy of handling. The surface of the mosaic
may have sunk into hollows: many of the tesserae, even though in
position, may be fractured; and the fine mortar in which the tesserae
were originally embedded may largely have lost its grip. The con~
ventional procedure has been described in categorical form by the
late Mrs T. V. Wheeler, F.s.A., who herself applied it successfully.t
Her account is here reproduced.

    1. Dig a trench 1 foot wide and 18 inches deep round the area of the
pavement to be lifted some days before the work of removal is started.
A considerable amount of moisture is thereby drained away.
    2. Build a shed or shelter of sufficient size to cover the pavement and
the drainage-trenches.
    3. Remove all dirt scrupulously from the pavement and from the
joints between the tesserae. The condition of the pavement will dictate
the means to be employed. These may vary from scrubbing with brush
and soapy water and/or gently scraping with a blunt knife, to the deli-
 cate use of an orange-stick or bellows.
    4. Place coke~buckets on bricks on the pavement and keep fires burn-_
ing day and night until the mosaic, its bedding and the earth beneath are
absolutely dry. The heat not only drives off any remaining moisture but
also disintegrates the Roman mortar. This drying-out is the most im-
portant part of the whole process and may take from two to five days
according to local conditions of dampness.
    5. Before or during the drying of the pavement, prepare a flat board,
 a few inches larger in each direction than the fragment or section under
treatment. A platform of {-inch board, reinforced with cross-battens, is
adequate.
   6. Remove the fires and clean the mosaic finally.
   7. Brush a coat of ordinary glue, prepared in a dixie nearby and suffi-
ciently thin to run into and fill up all interstices, over the surface and
leave it to set.                                  ;
            1. The Museums Journal, xxx (London, 1933), 104 ff.

                                   132
—A




                         WATCH-MAKERS JOBS
 A 8. Brush a second coat of thick glue heavily over this hardened sur-
   ce.
    9. Press down into this hot coat a piece of stout canvas newly wrung
 in boiling water. The canvas should be squeezed down with the fingers
 until it is certain that all air-bubbles are eliminated. A final coat of glue
 on top of the canvas will ensure adhesion to every tessera.
    10. Replace the fires in the drainage-trenches for an hour to drive off
 moisture.
    tz. Remove fires and allow the glue to harden. The time that this will
 take will again depend on local conditions, but upwards of eight hours
 should be allowed. Again, it is essential to make sure that the glue is set
 before attempting the work of removal.
    12. The mosaic can now safely be released from its bedding. Cut into
 the mortar of the bedding with trowels, slate-rippers or, if available,
 bar-chisels, leaving a good clearance of 2-3 inches below the lower
 surface of the tesserae.
133. Slip in planks underneath as the bedding is removed. These
should project beyond the edges of the pavement, for use in reversing it.
14. Lay the prepared board on to the surface of the pavement.
iTS.     Using the lower planks as levers, turn the pavement, now sarid-
_ wiched between wood, on to the prepared board, which now becomes
_ the working-platform. The pavement, or section of pavement, can now
  be removed to a work-shed on this platform.
     16. Remove all Roman mortar. If the heat from the fires has pene-
"trated properly the greater part will come away if gently tapped with a
wooden mallet. Care must be taken to scrape away any obstinate mor-
 tar from the side and back of each tessera, and beliows used to blow
  fine dust from between them. The tesserae are now in position face-
- downwards on the glued canvas and are clean.
                                                                           glue
17. A slight sprinkling of water applied here will soften the
                                                                       surfaces
- sufficiently, without releasing its grip, to ptess the now convex
of the former hollows into their original horizontal position.
18. Nail a two-inch frame round the working platform.
                                                                        so that
19. With soap or thick grease fill up all breaks in the pattern,
      modern    cement  will be kept back  from  the ultimate level of the face
_ the
_ of the finished pavement.
                                                                          Roman
20. Mixa sufficient quantity of modern cement with broken
                                             in the  original pavement ,  to pour
" material, imitative of the mortar used
_ into the joints between   the  now-isola ted   tesserae.
                                                                         is filling
 21. Tap the frame on every side, to ensure that the mixture
all joints and that   all air-bubb les are  eliminat  ed.

                                         133
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM    THE    EARTH

    22. Lay a reinforcement of wire-netting and steel rods within the
frame and fill up with cement. If the section is of considerable size (and
it is possible to handle a section 6 feet by 3 feet by this method) a second
layer of reinforcement may possibly be needed. The cement should be
brought to a smooth surface within the frame and left for two days or
more to set. Where large pavements are to be removed, sections of a
workable size should be determined upon, and marked with tell-tales
on the canvas, which, initially, may cover the whole surface. The
canvas may then be cut along the lines laid out and each section lifted
separately.
   23. The frame can now be knocked away and the pavement re~
versed, canvas-side up.
   24. Flood boiling water on to the canvas until the glue is sufficiently
dissolved to allow the canvas to be lifted, not pulled, away. Any remain-
ing glue should be removed with boiling water and a nail-brush. If, ia
this process, any tessera is found to be loose, it should at once be reset.
   25. The breaks in the pavement may be treated in accordance with the
policy desired. If restoration is envisaged, the newly-cut tesserae will
declare themselves as modern and so prevent deception. If restoration
is not desired, the breaks should be brought to a smooth surface at
the general level of the mortar-bedding.
   The pavement should now be strong enough to withstand any reason-
able handling and ready for exhibition.




                                    134
                             CHAPTER      10


                  Tactics and Strategy

Tue main subject of this chapter is the overall planning of field-
research, a phrase disguised above under the somewhat inflated term
‘strategy’. In retrospect every archaeologist is constantly arranging
his facts into a pattern, his laboriously collected words into a coherent
sentence. Less frequently does he place his inquiries in advance with
an equivalent regard for sequence. There is some excuse in the fact
that at the present time field-archaeology is still dominated in Britain
by special conditions arising out of a hard war and a harder peace.
It is conditioned, too often, by the incidence of a bomb-hole or a
housing scheme or an aerodrome, or by sheer economic duress,
rather than by long-term planning. Yet even between wars, strategic
planning, though sometimes talked about, was rarely carried into
effect. Other factors — personal or international competition, sheer
Jack of imagination — obstructed it. Sites were dug because they
‘looked good’ or because they might produce information, rather like
carrying out a surgical operation at random on a patient in the hope
of finding somewhere the cause of an undiagnosed disease. It was
thus that the neolithic surgeon used to cut a hole in a man’s skull in
the hope of letting out a headache; but not thus, I need hardly say,
is the orderly way of science. As archaeologists we are excessively
prone to opportunism: we do not sufficiently plan or create our
opportunities. Admittedly a happy chance has from time to time
added unexpectedly and even dramatically to knowledge; for instance
the finding of that famous seventh-century boat-burial in the mound
at Sutton Hoo. Nevertheless, the progress of science depends less
en these hazards than on the methodical, logical use of the disciplined
imagination in the evaluation of cause and effect. It depends in no
small measure upon careful strategic planning.
   The nearest approach to planning during the past half-century or
more is probably to be recognized in the discovery and enlargement
of the Minoan civilization of Crete. The vivid quality of the civiliza-
tion itself, the imaginative genius of its prime discoverer, and its
                                   135
             ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM    THE   EARTH

central geographical position have combined to give a certain unity
to the multifarious but more or less related work which has been
carried out by several nations in the adjacent lands. But even there
co-ordination has been notoriously inadequate and the results pro-
portionately scrappy and unsatisfying. A great opportunity has been
missed. In the circumstances, as illustrations of what I mean on the
one hand by tactical and on the other by strategic planning, I may
be forgiven the presumption of taking two examples from work in
which I happen myself to have been concerned, where it is at least
possible to speak at first hand of the conscious and careful sequence
which was present continuously from the outset in the mind of the
director. The first of these two examples is an example of tactical
planning in the development of a local problem. That problem was
the unravelling of the history of Verulamium in Hertfordshire as a
Roman and pre-Roman city, with its potential bearing upon the
Caesarian campaign which culminated hereabouts in $4 B.c.
   I may recall that Verulamium, in the valley below the medieval and
modern town of St Albans, is a site of some exceptional interest in
the protohistory of these islands. There or thereabouts in pre-Roman
times reigned, as his coins tell us, King Tasciovanus, the father of
Cunobelin; and since Cassivellaunus was a predecessor on the same
tribal throne, it was assumed that there also Julius Caesar had found
and stormed the headquarters of his great opponent in 54 B.c. Later
events included the martyrdom of Albanus, a Christian citizen of
Verulamium and our most authentic Romano-British martyr, and a
visitation by St Germanus of Auxerre who thus provided one of the
few unquestioned fifth-century contacts between Britain and the
Roman world. Altogether, the site was fraught with archaeological —
possibilities of an alluringly miscellaneous kind. The historical and
geographical sequence of human occupation in the St Albans region
through the five centuries presented a challenging problem.           ;
   The visual starting-point was the large walled and embanked area,
some 200 acres in extent, which manifestly represented the developed
Roman municipality. The conventional theory before excavation 4         }


was that this area represented also the pre-Roman capital and one of
the first functions of the excavators was to check this view. Accord-
ingly, deep pits were sunk to the natural surface within the walled
area, and at the same time sections were cut through the defences,
                                 136
                                                                        :
                    TACTICS     AND       STRATEGY

The former failed to reveal any pre-Roman occupation; the latter
showed that the defences were not earlier than the second century
A.D.


                                                  VERULAMIUM
                                              THE SUCCESSIVE BELGIC
                                               AND ROMAN CITIES     ‘AN
                                                                      ref




                              Scale of One Hile
                                      Ya



                                                                    on the
Fig. 20. Successive sites of pre-Roman and Roman Verulamium. (Based
Ordnance Survey 6-inch map, Herts. XXIV, by permission of the Controller
                             of H.M. Stationery Office)

   That may be regarded as Stage I of the investigation. Stage II was
directed inevitably to the examination of the next most evident
                                                                        as
structural relic in the vicinity; an unexplained earth-work known
                             ed  on the hill-side from under a part of the
‘The Fosse’, which project
                                    137
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

circuit of the second-century defences. Here, in and under the ram-
part, was found a considerable quantity of native pottery, presum-
ably indicating the proximity of the pre-Roman site; but an admix-
ture of early Roman material indicated a post-conquest date. Stage II,
then, had identified the site of an earlier Roman town, but left the
pte-Roman settlement still in the air.
   The early pottery recovered from ‘The Fosse’ served at least as a
pointer. The earth-work lay just below the brow of the plateau flank-
ing the valley which carried the main Roman site, and the obvious
next step, Stage III, was to pursue the inquiry on to the plateau itself.
Here, in the depths of a tangled game-preserve, lies a complex group
of unmapped and unimpressive earth-works. Some of these were
disused field- or woodland-boundaries, but amongst them was a
nucleus which was proved by excavation to be a portion of the pre-
Roman city. A part of our question was thus answered; the associated
remains, however, were of post-Caesarian date, and evidence was
still lacking for the Caesarian episode. (Fig. 20).
   There was still an unexplained feature which appeared to relate to
the pre-Roman site. A mile to the north of it were traces of a cross-
country dyke or barrier facing away from Verulamium. Excavation,
which may be classified as Stage IV, showed that (a) this dyke was
likewise of pre-Roman date, and (6) it had originally barred an open
gap of chalk-land between the hill-top woodland on the one hand
and the marshy valley on the other. It was presumably a boundary
of the pre-Roman civic territory at a point where natural obstacles
were missing. Its major office in our task of exploration was, however,
as a pointer to draw fresh attention to a seemingly related but mysteri-
ous cross-country dyke of far more formidable size on the opposite
side of the valley.
   This further dyke, known to fame as Beech Bottom, is a remark-
able construction. It is 100 feet wide and upwards of 30 feet deep,
with a bank on both lips. It is sited along the bottom of an east-west
valley, and there is only the greater size of the more southerly marg-
inal bank to show that the work faced north. It was clearly a major
traffic-barrier rather than a military work in the narrower sense.
About a mile of the dyke is still visible, but a further half-mile has
been traced by excavation or safe inference. Its examination had
already been begun as Stage V when a happy chance supplied more
                                  138
                    TACTICS      AND       STRATEGY

definite evidence than unaided science could have expected. Work-
men digging a sewer at measured depths through the dyke, at a point
where it had been filled up, found a coin-hoard of the second century
A.D. deep in the filling but still a dozen feet above the bottom of the
ditch. The coins — a shovelful of them, it was said —- were immedi-
ately scattered amidst the ready hands and pockets of the cosmopoli-
tan gang of workmen concerned. But a strenuous search that night
in a multitude of local places of refreshment and entertainment pro-
duced about forty of them, enough to indicate the general character
and date of the hoard. It was clear that the ditch in which they had
been found was of some considerable age by thé second century
A.D., and that solid fact, combined with its entirely un-Roman
character and siting, placed it fairly and squarely in our pre-Roman
period.                                                                 .
   But this  was not all. Ifthe dyke had  served any  logical purpose at
all, it must have barred a fairly open stretch of country between two
river valleys and fords: that of the Ver, beside which Verulamium
stands to the south-west, and that of the Lea to the north-east (Fig. 21).
Along this line the eye is carried to a height above the ford across the
Lea, where are the remains of the greatest oppidum in this part of
England, tht which adjoins the little country town of Wheathamp-
stead. The present fame of this oppidum may be measured by its
appearance in an historical novel; but it was not in fact until Stage VI
of our planned advance that the significance of the mighty earth-work
became tolerably clear; it had previously attracted little or no atten-
tion. The profile of its defences is of the same kind as that of Beech
                                                                on a
Bottom, only more so. The enclosure is some 90 acres in extent,
platform above the Lea, just as pre-Roman Verulamium stands on a
plateau above the Ver. A significant difference between the two sites
began to emerge, however, as excavation proceeded. Whereas the
                                                                    of
Verulamium site began in post-Caesarian times, when, in the age
                      things  and  forms  were  already beginning   to
Tasciovanus, Roman
                                                                   no
penetrate the backwoods of yet unconquered Britain, there was
hint of Romanization in the equipment        of the Wheathampstead
                                                              decades
oppidum. In other words, this oppidum preceded the last two
                                                      an easy further
of the first century 3.c.; and, that being so, it was
                                                                 even inter-
step to ascribe its great defences to a phase of inter-tribal or
                                                         British campaigns.
national rivalry such as marked the age of Caesar’s
                                     139
   ST ALBANS ann WHEATHAMPSTEAD. HERTS.
   WITH FORMER        WOODLANDS RESTORED ON GEOLOGICAL            BASIS
                                      ROMAN -WORKS:
                                                              &
                                                        em)   Rophhee   OF   OP




                          Rat aeerey o)
                              ee Let So ah
                                          Laortad




     THICKLY WOODED
     CLAY LAND
     LIGHTLY WOODED                                 ?
     GRAVELS ere ||es 9 On es ed igs _,                       ALLUVIUM.


Fig. 21. Map of the earthworks of Wheathampstead and Verulamium, with
                      intervening dykes, (See p. 138)
                     TACTICS      AND      STRATEGY

Here, if anywhere, may we locate the headquarters of such a
one as Cassivellaunus. At least we are approaching closely to his time
and environment, and no rival site is known. The name of Wheat-
hampstead has now, with no great questioning, entered the books as
the scene of Caesar’s culminating British victory.
   Thus in six progressive stages, developing gradually and logically
from known to’unknown, the vista of a formative phase of proto-
historic Britain began to unroll itself. In reverse, the picture is that of
the initial overlordship of a powerful Belgic king, competitively
exploiting a countryside which had previously, it seems, been but
thinly inhabited. Thereafter, during the Augustan Peace on the
Continent and the centralization of native rule in south-eastern
Britain, the emphasis changes: fortifications, hereabouts at any rate,*
are now of trivial size, and continental trade percolates with increas-
ing freedom. The phase culminates in the formal extension of the
Pax Romana to lowland Britain in a.D. 43; thereafter fortification was
discounted by over-confidence, which was in turn countered by the
Boudiccan revolt and by the consequent construction of new defences
of no mean order (‘The Fosse’); and finally, in the spacious days of
the second century, the town took shape on evolved, conventional
continental lines. We are not here concerned with the details, only
with the sequence of thought and action - an elementary illustration
of archaeological tactic on halfadozen miles of landscape.
  From the Hertfordshire parish-pump, I turn to the wide horizons
of Asia, to planning on a large scale to which the term ‘strategy’ may
properly be applied. Again, the example is from my own experience,
on the renewed plea that first-hand witness has an actuality which
may sufficiently counterbalance defects. As Director-General of
Archaeology in India from 1944 to 1948, I had, in spite of war and
acute political difficulties, an opportunity such as few archaeologists
have had: of strategic planning within the far-flung boundaries of a
whole sub-continent. The northern and southern parts of that sub-
continent differ alike in the character of their respective problems
and in the amount of work previously done upon them. Central and
south India, with which I am here concerned, had scarcely been
                                                                       a
worked at all. In the whole of that great southern region, some half
                                                                          cal
million square miles in extent, there wasin 1944 no firm archaeologi
                                                               and ambition.
  1. At Colchester their size was sustained by dynastic wealth
                                     I41
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

 datum-line prior to the Middle Ages. In the north of India, con~
 tacts with prehistoric Mesopotamia and, later, with Persia and the
 lands of the classical West had provided reasonably fixed pegs upon
 which to hang some part of the prehistory of the frontier-lands. In
 the south, most of these pegs were absent. Sporadic exploration of an
 unmethodical kind had there revealed great quantities of material;
 urn-fields had been gathered up like rice-crops, meg@lithic tombs had
 been ransacked (sometimes, as recently as 1942, with the aid of dyna-
 mite— p. 113), town-sites had on occasion been broken into and mis-
 cellaneous debris recovered from them; but nowhere had this archae-
 ological loot been interrelated systematically with itself or correlated
 with any external datum. Of the museums of the region it would have
 been sufficient to quote the words applied by Petrie to nineteenth-
 century museums in general: ‘Our museums are ghastly charnel-
 houses of murdered evidence; the dry bones of objects are there, bare
 of all the facts of grouping, locality and dating which would give
 them historical life and value.’
    In this world of chaos there was, however, one potential fixed
 point. Since 1775, Roman coins, generally in hoards of gold or silver,
 have turned up from time to time, mostly in south India where they
 represent the Imperial luxury trade abundantly vouched for in classi-
 cal and Indian literature. Here was a chance of securing the required
 datum. Could we but find a significant association of Roman coinage
 or other datable Roman imports with a native Indian culture, we
 should have at once a firm base from which to advance upon the
 general problem of the ancient chronology of the Indian peninsula.
    Accordingly it was one of my first acts as Director-General in 1944
 to draw up a list of sites known to have produced Roman coinage and
to send two members of my staff on a 3,000-mile tour of the listed
 sites with a view to selecting one of them for investigation. My envoys
 worked steadily down the west coast of India and round Cape
-Comorin without encountering any very hopeful sign. But the solu-
 tion was in fact imminent from another source.
    InJuly 1944 I visited the Madras Museum and found in a cupboard
 there a part of a Graeco-Roman amphora of a type familiar in the
 Mediterranean region about the beginning of the Christian era. It had,
 I was informed, been dug up recently at a coastal site near Pondi-
 cherry, then the capital of French India, 80 miles south of Madras,
                                   142
                    TACTICS      AND     STRATEGY

I shall not lightly forget the (to me) dramatic moment when chance
put into my hand here on a hot afternoon of a south Indian summer
an answer which I could almost believe that fate had sent me 6,000
miles from my little Roman Britain to discover: an answer which I
had indeed sought but had scarcely dared to expect. By arrangement
with the French authorities, I lost no time in visiting Pondicherry,
and saw in the public library there a collection of objects which had
been recovered during the previous two or three years by French
antiquaries at a site known locally as Arikamedu, 2 miles south of the
town. The collection comprised a considerable quantity of Indian
pottery, beads and other objects, together with a remarkable assem-
blage of material of Mediterranean origin, including many sherds of
amphorae, fragments of glassware, part of a lamp, and an untrimmed
crystal intaglio representing Cupid with an eagle. To these may be
added another gem bearing allegedly a head of Augustus but no
longer available. More important than all these, however, were
several sherds of red-glazed ware of the kind made at Arretium and
other Italian centres prior to c. A.D. 45. The meaning of these things
had not been suspected by their finders, but to an eye trained in the
West it was instantly and easily apparent. Dated pottery, by virtue
of its relatively limited durability, was better evidence even than
dated coins, with their less computable survival-value. It remained to
ascertain, by careful digging, the precise relationship between this
Arretine ware and the Indian culture or cultures found on the same
site.
   Our subsequent (1945) excavations have been fully recorded. It
will suffice to note here that the relationship was readily established,
and that the site will therefore go down in the history of south Indian
archaeology as that from which the classification of ancient south
Indian cultures effectively began. With the aid of the dated imports
referred to, it defined for the first time the chronological position of
an extensive complex of south Indian pottery and other equipment
                                                                       the
dating from the first two centuries A.D.; and it was not long after
conclusion of the work that the importance of     Arikamed   u  was found
to extend far beyond the vicinity of the site itself. This extension was
                                                                         g
the result of carefully planned, progressive research, proceedin
steadily from   known   to part-know  n to unknown,    and its main stages
may be recounted in the present context.
                                   143
              ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

   The first step was to discover the distribution of the more distinc- _
tive of the Indian wares thus newly dated. A tour of south Indian
museums met with immediate success. Amongst the distinctive pro-
ducts of Arikamedu was a type of dish (Pl. 17) decorated on the in-
ternal base with concentric rings of a rouletted pattern otherwise
foreign to Indian ceramic but familiar on certain classical wares
including Arretine ware itself. Some of these rouletted dishes were
doubtless imports from the Mediterranean, others were local Indian
imitations. A search of museums showed that dishes of this kind had
been found in southern India at a number of places separated by
some hundreds of miles from one another (Fig. 22). The famous
Amaravati, for example, which supplied the Buddhist sculptures
displayed in the entrance-hall of the British Museum, had produced
sherds of them, now in the Madras Museum. At other places, such
as Maski and Kondapur in Hyderabad State and Chandravalli and
Brahmagiri in the northern end of Mysore State, this distinctive
decoration, type, and fabric had been found in ill-published and
ill-conducted excavations. Maski, Kondapur, and Chandravalli had
been, in part at least, towns of the central Indian Andhra Empire
which flourished at the end of B.c. and the beginning of a.p., and at
Chandravalli stray denarii of Augustus and Tiberius had also been
found. The historical and archaeological environment was therefore
consistent with the Arikamedu dating. At all these sites the newly
dated rouletted ware introduced at once an element of chronological
precision; and on all of them it was manifestly associated with an
elaborate and distinctive ceramic industry which differed largely from
that at Arikamedu but could now, presumably, be regarded as con-
temporary. Already the fixed-point of Arikamedu had indicated the
possibility of dating, by means of a little careful excavation, a wide-
spread and important Indian culture more than 300 miles away.
  A visit to one of these sites, Brahmagiri, in 1945 indicated other and
wider possibilities. Trial excavations of a somewhat unorthodox kind,
assisted on occasion by high explosive, had here been carried out by
the State Archaeological Department and had revealed remains of an
extensive ancient township. But the outstandingly interesting feature
of the area was this: that adjoining the town-site was a large cemetery
of megalithic tombs of a kind widespread in peninsular India but
never hitherto adequately dated. Further, the Brahmagiri cists were

                                  144
                      TACTICS      AND     STRATEGY

marked by the circular entrance-opening or ‘port-hole’ which is
present on many other Indian examples and on comparable tombs in




                                                           WY? CALCUTTA po
                                                                ge



                                                           ft
                                                           $
                                                           es




                                                 DISTRIBUTION OF
                                              ROULETTED WARE _._@
                                               PAINTED ANDHRA WARE -o
                                               SITES WITH BOTH ~~ --©
                                                    (MODERN CITIES a)
                                                     SCALE or MILES
                                                            100      _200 _300


                                                                            of
 Fig. 22. Map of India showing sites which have produced ‘rouletted ware’
                           the first century A.D.

western Asia, northern Africa, and Europe (including Britain) and
may be a significant common factor. Indeed, these Indian tombs greet
the eye of the visiting European prehistorian witha friendly familiarity
                                     145
              ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

and at the same time with a challenge: their date and origin at
once become matters of more than local importance. Their general
character has indeed been familiar since the work (referred to on p. 23)
by Meadows Taylor in Hyderabad State in the middle of the nine-
teenth century, and James Fergusson drew renewed attention to them
in his Rude Stone Monuments in 1872. The curiosity of others, too,
has not been lacking, and in the aggregate some hundreds of these
cists in central or southern India must have been despoiled at one
time or another for the benefit of public or private museums, from
Oxford to Madras. The result has been merely to pile up the moun-
tain of our ignorance. Until the undated contents of these tombs
could be related to a fixed chronological point, their further spolia-
tion was waste and worse than waste. But here at last, at Brahmagiri,
was a clear opportunity for the establishment of such a relationship;
for the equation of the culture represented by the tombs with evi-
dence from an adjacent town-site containing a known factor — the
dated rouletted ware of which sherds had already been unearthed
there. It remained to ascertain the precise nature of this equation by
the normal methods of scientific excavation.
  Accordingly, as has already been recalled in Chapter 4, in 1947 a
simultaneous exploration was carried out on the Brahmagiri town-
site and in the adjacent megalithic cemetery. The former revealed
three successive and distinctive cultures, of which the uppermost was
associated from the outset with our rouletted ware of the first
century A.D. This topmost culture is now identified as that of the
Andhra phase to which reference has already been made. Below it,
and partially overlapping it, was a culture identical with that which
was being revealed at the same time in the neighbouring megalithic
cists. The overlap between the two, assessed in the manner described
on p. 65, was amply sufficient to indicate that the megalithic culture
with its elaborate iron equipment, lasted into the first century A.D.
Thus, for the first time a fixed chronological point was obtained for a
group of megalithic tombs of characteristic south Indian type.
  But this was not all. A reasonable computation of the time-value
of the megalithic strata - a computation which need not be reviewed
here — suggested a backward duration of some two to two-and-a-
half centuries from the terminal date in the first century a.p.; that is,
the culture had arrived somewhere about 200 B.c. Below that was an
                                  146
                   TACTICS      AND     STRATEGY

8-foot accumulation of occupation material representing an alto-
gether different and more primitive culture. Whereas the Andhra
pottery had been turned on the fast wheel and the megalithic pottery
(it seems) on the slow wheel, the crude wares of the lowest culture
had been hand-made, without any sort of wheel. Again, whereas the
overlying cultures were both in an advanced stage of the Iron Age,
the lowest was essentially in the Stone Age (polished stone axes, rough
microliths), although bronze was not altogether unknown - the first
evidence, incidentally, for anything approaching a Bronze Age in
south India. Yet, in spite of the disparity of the two cultures, there
was clear evidence that this crude chalcolithic community had out-
lasted the arrival of the megalithic intruders: in other words, that the
chalcolithic culture, elements of which had long been recognized,
without context, in many parts of south India, had lasted into the
second century B.c., and extended backwards from that date through
8 feet of deposit.
   It would be irrelevant here to consider the details and implications
ef this happy concurrence of evidence, although in fact it was to the
wider interpretation of the culture-movements represented by it that
our work was directed. Suffice it to observe that we had recovered a
picture of a rudimentary stone-using society overrun suddenly
(during the Time of Troubles following the break-up of the great
Asokan Empire) by an elaborately equipped invasion of iron-users
and megalith-builders, followed in turn by the sophisticated civiliza-
tion of the surgent Andhra empire: three hitherto unclassified but
widespread cultures now for the first time arranged in clear sequence
with a chronological datum-line at one end of the sequence and in
consequence a new significance in subcontinental protohistory. So
important was it to establish this datum-line beyond all shadow of
doubt that a small parallel excavation was in fact carried out simul-
taneously on another Andhra town-site some 45 miles away. This
site (Chandravalli) yielded parallel evidence in the association of our
rouletted ware with local Andhra coins, overlying ‘megalithic’
fabrics, and incidentally produced from one of the Andhra layers a
denarius of Tiberius dated a.D. 26-37 (PI. 16). It would be difficult to
imagine a more satisfactory conclusion to our campaign: at one end
of our story, our key-evidence associated with Roman ware of the
first half of the first century A.D., and at the other end of our story
                                  147
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

identically similar evidence associated with a Roman coin of the same
  eriod.
‘ This story of the ‘opening up’ of central and southern Indian
chronology by gradual pervasion from our starting-point at Arika-
medu may here be carried one further stage. In front of us loomed
the great problem of linking up the newly found chronology with
that of the northern Indian plains, where lay the great cities of Indian
epic and protohistory. The problem threatened difficulty of a special
kind. The cultures of these north Indian cities have been fairly exten-
sively ‘sampled’ in a very rough-and-ready fashion, and are found to
differ in every respect from those of the south. Correlation was there-
fore only feasible on a site where south and north had actually met
and had existed for some time side by side.
   Search revealed exactly such a site, potentially, at a point where the
northern plains bend southwards along the broad coastal strip between
the Bay of Bengal and the Eastern Ghats or inland hill-barrier. In
Orissa, adjoining the old temple-city of BhubaneSwar and not far
from the sacred east-coast town of Puri, home of the notorious
Juggernath, lay the embanked site of an ancient city, now known as
Sigupalgarh, which fulfilled the necessary geographical conditions.
Excavation in 1948 and 1949 showed that it also fulfilled the archae-
ological requisites which we had postulated: for in stratified relation-
ship with a distinctive and widespread northern ceramic lay sherds
of our now-famous rouletted ware, identical with that which only
three years previously we had found nearly 700 miles to the south-
west in association with first-century Arretine. North and south were —
now for the first time firmly interlocked.
   I need not pursue this matter further. Enough has been said to
illustrate how three seasons of carefully planned, progressive work
were able to draw a clear archaeological datum-line across many
hundreds of miles of a sub-continent, and to open up spacious new
vistas of cultural relationship. Generations of fumbling from site to
opportunist site might easily have failed to approach this result — have
indeed in the past failed to do so. The two necessary factors were
present: Opportunity and Planning. To these might be added the
factor of Luck, but I do not much believe in Luck. Hard thinking and’
steady execution are at least its honest and dependable substitutes.
Have a plan, and make the opportunity, remembering with hope and
                                   148
                    TACTICS      AND     STRATEGY

at the same time with humility the dictum of Gibbon that ‘the winds
and the waves are always on the side of the ablest navigator’.

                                    *



Lastly, a problem in which strategy merges closely into tactics may
suitably be considered in this chapter since in fact matters of major
policy are involved. From time to time the question arises: shall stress
be laid (in some particular programme of work) upon horizontal or
upon vertical excavation? By ‘horizontal excavation’ is meant the
uncovering of the whole or a large part of a specific phase in the
occupation of an ancient site, in order to reveal fully its layout and
function (cf. Pl. 12). By ‘vertical excavation’ is meant the excavation
of a restricted area in depth, with a view to ascertaining the succession
of cultures or of phases and so producing a time-scale or culture-scale
for the site. The two procedures are of course complementary, not
antagonistic, and the excavator may be expected to attempt, if rarely
to achieve, both methods of approach. But in a great majority of
instances, a priority has to be determined, having regard to the state
of current knowledge and the resources available.
   Let us consider the nature of the evidence which the two methods
may be expected to supply. Vertical excavation alone, whilst supply-
ing a key to the length of an occupation, to its continuity or inter-
mittency, and to some part of its cultural equipment, cannot be
expected to reveal save in the most scrappy fashion the significant
environment — economic, religious, administrative — of a human
society. In other words, it leaves us in the dark as to those very factors
which fit a past culture or civilization-into the story of human
endeavour and so make its recovery worth while. It is the railway
time-table without a train. On the other hand, the extensive hori-
zontal excavations which were in effect the normal practice before
stratification was adequately understood generally produced an
abstraction — often a very confused and misleading abstraction — un-
related with any sort of precision to the sequence of human develop-
ment. They were trains without a time-table. The trains sometimes
ran vigorously enough, but we knew not when they were running
or where they started, or their intermediate stopping-places, or their
destination.
                                   149
              ARCHABOLOGY           FROM     THE   EARTH

   At certain stages of research both these incomplete methods may
have a substantive value; indeed, they are themselves stages in the
progress of research. I am not, for example, of those who scorn the
horizontal excavation (in the nineties) of the Roman town of Sil-
chester. True it was dug like potatoes, without a shadow of the
scientific nicety of the contemporary excavations in Cranborne
Chase; and the resultant plan is the uncritical synthesis of a varying
urban development through more than three centuries. But it gave
at once, and with a rough accuracy, the general impression of a
Romano-British town such as fifty years of subsequent and often
more careful work have failed to equal. More exact vertical and
horizontal digging on both this and other similar sites has indeed
begun to reveal the sociological evolution essential to our historical
perspective; but who amongst these later and wiser excavators has
not constantly referred back with profit to the crude, primitive
assemblage of Silchester?
   So also elsewhere. The Glastonbury lake-village, excavated un-
critically with results that are often infuriatingly baffling, has never-
theless given us the complete layout of a small Early Iron Age settle-
ment and so enabled us to assess in broad terms the social and econ-
omic significance of such a settlement as no exacting and partial
probing could have rendered possible. For that, even in moments
when the evidence in detail completely fails us, we may be properly
thankful. And let us for a moment look further afield. One of the
most dramatic and revealing of all excavated cities is prehistoric
Mohenjo-daro, beside the Indus in Pakistan. Technically the methods
adopted by a succession of excavators there became almost an inter-
national scandal, and neither Professor Piggott nor I have been at pains
to spare the lash. But the primary marvel of the great Indus city is not
that it did (or did not) develop in such-and-such a fashion between,
let us say, 2500 and 1500 B.c., but that it existed at all in the remarkable
form that extensive, if disproportionately summary, excavation has
revealed to us. Its house-walls, towering accumulatively above our
heads, its long straight streets, its lanes, its elaborate drainage system,
its citadel — these and other things in bulk re-create a whole phase of
human society even though in detail they fail to analyse it for us.
Analysis — by careful vertical digging - should, of course, have accom-
panied all this summary horizontal clearance; but there can be no
                                    150
                    TACTICS      AND      STRATEGY

question that Mohenjo-daro takes its place as the representative of
one of the great civilizations of the ancient world in some measure
by virtue of the crimes of its explorers.
   And since we have arrived in Pakistan, let us take again one more
familiar example from that land. For a thousand years the city of
Taxila stood upon successive sites in the northern Punjab, and one of
these sites, of the first centuries B.c.—A.D., was extensively cleared by
Sir John Marshall so that a considerable portion of a remarkable rect-
angular town-plan was ultimately revealed (Pl. 12). The clearance did
not conform with modern technical standards, and in fact more than
one phase is represented without discrimination in the published plan.
Nevertheless, the outstanding interest of Parthian Taxila is the general
character of its buildings and their relation to a street-grid without
known analogy in this part of Asia. Had the excavator concentrated
on vertical digging on this deep site he would have given us valuable
information for which we are still waiting; but he could scarcely have
given us also the picture which we owe to him of a teeming city with
its streets and temples, its palaces and its shops. He would have given
us a useful catalogue but not, as in fact he has, a vivid chapter of social
history.
   The four examples of horizontal digging which I have given -
Silchester, Glastonbury, Mohenjo-daro, and Taxila (Sirkap) - are
not very happy in that none of them was excavated with adequate
skill. Technically, they all belong to the pre-Pitt-Rivers era, though
Pitt Rivers had in fact established his methods before any of them
began. Needless to say, it must not be inferred that horizontal excava-
tion is necessarily summary and unscientific! Ideally, the excavation
of a town-site would begin with vertical digging, sufficient to estab-
lish the time- or culture-sequence, and would proceed to the careful
horizontal digging of successive phases, one at a time. Obviously
the process cannot be reversed, and at the three sites mentioned, only
the careful vertical excavation of areas not yet touched can partially
replace the squandered evidence. A better example of horizontal
excavation on a small scale is provided by Little Woodbury near
Salisbury, where Dr Gerhard Bersu cleared the greater part of an Iron
Age farmstead and was able to reconstruct both its architecture and
its economy. The site was a shallow one, and the technical problem
was incomparably simpler than on a deeply accumulative town-site;
                                    151
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

nevertheless, it is chastening to reflect how little of the real meaning
of Little Woodbury could have been recovered merely by vertical
samples of it.
    With the proviso, then, that all horizontal digging must proceed
from clear and comprehensive vertical sections, the question of prior-
ity is fundamentally not in doubt. Careful horizontal digging can
alone, in the long run, give us the full information that we ideally
want. Vertical digging will, by itself, serve a valuable purpose in
establishing the geographical distribution of a culture and its time-
relationship with other cultures from place to place; but this evidence
still derives its ultimate significance from a knowledge of the social
environment of the cultures concerned. Wise words are said by the
authors of the Council for British Archaeology’s Survey and Policy of
Field Research in the Archaeology of Great Britain (1948) in their state-
ment with reference to the Early Iron Age, that to have at least one
site in each main region of the country excavated totally ‘will now
be of more value than merely to sample a number of sites in the same
time instead’. But they are equally wise when, on the following page,
they also advise that hill-forts be submitted to ‘selective excavations
to ascertain the date, character, and sequence (if any) of the defences,
and whether or no the fort was permanently inhabited. This method
      . should be continued regionally.’ It is all a matter of bias, and
bias depends upon our knowledge at the moment of the problem of
 the moment. There is no essential conflict, but the question of priority
 is worth careful thought in archaeological planning.
   Once more, the moral is that the exercise of tactical skill without a
controlling strategy is opportunism run riot. Or, to change the meta-
phor, the excavator without an intelligent policy may be described
as an archaeological food-gatherer, master of a skill, perhaps, but not
creative in the wider terms of constructive science.




                                   152
                            CHAPTER       II


                                 Staff
Tue time has come to consider the staff and machinery with which
all the various operations described in the preceding chapters are
carried out. First, the personnel.
   The staff of an archaeological excavation on any considerable scale
includes a director, a deputy director, a supervisor for each area under
excavation, a trained foreman, a small-find recorder, a pottery-
assistant, a photographer, a surveyor, a chemist, a draftsman, and,
according to need, an epigraphist or numismatist. In rare cases, certain
of these posts may be combined, but it is preferable, and often neces-
sary, to subdivide them. Where distances are short, asin Great Britain,
it may be possible to dispense with the chemist and the draftsman
in the field, but it is inadvisable to do so. Only an ignorant critic
could protest that the list is excessive. Nevertheless, large and
relatively costly expeditions in the past have failed of their duty
through false economy or lack of prevision in this all-important
matter of staff.
  To the official and essential nucleus, a valuable addition is student-
labour. I have never undertaken an excavation, whether in Britain or
overseas, without the assistance of university students, and I suppose
that in England, Wales, France, and India soo students or more have
at one time or another worked with me in this fashion. My debt to
them has been immense. They impose a constant need for clear exposi-
tion and therefore for clear thinking. They ask simple, awkward
questions, which have to be answered convincingly or with a frank
                                                               They
and wholesome admission of ignorance. You can’t fool them.
                                                               best of them
are the friendliest and most stimulating of critics, and the
                                                             is to
rapidly become the most co-operative of colleagues. My habit
                                                      give the senior con-
work them in pairs, a senior with a junior, and to
                                                                      visors
siderable, if controlled, responsibility - indeed my site-super
            always  senior students.  A note  on  their   training  will be
are nearly
                                                                   that of a
given below (p. 162). The whole problem is almost exactly
commanding officer with a bevy of     young  subalterns .
                                    153
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

  I append a few observations on each of the posts which I have
named.

                           THE   DIRECTOR

It would be easy to be trite in describing the qualities of the director.
It goes without saying that he must have the combined virtues of the
scholar and the man of action. ‘Scholarship is by no means all that is
wanted,’ affirms Petrie; ‘the engineering training of mind and sense
- . . will really fit an archaeologist better for excavating than book-
work can alone.’ I shall say more about this matter of scholarship in
a moment or two. Meanwhile, it is scarcely necessary to observe that
the director cannot be an expert in every branch of his work, any
more than a general is an expert in every tank or gun under his com-
mand. But, just as a general must be exactly familiar with the per-
formance — the range, fire-power, mobility, and so forth — of every
arm available to him or his enemy, so must the director of an archae-
ological excavation be acquainted with the exact potentiality of the
various techniques appropriate to his craft and the nature of the prob-
lems which are likely to oppose him. He may himself, for example,
be an indifferent photographer, but he must know accurately the
capacity of his cameras, lenses, and filters, and must thoroughly
understand the preparation of a photographic subject; at all points
he must be able to direct or check his expert. I have been blessed with
a series of exceptionally competent photographers, but scarcely ever
have I had an archaeological photograph taken without carefully
checking the subject through the lens before exposure, for lighting,
position of scale, angle, and background. Experience of this proce-
dure (and of the converse) has convinced me of its necessity. The
director, and he alone, is responsible for the record of his work; he
knows, or should know, better than anyone else exactly what his
record should express; and he can achieve the best possible record
only through a full knowledge of the capacity of the mechanism
which he is using.
   So throughout the complex operation of modern field-work. The
director sets the standard of achievement and must know enough to
impose his standards without question on his experts.
  But he is, of course, more than a gauge of technical values. He is a

                                  154
                                STAFF

leader, and it is a truism that leadership is based not merely upon
knowledge but also upon imagination. It is not enough to confront
the situation when it is presented; the leader may be expected in some
considerable measure to create and define the situation, to be some-
thing of a strategist as well as a tactician. The present book deals
mainly with the tactics of archaeology, with technical devices and
local problems, but the ultimate quality of the field-archaeologist
is the wide comprehension of the inter-relationship of major prob-
lems; in other words, a disciplined imagination. An outstanding
example of this quality is easy to recognize in the work of Sir Arthur
Evans, the discoverer of Belgic Britain and Minoan Crete. It is a
quality which exalts field-archaeology from a technical science into
an art.
   Above all, the director must cultivate a scrupulous accuracy and
completeness in the observation and record of his factual evidence.
Accuracy is a fundamental quality of scholarship, and there is a
scholarship of field-archaeology as there is of other scientific discip-
lines. Let us pause for a moment and consider this matter of scholar-
ship a little further. Excavation has been described by a superior
person as ‘dirt archaeology’, with the implication that it bears some-
thing of the same relation to ‘scholarship’ as landscape-gardening
does to botany. But what is ‘scholarship’? It might perhaps be de-
fined in the broadest terms as ‘accurate and comprehensive knowledge
adequately expressed’. Admittedly, other and narrower definitions
have found favour. The Oxford English Dictionary declares that it is
‘learning, erudition; esp. proficiency in the Greek and Latin languages
and their literature’; blandly adding that formerly the scholar was
 often ‘one who had studied at the university, and who, not having
obtained any fixed employment, sought to gain a living by literary
work’. Even that nice definition fails to reach the precision of J. M.
Barrie’s Fleet Street professor who, in his examination of budding
journalists, included the question: ‘Pabulum, Cela va sans dire, Par
                                                                       of
excellence, Ne plus ultra. What are these? Are there any more
them?’ — the correct-answer being,    ‘They  are scholarship,  and  there
                                                                      the
 are two more, namely Tour de force and Terra firma’ Presumably
          of the  phrase  ‘dirt archaeology’   would   equally   describe
 author
                                                                     need
 Darwin’s study of earthworms as “dirt biology’. Anyway, we
                   1. When a Man’s Single, chap. ix.

                                   1$5
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

not bother our heads any more either about the superior person or
about the Oxford English Dictionary. ‘Scholarship’ as a monopoly of
classical erudition has in fact been dead since the 1850s when Nean-
derthal Man, the Boucher-Prestwich hand-axes, and the Origin of
Species almost simultaneously smote it hip and thigh.
  In the liberal and only valid interpretation of ‘scholarship’, field-
archaeology and excavation, no less than textual criticism, may be a
proper qualification of the scholar. Pitt Rivers was a scholar. But
excavation is by itself, of course, no more scholarship than is the
ability to construe the Aeneid. Pitt Rivers was a scholar not merely
because he dug well, but above all because his powerful imagination
enabled him to visualize and create new standards of scientific
accuracy. His super-accuracy was the cardinal quality of his scholar-
ship. It was not simply that he was methodically and pedantically
accurate; added to method was a comprehension of the causative
relations of things which gave structure and corporeality to his
observations and records - ‘comprehensive knowledge adequately
expressed’, as I have understated it. And that comprehension of
causative relations is a vital quality in scholarly field-work. It is a
quality which cannot be initiated but can be immensely developed
by training. It is in fact a necessary part of a modern archaeological
education. The evolutionary development of flint implements, of
pottery-types, of script, of pictorial or sculptural renderings, is taught
to-day to the young archaeologist as a matter of course. But let the
budding director himself take up such a study in detail on an objec-
tive basis, let him explore for himself the possibilities and pitfalls in
the varying categories of evidence bearing upon some selected group
of material — let him discipline his mind for some months in an exact
appreciation of evidential values and inter-relationships, and he will .
acquire a part of the grammar of his subject, without which he can
never achieve full literacy. It matters not at all that his subsequent
studies may take him to Asia or Africa. A detailed study of Bronze
Age wares in Wiltshire will prepare him for a detailed study of the
chalcolithic wares of Persia. After all, Pitt Rivers chose fire-arms.
The procedure is in all essentials identical, and the switch from the
one to the other is merely the redirection of trained eyes.
  And while we are discussing some of the component elements of
the director, let us not omit an understanding of structural relationship,
                                   156
                                   STAFF

  which is another aspect of the causative relationship of which I have
  been speaking. The properly equipped director is one who has had,
  amongst much else, some specific architectural training. His under-
  standing of the Palace of Minos or the Ziggurat of Ur will be none
  the worse if he has learned the sort of things that C. F. Mitchell has
  long taught in his Building Construction (12th edition, 1945). Sooner or
  later, the excavator of neolithic and later cultures will be confronted
_ by structural evidence in stone, brick, or timber, and this evidence
  may mean little or nothing unless viewed with an understanding of
  the significance of structural factors. But, in a wider context, the
  structural sense is one which is invaluable also in the understanding ~
  of the inter-relationship of soil-strata. It is a source of constant aston-
  ishment to me to find how lacking is the average mind in the under-
  standing of what is and what is not structurally possible in the analysis
  of a section. On all grounds I have no hesitation in urging a system-
  atic course of architectural training (lasting, say, six months) upon
  anyone who proposes to devote himself to field-archaeology.
     There is indeed no limit to the desiderata with which one might
saddle the embarrassed director. But before attempting to impose an
  impossible burden upon him, we may distinguish fairly clearly be-
  tween two kinds of qualifications; those which can be delegated and
  those which cannot. Amongst the former are, as I have already sug-
  gested, photography and draftsmanship. One of the best archaeologi-
  cal excavators known to me — unsurpassed as a painstaking and
  accurate analyst of stratigraphy — is devoid of any sort of skill as a
  draftsman. The chemical, physical, or botanical analysis of soils is
  manifestly the task of a separate specialist with laboratory equipment.
  The extent to which the director should be a linguist is more debat-
  able. Technically, the methods of excavation are identical whether a
  literate or an illiterate culture be in question. Petrie’s view was that
  ‘the ancient language of a country, all important as it is in the study
  of remains, is yet in its critical aspects not so essential during field-
  work. But the excavator should at least be able to take the sense of
  ali written material which he finds.’ That is a fair enough statement.
  Nevertheless, every expedition concerned with a literate antiquity
  should have on its staff or within a few hours’ reach a fully qualified
  epigraphist who can gauge instantly and in some detail the potential
                                                                          and
  value of a tablet or a seal or a coin. The necessary linguistic
                                     157
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

epigraphical studies are generally such as monopolize the time and
capacity of the specialist, and they can rarely be combined with the
wider functions and qualifications of the director. With Petrie’s reser-
vation, therefore, linguistic proficiency may be regarded as suscep-
tible to delegation.
   But the qualities which cannot be delegated are the instant under-
standing of structural and stratigraphical problems, the quick and
accurate correlation of the various groups of evidence as they appear,
the reasoned appreciation (sometimes miscalled ‘intuition’) of the
immediate needs of the work as it proceeds from day to day, the
capacity for undelayed but well-founded decision, and the ability to
ensure even progress in all the various departments and sub-depart-
ments of the enterprise. To these qualities must be added a clear antici-
pation of the needs of the ultimate report, and the capacity to present
that report in a clear, concise, and intelligible form. In other words,
and in brief, a precise and trained mind and an informed and inform-
ing imagination are the qualities of the director of an archaeological
expedition. And having said that, I am aware that I have carried the
reader scarcely at all along the upward path. There are, however, a few
practices which I have found of use in an attempted approximation to
those qualities in the field, and I note them for what they may be worth.
  First and foremost, the director must be a free agent, free from
administrative detail. His primary and constant duty is to circulate
from site to site and from workshop to workshop. Every section, in
its latest manifestation, must be clearly in his mind’s eye, and he must
be familiar with every development in the hour-to-hour work of his
team. If plans or sections are being made, he must himself ensure
their adequacy; if his draftsman is drawing pottery, samples must be
tested. His surveyor must be overlooked critically, his photographer
utilized and supervised. Above all, he must familiarize himself with
the groups of pottery as they lie on the tray beside the work or as they
come from the wash, and he must occasionally check the marking
of them. The indexes of small finds must be inspected daily. At some
moment or moments during the day, he must examine the field
notebooks of his supervisors. And he must keep his colleagues and
employees constantly, in varying degrees, ‘in the picture’, and ensure
that they are, each of them, aware of the importance of their indi-
vidual contributions to the progress of the work.
                                   158
                                  STAFF

    This last point is essential to the maintenance of morale and effi-
 ciency. It ensures the fullest and most intelligent co-operation of every
 member of the team. Once more I turn to soldiering for an analogy.
 One of the great qualities of a certain celebrated commander was his
 habit of taking almost every one of his soldiers, from general to
 private, into his confidence before a battle. Almost every British
 fighting-man at E] Alamein was a partner to his general’s plan and
 could collaborate intelligently therefore in victory. As often, military
 and archaeological field-work march alike in this. Tell your unit,
 before you start digging, exactly what problem you are out to solve,
 how you intend to tackle it, and, when possible, the sort of time-table
 which will probably be required. This last is particularly desirable
 with a relatively inexperienced staff. I recall, for instance, how at
 Arikamedu, in south India, where we sought and found for the first
 time extensive evidence of a Roman culture in significant contact
 with a hitherto unknown Indian culture, I explained beforehand in
 detail the nature of our problem and our methods, and ended with the
 warning that significant results need not be expected for a fortnight.
 In fact, the excavation opened badly; the site had been much dis-
 turbed, and for nine days nothing of importance was found. Then,
 on the tenth day, one of my Indian students emerged excitedly from
 the muddy depths of a cutting at sea-level with the stamped base of
 an Arretine dish in his hand. Thereafter the results were overwhelm-
 ingly satisfactory, but in those first days with an untrained staff and
 students and the mercurial south Indian temperament to contend
 with, we had been saved from something approaching disaster by
 the timely warning.
    This is not to say that all can be foreseen and that there is no place
 for opportunism in digging. But the whole framework of the prob-
 lem must be very carefully constructed before the work begins, and
 the use of opportunity is limited by that framework, which must
 itself be comprehensive enough to admit it. Here, however, I am
 again encroaching upon the general problem of archaeological
 strategy (Chapter 10).
    And all the time that the director is attending unrestingly to those
various and vital details, the growing accumulation of evidences and
 inferences is working upon his mind, creating new ideas, suggesting
 working theories or probabilities for trial, confirming or bending his
                                   159
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE     EARTH

plan. He alone can (and must) know all the latest evidences as they
emerge and can fit them into a logical pattern. Nor should he defer
this operation until he reaches the remote sanctuary of his study.
Inferences of a general or far-reaching kind will constantly refer back
anew to detailed observation in the field, requiring fresh trial and
appreciation of the material evidence. The more thinking that the
director can do in the actual presence of that evidence, the better,
and it goes without saying that the factual interpretation must be
absolute and final in that presence. Says Petrie:
   At the moment that a fact is before the eye — a fact which may
never be seen again, and perhaps never paralleled      —it is needful for
the observer to make certain of all the details, to verify every point
which is of fresh value, and to record all that is new with certainty and
exactitude. ... Everything seen should be mentally grasped, and its
meaning and bearings comprehended at the moment of discovery, se
clearly that a definitive statement can be made, which shall be as
certain and as absolute as anything can be which depends on human
sense.         2
There is but little place here for the esprit d’escalier, and the director
must be sufficiently liberated by his staff from routine cares to keep
his wits actively and unceasingly about him. A director who knew
this and always carefully chose his staff was more than once accused
of taking credit for the work of others. The accusation was, of course,
correct; he knew his job and chose a staff capable of doing much of
his work for him. Perhaps, after all, the greatest qualification in a
director is the capacity to select and train a competent staff. Let us
turn now to that staff and consider some of its requisites.

                       THE   DEPUTY      DIRECTOR

Whilst the director is the operational leader of the expedition, the
deputy director is primarily in charge of the administration. He (or
she) deals with the well-being and pay of the various grades of staff,
and is personally responsible for the smooth working of the machine.
He should also be a trained field-archaeologist, in close touch with
the director and able in emergency to represent him, but is not
officially responsible for the scientific aspects of the work. If he is a
specialist in some relevant branch of archaeology, so much the better.
                                   160
                                    STAFF

   The following are amongst his duties:
   (a) Billeting or housing. This problem, of course, varies widely with
local conditions. It ranges from the strenuous task of securing lodg-
ings in a provincial English town to the relatively easy one of building
a village of grass-huts in Bengal. Whatever its precise nature, it must
be tackled well before the actual work of the expedition is timed to
begin. Special attention must be paid to the administrative office, the
drawing-office, the photographic dark-room, and the pottery-shed.
In certain expeditions to the Near East between the wars, an unneces-
 sary degree of luxury was sometimes sought at disproportionate cost
 in the living-quarters of the party. On the other hand, the notoriously
 Spartan conditions under which the Petries used to run their camps
 reached the opposite extreme. Unnecessary discomfort amongst any
 considerable body of people for any considerable time can only lower
 efficiency and is itselfasufficient symptom of inefficiency.
    (b) Equipment. The director is immediately concerned in the choice
of equipment, but its preparedness and maintenance are largely the
 duty of his deputy. The theodolite or its equivalent must be checked,
the surveying-poles must be kept freshly painted (a shabby surveying-
 pole is sometimes hard to see, and is another emblem of inefficiency),
 there must be an adequate supply of bubble-levels and well-con-
 ditioned measuring tapes, there must be good string, pegs, labels,
  cloth or strong paper bags, notebooks with water-proofed covers,
  drawing-boards and paper, and so forth. All these are the proper
  charge of the deputy director, and are a constant drain on his atten-
 tion.

    (c) Accounts. The ungrateful task of keeping the running accounts of
_ the expedition falls to the deputy. This is no light matter, but a deputy
                                                                               l.
  who cannot carry it is an unjustifiable addition to the personne
Above all, he must deal        accurate ly  and   promptl  y  with   the weekly
                                                                               for
 wages bill, including the tiresome complication of baksheesh
           finds where the  hateful bonus-s   ystem  is in  vogue.  Any   sort  of
  special
                                                      reacts  instantly  and  un-
  error in the payment of wages and baksheesh
  favourably on the relations between master and men.
                                                                               the
     (d) Supplies. The organization of food-supplies is the duty of
  deputy, with or without the assistan     ce  of a ‘housek  eeper’.

         F                              161
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

  (e) Hospital. The first-aid box and, if necessary, a supply of other
simple remedies are maintained by the deputy, and a daily “hospital
hour’ is normally necessary in the more remote parts of the world. A
knowledge of first aid is thus added to the deputy’s qualifications, to-
gether with a sympathetic firmness in its application.

                          SITE-SUPERVISORS

I have generally chosen these from amongst my senior students, that
is, students with one or more seasons’ training behind them. They
are in charge of an area sufficiently compact to enable them to keep
in immediate contact with all work done in that area throughout the
day. Scarcely a shovelful of earth is removed save under their eyes.
They are personally responsible for the small ‘control-pits’, each
normally some 2 or 3 feet square, which are cut ahead of the main
work to provide a preview of the strata (p. 84). They write up the
area notebook, keep sketch-plans and sections, and record special
small-finds. They insure that each stratum has its separate small-find
box or basket, with tie~-on labels and supplementary loose label (p. 188).
Their equipment is contained in a portable ‘desk’ or box, for which
they are individually accountable. So far as possible, they have the
same workmen from day to day, get to know them individually, and
allot them tasks suitable to their various capacities. They are, in fact,
platoon-commanders, and on their efficiency depends ultimately the
technical adequacy of the excavation. Wherever feasible, they are
each assisted by a junior student whom they help to train,

                              FOREMAN

The foreman is the sergeant-major. He has proved himselfasa digger
and should be the best workman on the site. He may assist in the un-
covering of especially fragile or important objects, But he must,
above all things, be by nature capable of controlling his men with
firmness and scrupulous fairness. On arrival in the morning and (in
the East) after the midday break he calls the roll, and he marshals the
men on pay-day. He should know his workmen individually from
a somewhat different angle from that of the site-supervisor, and
should show patience and assiduity in their training. At the end of
                                  162
                                STAFF

each week, he is responsible for providing the deputy director with
all information required for the pay-sheet. The best foremen are also
enthusiasts. In England, William Wedlake my foreman and colleague
at Maiden Castle and in France, Thomas Hepple, who assisted Mr
J. P. Gibson and Mr Gerald Simpson on Hadrian’s Wall, and
 W. E. V. Young, Mr Keiller’s foreman at Avebury, are three out-
standing examples of the foreman-archaeologist and friend. In India,
I had one such, a Punjab peasant, whose mind was constantly on his
work whether he was on duty or off, and who used to come and
discuss the problems of the site with me in the evening. One or more
of Sir Leonard Woolley’s Iraqi foremen, I believe, used to travel
voluntarily some hundreds of miles every year across the desert in
erder to rejoin his old chief’s staff during subsequent work near
Antioch. Such friendships are amongst the highest reward that a
director can desire. They bridge the class-room and help to link
inferred fact with basic earthy knowledge.

                   THE   SMALL-FIND      RECORDER

The recording of a ‘find’ begins at the moment of discovery. Unless
it requires special treatment or attention the object is placed immedi-
ately in an adjacent box or tray or basket to which is tied a label
bearing the code-name of the site, the number of the square or other ~
sub-unit, and the number of the stratum. The last I always place
within a circle, to distinguish it unmistakably from all other numbers.
A duplicate label, loose, is placed in the bottom of the receptacle.
(See Chapter 13, pp. 185 ff.)
   At a suitable moment, at the end of the day’s work or earlier, the
receptacle is transferred te the small-finds shed, where its contents are
cleaned, so far as is suitable at this stage, and marked by the small-
finds recorder, either with Indian ink or white paint on the objects
themselves or on labels tied firmly to them. Sooner or later, it is
useful to cover the mark neatly with shellac as a protection.
   The recorder’s next act is to card-index all individual objects of any
possible significance. I always maintain two card indexes, one by
categories, the other by sites. See p. 190.
   Such objects as require first-aid are then handed over to the field-
laboratory for treatment (p. 195). Most of them, however, can be
                                  163
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

immediately packed for transportation to base, either in boxes or in
bags of paper or cloth (pp. 188-9).
   A high responsibility rests upon the shoulders of the recorder. He
is personally responsible that every object is clearly and correctly
marked on as inconspicuous a surface as possible; no object should be
spoilt for subsequent photography or display by an unsightly code-
symbol. He is also responsible for storing the boxed or bagged finds
in such a fashion that they are quickly accessible if required for refer-
ence in the field - a very important desideratum, sometimes over-
looked. The finds-shed must, in other words, be in impeccable order.
Muddle means inaccuracy, delay, incompetence, and the destruction
of evidence laboriously garnered. At a small excavation the problem
is proportionately simple, but at a large one the recorder will require
a staff, which must be subjected by him to the closest supervision and
discipline. Every addition to the staff multiplies manifold the risks of
inadequate or even incorrect recording, and the recorder must
remember that on his unceasing vigilance depends much of the
scientific value of his expedition’s work. He is a pillar of the
enterprise.


                      THE   POTTERY-ASSISTANT

The duties of the pottery-assistant equate with those of the small-
finds recorder, and on a small excavation the two posts may be com-
bined. But at most excavations, particularly in the East, where pottery
is liable to occur in embarrassing quantities and is usually of the highest
possible evidential value, it is essential to have a trained assistant ex-
clusively in charge of this department. And a very exacting task is his.
His preliminary qualifications must include an extensive knowledge
of previously recorded discovery, so that he can instantly spot
analogies amongst his new material and can bring them at once to
the notice of the director. He must also have a sound general know-
ledge of ceramic techniques, so that, for example, he can protect
from the omnivorous pottery-washers such wares (e.g. wares painted
after baking) as require special treatment. He must be a strict discip-
linarian, and possess a clear and orderly mind. And he must have a
simple, effective routine for the marshalling of the fairly considerable
working staff which, on any large-scale excavation, must be allotted

                                    164
:
                                    STAFF

‘to him. No hampering economy should ever be imposed upon him;
 if the expedition cannot afford an adequate pottery-department, it
should close down at once. The hackneyed assertion is a true one:
pottery is the alphabet of archaeology. Its plasticity lends it a special
facility in the imitation of other fabrics such as metal-work, leather,
basket-work, or other pottery. For example, Roman terra sigillata
imitates metal-work or glass-work, some Bronze Age beakers imi-
tate woven grass, some neolithic pottery in Western Europe imitates
leather-work, some pottery both in Europe and in India imitates
  Roman terra sigillata; and so on. Pottery is thus liable to preserve the
  influences of other wares and materials and to represent cultural or
 industrial interactions of various and often vital kinds which would
otherwise be lost to us. Its fragility limits its normal durability and,
unlike metal-work, which may last for generations or centuries and
    is also more liable to be treasured for intrinsic value, the date of its
    destruction (at any rate in mass) can be approximated to its date of
    manufacture. That same fragility tends to restrict the diffusion at
    least of the commoner wares to a measurable vicinity of their kilns;
although it is salutary to recall that Graeco-Roman amphorae, owing
to the popularity of the wines which they contained, found their way
in numbers to the shores of the Bay of Bengal, thar Roman glass
    reached India and China where local glass was almost unknown, that
    Roman Arretine ware found a sale in south India by reason of its
    superiority over local products, and that Chinese celadom ware pene-
    trated far and wide over Asia and Africa in the ninth and following
    centuries A.D. partly because of its quality and partly because of the
    forceful salesmanship of Chinese merchants. But whether because
    most pottery is fairly local or because some of it is astonishingly and
    significantly exotic, it is of the first importance to the archaeologist,
    and the immediate and faultless record of field-evidence relating to it
    is a primary care of the director and his administration.
       The pottery-assistant is therefore a very important person. His
    methods will vary with his own ideas and circumstances. In Chapter
                                                                          e
    13 are discussed procedures suitable on the one hand to a temperat
    (often intemperate) climate and on the other     hand  to the more pre-
                                                                        can
    dictable tropical or sub-tropical climates where most of his work
    be happily done out of doors.

                                       165
                ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE    EARTH

                          THE   PHOTOGRAPHER

 The essential qualifications of the field-photographer are (a) that he
 shall be technically dependable in all lights and colour-schemes, and
 (6) that he shall be quick and ingenious in the improvisation of scaf-
 folding for his camera and, in particular, of a readily accessible dark-
 room; he must at all times be in a position to produce the developed
 plate or film for inspection by the director within 20 minutes of ex-
 posure. To these qualities he must add a thorough understanding of
 the preparation of a subject, whether in the open air or in the studio,
 although this is ultimately the personal responsibility of the director.
 Further notes on these matters will be found in the chapter on
 photography (p. 200).
    An intelligent and experienced photographer is a sine qua non.
From the beginning of the excavation, it is his spare-time job to make
 a study of the site at different times of the day, and so to be prepared
 to advise in regard to lighting and position. Here again, the director
 is primarily responsible, but a good and observant photographer can
 help him a great deal. Like a doctor, the photographer must be avail-
 able and prepared at a moment’s notice and at all times. On an excava-
 tion ef any magnitude his duties cannot be combined with those of
 any other member of the staff.

                            THE    SURVEYOR

The preparation of a measured drawing of a section is the duty of
the supervisor, under the eye of the director. The supervisor and
the director know more about the stratification and meaning of the
sections than anyone else, and the task cannot be delegated.
   On the other hand, the preparation of a contoured survey or the
plan of a building, though, like everything else, demanding constant
supervision, must on a large excavation be delegated primarily to a
professional surveyor. I do not propose to include here a detailed
excursus on the craft of surveying: many handbooks are available.
But there are one or two observations which may usefully be made
  1. e.g. T. Baker and G. M. Leston, Land and Engineering Surveying (2oth ed.,
London, 1945); R. Parry and W. R. Jenkins, Land Surveying (5th ed., London,
1946); R. J. C. Atkinson, Field Archaeology (London, 1946); A. H. Detweiler,
Manual of Archaeological Surveying (New Haven, 1948).

                                    166
                                  STAFF

 in regard to the application of professional survey-methods to
 archaeology.
    First let us consider the nature of the tasks which are likely to await
 the archaeological surveyor. These are: (a) the preparation of a site-
 plan, generally contoured and often of considerable extent; and (b)
 the planning of a structure or group of structures on a small scale or
 in detail. For (a), either a plane-table or a theodolite may be used; (b)
 is normally carried out by triangulation from a base-line. In both
 categories, it is important to remember the degree of accuracy re-
 quired. Here I tread upon delicate ground. Throughout this book I
 have stressed the vital need for accuracy, and I would countenance no
withdrawal from the position. But there is a kind of accuracy which
 frustrates itself by its disproportion to needs or possibilities, or may
even result, paradoxically, in an essential inaccuracy. In my experi-
 ence, professional surveyors are liable to lose the conformation of the
 wood in the planning of the trees; to lavish so much care upon the
 slight irregularities (many of them often secondary and accidental) of
 an ancient wall as to misrepresent its essential character and original
 intention. I have already remarked upon a similar “over-accuracy’ on
 the part of the inexperienced in the rendering of a section (p. 74). In
 all cases, the degree of ‘accuracy’ must be commensurate with the
 scale to which the plan is to be published. A plan drawn to the scale
 of } inch to 1 foot will commonly be published to the scale of 4% inch
 to 1 foot, and on that scale small excrescences of flint work, or small
 variations due perhaps to subsidence or other deformation, will cease
 to signify. Omit them therefore; but do so only after careful con-
 sideration. In a measured section it would be utterly useless pedantry
 to measure every small pebble in a gravel layer, and the same need for
 proportion and common sense is present in the ground-survey. Do
 not be more ‘accurate’ than your scale permits; do not overload your
 machine. We all know the dangerous pedantry of the ultra-careful
 motorist who, in season and out, laboriously obeys every rule of the
 Highway Code. We have seen how agerieved railwaymen or meat-
                                                                         the
 porters can hold up a community by a deliberate adherence to
 mules of their trade. With less deliberation,   perhaps,  but  with  equal
 pedantry, the professional surveyor can not only hold up an excava-
                                                                        sur-
 tion but can imperil the real accuracy of its records. Watch your
 veyor, and train him in the difficult but necessary art  of distinguishing
                                     167
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

essentials without invalidating the impersonality of his record. It can
be done.
   For archaeological purposes, therefore, I prefer a somewhat simpler
instrument than the regulation theodolite. An artillery ‘director’,
designed for quick but essentially accurate survey, meets much of the
need and is a far handier machine, and many instrument-makers have
equivalent instruments on the market.
  Similarly, the use of innumerable ‘checks’ and diagonals from a
base-line to a wall-system, with an accumulation of small errors, is
often better replaced by the careful survey of two terminal points
on which the plan is swung from a quick series of local measurements.
Thereby, the correct local interrelationship of the walls of a building
- in other words, its essential character — is often more accurately and
speedily recorded than by more elaborate professional methods.
   Having said this, I must end by warning the student against the
opposite extreme. A very eminent archaeologist of my acquaintance
used to set out on a surveying-expedition with two pea-sticks and a
visiting card; the former for ‘line’, the latter (sighted along the edges)
for ‘angle’. I saw some of his results, and marvelled that they were
not more inaccurate than they actually were. But then he was a genius.

                         THE   FIELD-CHEMIST

A small field-laboratory and an experienced and resourceful chemist
are essential save in the rare instances where a static laboratory is with-
in easy reach. The work of conservation in the field is limited as a
rule to first-aid, and it is highly important for subsequent treatment
that the field-chemist shall keep a careful and detailed record of all
action taken by him. This record must accompany each object to the
base-laboratory, since subsequent action may be conditioned by it.
For example, not long ago a work of sculpture arrived in Brussels,
seemingly in perfect condition; but shortly afterwards it burst into
pieces — the excavator had imprisoned salts within it by impregnating
the surface with celluloid and had omitted to inform the recipients.
   It is particularly important that the field-chemist shall be able to
treat coins in any metal with a minimum of delay, since their evidence
will be required at once by the director. For the rest, the chemist’s
main functions are (a) to prevent further decay, and (b) to consolidate

                                    168
                                   STAFF

  friable objects sufficiently for removal and transportation. These
  functions will be amplified in Chapter 14 (p. 195).

                             THE   DRAFTSMAN

 The work of the draftsman is various, involving a range of qualities
 rarely possessed by one and the same individual. In practice I have
 generally found it necessary to employ three draftsmen, although I
 have known one or two exceptional men who have covered the
 whole ground.
    Whether one or three, it is essential that the draftsman shall thor-
  oughly understand the technique of line-block reproduction (p. 226),
  and shall so be able to attune his style to the machine: to employ lines
  of the right thickness and firmness, having regard to the extent of
  reduction required in publication, and to avoid too close a proximity
  of one line to another, such as may lead to a fusion of the thin metal
  strips that will ultimately represent those lines on the blocks. Clean
  lines and clean hatching, without an unnecessary coarseness of detail,
  entail a sureness of hand and eye that, combined with experience, are
  a primary qualification in all types of scientific draftsmanship,
     On that common basis, the work falls roughly into three categories:
  the tracing and lettering of maps and plans, the drawing of objects
  and the semi-schematic drawing of pottery. In all these things, the
  critical eye of the director is a present need. As always, the director
  must be able to impose his judgement with an acceptable authority
  upon his draftsman. At the same time, the draftsman’s initiative must
  be encouraged; his advice, comments, criticism are, or should be,
  always worth listening to, and I have often profited from them. Not
  only in matters of scientific interpretation, but in the attractive
 presentation of his material, the draftsman can help the archaeologist
 to ‘get over’ to his public — his scientific no less than his non-specialist
 public. Few scientists are so devoid of humanity that they will not
 look more eagerly and attentively at an attractive diagram than at
 unrelieved geometry. The placing of a plan upon the page, its rela-
 tionship to its lettering, scale, north-point and key, the character and
 placing of its border, the rendering of a bead or bracelet in clear line
 from anexpressiveangle, are all factors worthy of consideration. These
aesthetic attributes do not imply any special measure of elaboration;
                                     169
                 ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM     THE    EARTH

 indeed simplicity of expression is as important in illustration as
in text. Occasionally, scientific illustration has been excessively
elaborate. Good taste is the yardstick, but good taste is a very positive
quality, partly a matter of instinct and partly of deliberation. Let the
director and his draftsman deliberate frequently together, profiting
from their combined good sense and such instinct as may have been
vouchsafed them.
   The difference between a well-presented and an ill-considered plan
is indeed immense. I have referred to the placing of the border: let it
be so placed that no space is unnécessarily wasted, but in such a fashion
as to enable the actual plan to be balanced with the lettering and pleas-
ing to the eye. Whether the observer fully realize it or not, waste
space is distracting and disturbing. Equally, of course, overcrowding
must be avoided, but this is a less frequent crime. Above all, let every
word and figure in the plan be easily legible after reduction by the
block-maker. Far better let them be too large than too small; nothin
can be more frustrating and infuriating than an indifferently legible
scale - a comnion failing. And let the draftsman avoid all unnecessary
underlines and frills ~ a vice to which engineering draftsmen have
been particularly prone. How far he should let himself go in the
matter of additional and scientifically unnecessary decoration is, be it
repeated, a matter of taste. The old map-makers who adored the
seven seas with whales and ships and wrote their titles upon scrolls
sustained by cherubs, or Stukeley who added appropriately romantic
ruins, produced works of art which often disguised a deficiency of
scientific information.      In recent times, Mr Heywood Sumner has
enriched his plans and maps with a décor that is often a pleasure to the
eye but is sometimes overdone.’ Again, the Royal Commission on
Historical Monuments (England), in its Westmorland and other recent
volumes, has made a brave attempt to relieve the monotony of small
plans of hut-circles and the like by the addition of large and highly
ornate titles, which are well meant but not always relevant. On the
other hand, a north-point is fair game for the decorator within
moderation, and has a well-established tradition of ornament behind
it. Generally, when in doubt simplicity is best.
   1 For example, in his Descriptive Account of Roman Pottery Sites at Sloden, etc.
(London, 1921), his general map hasa heavily over-weighted and unnecessary
border, but his other plans and diagrams are, in my judgement, perfect.

                                       170
                                STAFF

   The expression of an object such as a brooch by the draftsman in-
volves a somewhat more developed artistry. Per contra, I have known
draftsmen who could achieve this but who were quite unable to rule
the clean lines of a plan or to produce clear and attractive lettering.
Here we need an artist in the more orthodox and creative sense of the
term, and he is often one who scorns the more mechanical technique
of the architect’s draftsman. The artist, however, is inclined to impose
his own personality upon the motifs of another age, and the objective
accuracy of his rendering is sometimes questionable. He needs watch-
ing. The choice of the expressive angle, the extent to which his picture
calls for a diagrammatic element or supplement, are matters for the
director’s consideration, and the director must, by training and
experience, know his part.
   Mention may be added of a draftsman’s trick which I have on occa-
sion found extremely useful — the tracing of fragile objects on to glass
before their removal from the soil. Iron objects in particular are some-
times found in so friable a condition that they have to be waxed or
plastered (p. 197) before they can be lifted. When that need arises, an
immediate record is essential, and the simplest method is to place a
sheet of glass (e.g. an old photographic plate which has been cleaned
and sponged with a lump of cotton-wool dipped in alcohol) over the
object and to trace the latter in Indian ink on to the glass. Negative
contact prints can then be made from the inked glass, and in due
course further positive tracings made from them, whilst the glass can
be again cleaned and re-used. The method is both speedy and accurate.
   Lastly, there is the very important question of pottery-drawing.
This is in some aspects the easiest task of the three, but likewise
involves careful training, Accuracy is allimportant, and can be aided
by a variety of devices — notably, graduated horizontal and vertical
rules with a graduated arm that can be slid up and down the vertical
tule. The pot is placed upon the fixed horizontal rule against the
fixed vertical rule; the adjustable vertical rule is moved up to it, and
the adjustable horizontal rule is moved down to the top of it. The pot
is thus framed in a rectangle graduated on all sides in inches or centi-
metres, and offsets can be taken from them to the pot at appropriate
intervals.
  A sherd cannot, of course, be so treated. It must be wedged with
plasticine at the correct angle and measured from a vertical scale.
                                  171
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM    THE    EARTH

Great care is necessary to ensure the correctness of the angle, by
planting the rim (if such it be) firmly upside-down upon the board,
or by testing the horizontality of the wheel-marks on a wheel-turned
sherd. The diameter of a fragmentary rim is ascertained by matching
the rim against a chart of concentric circles prepared for the purpose.
   The standard practice now is to render half the pot in section and
half in elevation. All pots should be drawn life-size unless excessively
large; the usage sometimes adopted of drawing them half-size saves
paper but increases inaccuracy. Normally, no pot should be illus-
trated in a published report at less than one-quarter actual size (linear),
and a decorated pot (e.g. ornamented terra sigillata) should be repro-
duced half-size. Very large pots, and these only, should be reduced
to less than one-quarter by the block-maker.
   It is sometimes desirable, especially in hand-made pottery, to indi-
cate the texture of the ware by hatching the ‘elevation’ side of the
drawing. This involves artistry of the kind indicated in our second
category of draftsmanship, and must be well done. Above all, both
in the outline and in the hatching of the drawing, care must be taken
to avoid giving an excessively mechanical aspect to a hand-made pot.
Lines such as those of base and rim should generally, in such pottery,
be drawn freehand, not ruled.
   One more point: make sure that the draftsman appends to each of
his drawings of pottery and other ‘finds’ a transcription of the
appropriate label.

                              LABOURERS

Digging is a skilled craft, and many years ago I began a note on this
subject with the words ‘Abjure voluntary labour’. To-day, in 1955,
voluntary labour is Hobson’s choice. The old-fashioned British
labourer survives only in a few odd corners of the land; indeed, so
rare is he that one is sometimes inclined to class him with the mythical
Mrs Harris. A note, therefore, which before the war might have run
to some length may now be compressed into a few paragraphs, most
of which are applicable to labour in general and are not confined
merely to the (former) home-product.
  Let me say at once that my experience as an employer in Great
Britain is based on England and Wales; as an archaeologist, to my

                                   172
                                  STAFF

great loss, I have never attempted, like the Roman legion, to ‘curb the
fierce Scot’. On the Continent, I have employed Bretons and Nor-
mans, and in India a great variety of races, ranging from the tall, regal
Punjabi Musulman to the tiny, volatile Madrasi. With Arabs I have
never worked, although I have often enough watched them with a
critical eye upon archaeological excavations. They do not appear to
be a very different problem from the north Indian Muslims. In fact,
I would hazard a guess that, from Carnarvon to Calcutta, the basic
factors of labour-control or, in the quaint terminology of the army,
“Man-management’ are very much the same. Impartial dealing, a
readiness to share discomfort, provision of such comfort as may be
feasible without ostentation, and above all an occasional gleam of
elementary humour (never sarcasm), summarize the qualities required
everywhere of the director by his workmen. Something more will be
said about these qualities, but first let us consider the technical accom-
plishments required of the workmen themselves.
   The local tools used by the labourer will differ considerably from
place to place, and a separate section will be devoted to them (p. 178).
But it stands to reason that the workman shall thoroughly under-
stand their usage, and that his mind and muscle shall be accustomed
to them. A drawback to the kind of labour that usually comes to the
field-archaeologist to-day in Great Britain is that it is often unac-
quainted with pick and shovel and has to be taught ab initio; it con-
sists of unemployed or unemployable invalids, garage-hands, drapers’
assistants, university students and the like, to whom picks and shovels
are encumbrances rather than instruments. On the other hand in
certain parts of Asia — Palestine, Syria, Iraq, some districts of India —
are men whose fathers and grandfathers have worked for British,
German, or other archaeological expeditions, and who have inherited
a useful understanding of the matter. And indeed, to be just, the uni-
versity student, if he is of the right sort, can usually be trained without
undue delay to a fair measure of technical competence; only, he could
usually be better employed in more detailed and specialized work and
is largely wasted in the basic task of digging.
   Tidy excavation implies a skilled knowledge of this basic task.
Without tidiness, all is lost. A trench such as that ingenuously illus-
tratedinPI. could not safely be interpreted or recorded even by an ex-
perienced interpreter. The proposed cutting must be laid out carefully
                                    173
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

by pegged strings at the outset, and must be clearly and vertically
cut ~ as vertically as the nature of the material will permit. The gener-
al tendency is to cut a trench with too much outward slope or ‘batter’ -
on the sides, with the double result that the stratification is distorted
and the cutting becomes excessively narrow as the digging proceeds
downwards. This tendency must be watched constantly by the
supervisor and corrected immediately. If the batter be allowed to
accumulate, the subsequent cleaning down to a vertical face will
almost inevitably result in a mixture of material from different levels
and a confusion of evidence. A further tendency is to leave blunt
angles at the ends and base of a cutting, thus again obscuring the
stratification and inducing muddle. Precision must be the order, and
precision and tidiness are synonymous.
   Another common error of the unskilled digger is to cut down too
much material at one time. Picking is generally easier than shovelling,
and the pick-man is liable to show an excessive zeal. The result is that
the floor of the cutting is encumbered with loose material which is
liable to conceal stratification and to get trodden into alien strata.
Usually, the less earth loosened at any one time the better; keep the
cutting clear so far as the controlled progress of the work will permit,
   A corollary of this is: avoid crowding your workmen. A scene
such as that illustrated in Pl. 4a implies every sort of disorder.
 Material is inevitably mixed on the floor of the trench, there is a
‘constant risk of ‘finds’ being placed in the wrong box or basket, the
 supervisor cannot sce what is happening, and chatter amongst the
men swells to an uproar. Noise on an excavation generally implies
inefliciency; always with the proviso that the Oriental is a born
chatterer and is unhappy without a considerable measure of noise
about him. In the East, therefore, noise, as distinct from concentrated
conversation, is merely local colour and may be a symptom of happi-
ness. I have stood upon an Eastern site and marvelled at the miscel-
laneous noise welling up around me from men, women, and children
all busily and effectively engaged upon their tasks. But noise amongst
British workmen is a bad sign. Almost every gang of them contains
at least one addle-pated gossip, who must be isolated and extinguished
at once, or the good men will rapidly deteriorate. On the other hand,
during off-hours, perhaps when sheltering from rain, the English
workman will chatter merrily with the best of them, and a gang of

                                  174
                                STAFF

Welshmen will sing like an angel-choir, in such fashion as to make a
virtue of discomfort.
   The word ‘discomfort’ raises another point. The director who
looks after the reasonable comfort of his men, for example by the
provision of shelter from rain or sun or by ensuring an efficient water-
supply - occasionally by a bucket of hot tea on a wet day ~ is merely
doing his duty. But a word of warning is necessary. An over-solicitous
attention to ‘welfare’ may easily result in dissatisfaction. Such is the
perverseness of human nature that excess often begets an unreasoned
desire for more; in other words, breeds a new kind of discontent. A
horse will always nose as of right a pocket from which it has received
sugar. Translated into human nature, this expectancy becomes a form
of irritation, which is dry fuel to any petty spark of discontent which
may happen to be near. The disconcerting result is that ill will arises
out of charity; and indeed perhaps the word ‘charity’ sums up the
weakness at the base of the trouble. Charity has no inevitable limit
and is therefore susceptible to exploitation. In other words, the
charitably minded director suddenly finds that he is being exploited,
and, if remedy be not immediately and tactfully applied, the path to
hell has been well and truly paved.
   One’s workmen, then, must be carefully teamed, to prevent the
bad from corrupting the good; the fool and the chatterer must be
relegated to jobs where they can meditate in solitude upon their (or
their director’s) folly; the gangs must be spaced to ensure adequate
Lebensraum; and a proper care for their well-being must not degener-
ate into an over-anxious solicitude. To all this must be added an alert
readiness on the part of the director or supervisor to share any special
hardship, such as working in water or mud, or in excessive heat or
cold. Furthermore, if, as on very rare occasions, there is some slight
element of risk, that risk must be shared or even wholly undertaken
by the senior staff. Such active co-operation is essential and is worth
more than an infinitude of charitable petting. And at any moment of
difficulty or fatigue, the casual jest may be the anodyne. I have seen,
towards the end of the day, the lines of young native basket-carriers,
upon whose speed and regularity depends in great measure the general
tempo of an Eastern excavation, falter and chatter and play truant in
spite of the despairing efforts of a strong-minded foreman. Basket-
carriers are never the most responsible members of the party, and
                                  175
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

they are necessarily numerous and elusive. A joke and the organiza-
tion of a basket-carriers’ competition were the immediate solution;
the whole gang leapt into life, and the foreman leaned upon his stick.
Solvitur jocando, and this applies throughout the world.
   Finally, there is another form of stimulus which has become habi-
tual in some countries: the allocation of bonuses or baksheesh (univer-
sal Oriental word!) to workmen distinguished by a special aptitude
or good fortune in the recovery of ‘finds’. This system has in the past
been normal in Great Britain, Egypt, and the Near East, although 1
understand that an attempt is being made to abolish it in Iraq, and
under modern economic conditions it has practically died out in
Britain. So far as I know, it has never been used in India. It is an un-
mitigated curse to the director or, rather, the deputy director; it com-
plicates accounting, it adds materially to cost, and, unless administered
with a rare combination of honesty and cunning, does almost as much
harm as good. It has been found or thought necessary in countries
where dealers and collectors stand menacingly at the workman’s
elbow, ready to tempt with inflated values. Indeed the problem is not
an easy one. There can be no doubt that in the past much has been
salved for science in the East by the baksheesh system. Even in Great
Britain, objects, notably coins, have probably been saved in similar
fashion from disposal at the local public house (though amongst
Britons it is to the ‘national sporting instinct’ that the bonus is
presumed to appeal). But the real answer to all this is not ‘bribed
honesty’, which is what the baksheesh system amounts to, but ade-
quate supervision. After all, the director’s best guarantee of the
honesty of his workmen is, in the words of the French Prehistoric
Society’s Excavation Manual, ‘de ne pas les quitter une minute’. The
 baksheesh system was in fact adopted in the ill-controlled mass-excava-
tions which have long ~ far too long — been characteristic of Eastern
archaeology, as a substitute for adequate supervision. On a properly
supervised excavation, nearly all the diggers are constantly under the
eye of the site-supervisor, and theft would in any event be difficult.
  But there is a little more in the matter than that. Apart altogether
from the question of monetary gain to the workman by the sale of
objects of marketable worth, the archaeologist has to remember that
the requirements of science involve a complete change of values on
the part of the peasant, and the bonus-system, wisely applied, un-
                                  176
                                 STAFF

doubtedly helps to impress the new scale upon his mind. When the
workman begins to realize that what is to him a mere fragile crock
or a fragment of carved bone and nothing more may, to his super-
visor, be an historical ‘document’ of high importance, deserving of
a monetary bonus, he is on the way to a mental readjustment which
may ultimately turn him into something more than a mere dirt-
shifter. Nevertheless, my Indian experience shows me that, by com-
bined example and occasional commentary, the intelligent supervisor
can achieve this end without the embarrassments entailed in baksheesh:
For example, a workman finds an old horse-shoe; he is told that it
was made 2,000 years ago. He in turn remarks upon its general simi-
larity to the horse-shoes which his uncle, the local blacksmith, makes,
but proceeds to observe minor differences. The brief discussion — it
must not be protracted, or all work round about ceases — leads to
other historical or archaeological points, and the man becomes in-
telligently interested in his work. But let this discussion be of a casual
and particular nature. Don’t assume that your workmen are all
breathlessly awaiting general instruction in archaeology. I well re-
member an earnest antiquary inflicting an eloquent address upon the
workmen at an excavation (during the lunch-hour) on ‘prehistoric
man’, and turning at last, well pleased with his effort, to a patient
member of his audience with the question: ‘And now, my man,
what interests you most in your work here?’ - to which the navvy,
slowly removing his pipe and meditatively spitting, replied gruffly:
‘The five-o’clock whustle.’




                                   177
                              CHAPTER    12


                               Tools

INADEQUATE tools are not an excuse for bad work. No responsible
archaeologist will undertake an excavation without adequate staff
and equipment save in a rare emergency. The equipment falls into
two main categories: that of the directing staff, and that of the
labourers.
             (a) EQUIPMENT OF THE DIRECTING STAFF
     . Theodolite or simplified equivalent (see p. 168).
    . Plane-table.
    . Reinforced measuring tapes 100 feet (or metric equivalent) long.
    . 2-foot and 5-foot folding rules, or their metric equivalent.
    . Prismatic’oil-compass.
  ww. Drawing-boards, including several light boards of 3-ply wood
  f&wWDhND
  An

      for work on the site.
    . Plumb-bobs.
   on Bubble-levels.
    .
   9. Drawing paper, some of it squared (e.g. in 1-inch squares with
      eight subdivisions).
  Io. Architectural scales.
  II. Good pencils, and soft erasers.
  12. Broad-bladed knives (blade about 7 inches long) and/or pointed
      masons’ trowels.
  ee Good string.
  T4. Indian ink, pens, and paint-brushes.
  15. Circular celluloid protractors.
  16. Large celluloid set-squares.
  ye T-squares.
  18. Good drawing-pins.
  19. Paper-clips.
  20. Small pay-envelopes (for coins, &c.).
  hie Small tie-on labels.
  22k Notebooks.
  23% 3-inch and 6-inch nails,
  24. Scales of various kinds for photography, &c.

                                  178
                                 TOOLS

  Some of the above, such as the theodolite, the compass, and the
major drawing-instruments, will be stored centrally, But many of
them must be in the possession of every site-supervisor, who should
keep them in a tin box labelled with the code-name of the area for
which he is responsible and preferably also with his own name. This
box will contain a measuring-tape, 2-foot rule (or equivalent),
plumb-bob, bubble-level, pencil, eraser, string, ink, pens, paint-
brushes, paper-clips, envelopes, labels, nails, and, not least, notebook.
 The knife or trowel should accompany the supervisor everywhere, as
 an indispensable and inseparable instrument. Indeed, it is almost a
badge of rank; without it, the supervisor can scarcely begin upon his
task. Its uses in the detailed examination of a section are almost
infmite. It is used, for example, for cleaning and checking difficult
sections, and for testing by pressure, ‘feel’, or sound subtle differences
in the soil. It is essential in the final preparation of almost every sub-
ject for photography. It is a useful marker in survey. It has a hundred
uses and should be a treasured personal possession.

                 (b) THE LABOURERS’ EQUIPMENT
This will vary in detail with the locality, and the following is a
generalized list.
      . Picks.
      . Small picks or trenching-tools.
      . Large shovels.
        Small shovels or scoops.
        Spade.
        Turf-cutter or trimmer or edging-knife.
      . Baskets or pans (in the East, for the removal of soil).
   H.
   WN   Wheel-barrows (in the West).
   SIAWPR

   ve). Knives or trowels.
  10. Planks.
  11, Crow-bar.
  12. Sledge-hammer (particularly for driving in fencing-posts).
   Of these, the pick is the primary instrument in excavation, not
merely for the general loosening of the ground, but also, properly
controlled by a good workman, for comparatively delicate work, for
which its weight gives it a relatively effortless control. The tool is
                                   179
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

easily misused, and the pickman requires special watching and train-
ing. For example, the tendency to use the broad end must often be
checked - the pointed end does less accidental damage. And it is
frequently desirable to avoid hammering every scrap of earth with the
pick, but rather to use the instrument as a wedge with which to lever
off considerable lumps of earth, driving in the point well back from
the cutting-face for this purpose. Above all, except in strata known
to be of considerable depth, prevent the pickman from driving the
pick too deeply into the soil. ‘ Wholesale’ digging obscures the evi-
dence. Lastly, having loosened.a reasonable quantity of earth, the
pickman should stand aside and leave the spot free for clearance,
observation, and detailed work. A good pickman will think with the
end of his pick, observing not merely with his eyes but also by slight
differences in the “feel’ of the earth. The pick should be kept sharp.
   The small pick or trenching-tool is essentially the digging tool of the
foreman or supervisor, or of a specially experienced workman. The
lightness of this instrument makes it particularly sensitive to slight
changes of soil‘or even of sound — for example in working towards a
mud-brick wall (p. 104). With the knife, it is useful for disengaging
objects from the soil. It is the normal instrument for the digging of the
control-pit, (p. 84), where the supervisor is working in unknown
material. A word of warning: a lazy workman (in the East) will
always try to exchange his large pick for one of the small ones, so
that he may squat and peck idly at the surface with a minimum of
effort. The supervisor will soon learn to detect the difference between
the escapist and the honest man who is using the small pick for a good
and intelligent reason.
   The turf-cutter or trimmer or edging-knife is an essential instrument.
Its feature is a sharp crescentic blade in the same plane as the handle.
It is used for the very important task of trimming the sides of cuttings
to a clean, vertical face, without which proper examination and
record are difficult or impossible. It should not, however, be used for
substantive digging, partly because it is not strong enough for the
purpose but partly also because of necessity it cuts clean through any
fragile object that comes its way. Upon its proper use in suitable soils
depends in no small measure the cleanliness and effectiveness of an
excavation in detail.
   The basket or iron pan is used on Eastern sites (a) for the removal of
                                  180
                                 TOOLS

spoil-earth, and (b), when properly labelled with atie-on label indica-
ting site and stratum, for collecting pottery in the field. The life of a
basket can be extended by reinforcing with wire. For the removal of
dusty soil, the inside can be coated with mud or lined with a rag. It
should incidentally be a matter of routine to ensure that no clod of
unbroken (i.e. unexamined) earth is ever included with the dust.
   In PI. 18 is illustrated a fairly complete set of tools from an Indian
excavation. The only notable absentees are a sharp-edged spade and
shears or scissors. The objects shown are:
   1. 2. Large and small picks.
   3. Small pick with shovel-end.
   4. Hand-shovel.
   S . Shovel.
   6 . Turf-cutter or trimmer (a much worn example), very useful for
       trimming down sections.
     . Basket for removing earth, usually carried on the head.
       Superviser’s knife.
     . 2-foot scale.
     . 4-foot pole (6-foot and 8-foot poles should be added).
     . Graduated triangle, with bubble-levels affixed. For use, see p. 89.
     . 2-foot rule.
     . 100-foot reinforced tape.
     . Notebook with alternate pages squared (1-inch squares sub-
       divided into }-inch squares).
     . Bubble-level.
     . Plumb-bob.
     . Brushes of various sizes and shapes. Brooms, hard and soft,
      should be added.




                                   18k
                              CHAPTER      13


                   The Pottery-Shed#

 EXCAVATIONS may be expected to produce material which requires
 to be collected, labelled, stored, and eventually packed and trans-
  ported from the site. However abundant or restricted this material
  may be, commensurate arrangements must be made to ensure that it
_ will reach its destination adequately labelled, and so treated and
  packed that it arrives in at least as good a condition as that in which
  it was found. These notes are designed as an aide-mémoire for pottery-
  or small-finds assistants (see above, pp. 163-4) or for the student-
  excavators who may be expected to assist in the work of handling
  the material. It is assumed throughout this chapter that the pottery-
  assistant is in supreme charge of the staff detailed for the reception,
  preliminary classification, and dispatch of all “finds’.

                               THE ‘FINDS’

 The material found will fall roughly into two large classes:
   (i) Pottery and bones, which usually form the bulk of the material
 and are treated mainly as a series of groups of material rather than on
 an individual basis.
   (ii) Other material, which is treated on an individual basis and may
 be included, whatever its size, under the general term ‘small-finds’.


                          ACCOMMODATION

 It is obvious that the amount of storage-space and working space re-
 quired will be related directly to the type of excavation and its
 location. For the purposes of the present description, it is proposed to
 take a moderate-sized excavation on a site producing a fair amount
 of finds in a country with a rainy climate; but the same basic principles
 apply to all excavations, whatever their location and problem.
   1. I gladly acknowledge the help of Mrs M. Aylwin Cotton, 0.8.8., F.S.A.,
 in the preparation of this chapter.

                                    182
                        THE   POTTERY-SHED

   The director (or deputy director) of the expedition will have made
arrangements for the necessary accommodation for handling and
storage. The pottery-assistant will, however, be expected to utilize
these facilities as advantageously as possible, and there is commonly
much scope for his initiative in this matter. He (or she) should aim at
organizing:
   (a) A pottery-shed in which all the bulky material can be handled
and stored.
   (6) An office in which the ‘small-finds’ can be recorded and stored.
   Ifpottery or objects are to be drawn on the site, a quiet drawing-
office is also desirable, and a small field-laboratory will be necessary
(p. 195). Locks should be fitted to all these rooms or sheds.

                            HOURS    OF   WORK

It is usual for the ‘finds’ to be transferred from the excavations to the
pottery-shed at the end of each working-session. Whatever arrange-
ments are made for working-sessions on the “dig’ itself, the pottery-
shed should be open for a reasonable time after the end of each work
ing session to receive and stack the incoming material. As site-
supervisors may need at any time to examine the stored material or
to obtain supplies or trays, the pottery-shed should also be open as
far as possible throughout the day. As it should not be left unsuper-
vised at any time when it is open, the assistant in charge should
arrange to ‘stagger’ the hours of his workers, or, if single-handed, to
arrange for a volunteer to take charge during absence.

                     SITE   AND     WATER-SUPPLY

The desirable attributes of a pottery-shed are that it shall be spacious
and light and equipped either with running water or within easy
reach of a water-supply. It should be as close as possible to the areas
under excavation, and should have a clear space outside for pottery-
washing and drying in fine weather. In wet weather, if sufficiently
spacious, it can also be used for washing and drying pottery, but, if
space is restricted, the pottery-assistant should try to arrange that
shelter elsewhere can be used where volunteers can work on the
material. A tent ora marquee is an inadequate substitute for a pottery-
shed. A barn, large shed, Nissen hut, empty garage, or bare room
                                    183
              ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM   THE   EARTH

serves well. Ifrunning water is not at hand but exists in the immedi-
ate vicinity, a labour-saving device, well worth consideration, is to
run a long hose from the source of supply to a tank or water-butt
outside the shed or building. Ifwater has to be carried from a dis-
tance, arrangements for local storage are even more necessary.


                             EQUIPMENT

The minimum furniture required for comfortable working in a
pottery-shed is one large trestle-table and a bench or seats. Boxes,
ranging in size from tea-chests to match-boxes, are of the first im-
portance. Large storage-boxes can be used both for storage and for
the packing and the transport of the heavier finds but, as these are not
acquired nowadays easily or cheaply, smaller light wooden crates and
strong cardboard boxes should also be collected. Wooden fruit-boxes
are very useful for storage and for the transport of lighter materials,
and will carry pottery if it is not too heavy. They can often be ob-
tained in the local market from a fruit-merchant or from the head
porter at the goods entrance of a large store. They can be stacked in
the pottery-shed with their open sides outwards to form racks for
the temporary storage of material. Smaller cardboard boxes and tins,
of all shapes or sizes, are useful for packing separate pots, small-finds,
and earth-samples.

  Stationery supplies required are:
    Paper bags of varying sizes.
    Pay-envelopes.
    Tie-on labels and small white tags.
    Paper-clips and balls of string and twine.
    Index-cards and guide-cards.
    Pens, mapping-pens, pencils, chalks, and small paint-brushes.
    Black waterproof Indian, red, and white inks.
    Blotting-paper.

Pottery-washing equipment consists of:
    Trays of various sizes or drying mats.
    Washing-bowls.
    Nail-brushes, soft paint or pottery-brushes, and old tooth-brushes.

                                  184
                         THE    POTTERY-SHED


                           POTTERY     WASHING

 *Finds’ from the excavations are received at the pottery-shed in trays,
 baskets, or bags. Each receptacle will have with it two labels record-
 ing its provenance: one loose and one tied on to the receptacle. From
 the time of its reception until it is dispatched, all or any part of the
 contents of these receptacles must always have an accompanying
 label giving this information. In so far as is practicable, the material
 received at the end of each working-session should be worked over
 during the succeeding session. If this cannot be done, it should be
 bagged temporarily and stacked in order of date received. A wet day,
 with extra assistance, may provide an opportunity for clearing up
 arrears, the material being dealt with so far as possible in the order of
 receipt.
    The pottery assistant will be expected to instruct volunteers in the
 details of the handling of the material and will be responsible for
 seeing that they give it proper treatment and that it is correctly
 labelled and packed. Although the site-supervisors may have handed
 in their more important small-finds separately it will be found that the
 so-called pottery-trays often contain much that is not pottery. On a
 Roman site a tray may well contain a few bones, oyster-shells, iron
 slag, brick or tile, tesserae, and perhaps fragments of painted plaster.
  A preliminary examination should be made, therefore, to see whether
  there is any material that should either not be washed at all or should
  be washed with special care. In both cases it is advisable to isolate this
  material on separate trays, of course with duplicate labels. Soft or
  fragile pottery should be dried out thoroughly under cover before
  being washed. If it is still unsuitable for-washing, it can be brushed
  with a soft brush and then impregnated with bedacryl in toluol to
  consolidate it, or, if bedacryl is unobtainable, a 10 per cent celluloid
  solution can be substituted.
     Each washer, starting with a tray of unwashed pottery and other
  washable material, requires a clean drying tray or mat, a bowl with
- washing water, and suitable brushes. The first step is to place one of
  the two labels in the drying tray. This is essential as it ensures that if
  the washer is called away and a partly finished tray is moved, the
  material still retains its identity. Unmarked material isolated from its
  label cannot be used as dating evidence, and the carelessness of a
                                     185
               ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

washer in this respect can destroy the work of a careful excavator.
The material is then washed piece by piece and placed on the clean
tray to dry. It is not a good thing to empty a number of sherds into
the washing bowl. They may not benefit from soaking in the water,
they may sink into the muddy sediment which soon collects in the
bowl and get thrown away when the water is changed and, in any
case, the washing bowl has no label! Hard wheel-turned and well-
baked coarse pottery can be scrubbed with a nail-brush or tooth-
brush. Hand-made pottery, glazed pottery (e.g. Samian), and badly
baked pottery should be washed with a soft pottery-brush. Painted
pottery, painted plaster, etc., should not be washed until the director
or the site-supervisors have been consulted. The edges of sherds
should be brushed as well as the insides and outsides. It will save time
in marking and sorting trays if the material is placed on the drying
tray in an orderly manner. All rims, bases, and decorated sherds
should be placed in the top half, plain sherds at the bottom and sundry
objects such as shells, nails, tile, etc., piled in separate small heaps.
Finally the washer adds to the finished drying tray the second label
from the now empty ‘unwashed’ tray. Unless the supply of water is
restricted, the water in the bowl should be changed frequently.
(Pottery washed in muddy water retains a thin coating of mud when
dry and may require to be rewashed.) The drying tray is then placed
in the open or under shelter until its contents are dry, care being
taken to anchor its label firmly.
   Washers should be encouraged to take an interest in the material
they handle and in its provenance; their memory of where a particu-
lar pot can be found has often proved valuable when it has been
required quickly for inspection.
   Trays of dried material should be shown to the site-supervisors so
that they may note the contents in their field notebooks and so that
they can reject any material that is not required further. Pottery that
has not reacted adequately to simple washing in water can at this
stage be segregated and re-treated by further washing in teepol (a deter-
gent) and water, or, if coated in lime which it is desired to remove,
treated by soaking in a dilute solution of nitric acid (10 or 20 per cent
solution) followed by several rinsings in clean water. Pottery in acid
must be kept under observation: often 10 minutes’ treatment or
until effervescence stops is all that is required. Painted sherds should
                                  186
                        THE    POTTERY-SHED

only be dipped in the solution, and a corner should always be tested
first to see if the colour is fugitive.

                          POTTERY     MARKING

The trays are now ready for marking. As a general rule all rims, bases,
and decorated sherds are marked. The site-supervisors should be con-
sulted to ascertain whether they require that all sherds of a particular
group should be marked. The aim in marking is to give each marked
piece its provenance in a clearly legible but inconspicuous position so
that it can be handled with safety when removed from its label. Rims
and sherds are marked on the inside, bases on the underside. For all
sherds on which it shows clearly, black waterproof ink is used; black
and dark-grey sherds can be marked with white ink. Mapping-pens
are used, and, if they are kept clean by wiping, washing, or scraping
after use, will write more legibly and will last longer. Markers
should remember that sherds may be required for display and
that it should be possible to lay them out right side up so that the
marking does not show. Some wares, especially Samian, are easily
marked on the line of fracture. The exact lettering to be used will be
indicated on the labels. As a rule, it consists of a letter or abbreviation
to indicate the location of the excavations; a letter or number to
indicate the site; the area, square, or trench involved; and the number
and perhaps the orientation of the actual layer. Conventionally this
last is encircled: e.g. VER/G MII means @#®>) Verulamium, Site
G, Area M Il, Layer 14 North. ‘Group’ material does not need any
closer identification. If, however, material has been pin-pointed
three-dimensionally (p. 87) and given a-serial number in the field
notebook (a number which is conventionally included in a triangle,
e.g. /\) this may be added. Porous pottery does not take ink readily.
The area to be marked should first be varnished and then marked
over the dry varnish.

                        SORTING    AND    BAGGING

 To bundle into a bag the contents of a mixed tray of material is
 deleterious to the material itself and throws extra work on to the
‘experts who handle the material later. Well-washed pottery if mixed
                                    187
                ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM   THE    EARTH

 with oyster shells comes out of the bag with a film of shell fragments;
 large pieces of tile and brick may bruise or break the finer sherds; and
 iron slag and nails when mixed with the pottery are a constant nuis-
 ance. Fresh duplicate labels should be written for each type of material
other than pottery in the tray, and these collections with their labels
should be placed in separate bags and relegated for further treatment.
 When the material is reduced to a group of clean, marked pottery
only, it is ready for bagging. The site-supervisor should be consulted
as to whether special wares or types should be subdivided and bagged
separately. If so, further labels will have to be written. The final
group of pottery is then placed in a strong paper bag, or, if bulky,
in a double bag, together with one of its two labels. The other label
is threaded on a suitable length of string. Pottery bags should
be treated as small parcels and should be tied up firmly both along
their length and their width, the string being tied in a single reef-
knot or bow and not in a multiple knot. Knots are a menace to
anyone who may have to open hundreds of bags. Whole pots, or
a collection of sherds which may join to form part of a pot, can be
bagged or boxed separately. The pottery bags are now ready for
storage.

                     STORAGE    OF   POTTERY,    ETC.

Pottery bags should be sorted into groups from each site, and from
each area or trench in that site. They should be stored so that all the
bags from any particular area or level can be produced quickly for
inspection. Storage-boxes should be labelled clearly with the name
of the excavation, the site number or letter, the trench or area num-
ber or letter, and the type of object stored in them. If more than one
box is required for an area or trench, boxes should be numbered and
kept together. They should be packed firmly, but only filled level
with the top so that they can be either fitted with lids or slats or piled
on top of each other to save space in transport. It is usually convenient
to store all bulky material in the pottery-shed, even though it may
include sherds which have been indexed separately as ‘small-finds’.
The boxes used for non-ceramic material should be clearly labelled
for each site (e.g. ‘bones’, ‘iron slag’, ‘architecture’, “earth-samples’,
‘charcoal’, ‘shells’).
                                     188
                          THE   POTTERY-SHED


                                  PACKING

  At the close of the excavation-season, the material will probably have
  to be packed for removal from the site. Ifit is to be sent by rail or by
  sea, arrangements must be made to pack the boxes securely, to close
~ them with lids or slats and to nail on addressed labels. Whole pots
  should be filled with wood-shavings or other packing-material. The
  wedging material in the packing-cases should be rammed in with a
  wooden rammer to make it so compact that the pots will not work
  loose and break in transit. Sawdust is not satisfactory as a wedging
  material. A list of the contents of each case should be included in it
  and a duplicate list be sent by mail or taken with the excavation-notes.

                            POTTERY     MENDING

  If pottery is to be mended on the site, the pottery-shed should be
  equipped with boxes of sand, plasticine, and jars of cellulose dope,
  amyl-acetate and acetone. Methods are a matter of demonstration
  rather than description.

                        INDEXING      ‘SMALL-FINDS’

   All material treated individually as a ‘small-find’ will be received by
   the small-find recorder (p. 163) either direct from the site-supervisor
   oras bags of material sorted out from the pottery trays and transferred
   from the pottery-shed. Whether or no this material is to be cleaned
   and marked on the site, it should always be indexed. ‘Small-find’
   material usually includes the more closely datable evidence and, in
   addition, tends to be fragile and to require extra care in handling and
   treatment.
                                                                          the
      The record falls into two parts: (a) the accession-registers, (b)
   card-indexes.
                                                                        small
      The most convenient system of registration is to keep a
                                   (i.e. for each  main  subdivi sion  of the
   accession-book for each site
                           are ruled in  column s for enterin g the accessi on
   excavation). Its pages
                                                          and amount of
   number, type of object, provenance, finder, date
                                                   from a  site is received,
   bonus paid (if any, see p. 176). As each ‘find’
                                                         in red ink
   it is given a serial accession-number which is marked
                                       189
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

on its bag and/or labels. The appropriate details are added:
e.g. G. 49. 123, Bronze brooch, M II (8) Dark Earth, John Smith,
1.8.49, 6d.
    The card index is then prepared in duplicate, for arrangement on
 the one hand by categories and on the other hand by sites. On the
 first or ‘object’ card, the type of object is printed at the top; the
 accession number is written in red ink on the top right-hand corner;
 then the provenance and any other useful details follow; and finally
 a sketch or small photograph is added (ifnecessary on the back of the
card) so that the object can be-identified if at any time it should be-
come detached from its label. The second or ‘site’ card is a duplicate
of the first except that the provenance of the object is printed on the -
top of the card and the type of object below. Two boxes are provided
to hold the cards: one for the ‘Object Index’ and one for the ‘Site
Index’. The object cards are filed in the Object Index behind guide
cards for each type of object. Objects made of the same kind of
material should be filed next to each other (e.g. Bronze, Bronze
Bracelets, Bronze Brooches). The guide cards should be arranged in
alphabetical order. In the Site Index, guide cards are made out for
each area or trench (e.g. VER/G M II), and behind these all cards
belonging to that area are filled in order of successive layers. The
groups of cards for each site should be filed separately so that, for
example, all coins from Site A can be looked up easily and are not
intermingled with those from Site B. In excavations in which the
material has to be left behind, or in which a record of the finds has to
be furnished to a local authority, a single card index is inadequate.
Arrangements may have to be made to compile a duplicate catalogue
in addition. If so, when photographic assistance is available on the
site, one drawing of the object may be made, and as many prints of
it made as are required. These can then be pasted on to the index cards
and in the catalogue in the appropriate places. Often, in this system,
type-forms of pottery are drawn and should be treated on a routine
“small-find’ basis,

                        INDEXING        COINS


Coins should be identified and fully indexed in both ‘object’ and
‘site’ indexes, by reason of their importance as date-indicators.
                                  190
                        THE    POTTBRY-SHED

Beside the record of provenance, the cards should contain the follow-
ing information:
  1. The obverse legend and type. Breaks in the legend are indicated
by a /; illegible letters are enclosed in square brackets [].
  2. The reverse legend and type.
  3. The mint-mark, if present.
  4. The condition of the coin, whether it is in mint condition, good
condition, worn, corroded, or illegible.
  s. Ifno reference books are available, the date of the emperor’s reign
should be added. If reference books are available, the coin should be
looked up in these and its denomination (e.g. sestertius, antoninianus,
etc.) and a more precise dating added.
   References for Roman coins down to A.D. 300 can at present be
quoted from Mattingly and Sydenham’s Imperial Roman Coinage:
later coins from Cohen’s Monnaies frappées sous l’empire romain. A
specimen card might read as follows:

     DUPONDIUS           of DOMITIAN                    VER/G 49 123
          M It @® Dark Earth A\ NE S 4’ 1’-2/ 1-6"
     Obv. IMP      CAES       DOMIT       AUG        GERM     COS      XIl
            [CENS      PER    PP] head L.
     Rev. MONETA/AUG [USTI] S C Moneta stg. 1., hold-
           ing scales and cornucopiae.
               Worn
                  383                                               A.D. 86
     M. &S.


                             BONES    AND    SOILS

                                                                            must
Somewhere in this book, and here as well as anywhere, a plea
                               ly   collect ion  of  biologi cal  and  botanic al
be put in for a more scholar
                even  our  better  excavat  ors  have   normal  ly  achieve  d in
material than
                                                                        been the
the past. For example, animal bones have, it is true, long
                                                  reports , but  few,  very  few,
subject of special sections in archaeological
                                  analyti cal  details  which,   in  the  present
of those reports give us the
                                                                      happens is
state of knowledge, are urgently required, What usually
                                                         to some    compla isant
this: a few bundles of selected bones are sent off
                                      191
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE    EARTH

biologist, who subsequently reports the presence of Bos longifrons,
Ovis aries Studeri, Equus agilis, and Canis familiaris lacustris, and receives
a fulsome tribute therefor in the published report. Let it be said at
once that this sort of thing nowadays gets us almost nowhere. Bones
are documents as are potsherds and demand the same scrupulous
attention both on the site, in the small-finds shed, and in the labora-
tory. Consider the information which we may expect from them.
If in sufficient quantity (as they not infrequently are) they can give us
from phase to phase, not merely a list of the fauna category by cate-
gory, but also = what is far more important — a hint as to the economic
function of that fauna. To what extent do the bones represent food?
To what extent do they indicate sheep or cattle killed young, before
the winter? Alternatively, what proportion of the sheep or cattle
represented were sufficiently aged to prove organized winter-feeding?
Were sheep thus maintained more extensively than cattle, implying
a dominant importance of wool: Were horses eaten? ridden? driven?
(Size and age are here amongst the diagnostic factors.) Were pigs
 kept in sufficient numbers to imply appreciable exploitation of mar-
 ginal forest-land: Did the proportion of one category of stock to
 another vary in the course of the occupation of a site? These are some
 of the questions on which excavator and biologist must confer after
 examination of all significant bones from a site in their stratigraphical
 contexts. How often is this done? Of course the quantitative analysis
of animal-bones has in it an element of unreality, since a single
skeleton is frequently multiplied arbitrarily in its fragments. The
same objection applies to the quantitative analysis of potsherds.
Nevertheless, exercised with common sense, the counting of bones,
as of sherds, may, under normally favourable conditions, be expected
to yield usable statistics, and must be attempted.
   Similarly with the collection of soil-samples. The preservative
capacity of damp soils is truly astonishing. Seeds, leaves, plants, wing-
cases of beetles, may be incorporated in a condition that renders
recognition easy. At Stanwick in 1951 we found at the bottom of a
rock-cut ditch of the first century A.D. a layer of wet clay representing
a pool of water which stood there from the earliest days of the cutting.
In it, amongst other organic remains, was a puff-ball which the British
Museum (Natural History) had no difficulty in recognizing and
naming at once after nineteen centuries in the soil. A word of warn-
                                      192
we


                             THE     POTTERY-SHED

ing may be added: some seeds may be less durable than others, and,
whilst positive evidence of an ancient vegetation is satisfactory enough
negative evidence may require further thought and consultation.
   Finally, whilst on the subject of plant-seeds it may be added that an
impressive number of cereal-identifications has been rendered pos-
sible by impressions of grains on hand-made pottery. Sherds of little
intrinsic significance may in this fashion achieve an accidental im-
portance which justifies and indeed necessitates a careful examination
of every scrap, however featureless otherwise, from the moment of
 discovery onwards. .

                   VARIANT       LAYOUT      FOR   DRY    CLIMATES

 Where rain is not a factor and work can be carried out for weeks on
 end in the open, the task of the pottery-assistant can be simplified by
 the use of a grid outside the pottery-shed.
    A reasonable area adjoining the pottery-shed is carefully levelled
 and smoothed, and a rectangular framework x yards (say, 20 yards)
 square is marked out by neat lines of stones. Within the frame, sub-
 sidiary compartments are formed by similar lines of stones laid down
 in both directions at 1-yard intervals. These subsidiary squares are
 then demarcated by flat wooden labels driven in along the margins
 of the framework and bearing in one direction the denominations of
 the various excavated sites (square-number or trench-number) and
 in the other direction the successive numbers of the layers (525.35
 etc.). Thus every subsidiary square is identified with a horizontal and
 a vertical datum on the excavated site. In the illustration (PI. 20),
 taken from the Arikamedu excavations of 1945, the line of labels
 across the foreground represents the site (A1, A2, A3, etc.) and the
 line receding from the camera represents the layer or stratum.
    The operation of the grid is as follows. As the basket-carriers
                                                                         the
 bring in the labelled baskets of pottery at intervals during the day,
 pottery-assistant empties  the contents, with  their two  labels, carefully
 on to the appropriate square. In the illustration, he is actually empty-
                                                                        This
 ing a basket on to the square representing stratum 8 on site Ag.
                                                            this stage the
     task is never delegated; it must be remembered that at
                                                                    nalysis, see J. G. D.
        1. For an excellent account of the applications of pollen-a
                                    nt of Northern Europe (Cambri dge,   1936), pp- 31 ff.
     Clark, The Mesolithic Settleme

        G                                    193
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

individual shetds are riot snatked, and any careless spilling will irre-
parably transfer a sherd to its wrong stratigraphical position. After
being emptied, the basket, no longer labelled, is sent back to the
éxcavation for re-use.
  The next stage is to inspect the sherds thus lumped and to transmit
all that do not require special treatment to the washers, who in the
illustration are seen squatting under the banyan-tree at the back. The
cotitents of one square only ate washed by each washer or group of
washers at any otie time, otherwise admixture is inevitable. When
dry, the washed sherds are transferred group by group to the table,
where they are further examined by the pottery-assistant (and as
often as possible by the director) and are marked carefully, sherd by
sherd, by the marker under the pottery-assistant’s direction, in accord-
ance with the two labels which still, of course, accompany them.
Finally, the marked sherds are bagged, group by group, with one
label in the bag and the other tied on outside, in accordance with the
procedure already described.




                                  194
                               CHAPTER         I4

                  The Field-Laboratory

AN archaeological chemist must be available to any excavation where
friable or perishable materials are likely to be found, and in most parts
of the world this means that a small field-laboratory is an integral
part of the outfit. It has already been affirmed (above, p. 168) that the
primary functions of the field-chemist are to help in the removal of
fragile objects from the soil and in their subsequent transportation;
to arrest the decay or distortion of objects on exposure; and to clean
objects, notably coins, which must be identified as the excavation pro-
ceeds. He must also, as a guide to later treatment, keep a log-book of
all first-aid administered by him, object by object.
   The chemist does not require extravagant accommodation, but he
must have a plentiful supply of salt-free water. In desert or semi-desert
regions, this is not easy. To test for salinity, a silver nitrate solution
is recommended. The solution is prepared by dissolving 5 gm. of
silver nitrate crystals in 500 c.c. of distilled water, followed by 10 c.c.
of strong nitric acid. The test is carried out thus: Two clean test-tubes
of the same size are half-filled, one with pure water from the expedi-
tion’s reserve and the other with the local water. To each of these
tubes are added ten drops of the silver nitrate solution, and the tubes
are shaken. A white precipitate or milkiness is produced which varies
with the amount of the chlorides (which are invariably present with
other salts) in the water. The milkiness produced in the pure water
will be relatively slight.
   The same test can be applied to water in which salt-impregnated
                                                                                 be
objects, such as pottery, have been washed, and the washing should
continued until the wash-water shows no more reaction than the pure
water.
   Distilled water is also essential, together with the following chemi-
cals, etc.:2
                                                                the Archaeological
   1. Miss Ione Gedye, who is in charge of the laboratory of
          of the Universi ty  of London,  has kindly   prepared  the list on p. 196,
Institute
                             has been good  enough   to read the  chapter.
and Dr H. J. Plenderleith
                                        195
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE   EARTH

  Nitric acid (or hydrochloric acid if nitric is unobtainable).
  Acetone.
  Amyl-acetate.
  Silver nitrate,
  Citric acid.
  Sulphuric acid.
  Acetic acid.
  Ammonia.
  Caustic soda.
  Celluloid cuttings.
  Shellac.
  Bedacryl 122 x.
  Toluol.
  Teepol or similar detergent.
_ Sodium sesquicarbonate.
  Polyvinyl acetate.
  Methylated spirit or alcohol.
  Plaster of Paris.
  Granulated zinc.
  Graphite slab.
  Copper wire.
  Copper and brass rods.
  Batteries or transformer.
  Glass or pottery tank.
  Glass or porcelain dishes and beaker.
  Saucepans.
  Measuring glass.
  Test-tubes.
  Glass bottles.
  Spoons.
  Penknives.
  Wire brushes (steel and brass).
  Nail-brushes.
  Tooth-brushes.
  Paint-brushes (1 inch and 2 inch).
  Emery paper.
  Sand-bath.
  Wire wool,
  Soap.
  ‘Wax (to wax labels).
  Small tag labels.

                                    196
                        THE    FIELD-LABORATORY

  Reinforcing material (sacking, iron rods, and wire).
  Paraffin wax.
  Some source of heat.
   Sandpaper.
   I do not propose here to present a manual of first-aid: several books
are available.1 But to indicate something of the required scope of this
little laboratory, I append a few notes on typical operations.
    1. Metal objects, particularly ironwork, must be preserved suffici-
 ently to enable them to travel without further damage. Iron objects
 can often be salved temporarily by covering them with a plaster
 envelope, a process which must sometimes be done before the
 removal of the objects from the position in which they are found.
 After being thus treated, they should be carefully but firmly bound
 to wooden splints by means of a cloth bandage. (Prior to treatment,
‘however, they should be drawn to scale by the expedition’s drafts-
 man, where possible on a glass plate - see p. 171.) Subsequent treat-
 ment depends upon circumstances, but should normally be deferred
 until full laboratory equipment is available. Paraffin wax (with a
‘high melting-point) has frequently been used instead of plaster as a
‘temporary jacket for metal or other fragile objects, but is a last
 resort. Care must be taken to avoid melting the wax into the objects;
the wax is not easy to remove completely for the subsequent treat-
 ment, and, if salts are thus imprisoned, disintegration is hastened
 rather than delayed.
    2. Coins, if still illegible after drying and brushing, must usually be
 treated on the spot. The nature of the treatment will depend upon
 their metal and its condition, and the field-chemist must be fully
 trained and experienced in this work if he is to do more good than
 harm. In particular, it must at the outset be ascertained whether there is a
reasonable core of the original metal - otherwise the washing away of
 impurities will wash away the coin. (The presence of a metal core in
 a corroded iron object can generally be detected by its being strongly
 attracted by a magnet.) In a majority of instances, where there is a
 considerable surviving core, the electrolytic method is the safest for
 metal, but this is not always feasible. It consists of the suspension of
the object (coin, etc.) on a copper wire attached to the negative pole of
                                                                        1934); also
    1. e.g. H.J. Plenderleith, The Preservation of Antiquities (London,
 Ancient India, no. 1 (Delhi, 1946), pp. 77-82.

                                        197
                ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

 a battery, and immersing it in a 23 per cent caustic soda solution con-
 tained ina glass vessel, in which is immersed a piece of graphite wired
 to the positive pole of the battery. The electric current passes through
 the object and the solution and removes impurities from the metal.
 The difficulty is that the battery needs recharging after 24-48 hours’
 work, and it is not always possible to sustain the necessary battery ser=
 vice. After treatment, the objects are thoroughly washed in distilled
 water and are then coated with bedacryl or polyvinyl acetate or some
 equivalent protective covering; bakelite varnish will serve if nothing
 better is available. Gold, of course, needs no chemical treatment, unless
 marred  by obstinate stains orincrustation      s, can be freed byimmer-
                                               which
  sion in a strong hydrochloric acid or by boiling in a detergent solution.
     Ifthe electrolytic method is considered unsafe, copper or its alloys
  may be cleaned in a mixture of 1 part tartaric acid, 1 part of caustic
" soda, and 10 parts of water. The objects should be kept in the mixture
  until all the green incrustations have been dissolved away, leaving the
  liver-red core behind. They are then thoroughly washed in water and
  finally coated with bedacryl or polyvinyl acetate. An alternative
  treatment is: (i) citric acid, and pickling in 50 per cent sulphuric acid
 to remove any red oxide; (ii) neutralize with ammonia or any alkali
 after the acid treatment; (iii) wash in distilled water; (iv) carry out the
 silver nitrate test with the last wash-water (see above); {v) dry in
 alcohol; and (vi) coat with bedacryl or polyvinyl acetate. Com-
 pletely oxidized copper coins should, at the outset, be left in a 10 per
 cent sodium metaphosphate solution until free from calcareous
 matter. Sometimes this is sufficient to reveal the inscription; if not,
 they should be treated with the above-mentioned tartrate mixture
 diluted to half strength.
    Silver coins and other objects, if the metal is debased with copper
  (as it not infrequently is in the later Roman coinage), can be cleaned
  with 3 per cent sulphuric acid until free from all red spots of copper
  oxide. Thereafter, the coins are brushed and well washed in water.
  Pure silver, if superficially corroded, can be cleaned by immersion in
  dilute ammonia or dilute formic acid. Or it may be wrapped in zinc
  sheeting and suspended for a couple of hours in water acidified with
  a few drops of acetic acid.
    Whatever process be adopted, the director must ensure that at no
  stage is the object separated from its site-label (which should be waxed to
                                     198
                     THE   FIELD-LABORATORY

avoid defacement). The chemist must be sufficiently an archaeologist
to appreciate fully the importance of the label. See that he does not
undertake too much work at any one time; a crowded laboratory
will inevitably lead to confusion of evidence, particularly in the case
of coins and other small objects. When a coin is immersed for cleaning,
its label must be securely attached to the wire whereby it is suspended.
   3. Tablets or seals of unbaked clay, such as are found on Mesopo-
tamian and Indian sites, must be baked carefully for handling and
preservation. This work should be within the scope of any experi-
enced excavator, but, all things being equal, is a fair charge upon the
chemist’s time. The method is fully described and illustrated by P.
Delougaz, “The Treatment of Clay Tablets in the Field’, Studies in
Ancient Oriental Civilization, no. 7 (Chicago, 1933), and need not here
be repeated. It may be added, however, that the exposure of orna-
ment or script is deferred until after the baking and is most effectively
developed, according to moder practice, with the aid of a simple
form of sand blast.
   4. Objects ofwood freshly dug from damp soil are liable to split, warp,
 ot be destroyed altogether on drying. The task in the field is to maintain
 their humidity, for example by embedding them in athick layer of wet
sawdust, moss, or newspaper. Sometimes the wood can be slowly dried
 and the moisture replaced by glycerine, which is retained by a skin of
 10 per cent polyvinyl acetate or shellac in alcohol. Wood from saline
 areas should be washed in salt-free water or treated with applications
 of liquid paper-pulp for the purpose of drawing out the salt.
    An equivalent treatment is necessary for shale and leather.
    The working principle should be to keep all such objects damp
 until they can be handed over to a fully equipped laboratory, and to
 avoid impregnation with wax or other material liable te make per-
 manent conservation difficult (see p. 197).
    5. Bones must be carefully and lightly brushed clean, and can be
 painted or sprayed before removal with polyvinyl acetate diluted
 with toluene or methylated spirits or shellac diluted with methylated
 spirits or alcohol. If the bones can be removed but are still fragile,
 they can be soaked for 3-4 days in a tank containing bedacryl or
 polyvinyl acetate suitably diluted with toluol with an air-space under
 the lid. They should then be laid out on a wire grid, otherwise they
 will stick to everything.
                                    199
                              CHAPTER       I5

                         Photography?!
Tue overriding difficulty of the archaeological photographer is to
induce his camera to tell the truth. That quality is as much a matter
of proper emphasis as of accumulative statement, and not a little of |
the photographer’s time and.skill, both in the field and in the studio,
are devoted to the rescue of the more from the less significant. The
preparation of the subject, the selection of light and angle and lens,
the use or non-use of filters, the choice of ‘hard’, ‘soft’, or ‘medium’
_printing-paper, the differential printing of portions of the same nega~
 tive are all matters which extend the photographer’s function beyond
the limits of mere technical skill. In all of them the director is as            :
busily concerned as is his photographer.
   No attempt is made here to interpolate a manual of photography.
It is assumed that technical proficiency and good equipment are
alike at the director’s disposal. They are not difficult to find. On
the other hand, their efficient utilization is rare enough to be classed
amongst the virtues, and a few notes upon this matter are not out of
place.
   No amount of mechanical skill is a substitute for the careful pre-
paration of the subject. Clean, sharp angles between the divergent —
planes of a section, carefully and emphatically cut with trowel, knife,
or edging-tool, are essential if the section is to tell its story with the
minimum of confusion. Furthermore, a spotlessly clean trench is no —
mere “eye-wash’, if only because it gives the spectator a justifiable
trust in the orderliness and accuracy of the work. Even the top edges —
of a trench should be neatly trimmed and the grass cut and swept
along them; a stray blade of grass in the foreground of the picture —
may be overlooked by the eye but may loom embarrassingly in the
lens. Strata readily distinguishable in nature may merge in the black-
and-white of the plate and may, on occasion, have to be emphasized —
by careful spraying or by additional smoothing or even deliberate
     1. Mr M. B. Cookson has been good enough to check the technical points in
 this chapter.

                                     200
                               PHOTOGRAPHY
 roughening, though such aids should be used only where all other
 methods (e.g. the use of a filter) fail. An example is illustrated on
 Pl. 19. Sometimes, particularly in a dry Eastern climate, a whole
  section may have to be damped to bring out its texture or colouring.
  In one way or another must we thus compensate for the absence of
_ photographic colour until such time as colour-photography becomes
 the normal medium.
    Then there is the selection of light. For most archaeological sub-
 jects in the open there is one optimum moment during the day, and
 the day itself may have to be chosen carefully for sun, shadow, or
 half-light. In the East, where the strong sun usually kills the detail of
 a subject, most of my photography was done in the fleeting moments
 between first light and sunrise. The time-margin in these circum-
 stances is a matter of minutes, and everything must be prepared
 beforehand. In special circumstances reflected sunlight may be em-
 ployed; thus I photographed the sculptures in the Elephanta caves
 near Bombay by means of sunlight reflected into the dark recesses
 by a succession of large mirrors. Whatever the special problem, it
 may in fact be laid down as a general rule that the preparation of a
 subject occupies hours, occasionally days, before the brief session with
 the camera. Innumerable slipshod and uninformative photographs
 in excavation reports (Pl. 22) prove that this elaborate preparation is
 not unnecessary.
    Every archaeological photograph should include a scale, either in
 the form of a graduated rule or rod or in that of a human figure.
  (Adult human skeletons provide their own scale with as much accur-
  acy as may be expected from a photograph.) The scale should nor-
  mally be parallel with the plane of the camera-plate; if the latter is.
  tilted! the graduated scale should be correspondingly tilted, other-
  wise the graduations are in perspective and of variable length. With
  very rare exceptions, the scale must be precisely parallel with the side
  of the plate, and great care should be taken in its placing. Nothing
  looks worse than a scale unintentionally out of the vertical or hori-
  zontal, Incidentally the scale should be clean and unscarred; it is
  preferable to reserve a graduated pole specially for photography.
                                                                            it must be
     1. Note that, however much tilted forward the camera may be,
                      if any horizon is visible, and the levelling of the camera  with
   evel horizontally,
  a bubble-level is one of the first acts of the photographer.
                                          201
              ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

  Care should also be taken to ensure that the scale is in the same
plane as the main feature of the subject. It is surprising how often
this obvious precaution is overlooked, a scale, for example, being
placed considerably nearer the camera than a small object with which
it is supposedly associated. On the other hand, the scale should not
monopolize the attention of the spectator. A central scale is, for this
reason, usually bad. Where the scale is a human being, as is often
desirable in large subjects, the individual thus honoured must remem-
ber that he is a mere accessory, just so many feet of bone and muscle.
I have in front of me as I write.a monumental report on a Palestinian
excavation in which a collotype illustration nominally representing a
building under excavation shows in the centre the figure of the
director facing the camera with a look of smug self-satisfaction, his
hat in his hand so that no feature of interest may escape his admirers.
Another, even more ludicrous, misuse of the human scale further
East is illustrated in Pl. 24b, the sinner again being the director him-
self. Two axioms of the use of the human scale are (1) that the figure
shall not occupy a disproportionately large portion of the picture
(if so, a linear scale must be substituted), and (2) that the figure shall
not look at the camera but shall be ostensibly employed in as imper-
sonal a manner as possible. On occasion the figure can be something
more than a passive scale. For example at Wroxeter, Mr J. P. Bushe
Fox was hard put to it to express the placing of a flue in an un-
spectacular fragment of walling, but eventually lighted upon the
successful device of including in his snapshot a workman pouring a
bucket of water into the upper end of the flue so that the water,
emerging from the lower end, indicated the continuity of the open-
ing through the thickness of the wall.
   With panchromatic plates or films a colour-filter is not usually
necessary. To emphasize reds and blacks, however, and to eliminate
greens and yellows, a green filter may be used with these plates;
whilst a yellow filter will produce tone-values more nearly approxi-
mating to those observed by the naked eye. The red filter will lighten
all reds and yellows, darken all greens and blues (e.g. in the sky, thus
emphasizing clouds), and will separate red from black. Variations of
exposure for panchromatic plates are as follows:

  1. Wrexeter Report 1914 (Soc. Ant. Lond. Research Report), pl. x, fig. 1.

                                    202
                           PHOTOGRAPHY

  With a green filter, an exposure six times as long as normal.
  With a yellow filter, an exposure twice as long as normal.
  With a red filter, an exposure four times as long as normal.

   Orthochromatic or yellow-sensitive plates are not used with a red
filter. The yellow filter with these plates will lighten yellow up to’
light orange and will darken all blues, The variant exposures are as
follows:
  With a green filter, an exposure nine times as long as normal.
  With a yellow filter, an exposure five times as long as normal.
   Other matters of importance are the focal length of the lens and
the regulation of the lens-aperture or ‘stop’. These factors are related
to each other and to the size of the camera. Remarkable results can
be obtained by very small cameras, and on distant expeditions it may
be necessary to adhere to them exclusively. But I have no hesitation
in recommending the use of a full-plate (6} % 84 inches) camera
whenever possible. The main reason for this choice has recently been
concisely expressed by Miss Alison Frantz as follows:
   Lenses are described and identified by their focal lengths. The focal
length, which is fixed for each lens, is approximately the distance be-
tween the lens and the image on the film when the lens is focused on
a distant point. Lenses of different focal lengths may be used, within
reason, on cameras of different sizes. For general use, however, a lens
of focal length equal to or slightly greater than the diagonal of the
picture-area is customary. Therefore the larger the camera the greater
the focal length of its normal lens. The images projected on the film by
lenses of the same focal length at a given distance from the object are
the same size regardless of the size of the camera, and the image-size
increases with the focal length. Therefore a larger camera will take
in a greater field than a smaller camera equipped with the same
lens.}
   Lenses with a short focal length and a proportionately wide angle
of vision are sometimes necessary, particularly at close range in a
confined space. But such a lens exceeds the capacity and expectation
of the human eye and reduces the normal visual emphasis of the sub-
ject, ic. flattens it; so that the effect is distortion and falsification.
                                                                 205.
         1. Archaeology (Arch. Inst. of America), Dec., 1950, p.

                                     203
              ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE   EARTH

The golden rule is to use as long a focal length (i.e. as narrow a visual
angle) as the subject will permit. And since, as explained above, a
large plate facilitates this procedure by providing a larger and more
inclusive field for any given lens, a large camera is preferable to a
small one.
   In practice, every archaeological camera requires three alternative
lenses: a long-focus (narrow angle) lens, a medium-focus lens, and a
short-focus (wide angle) lens. Something like a 12-inch lens, a 9-inch
lens, and a 6-inch lens, respectively, will suffice in normal usage. To
these may be added a telephoto lens, not often used but occasionally
of great value.
  The use of a large camera with a long-focus lens, however, necessi-         _
tates a proper understanding of the use of the ‘stop’, i.e. of the regu-
lation of the aperture in front of the lens. The depth of the field, or in
other words the distance between the nearest and the farthest points
of sharp focus, decreases as the focal length of the lens increases. On the
other hand, the depth of the field increases as the aperture in the dia-
phragm (or screen in front of the lens) decreases. In a subject of any
appreciable depth, therefore, the one factor has to be set off against
the other. A long or longish lens, desirable to ensure an undistorted
perspective, must be given a greater depth of focus by reducing the
size of the aperture, i.e. by ‘stopping down’. The widest stop is gener-
ally £.6-3, the narrowest £.64, the usual series being 6-3, 8, 11, 16, 22,
32, 45, 64. For subjects of average depth, something midway between
the two extremes — e.g. f.32 - is commonly adequate. It must be
remembered that as the aperture narrows the length of exposure
increases because less light penetrates, the rate of increase being X 2
for each successive smaller stop. Thus if f.22 requires an exposure of
half a minute, £32 will require an exposure of a minute.
   One further point in connexion with the ‘stop’. With any appreci-
able reduction of the aperture, the lens must be focused on the fore-
ground — say, 15 feet from the camera on the average — and not on
the middle distance or background.
  In the actual exposure, care must be taken to avoid halation. Al-
though modern films are normally ‘backed’ or ‘dyed’ to reduce this,
the difficulty is not thereby eliminated. Sky seen through trees or
over a building or rampart may produce indistinctness or fogging
during a long exposure timed to bring out the detail of a dark
                                   204
                            PHOTOGRAPHY

 foreground. When      the lens is within 45 degrees of the sun it
  must be carefully shaded by means of a hat or book or sheet of
  cardboard.
     To the apparatus already indicated for outdoor photography one
  more item should be added: a mobile tower 10-15 feet high. In
_ the East, where supplies and labour were relatively abundant, I
  had a wooden tower run up on every major site (Pl. 21). In
  Britain also towers of various designs have been widely used,
  though here I generally use trestles borrowed locally - a lazy man’s
  substitute.
     So much for out-of-doors. For the indoor photography of indi-
  vidual objects many of the same rules or recommendations apply but
  a few others may be added. When possible, it is the convention that
  objects shall be lighted from the top left, but this usage has often to
  be varied in order to emphasize a design or inscription for which
  some other angle is more suitable. In any case a proportion of reflected
  light, transmitted from a white board or a sheet of tin or a board
  covered with tin-foil, is usually necessary to show up the shadowy
  side and to lift the object from its background. In a fully equipped
  studio, artificial lighting may be used throughout, and with experi-
  ence, undoubtedly yields the most reliable results.
     For background I prefer black velvet save when the object itself
  approximates to that colour. For dark objects, a sheet of glass raised
  4 or § inches above a sheet of light-coloured (not quite white) paper
 on four corner-blocks gives a good shadowless background. Pure
 white paper may produce a slight halation. When, as in the photo-
 graphy of coins, it is desirable to include both sides of an object on
 the same plate, by interrupting the exposure and turning the object
 over, a black background is of course essential.
    In photographing an object at close range, it is important to ensure
that the scale is in or very near the frontal plane. Otherwise, if the
 object is of any considerable depth and the scale is placed on the back-
 ground, an appreciable disparity will result. In these circumstances the
 scale should be raised to the required height on a thin strip of wood or
 plasticine.
    Whatever the subject, the background and lighting should be such
 that no cutting out is subsequently necessary on the film or plate. To
 have to block out an irrelevant shadow or other feature is a confession
                                    205
               ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

of failure and, particularly if the object is a work of art, materially
reduces the value of the record.
   Lastly, all field-photographs must be developed immediately. Many of
them cannot be repeated at a later date, and the director must be
assured of his results within 20 minutes of the exposure. Rough
prints should follow within 12 hours.

            ADMINISTRATION        AND    RECORD    KEEPING


The photographer’s notebook. must contain all details relating to
time, position, exposure, and filter used. Thus

                   Harappa

                   Site E, Sect. X, South face

                   11.45 hrs. Strong sunlight

                   12” lens. Red filter. F.22. 3 secs.

   Ease of access to negatives is essential from the outset of an excava-
tion and, to this end, all negatives made and approved should be
numbered with a serial number orientation, the page in the site-super-
visor’s notebook, and, if possible, the position on the site and the
general plan or the drawing number (see below). It is quite simple to do
all this in the rebate or margin made by the dark slide, and the work
should be carried out with waterproof ink and a mapping pen, If
Cellophane envelopes are used for storing negatives, then the same
details will be added to the envelope, together with the type of print-
ing paper used in the print produced, Thus, if the Negative Register
is ever lost or destroyed, the details would still be available. In the
same manner the keeping of a Negative Register is essential, colum-
nized to receive all the foregoing details but with an added ‘Remarks’
column in which notes can be made of such matters as the existence
of lantern-slide negatives of the same subject, or whether the negative
has been used for publication, the date and reference of publication
being given.

                                  2.06
                             PHOTOGRAPHY

                           Diagrammatic Examples
               Negatives                                            Negative bag

237. RANCHI.    SITE SECT.         X.                    237
                                                         RANCHI
                                                         SITE B. SEGT. X
                                                         SOUTH FACE HUMUS
                                                               REMOVED
                                                         NOTEBOOK 10. P.41
                                                         DRAWING NO. 15
                                                         KODAK BROMIDE GRADE 5
                                                         TOMSHES


                                         “BMI
                                         ‘1h
                                         “STON
                                         “GN
                                         "gq
                                         01


                               Negative Register
RANCHI
                                                Siip.
                                    Drwwg. | note-
 serial } Site | Section       |        no. | book                     Remarks
 ay        E          x                  15         10    | Humus removed. Interim
                  South face                   | p. 41           Report pl. x.
                                                               Lantern-slide made.


                                        EQUIPMENT

In summary, the archaeological photographer in the field needs the
following equipment:

   1. A field camera of strong construction, full-plate size (64    83
      inches), with rising and  falling lens-panel and swing-back .
      At least six dark slides, each to hold two plates or films, and
        numbered.
      . Not less than three lenses: a long-focus lens, a medium-focus
      lens, and a short focus or wide angle. All should be of the best
      quality and anastigmatic, with a maximum aperture of £6°3
      (most of the exposures will be ‘time’). A telephoto lens may
      usefully be added for occasional use.
   3. Aset of filters (red, green, and yellow) to fit each lens or adapted
       to fit the whole series of lenses.

                                              207
                 ARCHAEOLOGY       FROM     THE   EARTH

   4. A heavy tripod, capable of raising the camera to a height of 6 feet,
       with a ‘tilting head’ to enable vertical photographs to be taken.
     . A 6-inch bubble-level.
   AW A large focusing cloth.
     .
   7. A small hand-camera of the Retina Contax or Rollicord type for
       speed or colour work.
   8. A small box which can hold paint-brush, small scales, pins, and
       plasticine.
   9. Tanks or dishes, one for developer, one for fixing, and one for
      washing. For economy, use packed developer and hypo powder
      in tins.
  io. Printing frame. Chétorines from negatives will have to be made
      in the field, and, since conditions are likely to be cramped, the
      printing can be carried out with a printing frame. Bromide paper
      in three grades (soft, normal, and contrast) is required.

  Note. For both negative-development and printing, a small timing
clock is an essential, together with a thermometer to ensure that all
solutions are at a working temperature. In Great Britain even in
summer it is necessary on occasion to bring the developer tempera-
ture up to 65° F., and in Eastern countries it often becomes essential to
bring the solution down to a maximum of 75° F. by the use of ice.




                                   208
                                    CHAPTER       16


                    Publication and Publicity
  ‘A piscoveEry dates only from the time of the record of it, and not
  from the time of its being found in the soil.’ This classic sentence of
  Pitt Rivers proclaims fairly and squarely the ultimate moral and
  scientific duty of the field-archaecologist. It may be amplified by the
  familiar corollary that unrecorded excavation is the unforgivable
  destruction of evidence; and the more complete and scientific the
  excavation, the greater the measure of destruction. The less per-
  sistent methods of an older age may yet leave vital evidence for
  recovery: for example, in Lydney Park, Gloucestershire, a prehistoric
  and Romano-British site dug very extensively by an antiquary in
   1805 retained all the evidence necessary to reconstruct its character
_ and chronology by re-excavation in 1929. But to-day a site com-
   prehensively excavated by modern methods may be practically
- gutted of its evidence, and must be written off. The emphasis is on the
   word ‘written’.
      The first task in the compilation of an excavation-repott is ade-
   quate illustration. In this matter there is little to add, in principle, to
   Sir Flinders Petrie’s assertion half a century ago that ‘nowadays the
   main structure of a book on any descriptive science is its plates’. In
         fact, Petrie’s own standards of illustration, genius though he was,
  generally fell far short of those of his older contemporary, Pitt Rivers,
  and would not be accepted by the average British excavator of to-
  day. Nevertheless, his chapter on publication! stands as a fair general
_ statement of the theory of the business.
     In the matter of literary content it may be said that there are two
  preliminary problems to consider: those of substance and of form.
  First, how much detail shall a report contain? The answer is necessarily
  conditioned in some degree by circumstance. Quantitatively, Pitt
  Rivers digging a reluctant ditch in Cranborne Chase and Petrie
  digging a crowded cemetery in Egypt are up against very different
  propositions. Let us glance at their reactions.
                      1. Methods and Aims in Archaeology, pp. 114-21.
                                            209
eMATTE
               ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

  Pitt Rivers approaches the problem with a formidable combination
of acute sense and Victorian probity.
   The record of an éxcavatot [he says] takes about five times as long as
the actual digging. ... In my fourth volume ... everything has been
recorded, however small and however common. ... Everything has
been drawn, down to the most minute fragment of pottery that had a
pattern on it. Common things are of more importance than particular
things, because they are more prevalent. I have always remembered a
remark of Professor Huxley’s in one of his addresses. ‘The word “‘im~
portance”’,’ he said, ‘ought to be struck out of scientific dictionaries;
that which is important is that which is persistent.” Common things
vary in form, as the idea of them passes from place to place, and the
date of them and of the places in which they are found may sometimes
be determined by gradual variations of form. There is no knowing
what may hereafter be found to be most interesting. Things apt to be
overlooked may afterwards turn out to be of the greatest value in
tracing the distribution of forms. This will be admitted when it is recog-
nized that distribution is a necessary prelude to generalization. I regret
to find in endeavouring to trace the distribution of patterns, that archae-
ological societies illustrate fewer things than formerly. It is thought,
perhaps, that when a form has become commion, there is no use repeat-
ing or even recording it. This is a great mistake in my opitiion. ... The
illustrations need not be elaborate, but sufficient to trace the transitions
of forms.

  The General goes on to describe his modus operandi.
   The compilation of a work of so much detail necessitates the employ-
mient of clerks. I make it a rule that nothing in the letter-press should be
issued that is not in my own writing, and of course I am responsible for
the whole. But the calculation of the numerous and tedious indices; the
compilation of relic tables; the photographs; the identification, mea-
surement and restoration of the skulls, bones and pottery;, the surveys,
the contouring; careful labelling and correction of proofs; the draw-
ing of the plates; . . . requires the assistance of at least three men of
 different qualifications. Living in my house [he adds with a delightful
 Victorian smugness] they must necessarily be men of good character
as well as energy. Those who have left me have generally obtained
more lucrative employments. ... As a rule I have been well served by
my clerks.
             1. Excavations in Cranborne Chase, iv (1898), 37-8.

                                     210
                 PUBLICATION        AND     PUBLICITY

   Thus Pitt Rivers. Petrie, overwhelmed by the mass of finds from
his Egyptian sites, seeks refuge less in men of good character than in
basic index-series or corpora, to which newly found material can be
briefly and simply related.
   The practical utility of such a corpus is found at once when excavating.
Formerly it was needful to keep dozens of broken specimens, which
were of no value except for the fact of being found along with other
vases. Now the excavator merely needs to look over the corpus of plates,
and writes down on the plan ofthe tomb, say B 23, P 35 b, C15, F 72,
thus the whole record is made, and not a single piece need be kept unless
it is a good specimen.

   Be it repeated that these two different methods arise from different
local problems, and for neither can universal validity be claimed.
There cannot be the slightest doubt that the Pitt Rivers system is the
ideal aim, but it is only feasible where the material is limited in quan-
tity, or where it does not lend itself to corpus classification: that is,
where it is too fragmentary or variable for easy systematization. It
cannot be disputed that in the more evolved industries, with which
Petrie mostly dealt, a useful corpus-system can and should be evolved.
An obvious example of a ceramic susceptible of corpus treatment is
Roman terra sigillata or Samian ware, which is, or shortly should be,
nearly as capable of a detailed standard notation as are Roman coins.
These are now becoming a relatively simple matter. Thus in a report
of mine some years ago Mr B. H. St J. O’Neil, later Chief Inspector
of Ancient Monuments,         was able to list the Roman       coins with
abbreviated references largely to the then new standard works of
Mattingly and Sydenham, and thereby compressed his reasoned
catalogue of 1,668 coins into eleven pages. This achievement may be
contrasted with the allocation of eighty pages to 1,000 coins required
in the Wroxeter reports in the same series, issued before the Mat~
tingly-Sydenham corpus was published. In other words, publication
without the corpus occupied twelve times as much space as publication
with the corpus. The advantages of a scholarly corpus or yardstick need
no further emphasis in such cases, and the extension of the corpus-
system is certainly no less urgent now than it was in Petrie’s day. But
always with the proviso that it presents a very serious danger: it lends
itself to loose usage and to the overlooking of those subtle variations
                                    211
               ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE    EARTH

of form, the importance of which Pitt Rivers rightly emphasized.
Generally speaking, only an evolved and largely mechanized industry
offers suitable material for a corpus. In practice, particularly in a mal-
leable material such as pottery (unless made in moulds), it will always
have to be extensively supplemented by individual illustration.
   Whilst on the subject of the illustration of pottery, it may be re-
called as a matter of passing interest that 1952 marked the centenary
of the systematic sectional illustration of pottery in this country.
The method, now standard, whereby a pot is represented wholly or
partly in section, although used. occasionally by Samuel Lysons early
in the nineteenth century, was first formulated by (Sir) John Evans in
his report on ‘Roman remains found at Box Moor, Herts.’, published
in Archaeologia in 1852. He there shows four Samian vessels in section,
and is at pains to describe his modus operandi. His description is a
curious legacy from a painstaking age, and the description is worth
quoting.
   As the taking an accurate section of vessels such as those delineated
[he writes] at fitst sight presents some little difficulty, it may not be alto-
gether useless to record the process by which these sections were
obtained. The piece of Samian ware after being slightly greased was
plunged into fine sand, in a direction perpendicular to the axis of the
vessel, to within about a quarter of an inch of the centre, and the surface _
of the sand was then made level. A thin mixture of plaster of Paris was
next poured upon the sand until its upper surface was level with the
centre of the vessel. When this was set, the fragment of Samian and the
plaster were removed from the sand, and the plaster broken into a suffi-
cient number of pieces to set the fragment free, and these pieces being
reunited with their upper side downwards on a piece of paper, gave a
section from which the form of the vessel could be accurately traced.

All this is a little reminiscent of the burning-down of the swineherd’s
cottage to procure roast pig; but in substance the procedure was a
cardinal one, and is not the least of the many gifts for which our
 discipline is indebted to the great Evans clan.
    I turn now to the second of our preliminary problems, that of the
form which the excavation-report should assume. Here there is more
room than usual for idiosyncrasy. Certain desiderata can, however,
be premised. The report is intended primarily for the specialist-
 reader, but even the specialist may be accredited with a measure of
                                     212
                  PUBLICATION          AND    PUBLICITY

‘human frailty. He is not above the appreciation of conciseness, clarity,
 and ready accessibility — three virtues which are less common than
 they should be in such literature. The Royal Society, in a pamphlet
 issued recently on “The Preparation of Scientific Papers’, has clear
 words upon this matter. “Most [scientific] journals’, it remarks with
 an amiable cynicism, ‘prefer papers written for the moderate special-
 ist, that is to say, an author should write, not for the half-dozen
people in the world specially interested in his line of work, but for
the hundred or so who may be interested in some aspect of it if the
paper is well written.’ After all, an excavation-report is a scientific
newspaper, with news-paragraphs, leading-articles, stock-market,
 hatch-match-and-despatch, and even “small wants’. Let the writer of
 it study unashamedly the higher forms of journalism, and neither he
 nor his clientele will lose thereby. And just as, in a newspaper, one
 does not want or expect to read solidly from front to back in order to
 discover the salient news and views of the day, so in a well-balanced
 excavation-report the student may properly expect to discover some-
 thing of the wood without a prolonged, tedious, and exasperating
 hunt amongst the trees. Of course the trees must be there, or the wood
 would not exist. But, alas, how many reports are merely jungle! -
 biblia a-biblia, fit only to be added to Elia’s catalogue of books which
-are no books.
    A year or two ago, a joint-meeting of three sections of the British
 Association for the Advancement of Science discussed ‘The presen-
 tation of technical information’, and the primary speaker, Professor
 R. O. Kapp, had much that was pertinent to say. To-day, he ob-
 served, talk and paper were among the more important of the tools
 with which the scientist and the engineer had to work. Time was just
 as precious when reading a report as it was when using an instrument,
 and the worker could not afford to wait while a verbose author was
 developing an argument at unnecessary length. If one could justify
 training for research one could justify training in the art of exposition.
 Let scientists attempt deliberately and systematically to raise the
 standards of exposition in all its aspects, and try to perfect and teach it.
 Until that was done, science would continue to be hampered by the
 bad work of poor expositors. Professor Kapp was followed and
    1. General Notes on the Preparation of Scientific Papers (London, the Royal
 Society, 1950), p. 3-

                                      213
               ARCHAEOLOGY           FROM     THE    EARTH

reinforced by the representative of a distinguished firm of publishers,
who remarked that in ten years, of over 600 articles of a scientific kind
read and checked for publication, only five authors had sent in manu-
scripts in such a form that they could be forwarded to the printer
without delay or query. He might well have added an old dictum of
J. M. Barrie’s: ‘The Man of Science appears to be the only man who
has something to say, just now - and the only man who does not
know how to say it.’ It is but fair, however, to add that our leading
scientists are to-day aware of this shortcoming. At the Royal Society's
Scientific Information Conference in 1948 considerable concern was
expressed about the quality of scientific papers presented for publica-
tion, and the pamphlet (already referred to, p. 213) on “The Prepara-
tion of Scientific Papers’ was a result. Nor are the disease and its
remedies confined to the scientific world. I commend to all and
sundry two excellent booklets issued as directives to the Civil
 Service in an attempt to purge official English. They are entitled
Plain Words and are from the experienced pen of Sir Ernest Gowers.*
They are admirable reading and should be in the hand of every
 archaeologist.
  Yet another word may be said upon this matter, for it is near to the
heart of the business. I would appeal for a little more artistry in our
scholarship. A generation ago, G. M. Trevelyan was inveighing
against the dullness of historians, and we archaeologists are certainly
in no better case.
 . The idea that histories [Trevelyan said] which are delightful to read
must be the work of superficial temperaments, and that a crabbed style
betokens a deep thinker or conscientious worker, is the reverse of truth.
What is easy to read has been difficult to write. The labour of writing
and rewriting, correcting and recorrecting, is the due exacted by every
good book from its author, even if he knows from the beginning exactly
what he wants to say. A limpid style is invariably the result of hard
labour, and the easily flowing connexion of sentence with sentence and
paragraph with paragraph has always been won by the sweat of the
brow,?
That is, of course, as true to the archaeologist as to the historian.
   1. Sir E. Gowers, Plain Words; A Guide to the Use ofEnglish (H.M. Stationery
Office, 1948), and ABC of Plain Words (same, 1951).
   2. Clio a Muse and other Essays (London, 1913), p. 34-

                                     214
                 PUBLICATION          AND     PUBLICITY

Sweating with the pen is no less important than sweating with the
spade. And Trevelyan cannot be bettered when he stresses the literary
function of the historian,
the exposition of the results of science and imagination in a form that
will attract and educate our fellow countrymen. . . . I wish [he adds] to
lay greater stress than modern historians are willing to do both on the
difficulty and also on the importance of planning and writing a power-
ful narrative. ... Arrangement, composition and style are not as easily
acquired as the art of typewriting. Literature never helps any man at his
task until, to obtain her services, he is willing to be her faithful appren-
tice. Writing is not, therefore, a secondary but one of the primary tasks
of the historian.’
   Of this excessively neglected matter of literary style more will be
said later in the chapter. Meanwhile, it is opportune at this point to
consider the form and planning of an excavation-report. Plain and
effective writing implies a plain and effective structure, and even
second-rate expression may sometimes pass if the basic arrangement
is sound and simple. At the risk of raising a personal prejudice to 2
ptinciple, I would lay down certain constituents as a sine qua non of
every excavation-report. There need be little hesitation in demanding
that the report shall begin with a very short summary, giving the
main headings of the matter, the plot of the play, so that the reader
is at once in possession of the context of all that follows. This summary
may usefully be isolated in italics; let there be no mistake as to what
and where it is. The nature of the second section of the report is more
variable, depending upon the scope and character of the material.
Where complex issues are involved, it is useful to have here a reasoned
review and interpretation of the new evidence in the light of previous
knowledge, recounting the new evidence only in sufficient detail to
indicate the nature and degree of its authority. How far interpretation
should partake of ‘theory’ at this stage and in this factual context is
matter for judgement and opportunity. But an element of theory
there must be if our facts are to mean anything. Julian Huxley well
expressed it when he said that ‘facts are too bulky to be lugged about
conveniently except on wheels of theory’.* The facts of to-day are
largely the selected and verified theory of yesterday. Once more, it
                 1. Ibid., p. 31.
                 2. Essays of a Biologist (London, 1926), p- 32.
                                      215
                ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

  is all a matter of proportion, and incidentally of a conscientious bor-
  derline between fact and theory, in so far as it is humanly possible to
  distinguish the two. In any case, either succeeding or preceding this
~ section must, of course, come the full statement of structural and
  stratigraphical evidence which is the hard core of the whole report,
  followed by description and analysis of the finds. Lastly, it is some-
  times useful (before a very full index) to include a short postscript to
  tie up loose ends and to indicate future needs, Appendices may deal
  with specially detailed-or controversial problems, but it is not usually
  advisable to clutter up an already elaborate report with an excessive
  number of appended essays.
     In brief, the nucleus of a report comprises: summary, synthetic
  review, full statement of evidence, discussion of general context,
  appendices (if any), index; and, however elaborated, these cardinal
  features should be clearly defined, immediately obvious and acces-
  sible to the reader.
     So much for the general shape of the report. Of details I do not
  propose to say very much, unless to reiterate the plea for brevity.
  There are reports that are excellent in substance but of such a pro-
  lixity as to make them difficult and painful of access. Suitable models
  are, however, readily available in our own language, and still shining
  at the head of them is Dr James Curle’s monumental work on New-
  stead, published as long ago as 1908. The importance of a clear
  exposition of the geographical and physiographical features of the
  site is now reasonably well understood, thanks largely to the work of
  O. G. S. Crawford, Cyril Fox, Stuart Piggott, and Grahame Clark
  in these matters. The “synthetic section’ of the report will deal also
  with the distribution of forms: we may recall once more the Pitt
  Rivers axiom — ‘distribution is a necessary prelude to generalization’
  - with the renewed reminder that a secondary function of the field-
  worker, if he be something more than a mere technician, is to place
  the evidence which he garners in its general context. Relic-tables, such
  as those evolved by General Pitt Rivers, have largely been abandoned
  by his successors in publication (though not in the field), and I am
  inclined to regret their omission. In suitable circumstances, particu-
  larly in dealing with the classification of a new or little-known
  culture, they serve a useful purpose, provided that they are associated
  with adequate sectional illustration. Graphs are sometimes a con-
                                    216
                   PUBLICATION          AND    PUBLICITY

 venient and concise form of record: here again we may easily forget
 that the General led the way,1 though in recent years Grahame Clark
 has developed them effectively for pollen distribution? and Chris-
 topher Hawkes for pottery.® Soil-analysis, where appropriate, is of
 such importance as to demand a special treatment which lies outside
 the scope of this book.
    But always we come back to the vital and basic problem of illus-
 tration. All along the line, the excavator’s fundamental function is
 that of record, primarily pictorial record. And in the preparation of
 his pictorial record he must clearly understand those technical pro-
 cesses of pictorial reproduction to which his draftsmanship and his
 photography must be subordinated if his published record is to do
 justice to his work. Satisfactory presentation is by no means a mono-
 poly of the printer and the blockmaker. Authors and editors must
  know exactly what they want, and exactly what the technicians and
  their machines and the kind of paper available may legitimately be
  expected to achieve. To this chapter are appended brief descriptions
  of the processes commonly used for archaeological illustration; here
  I would merely emphasize as an elderly editor that too many authors
  are insufficiently aware of them. It is indeed highly advisable — one
  might say essential - for the student, as a part of his archaeological
  training, to visit a blockmaker and to see the processes in operation.
  Pity the poor blockmaker! His task at the best is no easy one.
     A few other elementary exhortations may be added. Let us see to
- it that our maps, plans, diagrams, photographs state their purpose
  lucidly and concisely, without excessive margins and other waste
  space, illegible or untidy figures and lettering, or other irrelevant
  litter; and let them be printed on the right kind of paper. ‘Of course’,
  you will remark; but in self-justification I reproduce here two
                                                                         y
  illustrations from standard archaeological publications as cautionar
                                                          ensure clean
  examples (Pl. 24, a and b). Let us in our line-drawings
                                                                        properly
  lines, with proper differential emphasis, and simple lettering
           ated  into the ‘picture’ with  a justsense   of balance.  And  though
  incorpor
                                                 is of  secondar  y  importan ce,
  the artistic appeal of a scientific drawing
                                         e  factor.  It is at least as importan t
  aesthetic quality is not a negligibl
                1. Cranborne Chase, i, following p. 162.
                                                                &c.
                2. Antig. Journ. xvi (1936), 35; XX (1940), 68,
                3. Camulodunum (London, 1947)» P- 175+
                                        217
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

as is good literary form in the text. It can help to attract and hold the
eye, and so tighten the liaison between author and reader - an emi-
nently desirable objective. In an archaeological photograph, a clear-
cut, well-swept subject will tell its story with least effort to the
spectator and will, incidentally, carry additional conviction as evi-
dence of deliberation (contrast Pl. 22). It is a sound general rule that
untidy work is muddled work. All that I have said in the earlier part
of this chapter about the need for clarity of literary style applies to
the all-important matter of illustration.
   So much for general principle. In practice, as we all well know,
archaeological illustrations are normally reproduced in one of three
ways: (a) by half-tone block, (6) by line-block, or (c) by lithograph
(direct and offset). Collotype and equivalent processes are sometimes
used, particularly in foreign publications, with results which may be
superficially attractive, even sumptuous; but detail is liable to be lost
in inky shadows, and the result does not, as a rule, compete with good
half-tone. It should be added, however, that the plates in the present
book are reproduced by photogravure. Colour-processes are here
omitted, although they have manifest advantages over black-and-
white and will in due course become the normal medium. Indeed, they
would doubtless already be the standard method, but for the mess
which the world has made of its economics during the past dozen
years.
                                    *


But it is time to pass on to another aspect of the subject: to turn from
the problems attendant upon scientific publication to a related matter
which is at the same time easier and more difficult: to the not unim-
portant question of publicity and vulgarization.
   Once more we may begin with Pitt Rivers. Speaking in 1897 he
Jaments the inadequacy (at that period) of archaeological publicity.
   If ever a time should come [he observes] when our illustrated news-
‘papers take to recording interesting and sensible things, a new era will
have arrived in the usefulness of these journals. The supply, of course,
must equal the demand, but the demand shows what intensely stupid
people we are. People bowing to one another appears to form the staple
of those productions, as if it were not bad enough for those who are
compelled actually to take part in such functions. Field sports are no

                                  218
                  PUBLICATION           AND     PUBLICITY

doubt things to be encouraged, but can it be necessary to have a picture
of a man running after a ball on every page of every illustrated journal
in this country? Let us hope for evolution in this as in all other things.
It is gratifying to observe that, since 1897, evolution has not been
idle in this matter. Within the last thirty years, our leading news-
paper has seen fit to acquire exclusive rights in the primary publica-
tion of an Egyptian tomb. Another daily newspaper has financed the
excavation of a Roman amphitheatre in Wales. Yet another has dug
for prehistory in the bed of the Thames at Brentford, under arc-lamps
at midnight. A well-known illustrated weekly is frequently first in
the field in the announcement of archaeological discovery. Pulvis et
umbra are news-items, and the excavator is perpetually harassed by
 amiable young men and women with probing pencils and cameras.
In such circumstances, whether he wills it or no, it pays the excavator
to give his courteous attention. A ‘story’ is in any case in the making
and, if it is to have any sort of authenticity, its fabricator must be led
gently up the right sort of path. The press is not always accurate and
does not always emphasize those aspects of an excavation which are
scientifically the most important; but sympathetic help is the best
corrective of these failings, and may be regarded as a scientific no
Jess than a social duty on the part of the modern archaeologist.
   Long ago, G. M. Trevelyan remarked that ‘if historians neglect to
                                                                     past,
educate the public, if they fail to interest it intelligently in the
                                     is  valueles s except in so far as  it
then all their historical learning
                                                                         has been
 educates themselves’.1 Recently, Mrs Jacquetta Hawkes
 urging much the same thing.
                                                                   the
   This [she remarks] is the century of the common man. Just as in
                                                            to the art
 eighteenth and nineteenth centuries archaeology was adding
                                                        furniture of the
‘collections, the architecture, interior decoration and
                                                                       we must take
 wealthy and aristocratic, so it seems that in the twentieth
                               it add  somethi   ng   to  the  life of  a democratic
 deliberate pains to make
           Our   subject has  social  responsib ilities   and  opportunities which
 society.
                                                                      and books and
 it can fulfil through school education, through museums
            all the instrume nts   of what   is  often   rather  disagreeably called
 through
                                                  films and now tele-
 ‘mass communications’ — the press; broadcasting,
                                                      to contemporary life
 vision. Ifarchaeology is to make its contribution
                                    jettison ed by society, all its followers,
 and not risk sooner or later being
                                1. Clio, &c., p. 18.

                                         219
                   ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE    EARTH

 even the narrowest specialists, should not be too proud to take part in
 its diffusion. I would go further and say that we should not forget the
 problems of popular diffusion in planning our research.
    Indeed, at the present time the public is prepared, nay eager, to meet
 the scientist more than half-way. It is now up to the scientist to con-
 tribute his share. To do him justice he is not unaware of this duty.
 There may yet linger in remote cloisters a few pedants of the old
 school who will have none of this vulgarization, but their mortality-
 rate is happily high. The modern scientist increasingly recognizes the
 public as his partners. He spreads the empyrean at their feet; he serves
 up to them the principles of evolution in simple language, sometimes
 spiced a little with a topical tendentiousness. A monumental work
 entitled A Study of History is a best-seller in ten volumes. Prehistoric
 Britain and Prehistoric India are popular Pelican books. A scholarly
 account of the Pyramids of Egypt finds thousands of readers. Of
~ Digging up the Past a quarter of a million copies have, I believe, been
  sold. And so on. In this welter there is no secret refuge for the field-
  archaeologist. Ifhe would hide, he must hide in the limelight.
     All this is as it should be. A present-day excavation must provide
  for the General Public as a routine activity. Indirectly at least, that
  public is paying for a good deal of archaeology, through the national
  or rate-aided museums, through the Ministry of Works, through
  various Royal Commissions, through the universities, through archae-
  ological schools overseas in Italy, Greece, Turkey, Iraq, and Jerusalem,
  through the British Council, and in a variety of other ways. In spite
  of taxation, it still contributes also a little directly and personally as a
  testimony of its practical interest. The popes and princes of the
  Renaissance have in fact been replaced by the British taxpayer. How-
  ever embarrassing its attentions may be on occasion, the public is
  now in one way and another our patron, and must be cultivated and
  suitably rewarded.
     On all my major excavations I have accordingly made some special
  provision for this incidental partner to our work. I may again quote
  from one of my reports on a site in Dorset.
    Under conditions of unobtrusive discipline, the general public were
    1. ‘Purpose in Prehistory’, in London and Middlesex Arch. Soc. Trans., N.S.,
  X (1951), 198.
                                      220
                  PUBLICATION           AND     PUBLICITY

deliberately encouraged to visit the site. Notices directed the visitor’s
approach from the nearest main road. He was told (by notices) where to
park his car and where to apply for information. Throughout the exca-
vations it was the duty of an official guide-lecturer either to explain the
work to visitors or to organize reliefs of student-lecturers who, for regu-
lated periods, undertook this task, which, incidentally, provided for
the students in question an admirable training in clear thinking and
simple exposition. The public was not charged for these services, but
‘was invited to contribute to the cost of the work — a system which is in
practice both more democratic and more productive than a fixed tariff.
And, finally, a well-stocked postcard-stall is as popular as it is profit-
able. Picture-postcards of the site can be produced [or rather, could be-
fore 1939] at a cost of little more than a halfpenny each and will sell
readily at twopence each. Interim reports of the work, produced at
fourpence each, will sell at one shilling each. [Approximately 64,000
postcards and 16,000 interim reports were sold at the site in question.]
... In such multifarious ways can the present-day public be drawn to
contribute directly or indirectly to archaeological research.

    I would particularly stress the value to the archaeologist himself of
 speaking to and writing for the General Public. It is not difficult to be
 a specialist, to write fairly intelligibly for two or three fellow-special-
 ists, to produce ‘a preparation of opium distilled by a minority for a
 minority’. I know a distinguished archaeologist who claims that he
 writes for five people; most of us are less ambitious. And as specialists
 we tend to develop a sort of professional jargon which is a deterrent
 to a wider audience and ultimately a handicap to the specialist him-
‘self, [have already in this chapter quoted from the proceedings of the
British Association, and I am now reminded of a relevant presidential
address at an earlier meeting of the same eminent body. At this meet-
ing attention was drawn to the plague of pedantic verbiage which
had infested modern science, and a plea was made for simplification
and classification. That plea was a timely one; it might fittingly have
been extended from professional science to professional sport, to the
cinematograph industry and to professional journalism in general.
‘The danger of all this jargon, at any rate in science, is not merely that
it alienates the ordinary educated man but that it is a boomerang
liable to fly back and knock the sense out of its users. In the words of
                                                                          but singu-
   1. R. le Gallienne, Prose Fancies (1895), p. 81, speaking of poetry,
larly appropriate to much archaeology!
                                        221
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE   EARTH

the infallible Quiller-Couch, ‘If your language isJargon, your intel-
lect, if not your whole character, will almost certainly correspond.
Where your mind should go straight, it will dodge: the difficulties it
should approach with a fair front and grip with a firm hand it will
seek to evade or circumvent.’ I have been turning over the pages of
an excellent journal which makes it its business to present the results
of scientific archaeology to the general public, and my eye has fallen
upon three articles by three of the most eminent archaeologists of the
day. On one page I am caught up in the hyphenated tongue-twister
“leaf-shaped-sword-culture-complex’; on another I am invited to
consider ‘the diagnostic value of negative lynchets’; on a third I am
informed that certain place-names ‘were left by the equestrian inhum-
ators who brought in the later Hallstatt culture’. (One almost expects
to turn the page and find a reference to *tram-riding cremators’.)
An excellent friend of mine, in an attempt to distinguish between
the significant and the accidental aspects of megalithic tombs, has
recently brought to birth two hideous monstrosities, the twins
genomorph and phenomorph. I pray in all friendliness that they may be
short-lived. Yet another of my friends has attempted to make the
fairly simple phrase “historical approach’ easy for us by defining it as
“the endeavour to achieve a conceptual integration of individual
phenomena in terms of specified time and space’. For a less academic
parallel to this sort of thing I need look no further than the newspaper
which lies beside me as I write: on its front pages is a quotation from
a diplomatic manifesto in which the United States reaffirms ‘its stand
against unilateral cancellation of contractual relationships and actions
of a confiscatory nature’ - lovely phrase! Well, well; so one might
go on; I have in fact quoted relatively innocuous examples of a wide-
spread and malignant disease — far worse might readily be found,
Admittedly, an advancing science is from time to time faced with a
genuine and rational need for new nomenclature, new phrasing. But
let the need be met with restraint and circumspection. One word is
not necessarily more economical than two, whatever may be said
elsewhere (in other contexts) to the contrary. On the other hand, one
word will suffice to describe the scientific argot of which I am speak-
ing; and that word is Hokum, an alternative to Quiller-Couch’s
‘Jargon’. Let us purge our writing and our thinking of Hokum. It is
an infection to which the over-educated and the under-educated are

                                  222
                    PUBLICATION     AND    PUBLICITY

alike prone. G. M. Trevelyan oncé lamented a comparable failitig
amonest histotians. ‘The substitution of a pseudo-scientific for a
literary attnosphere in historical circles’, he wrote, ‘las not only done
much to divorce history from the outside public, but has dimimshed
its humanizing power over its own devotees in school and wiii-
versity.”
  A household remedy for this disease is not far to séek. It is to be
found in deliberate and periodical vulgarization. My advice to the
aspiring archaeologist is, Go and explain your ideas, young man, to
the Much-binding-on-the-Marsh Antiquarian Society and Field
Club. Shun all that is comprised in ‘gobbledygook’, that wonderful
American carpet-bag for wordy atid woolly pomposity;? use lan+
guage intelligible to the local bitd-scarer. Then at last you will begin
to understand yourself if you have aught to say. Let us not scorn the
profanum vulgus, In fact some of our greatest archaeologists and anthro-
pologists have needed no reminder in this matter. The classic Romani-
zation of Roman Britain, by Haverfield, J. G. Frazer’s Golden Bough
(until it became an encyclopaedia), and more recently Prehistoric
Britain, by Jacquetta and Christopher Hawkes, and Archaeology and
Society by Grahame Clark, are outstanding examples of the scholarly
approach to a wide public, whilst Sir Leonard Woolley is a famous
adept at the art. But pethaps for the masterpieces of popular writing
ih the scientific field as a whole we have still to look to men likeJ.H.
Jeatis ot J. B. S. Haldane or Julian Huxley, or ultimately to Charles
Darwin hitnself, whos¢ strong, simple prose thrust down all batriets
between minds and men. There was no Horatian sniff about Darwin.
  Terse, vigorous, direct prose is ultimately a matter of the sensibility
of the writer, but the smallest seed of it can be cultivated. I know cap-
able archaeologists who are yet so myopic as scarcely to read a book
outside their tiny ‘subject’. And I find that Mr St John Ervine has
                                                              ‘are
observed the same pheriomenon: ‘Archaeologists’, he reriarks,
odd fish addicted to periods, and unwillirig to take interest in any-
thing outside their own speciality.’ They have ceased, or have not
begun, to cultivate their garden; at best, they are concerned only with
a cabbage-patch. What can they really comprehend of works and
  1. Clio, p. 25.                           oS       :
                                                                        y
   2. On gobbledygook see E. Gowets, ABC of Plain Wotds (H.M. Stationer
Office, 1951), p- 57:
                                   223
              ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE   EARTH

days, or how express their comprehensions? It is a truism that words
create thoughts, only less than thoughts words. And the creation of
words is no unskilled job. “You will not get there,’ says the infallible
‘Q’, ‘by hammering away on your own untutored impulse. You
must first be your own reader, chiselling out the thought definitely
for yourself; and, after that, must carve out the intaglio yet more —
sharply and neatly, if you would impress its image accurately upon
the wax of other men’s minds. We found’, he adds, ‘that even for
Men of Science this neat clean carving of words was a very necessary
accomplishment.’ Yes, words are uncommonly important things,
even for Men of Science. And in the end, the vulgus is no bad judge.
Tt is the duty of the archaeologist, as of the scientist, to reach and
impress the public, and to mould his words in the common clay of its
forthright understanding.



               POSTSCRIPT           TO CHAPTER            16

With reference to pp. 217—18 above, the following notes are added on
the three principal processes of pictorial reproduction. By way of
preface it may be observed that line blocks, when not exceeding the
dimensions of the text-page, are printed with the text and are normally
numbered as text-figures, with Arabic numerals. Half-tone blocks and
lithographs are usually printed separately from the text, on higher-
grade paper, and are normally numbered as plates, with Roman
numerals, Line blocks of larger dimensions than the text-page are also
treated as plates,


                        (a) HALF-TONE BLOCKS
Wash-drawings, photographs, paintings, etc., are ‘continuous tone’
subjects. For purposes of reproduction, such pictures have to be broken
up into half tones (or broken tones), so that the final result is a printing-
block made up ofa series of dots, varying in size with the relative light
and shade of the copy. This necessity arises because half-tone blocks are
printed in exactly the same manner as type. A printing-roller charged
with printers’ ink passes over the surface of the block and by a ‘kiss’
touch imparts ink to whatever it contacts.
   In order to produce these dots for inking, the process includes the
                                     224
ti
 7




                   PUBLICATION        AND    PUBLICITY

 re-photographing of the original through a ruled screen interposed in
 front of the photographic plate. The screen consists of lines ruled on
  optical glass to form square apertures with opaque dividing lines. These
  break up the continuity of the subject into dots of varying sizes, the
  high lights being represented by exceedingly fine dots, the middle tones
by larger dots, and the deeper tones by still larger dots. From the nega-
  tive so obtained a copper plate is made: this is done by coating the
“copper with bichromated glue and printing it in contact with the
  negative: the intersections between the dots are eaten away chemically,
 ‘thus leaving the dots in relief. This copper plate is then mounted on
  wood and printed just as type is printed in a letterpress machine.
  - The size of the dots is controlled to meet various conditions of print-
_ing. Coarse newspaper-printing calls for a screen-ruling with approx-
"imately 60 lines per square inch, ruled at right angles to another 60 lines,
- giving intersections of 60 x 60 = 3,600 dots per squareinch. For maga-
" zine-printing and such like, a screen-ruling of 100 to 120 is mostly used;
for commercial work, 120 to 133 lines per square inch; while for the
finest printing, such as that of scientific subjects printed on high-grade
“art paper, the screen-ruling is generally 133 to 150.
_ A printer may spoil a good block by bad inking — by the use of too
much or too little ink, or by uneven inking. Only an experienced and
:skilled printer will get the best out ofa block, and it is sometimes prefer-
able to have the blocks printed by the blockmaker himself, if he has the
“necessary trained staff. Again, a block may be spoilt by the use of poor-
Be lity paper. At its best, a halftone block can be very good, but a
second-rate block or the second-rate printing of a good block will very
seriously mar any publication, however brilliant its other matter may
be. Careful scrutiny in the proof-stage is essential.
 ; There are certain points in which the author must help the block-
maker. First, glazed photographic prints are best for reproduction:
 matt prints, ‘art surfaces’, and toned prints should be avoided. Good
                                                                       be
 glossy black-and-white are best. Secondly, the subject must not
 overcrowded    with   detail, having regard  to  the scale of reduction
                                                                be quite as
     desired. Remember that, at the best, no halftone block can
                                                                       detail)
  clear as the original photograph, and detail (sometimes essential
                                                                    size and
 is liable to be obscured in reproduction. Thirdly, the actual
                                                            reproduced by
  shape to which it is required that the original shall be
                                                               Unnecessary
 ‘the blockmaker should be indicated clearly on the back.
                           of sky, or of foreground) should not  actually be
 _margins (e.g. an excess
                                                              indicated on
  cut off the original, but the required margins should be
                                                                not to press
  the back by lightly ruled pencil-lines: care must be taken

         H                            225
               ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM     THE   EARTH

heavily on the pencil and so to furrow the working-surface. Half-tone
blocks, though not normally printed with the text, should not as a rule
exceed the dimensions of the text-page, In ‘sizing’ blocks, do not
forget to allow for the titles or ‘legends’. Fourthly, avoid, if possible,
the preparation of fresh half-tone blocks from existing half-tone
illustrations. This involves double-screening and the production of a
second-hand doubly obscured version of the original, and is almost
always unsatisfactory.
   A half-tone block may normally be made up to 15 X 12 inches.
   Half-tone blocks, be it repeated, are commonly printed separately
from the text and half-tone illustrations are inserted, usually on special
paper, as plates (not figures). See above.


                            (b) LINE BLOCKS
“Line-drawings in black ink are reproduced by the line-block process:
 that is to say, they are photographed by the blockmaker in a special
 camera, and the lines are transferred on to a zinc plate, the ‘background’
of which is then eaten away in an acid bath, leaving the black lines in
relief for subsequent inking and printing. The zinc plate is then nailed
or screwed to a wooden block through certain of its recessed portions.
The line block, being printed in exactly the same fashion as letterpress,
can, as noted above, be reproduced simultaneously with the latter,
provided the size permits.
   Normally, a one-third (linear) reduction gives satisfactory results, but
one-half or one-quarter (rarely smaller) may have to be used. In the
case of a one-third reduction (linear) a drawing 12 X 6 inches will come
out at 4 X 2 inches and will therefore actually be only one-ninth of the
area of the original :hence the use here of the term ‘linear’ in specifying
degree of reduction.
   It is essential that the draftsman, in preparing’his drawing, shall know
the extent of proposed reduction, and shall so be enabled to regulate the
 thickness of his lines, the size of his lettering, and his general style
accordingly. An excessively thin line in the original will become in the
zinc-plate an edge of metal so thin as to be liable to -flaw in manu-
facture and damage ‘in the act of printing. Lines drawn excessively close
together wil] tend to merge on reduction: either the metal or the ink,
 or both, will tend to run from one line to the other, forming an untidy
 and unexpressive blot. This is particularly prone to ‘happen in the
 hatching, especially the cross-hatching, of a plan. It is essential that-the —
 individual lines of the hatching shall be bold and distinct from one
                                     226
                  PUBLICATION          AND     PUBLICITY

another. And nothing is more unsightly in a plan or diagram than
lettering which cannot be easily read. The fullest allowance for reduc-
tion must be made in sizing the lettering of the original drawing. Make
the lettering rather too large than too small.
   In selecting the size, shape, and extent of reduction of a drawing, do
not forget to allow space for the necessary title or legend (figure-
number, etc.) at the foot. If the illustration is to be printed with the
text — a desirable aim, not always feasible — the reduced drawing plus
title must not exceed the outside dimensions of the text of a printed
page.
  A maximum size for a line block may be taken as 26 X 19 inches.
Drawings to a scale above that size are reproduced by lithography, and
it is better to use this process for all line-illustrations over text-size. A
small lithograph is more costly than a small line block, but a large litho-
graph is less costly than a large line block. Small and simple corrections
can be made on a line block but are very undesirable.

                              (c) LITHOGRAPHS

The old method of lithography — printing from drawings on plane-
surface stone — has given way to modern processes of photo-litho-
graphy in which the map or plan is reproduced first as a photographic
negative and then printed therefrom on to a thin sheet of zinc. By
chemical processes the image is made to attract ink and the clean por-
tions of the zinc to repel ink. Such a plate is held taut on a machine
printing-cylinder. Ink-rollers charged with litho-ink and damper-
rollers charged with water alternately pass over the entire surface of the
                                                                          which
plate. The inked image is pressed on to another cylinder around
a sheet of special rubber is stretched and therefrom on to the paper,
hence the term ‘offset’ or ‘litho-offset’ or ‘photo-litho-offset’.
                                                                              be
   The advantage of the ‘offset’ process is that fine line-work can
                           ‘kiss’ touch  of a pliable  rubber  sheet  so that all
printed by the resilient
                                                                            into
undue pressure is avoided, and the inked lines are pressed gently
                                                                     the reverse
the texture of the paper without any image being visible on
     of the sheet. Correcti ons,  even minor   correctio ns, should be avoided
side
so far as possible.
                                                                      cannot be
   A lithograph thus requires careful separate printing and
struck off with the text.
                                                                X 30 inches.
   Lithographic plates may normally be made up to 40


                                      227
                              CHAPTER 17                                   )

  What are we digging up, and why?
       ‘No amount of technical knowledge can replace the comprehen-
       sion of the humanities or the study of history and philosophy.’
       WINSTON    S. CHURCHILL,    reported in Kabenhavns   Universitets
      Promotionsfest den rookt. 1950 (Copenhagen, 1951).


T HE previous chapters have touched upon the history of archaeologi-
 cal excavation, upon the search for an absolute chronology as the
 ultimate basis for the ordering and interrelating of our data, upon the
-stratigraphical method as a contributory procedure, upon the need
 for long-term planning if we are to secure the systematic advance of
 knowledge, and latterly upon the very vital questions of publication
and publicity. A little has been said also of the actual technique of
digging, of recording in the field, of laboratory-work, and of staff.
But there is one overriding aspect of our task which cannot be passed
by in a concluding chapter; and that aspect may best be expressed by
the question, “What does it all amount to?’ What are we trying to
do in this rather complex fashion, and how far can we hope to suc-
ceed? Any answer to this question is inevitably subjective and preju-
diced, but there is no great harm in a little honest prejudice. It may
at least stimulate the wiser judgement of those happy critics who are
devoid of bias.
   Archaeology is primarily a fact-finding discipline. It has indeed
been stated by an American writer that “Archaeology per se isno more
than a method and a set of specialized techniques for the gathering of
cultural information. The archaeologist, as archaeologist, is really
nothing but a technician.’! I have no hesitation in denouncing that
extreme view as nonsense. A lepidopterist is a great deal more than a
butterfly-catcher, and an archaeologist who is not more than a pot-
sherd-catcher is unworthy of his logos. He is primarily a fact-finder,
 but his facts are the material records of human achievement; he is
 also, by that token, a humanist, and his secondary task is that of
                     1. W. W. Taylor, as cited, p. 43.

                                     228
        WHAT      ARE    WE   DIGGING       UP,   AND    WHY?

revivifying or humanizing his materials with a controlled imagina-
tion that inevitably partakes of the qualities of art and even of phil-
osophy.
   But these are after all mere words. What in fact does this thing,
Archaeology, really amount to? The question is one which, in our
evaluation of evidence, can never be far from our minds. No matter
that in a majority of instances we cannot truly know: it is the privi-
lege of the intelligent to ask questions, and the claim of the unin-
telligent to have all the answers. The state of philosophic doubt is not
the least enviable of human conditions. Definition does not neces-
sarily clarify.
   Here at the outset we are confronted with elements of conflict.
We have on the one hand the technician or, if you will, the ‘scientist’,
busy with inches and analyses and smudges in the soil; busy with the
anatomy of history or prehistory. On the other hand we have the
humanist busy with its vital interpretation. There is a widespread
fashion to-day to incline towards the former trend, to regard archae-
ology as a natural science and to discount the intervention of ‘motive’
and ‘free will’. ‘Motives’, says Professor Gordon Childe, ‘are in fact
hardly capable of genuine historical study.’ This trend is a useful
teaction from the romanticism of a past century. But it can easily be
carried too far. [have remarked elsewhere upon a tendency to devolve
archaeology into a sort of dehydrated humanism, to mummify the
past, to transform our predecessors into “battle-axe folk’ or “beaker
folk’, until, by an instinctive and forgivable reaction, we begin almost
to personify battle-axes or beakers with a sort of hungry latter-day
 animism. Such phraseology represents a tendency that can only be
deplored. It runs deeper than its exponents sometimes realize. How-
ever broadly we use the words, man is in some sense the casket of a
 soul as well as five-shillings-worth of chemicals. And the soul or
 sensibility or mind - whatever we choose to call it - is beyond the
 reach of finite intelligence, since the mind obviously cannot encom-
 pass itself. Within the far-off limit of ultimate causes, the geologist
 can encompass or objectify the rocks with which he deals; not so the
 humanist with the intellect. There in the last resort all is subjective,
it cannot be otherwise. Archaeology increasingly and very properly
 adapts and adopts the methods of natural science and unblushingly
‘seeks its aid. It is not on that account itself a science in the class-room
                                    229
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

 meaning of the term. At the best it is a very inexact science. But per=
 haps for that reason its demands upon the constructive imagination
 are more immediately insistent than are those of some of the more
 self-explanatory class-room sciences. For that very reason, be it
 repeated, the archaeologist is a great deal more than a rather superior
 laboratory-assistant. He is also something of an artist. O. G. S. Craw-
 ford was near the mark when he affirmed that ‘Archaeology is an art
 which employs a scientific technique’. Or, as the Oxford historian,
 Sir Llewellyn Woodward, remarks, “Historical understanding is more
 than a series of detective tricks. It requires a mind already attuned to
 the scale of human action and practised in the subtlest use of language
 to express the depths and heights.” That is well said. The historian, and
 with him I group the archaeologist, must have a spark of the intui-
 tive comprehension which inspires the painter or the poet. “The
“highest reach of science’, proclaimed Matthew Arnold, ‘is, one may
 say, a faculty of divination, akin to the highest power exercised
 in poetry.’ All great historians have something of this power, and
 owe their greatness no less to it than to their scholarship. They
 make the past live because they are themselves alive and can
 integrate their reasoned facts with the illogicalities of life. Other-
 wise they were mere cataloguers, adding dust to dust and ashes to
 ashes.
   As archaeologists, then, we are at the same time collectors and inter-
 preters. The obvious next question is, What do we collect and seek to
 interpret? The question lands us at the outset in a minor quandary
 from which escape is urgent. Throughout these chapters the term
 archaeology has been used in the widest possible sense, including
 equally the study of eolithic choppers and of Victorian gas-lamps.
 Others are, I am afraid, sometimes less catholic in their usage. The
 French appear to have evolved a hierarchical distinction between
 Varchéologie and la préhistoire that is subtle enough to escape the
 average foreigner, but we have our British counterpart. From time
 to time one hears the terms ‘archaeologist’ and ‘antiquary’, or even
 that hideous and unnecessary pseudo-noun ‘antiquarian’, used with
 a sense of divergence significantly akin to that of ‘sheep and goats’,
 or ‘chalk and cheese’. The antiquary, it seems, is the more genteel of
 the two; he sits in a chair and uses a quizzing-glass, or in moments of
 supreme afflatus crashes upon his knees and rubs a brass. The archae-
                                   230
          WHAT     ARE   WE   DIGGING     UP,   AND   WHY?

ologist, on the other hand, wears corduroy shorts, strides about on
draughty landscapes with a shovel and an odorous pipe, and is liable
to be an undergraduate. To these divergent types, might be added a
third, the anthropologist, vaguely interested in flagrantly un-British
*natives’. Of course all this dichotomy or trichotomy is nonsense;
but there does lurk behind it a nucleus of actuality of a not wholly
desirable kind. The common tendency to discriminate archaeologists
as prehistorians and antiquaries as medievalists does good to nobody.
If anything, it attempts on the one hand to rob prehistory of a little
of the humanity that comes more easily to the Middle Ages; and
on the other hand to deprive medieval studies excessively of the cold
and calculating objectivity that is attributed to the prehistorian.
Recently, after training the young members of the staff of one of our
Historical Monuments Commissions on a typical prehistoric site, I
was glad to see them proceed with the excavation of a medieval site
by the identical technique, with fruitful results ranging in period
from the eleventh to the seventeenth centuries. And yet how rarely
has that simple and obvious procedure been attempted! Let it be
agreed that the two words ‘archaeologist’ and ‘antiquary’ shall in
future be exactly synonymous, rooted in a common discipline
and striving by the same or closely similar methods to the same
end,
  But what, when all is said and done, is that end? We have just
agreed (I hope) to work as brothers, but what of the nature of our
task Let us for a moment consider its range, with specific examples.
In a single year we have had the (former) Disney Professor of Archae-
ology at Cambridge busily and successfully exploring the Upper
Palaeolithic in France and Dr Leakey sweating after his pleistocene
industries through tropical Africa. Professor Grahame Clark in York-
shire was extracting with consummate skill the remarkable relics of
as squalid a huddle of marsh-ridden food-gatherers as the imagination
could well encompass. Sir Cyril Fox, of science and imagination all
compact, was, as recalled in a previous chapter (p. 18), reconstructing
the mumbo-jumbo of miserable Bronze Age barrow-burials on the
ultimate fringes of the ancient world. The writer was digging into the
first foothold of wretched Iron Age immigrants on the English south
coast and classifying their incompetent dog-biscuit potsherds. Mrs
 Stuart Piggott, with an inspiring fortitude, was ransacking the wacant
                                  231
                ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

 windswept vestiges of first-century hill-forts in the Scottish Low-
 lands, buoyed by the thought that it is better to travel hopefully
 than to arrive. Professor Ian Richmond, on Hadrian’s Wall, was
 expending the profoundest learning and an incomparable astuteness
 upon the uncovering of a medicine-man’s go-down. The list might
 easily be extended. But whither is it getting us? One may sometimes
 find oneselfintwo minds about it all. Is all information worth while,
  or are we justified in selecting and grading our material on a basis of
  priorities? And, if so, what priorities?
     This question might easily lead us into a prolonged discussion of a
  semi-philosophical nature. The temptation may be resisted without
  complete evasion of the issue. At the outset it is sufficiently clear that
  no single or simple answer is adequate. Much depends upon the angle
  of approach. Man is an animal with a biological tree. He is physically
~ an unspecialized animal, but with a specialized brain which enables
  him to elaborate and amplify his physique by means of an increasing
  range of artifacts or artificial limbs. He thus becomes the author of
  industries, which accumulate into cultures: until ultimately he is
  sufficiently Equipped to live in large communities, or in other words
  becomes civilized. In a large community the constant clash or col-
 laboration of brains leads, under balanced conditions, to a great
 civilization; under unbalanced conditions, to a proportionately great
 human catastrophe. The period of balance may be brief, as in fifth-
 century Greece, or long as in Dynastic Egypt. The period of unbal-
 ance may be one of obliteration and oblivion, or it may be one of
 patching and reshaping, of constant if unequal striving towards a new
 goal. Such sequences and possibilities are sufficiently familiar and
 need not be particularized, if only because Mr Arnold Toynbee has
 displayed them to a wide public in terms of his own ei
 philosophy of history.
    This elaborate process manifestly offers to the student more than
 one line of approach. In fact, modern archaeological research displays
 a recurrent duality. The normal approach of archaeology in Great
 Britain has in the past been along the lines of the classical tradition.
 The Grand Tour and the standard classical education have never, until
 recent years, been far from the mind of the British archaeologist; and
 names such as those of Stukeley or Sir John Evans or even Pitt Rivers
 himself do not outweigh the average truth of that statement. Greece
                                    232
                                                                               |sl
           WHAT      ARE   WE    DIGGING       UP,   AND    WHY?

  and Rome were the Mecca of the British student, provincialized a
  little in latter years by the great influence of Haverfield. For example,
  the Yates Chair of Archaeology in the University of London, in spite
  of its generalized designation, has always been interpreted as a chair
  of classical archaeology. And long ago we find the young Arthur
  Evans inveighing against the same bias at Oxford. Evans in his twen-
  ties was urged to apply for an archaeological studentship which had
_ just been established in the University. His immediately reaction was:
   © One feels that what is wanted is a student of “Classical Archaeology”
   and that anyone who wasn’t would probably have scant justice done
   him at Oxford.’ He went on to protest that “the great characteristic
   of modern Archaeological progress has been the revelations as to
   periods and races of men about which history is silent. . . . Oxford,
 however, seems to have set itself to ignore every branch of Archae-
_ ology out of its own classical beat.’ Evans's youthful protest was in
    1879. Four years later his mind was turning once more towards
    Oxford, and Dr Joan Evans has recorded an entertaining and signi-
   ficant correspondence between him and Freeman which further
    defines the contemporary attitude towards archaeology in these
    islands.
    There is going to be established a Professorship of Archaeology
  [wrote Evans], and I have been strongly advised to stand for it. Ido not
  think I shall, unless I see any real prospect of getting it: and to say the
  truth I see very little. To begin with, it is to be called the Professorship
  of ‘Classical’ Archaeology, and ... to confine a Professorship of
  Archaeology to classical times seems to me as reasonable as to create
 a Chair of ‘Insular Geography’ or ‘Mesozoic Geology’. ... Europe,
                                                                            that
  except of a favoured period and a very limited area (for I take it
  neither   Gaul,  Britain  or  Illyricum  were   ever  ‘classical’ in Jowett’s
  sense) is to be rigorously excluded!
  Freeman’s reply to Evans was,
                                                                       they will
     I think you should stand, if only for a protest.... Of course
                                                                      at the end
  have some narrow Balliol fool, suspending all sound learning
                                                               against you, but
~ of his hooked nose, to represent self-satisfied ignorance
  I would   go in just to tell them a thing or two.”
                                                                and his Forebears
     1. Joan Evans, Time and Chance: the story of Arthur Evans
  (London, 1943), pp. 221-2.
    2. Time and Chance, pp. 261-2.
                                       233
               ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM     THE   EARTH

The upshot was that Arthur Evans went his own way and discovered
immortality in Crete. Not indeed until 1926, when the Abercromby
Chair was established in Edinburgh, was there a real professorship of
prehistoric archaeology in Great Britain; and, if we ignore the purely
personal and honorific appointment eventually extended to Arthur
Evans (in 1909) as “Extraordinary Professor of Prehistoric Archae-
ology’, only within the last few years has Oxford so shaken free from
the old Jowett tradition as to follow suit with its own substantive
chair of European archaeology. This is remarkable, but such is the
fact.
   In Scandinavia, on the other hand, the situation has been exactly the
reverse. There not merely prehistory in general but Scandinavian
prehistory in particular, to which much other European prehistory
is very greatly indebted, held the field from the beginning of the
nineteenth century onwards, and it is only in recent years that classi-
cal archaeology has achieved a recognized academic status; for ex=
ample, by the foundation of classical chairs at Lund and Uppsala
about roto. In Scandinavia the undisguised parish pump has been
respectable fot a century and a half; in Western Europe as a whole
it has, until recent years, been scarcely tolerated save under a classical
pavilion.
   To-day a great reaction is in progress. Swedes have become
classicists and are digging up the Roman Forum; Britons, careless
of their classics, are digging up mesolithic forest-scavengers in the
mists of their own countryside. Indeed at the present time, save in the
dilute form of Romano-British archaeology and apart from some
notable work in North Africa by the British School at Rome, classical
archaeology is here largely under an eclipse, whilst prehistory flour-
ishes as never before. Even the modern Romans themselves have
brazenly uncovered the post-holes of some disreputable prehistoric
huts within a few yards of the respectable House of Livia on the
Palatine. Old values are being shuffled and new ones are emerging.
What is their relative significance? For example, is it really worth our
while to expend money and talent upon an entirely empty stone hut
on a Welsh mountain, whilst great sites on the arterial routes of
human development remain scientifically untouched? True, the one
is nearby and costs a few pounds, the other may be thousands of miles
away and will cost thousands of pounds; but such opportunist factors

                                   234
          WHAT      ARE   WE    DIGGING      UP,   AND    WHY?

are not for the moment at issue. The question is rather one of the
principle upon which we are going to work, of our sense of propor-
tion.
   Once more, it is, one may suppose, all a matter of our line of ap-
proach. Much depends upon whether our starting-point is that of the
biologist or that of the humanist. It has been argued by the biologist
that human institutions are governed by the same kind of natural
laws as is the development of the human body; that humanity and
human institutions may properly be studied in much the same way as
pigeons or earthworms. It is the developmental process itself that
focuses the inquiring mind. Achievement, good or bad, is an element
of processional change and is of no special intrinsic interest; it is a
register of trial and error in the stumbling progress of evolution. In-
deed the words ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are subjective misnomers. Who
are we to distinguish between them? They are arbitrary grades in our
 yardstick of change; we might as well say that a fish is ‘good’ and a
jellyfish ‘bad’.
    Admittedly the biological attitude is here stated crudely and per-
 haps unfairly, But Oswald Spengler, who has done not a little to lend
 this attitude the combined prestige of philosophy and history, states
 the matter in no very different style, and Professor Henri Frankfort
 has recently commented upon him in terms essentially parallel with
 my own. Spengler, remarks Frankfort,
 actually calls civilizations ‘living beings of the highest order’, and he
 undertakes to state with precision which phenomena characterize each
 stage in their life-circle. For him, an imperialistic and socialistic order
 follow a traditional and hierarchical society; expanding technique and
 trade follow greatness in art, music and literature as certainly as the
                                                                        never
 dispersal of the seeds follows the maturing of a plant which will
                                the biologica l metaphor literally,  to grant
 flower again. But to take
                                                                  but myth-
 in this manner reality to an image, is not morphology
                                                                     to
 logy; and it is belief, not knowledge, which induces Spengler
        the freedom  of  the spirit and the impredict ability of human
 deny
 behaviour.*
                                                               Spengler
    I too am of those,’then, who, with all proper respect for
                                                                        pment
 and his kind, are not over-readily tempted to equate the develo
                                                                (London, 1951),
    1. H. Frankfort, The Birth of Civilization in the Near East
 pp. 18-19.

                                      235
               ARCHAEOLOGY            FROM      THE    EARTH

of human institutions with the normal processes of organic evolution,
to Darwinize human ‘progress’. As Julian Huxley long ago observed,
“Numerous writers - largely because purely biological are simpler
than human phenomena — have been obsessed with the idea that the
study of biology as such will teach us principles which can be applied
directly and wholesale to human problems.’! The tendency is doubt-
less in part a reaction from the Book of Genesis, but needs a more
serious apologia than that. Organic evolution and social evolution are
not, in the present or any forseeable stage of research, equivalent
processes. Doubtless a remote eye, with a comprehension beyond that
of the mere homunculus, would integrate organic and intellectual
development and see them both as facets of the same crystal, cogs of
the same machine. But to the close-up, myopic view with which we
must content ourselves, the differences between the two processes are
more significant than the resemblances. Professor Gordon Childe has
recently had wise words to say on this matter. Speaking of the nature
of cultural changes, in fact of ‘progress’, he remarks:
   Inventions can be transmitted from one society to another [by diffu-
sion]. But that is just what is impossible in organic evolution. By no
possible means can one species transmit to another the mutation which
has proved beneficial, even though both inhabit the same region. All
that can happen is that natural selection gradually eliminates the species
that lacks the mutation. It is, I suggest, the operation of diffusion more
than anything else that distinguishes social from organic evolution and
explains the curvatures of the lines in any graphic representation of the
process.#
   No doubt the old postulate of universal and identifiable and even
predictable stages in human progress was the wishful thinking of an
age which, both in the moral and in the scientific sphere, was strenu-
ously setting its facts in order. Only, in the scientific sphere at any
rate, its facts were, of course, inadequate. They constituted a sort of
half-knowledge which, as is the way of half-knowledge, has usurped
an authority out of all ratio with its intrinsic worth. It is a paradox
that in an age when on the one hand the rights and prerogatives of
man have been asserted as never before, on the other hand the scien-
tific urge towards system and sequence has tended to put him into a
                1. Essays of a Biologist (London, 1926), p- 75.
               2. Social Evolution (London, 1951), p. 170.

                                    236
          WHAT      ARE    WE    DIGGING       UP,   AND     WHY?

queue or ‘crocodile’. Must we queue up for everything, even for our
humanity? Are we not all, even our scientists, getting excessively
queue-minded? I am indeed at one with G. M. Trevelyan when he
says that, “even if cause and effect could be discovered with accuracy,
they still would not be the most interesting part of human affairs.
It is not man’s evolution but his attainment that is the great lesson of
the past and the highest theme of history.’ There speaks one with a
surviving belief in that archaic phrase, the Nobility of Man. We need
not close our eyes to Man-the-Jelly-fish or Man-the-Whole-time-
Food-gatherer in order to believe in Man-with-Time-to-think-be-
 tween-Meals, in Civilized Man, but the last is, surely, of overriding
 importance. Civilization has been defined as ‘the aggregation of large
 populations in cities; the differentiation within these of primary
 producers (fishers, farmers, etc.), full-time specialist artisans, mer-
 chants, officials, priests, and rulers; an effective concentration of
 economic and political power; the use of conventional symbols for
 recording and transmitting information (writing), and equally con-
 ventional standards of weights and measures of time and space leading
 to some mathematical and calendrical science.’? What a ripeness of
 human mind and effort all that implies! Man in his most fully expres-
 sive phase. As long ago as 1852 the president of the Archaeological
 Institute could pronounce with some show of reason that in archae-
 ology
 it can no longer be assumed that the obscurest periods are the most
 worthy of investigation. Those, on the contrary, should be preferred
 which are richest in the materials intrinsically deserving of study; that
 is, in the visible development of the human intellect, the display of per-
 sonal character, the creative activity of the arts, the variety of the social
 relations, and the analogies or contrasts which these may present to life
 amongst ourselves.

  True, a modern supporter of that view lays himself open to an easy
  charge of atavism, and of choosing as his subject the kind of Man who
_ has had most to say, has expressed it most amply in material things,
  and is therefore the most susceptible subject for the archaeologist.
                   TZ. Gio, 0C.,; p12.
                  _2. Childe, op. cit., p. 161.
                   3. E. Oldfield in Arch. Journ., ix (1852), 3-

                                       237
               ARCHAEOLOGY             FROM     THE    EARTH

 But I think not. After those words had been written, I heard Sir
 Llewellyn Woodward, whom I have already quoted, saying much
 the same thing, though in better shape. He was speaking of certain
  scholars who had, he said, regained for history a place among the
  Muses, affirming that they did so ‘ultimately because they set a high
  value upon the dignity of man’, ‘I repeat this term deliberately,’ he
  added, “because one of the signs of disintegration in our own culture
  is an unwillingness to consider that man has dignity, that his acts may
  be noble. Once this conception of nobility is lost, history becomes
  nothing more than a rag-bag, a pawnbroker’s catalogue, or at best a
  psychiatrist’s case book.’ To this it may be countered that ‘nobility’
  is not of necessity absent from the savage, and that for example a
  Chitelperront point or a Solutrian lance-head may represent an
  achievement which partakes of the quality of intellectual nobility.
~ But [am not prepared to admit the Noble Savage within my general
 definition of the term, for the simple reason that he is a savage, suffer-
 ing from a savage’s restricted vision, tangental reasoning and lack of
 opportunity. 1 have in mind something far more complex and com-
 prehensive; something in fact which implies the background of
 civilization or some approximation to it; where the intelligence has
 been subjected to the widest possible range of stimuli and where its
 fruits have been most widely, quickly, and intelligently shared.
    There may be less hesitation in emphasizing this approach, since
 there is, it seems, a likelihood that it may receive less than its due
patronage from the archaeological student of the future. It seems
probable that the humanistic approach to the study of antiquity may
from now on give way increasingly to what has above been crudely
dubbed the biological approach. That change is due in part to the
fault of the humanists themselves, Until the citizens of Minos and
of the Indus valley arrived with their unread scripts to complicate the
scene, a normal approach to the great civilizations of the ancient
world — those of Greece, Rome, the Nile, Palestine, the land of the
Twin Rivers - was through the study of language. Archaeology
suffered from a linguistic preoccupation, very necessary and valuable
in itself but liable to obscure more material and equally valuable
aspects. For it would appear to be a truism that the preoccupying
study of language is rarely in practice compatible in one and the same
               1. Proc, of the British Academy, xxxvi (1950), I12.

                                     238
           WHAT     ARE   WE   DIGGING      UP,   AND    WHY?

 individual with the scientific, analytic study of phenomena as they
 present themselves in the earth. The linguist is, in my experience, a
 different sort of man from the excavator or the methodical student of
 cultural evidence in the wider sense. He is liable to be Little Johnnie
 Head-in-Air, and we all know what happened to him w'en he came
~ toa hole in the ground. The consequence of al} this has been to isolate
 certain fields of study, notably the classical civilizations, as preserves
 of a particular class of humanists, who have tempered their linguistic
  and historical training with art-criticism but have rarely got down to
  earth and studied the stuff of which their chosen civilizations are com-
  posed, or out of which their civilizations have grown. For them, Pitt
  Rivers has lived in vain. And now their own days appear to be num-
  bered, and with a perverseness which I do not attempt te conceal I
  begin to lament their passing. To-day the study of Greek is very
  definitely on the decline and even Latins under a cloud. We are in a
  period of speedy transition. The most eminent of our materialistic
  archaeologists to-day can, and does, read the odes of Pindar after
  dinner, but he is an elderly gentleman and it may be doubted whether
  there are more of his kind. The time has come to ask, What is replac-
  ing the traditional disciplines? A great variety of skills and techniques,
  but comparatively little that can educate and stimulate the humanistic
  imagination. For this vital quality is, it would seem, onlyin part in-
  nate. It isliable in most of us to be a tender growth and needs.careful
  nourishment. It needs the sort of nourishment that reflective liter-
  ature of the ‘highest quality, with an historical colouring, can best
  supply. It needs something equivalent to a classical education, and it
  is difficult to say what the suitable equivalents are. Whatever they be,
  they are urgently necessary if we are now to save archaeology from
  an overwhelmingly biological bias.
     In the past few moments the argument may seem fo have turned a
  cirde. It began with regret for the stranglehold of the linguistic
                                                                 with
  tradition on certain fields of archaeological study, and ended
  regret for the decline of that tradition. In actual fact I am.once more
  regretting the prospect of archaeology passing wholly into the hands
  of the biologist and the technician, just as much as I havebeen regret-
  ting the older and now doomed monopoly of the linguist and his-
  torian. There is to-day a genuine risk of a new severance between
                                                                         a
  humanism and science in these matters, just at the time when
                                      239
              ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM     THE   EARTH

closer integration of the two is feasible and necessary. The co-opera-
tion of biologists and geologists and botanists and physicists in our
research is a welcome portent; there is more cause for doubt when
we find our research passing increasingly to those whose main educa-
tion has been in these fields of natural science. Man, we may be
forgiven for recalling, is something a good deal more to us than an —
ingredient in the chemistry of the cosmos; and a course of poetry or
philosophy may properly be regarded as no less needful for the young
archaeologist — or the old one for that matter — than a course of pot-
making or pollen-analysis.
  This part of the present chapter may be closed, then, with the truism
that Man is not only the author or vehicle of a culture-trend, he is
also a personality. The struggle towards civilization has been the
struggle towards the fuller development and the more ample expres-
sion of that personality. The corollary is that a fair proportion of our
effort should be expended upon the exploration of sites and regions
which are likely to reflect the major achievements of civilization. At
present we are not doing that. Half a century ago the situation was
different. In r908 Hadrian Allcroft could write: ‘Characteristically
the English, who have done so much for the Hittite, the Minoan, and
the Egyptian, have as yet scarcely concerned themselves to apply the
same methods to the secrets of their own soil.’ To-day the position
is reversed. To-day we are perhaps excessively content with those
little domestic secrets: year after year we devote in our island an
abounding skill and enthusiasm to the huts or graves of the uttermost
rejects of the ancient world. True, we add thereby some particle to
the sum-total of human knowledge. But what does it all really
amount to? How much does it really matter? What of the great world
beyond? I was standing not long ago 5,000 miles away from here, in
the steppe of Turkestan, upon a tumult of mighty mounds whither
age after age came men from China, from the Mediterranean, from
Ind, to exchange their goods and fertilize their ideas, to express the
ancient world socially and aesthetically in the most complex polity
then known to man. Could we but transfer a tithe of our scholarship
for a few seasons to this great workshop of civilization — or indeed to
many others of the same high potentiality — what should we not gain
in our knowledge of human achievement: What could matter to us
more than that?                   .
                                 240
            WHAT      ARE    WE   DIGGING        UP,   AND    WHY?

    This final chapter, therefore, is primarily an appeal for a higher
 measure of concentration, on the part of British archaeologists, upon
 the riper achievements of Man as a social animal. It sometimes seems
 to me that we are liable to start the race in fine form, but to run out
_ halfway down the course. Let us for a change try to come in over the
  last jump. There is no sort of doubt that we in this United Kingdom
  can supply an initial field-training of a quality unsurpassed in the
_ world. Here, in Britain, is our training-ground; but where is our
ultimate fulfilment? The great adventure still awaits us in a shrinking
 and increasingly regimented world; and surely adventurers were ever
 a British export?
    The word ‘adventure’ may be allowed to evoke a tangental sen-
 tence or two about a theme which is near my heart. The term ‘adven-
 ture’ is, of course, a relative one. Some, like the late Andrew Lang,
     are content to find ‘ Adventures among Books’. Others have to go to
     the poles or climb Mount Everest to find them. Many so-called ad-
  _ ventures are entirely spurious. The other day I was reading a prepos-
     terous account by a professional adventurer of a journey through the
 _ Khyber Pass to Kabul, such as is made daily by countless green-
 _ grocers’ vans. It was described as a journey ‘through the Pass of Death
_ to the City of Brooding Suspicion’. But, nonsense apart, I am firmly
  _ of the opinion that our young men and women will lose nothing by
     a little real adventuring, and their search as archaeologists for the
     footsteps of civilized man in Asian or African tracks will add an inci-
     dental stimulus of a kind which is otherwise increasingly hard to find,
   It is now nearly thirty years since John Buchan wrote The Last Secrets,
     heralding the end of discovery in a world which now had nothing
   more to hide from us. Nevertheless, until a very few years ago the
     young Briton was still enticed into the paths of adventure by the
   worldly prospects of governing a tract of Asia many times the size
   _ of England, or of trafficking with tribesmen on the roof of the world.
  Now, in 1952, numbers of these avenues are closed by political
  change. Much of the potential adventure overseas has suddenly gone
  out of our life, and, with it, that sharpening and shaping of the
  character which is a by-product of it. Iam speaking soberly, not as a
  romanticist. Romance is merely adventure remembered in tranquil-
  lity, devoid of the ills and anxieties, fleas, fevers, thirst, and toothache,
_ which are liable to be the more instant experience. Iam commending
                                       241
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM      THE   EARTH

first-hand adventure as a necessary medicine to the character of
the young, and archaeology of the kind which I have been trailing
before the reader is fraught with the right sort of adventure. If ever
the student, in the chill recesses of his northern university, feel some-
thing of ‘that love of the sun, that weariness of the north (cette fatigue
du nord)’ of which Madame de Stiel wrote, with Winckelmann in
mind, let him indulge it for a while and give him opportunity to do
so. It will serve ultimately to enhance his proper patriotism, and
meanwhile will harbour him suitably, as an aspiring humanist, in the
lands of the south and the sunrise where the humanities and science
and civilization were themselves brought to birth. He will gather no
harm and possibly much good.
   It remains to touch lightly on the large problem of the ultimate
potentiality of our archaeological evidence. Whither, at the best, can
it lead us? What, after all, matters most in this discipline of ours?
If we are, perhaps, to select our objective with a little more thought
for essentials than we sometimes do, what shall ultimately govern
our choice? Recently, in an after-dinner discussion on relative values,
it was rashly Suggested to a Palestinian archaeologist that Palestine
was rather a backwater. “Yes,” he replied modestly, “but, after all, we
did produce the Trinity.’ The conversation then lapsed. I have since
been wondering afresh what the value of our archaeological evidence
really is. What do our bits and pieces amount to? Listen to the grave
words which Dr John Donne uttered on this subject three and a half
centuries ago?
  The ashes of an Oak in the Chimney are no epitaph of that oak, to tell
me how high or how large that was; it tells me not what flocks it shel-
tered while it stood, nor what men it ‘hurt when it fell. The dust of
great persons’ graves is speechless, too; it says nothing, it distinguishes
nothing. As soon the dust of a wretch whom thou wouldest not, as of —
a prince whom thou couldest not look upon will trouble thine eyes if
the wind blow it thither; and when a whirlewind hath blown the dust
of the Churchyard into the Church, and the man sweeps out the dust
of the Church into the Churchyard, who will undertake to sift those
dusts and to pronounce, this is the Patrician, this is the noble flour, and
this the yeomanly, this the Plebeian bran?
  Who indeed? Not the poor archaeologist, who may at best bottle.
the dust and send 1t hopefully to Professor Zeuner. Dr Donne cannot —
                                    242
          WHAT     ARE    WE   DIGGING     UP,   AND   WHY?

_ be gainsaid, but see how he cuts at one of the roots of our study! In
 a classic sentence it has been observed that a great nation may leave
 behind it a very poor rubbish-heap. And are we, as practising archae-
_ clogists, to award the palm to the unknown Sumerian who was
 buried at Ur with sixty-three helmeted soldiers, grooms, and gold-
 garlanded damsels, two chariots and six bullocks, or to the Nazarene
 in a loin-cloth who was nailed up on Golgotha between two thieves?
 I merely ask the question, but cannot help feeling that, were archae-
 ology alone the arbiter, the answer would not be in doubt. Give us
 helmets and gold garlands every time; bread and circuses give us,
 provided that the bread is carbonized and the circuses well-furnished
 with good solid bronze and marble. But let us at least, in our grati-
 tude for these things, remember the missing values that cannot be
appraised in inches or soil-samples or smudges in the earth.
    All this is not very encouraging. The archaeologist may find the
 tub but altogether miss Diogenes. He may answer with botanical
 precision Browning’s question, “What porridge had John Keats?’
 without a passing recognition of the author of Endymion. He must
 accept these risks, consoling himself with the reflection that no single
 approach to human accomplishment can be other than partial and
 chancy. The literary historian who overlooks art and craftsmanship
 and environment may lose as much as the archaeologist who can
 produce for us a harp without its music or a tub without its philo-
 sopher. Let us therefore count our blessings. We cannot fully read the
 language of the Minoans, but their palaces and frescoes, their wares
 and jewels, are themselves a pictographic language that tells us not a
 little of their way of living, and hints, however vaguely, at their way
of thinking. We must be content to do what we can with the material
 vouchsafed to us, in full consciousness of its incompleteness.
    Such is the uneven foundation on which the archaeologist is
 expected to attempt a vital reconstruction of man’s past achievement.
 And in this term ‘reconstruction’ is included literal, three-dimen-
 sional re-creation: the Palace of Minos as rebuilt by Sir Arthur Evans,
“Little Woodbury as re-created by Mrs Jacquetta Hawkes and her
 colleagues (Pl. 23), the Celtic chariot as set on its wheels again by
 Sir Cyril Fox. Whilst lauding such reconstruction, however, we may
 be well aware of its dangers. In the task of reconstruction it may be
 suspected that we are safest when we set aside the great civilizations
                                   243
              ARCHAEOLOGY         FROM    THE   EARTH

of antiquity and confine ourselves as anthropologists to the less
evolved communities, to folk whose anxious existence was concerned
mainly with preservation from hunger, gods, and neighbours. Whilst
we can never hope to follow in detail the convolutions of that intri-
cate organism called the ‘untutored mind’ and will tumble inevitably
into many gaps in its reasoning, at least its meanderings will lie
generally within the horizon of our comprehension. But when, in
the security and amplitude of city-life (civilization), men acquired
leisure to think between meals, they began also to escape us intel-
lectually, unless they were fully and intelligibly literate. Thus, it is
not very difficult for the archaeologist to reconstruct the humanity of
Little Woodbury but it is near the limit of his powers to revitalize
Mohenjo-daro, for all its astonishing completeness and its admirable —
plumbing. Mohenjo-daro remains an isolated and petrified complex
of another world, a dead city of the mlechchhas or aliens whose unin-
telligible words are not compensated for by any adequate pictorial
art. The difference lies not merely in the relative dimensions of the
two problems but, above all, in their widely differing quality.
   Be it repeated, all this is not very encouraging. But the task of
reconstruction, whether three-dimensional or two-dimensional, is one
from which the archaeologist must not shrink. It is in a way the crown
of his work. And it is surprising and reassuring to find how much
good constructive material can in fact be extracted from a rubbish-
pit —or lic implicit, for that matter, in the tale of a tub.
   That is the end of the present argument, but a postscript may be
added. The writer represents the end of an active generation. From
his momentary vantage-point, on the one hand he looks back upon
the path which he and his colleagues have tried to mark out during
the past thirty years, and on the other hand peers hopefully into the
mists of the future. Of the past thirty years, it may be averred that       —
we have had to devote a disproportionate share to the invention and        —
elaboration of basic techniques. That process will, of course, con-
tinue in the future, but we can perhaps claim — although it is rash to
prophesy — to have reached a point from which technical improve-
 ment will be incidental and mainly in detail. A good deal of the rough    —
pioneering has been done; it remains to exploit and develop. A
second retrospective observation is that we have perforce devoted a             _
great deal of our time to the systematization of cultures. This was
                                 244
           WHAT     ARE    WE   DIGGING      UP,   AND   WHY?

    inevitable. Thirty years ago we knew all too little where we were, all
    too little of the extent and direction of our material. We have had to
    set laboriously about the preparation of a grammar of our subject.
    Whilst amplifying that grammar, it is for the future to use it con-
    structively and significantly. To change the metaphor, we have, as
_ was remarked in Chapter 10, been preparing time-tables; let us now
    have some trains. Cultural catalogues are all very well, so far as they
 _ go. But they do not, of themselves, go very far. They are a means to
    an end. An admitted need of the present day is the methodical explor-
    ation of the social unit on a more expansive scale than has been normal
    in the past. The phase of the sondage or isolated trial-pit, however
    skilfully executed, is now in large measure past. What we need now is
    horizontal excavation on an extensive scale. Let us take, as an example,
    an Anglo-Saxon cemetery. It is not enough to know its general period
  _and character. We now require more precise and ample information.
    How many graves does it contain in its entirety? What range of time
    does it cover? What social grades does it indicate? What population-
    unit does it represent? To answer these questions, we need the careful
    uncovering of a whole cemetery, not merely a few graves here and
    there. And, in appraising its significance, a suggestion may be offered
    if only as a jeu d’esprit. Let some enterprising investigator make an
   actuarial and chronological survey of the reasonably modern grave-
    stones of some existing non-industrial village in England or Scotland,
    and compare its grave-groups with the equivalent periodic census-
    returns for that village. What ratio does the one bear to the other?
    A series of such experiments, used with proper care and a good deal
    of reservation, might introduce a new element of semi-objectivity
  into the population-problems which are of such vital importance to
    our understanding of past societies. Indeed, if I were asked to name
    one problem more than another which demands investigation during
    the next thirty years, whether here or abroad, I should say, ‘the
   problem of numbers’. It is not an inappropriate exhortation in a
   census-year, and within a few months of Professor Max Mallowan’s
   great discovery of the census-record of Assyrian Nimrud, to urge
   that the people of the past be numbered. No light task for the archae-
   ologist, but an essential one if we are to transform dry bones into
   something approaching live social history. Let us - and by risa
   mean ‘you of the new generation’ - get down to this task with

t
3
                                    245
              ARCHAEOLOGY          FROM    THE    EARTH

steadfastness and determination. Long ago, at Troy, at Silchester, at
Mohenjo-daro, at Glastonbury, we learned to hack open the earth
and to broadcast its treasures. Later, we learned by careful small-scale
dissection how to explore analytically in depth. We now need full-
scale three-dimensional excavation, combining the merits of both
methods; the total excavation of complete settlements; the provision
of reliable data for estimating the density and social structure of popu-
lation. Up to date, very little of the requisite work has been under-
taken and its distribution is very uneven. Indeed, nearly the whole
social problem lies before us, and we are now at last fit to tackle it.
I envy the new generation its great opportunity, as never before, to
dig up people rather than mere things, and to enable us, in the fulness
of time, to view the past and the present as a single, continuous and
not always unsuccessful battle between Man and his Environment
and, above all, between Man and himself.                       '
  And from the privilege of the printed page one final challenge may
be thrown to the young archaeologist. In years past, Victor Hugo
reminded us that we are all under sentence of death.
   We have an interval [added Walter Pater] and then our place knows
us no more, ... Our one chance lies in expanding that interval, in get-
ting as many pulsations as possible into the given time. Great passions
may give us this quickened sense of life, ecstasy and sorrow of love, the   —
various forms of enthusiastic activity, disinterested or otherwise, which
come naturally to many of us. Only be sure it is passion— that it does
yield you this fruit of a quickened, multiplied consciousness.
Those are fine words of Walter Pater’s, finely thought. They may                —
here serve to remind us, once and for all, that the scientist, the
archaeologist, is no mere clerk in a counting-house, no mere drafts-
man in a drawing-office. Passion, enthusiasm, call it what you will -
‘vitality’, the overworked élan vital will do — that is the basic quality
which our discipline exacts from us. And if you who are entering
upon it have no vital urge within, turn, I beg of you, to some less
human and more finite avocation than the study of mankind. There
are enough already of the house-painters who ape the artist.




                                  246
               SBHEEECT    BIBLIOGRAPHY

R. J. C. Atkinson, Field Archaeology (London, 1946).
K. M. Kenyon, Beginning in Archaeology (London, 1952).
GRAHAME Crark, Archaeology and Society (London, 1939).
O. G. S. CRAwForD, Archaeology in the Field (London, 1953).
F, E. ZeEungER, Dating the Past (and ed., London, 1950).
A. Lamine (editor), La Découverte du passé (Paris, 1952).
H. J. PLenDERLEITH, The Preservation ofAntiquities (London, 1934).
Giyn E. Dantet, A Hundred Years of Archaeology (London, 1950).
M. B. Cooxson, Photography for Archaeologists (London, 1954).




                                 247
                                             INDEX

      Adventure, 241 ff.                           Chanhu-daro, 73
      Afghanistan, 110                             Charsada, 109, 110
      Alaja Hiiyiik, 42                            Childe, Professor V. Gordon,       229,
      Allcroft, Hadrian, 240                           236
      Amaravati, 144                               Chronology, 38 ff.
      Anderson, Dr E. C., 50                       Churchill, Sir Winston S., 228
      Animal bones, 191 f.                         Cists, 118
      Arikamedu, 73, 143                           Clark, Professor Grahame, 34, $2-3,
      Arnold, Matthew, 230                             100, 216—17, 223, 231
      Arnold, Dr R. J., 50                         Coffins, 101, 118, 124
      Arretine pottery, 59                         Coity urns, 128
                                                   Control-pits, 84—5
                                                   Cookson, M. B., 200
      Bactra, 109
                                                   Corpora, 211-12
      Baksheesh, 176 f.
                                                   Cotton, Mrs M. Aylwin, 182
      Barrie, J. M., 155, 214
                                                   Crawford, O. G. S., 216, 230, 247
      Barrows, 21-2, 58-9,      101,   113 ff,
                                                   Curle, Dr James, 216
         119 ff.
      Beech Bottom dyke, 138
      Bersu, Dr Gerhard, 34, 78,       151         Darwin, Charles, 223
      Bethel, 34                                   De Geer, 43
      Bhubaneswar, 148                             Dendrochronology, 46 f.
 Birdoswald, 63                                    Deputy director of an excavation,
      Blackburn, Dr Kathleen, 63                     160 ff.
      Brahmagiri, 66, 67, 144 ff.                  Diospolis Parva, 53
      Braidwood, R. J., 52                         Director of an excavation, 154 ff.
      Brickwork, $4                                Donne, Dr John, 242-3
      British Association, 213, 221                Douglass, Dr A. E., 47
      British Museum, 20                           Draftsman, 169 ff.
      Browning, Robert, 243                        Dunstable Downs, 115
      Buchan, John, 241                            Dura-Europos, 107
      Buddhist stupas, 120
      Burgh Castle, 99                             Earthquakes, 42-3
      Burials, 17-18, 21-2, 58, 87, 100-1,         Egyptian calendar, 41
         113 ff.                                   Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 68, 73-4
      Bushe-Fox, J. P., 34, 100                    Ervine, St John, 223
                                                   Evans, Sir Arthur, 43, 233-4, 243
       Caerleon amphitheatre, 95 ff.               Evans, Dr Joan, 233
       *Carbon 14’, 50                             Evans, Sir John, 212, 232
       Cemeteries, 87, 124                         Evolution, 25, 39
       Chagar Bazar, 42                            Excavation, vertical and horizontal,
       Chandravalli, 44, 144, 147                       82 ff, 112, 149 ff, 244 ff.

                                                 249
rs.
                                   INDEX

Fergusson, James, 146                      Jargon, 222
Field-chemiist, 168-9                      Jarmo, 52
Field-laboratory, 195 ff.                  Jeans, Sir J. H., 223
Fluorine test, 49                          Jefferson, Thomas, 58 f.
Foucher, A., 110                           Jericho, 42
Fox, Sir Cyril, 17-18, 115, 216, 231,      Jones, Sir William, 25
  243
Frankfort, Professor Henri, 235            Kent’s Cavern, 70
Frantz, Alison, 203                        Kenyon, Miss K. M., 14, 98
Frazer, Sir James, 223                     Khafajah, 46
French Prehistoric Society, 29             Knossos, 43
                                           Koldewey, R., 99
Galley Hill skull, 49                      Kondapur, 144
Gedye, Ione, 195
Gergovia, 25                               Labels, 72, 184
Gezer, 62, 68                              Labourers, 172 ff.
‘Ghost’ walls, 97-8                        Lang, Andrew, 241
Gibbon, Edward, 149                        Leakey, Dr > S23 B 230
Glastonbury lake-village, 150              Leland, 18
Gowers, Sir Ernest, 214                    Libby, Dr W. F., 50, 53
Graphs, 217                                Limes Commission, German,          18, 34
Greenwell, Canon, 21-2                     Little Woodbury         farmstead, 151—a,
Grimes, W. F., 126-30                            243-4
                                           Lydney Park Roman site, 209
Hadrian’s Wall, 63—4
Haldane, Professor J. B. S., 223           Maiden Castle, Dorset, 81—2
Harappa, 35, 36, 87, 101-2, 107, I1I—      Mallowan, Professor Max, 245
   112, 124                                Mankato advance, 52
Haverfield, Professor H. J., 223, 233      Marshall, Sir John, 108, 151
Hawkes, Professor C. F. C., 217            Maski, 144
Hawkes, Mrs Jacquetta, 56-7, 219-          Masonry, $4
  220, 223, 243                            Merewether, Dean, 114
Hiuen Tsang, 109                           Mesolithic, 43, 52
Hugo, Victor, 246                          Minoan Civilization, 135-6
Huxley, Julian, 215, 223, 236              Mohenjo-daro, 69, 107, 150, 244
Hyderabad State, 22, 144                   Mosaic pavements, lifting of, 132 ff.
Hywel Dda, 63                              Mouldings, 54
                                           Mud-brick, 36, 103-4
Ilustration, 209, 217 f., 224 ff           Mysore, 64-5, 144
Indexing coins, 190-1
Indexing ‘small-finds’, 189~90                 Napoleon I, 15
India, 141 ff.                                 Napoleon III, 18, 23
India, Archaeological Survey of, 34            Newbould, Miss Theodora, 14
Indus Valley Civilization, 39, 69, 107         Newstead, 216
Ishtar Gate, Babylon, 99                       Newton, Sir Isaac, 56

                                         250
                                      INDEX

Oakley, Dr Kenneth, 49, 50                   Royal Commission on Historical
O’Neil, B. H. St J., 211                       Monuments (England), 170
Oven, prehistoric clay, 128                  Royal Society’s Scientific Informa-
                                                   tion Conference, 214

Packing pottery, 189                                                        ’


Pakistan, 39, 44, 109, 150                   Scarborough, Iron Age site at, 45
Palaeolithic cultures, 44                    Schaeffer, Dr Claude, 42
Pater, Walter, 246                           Schliemann, 23, 59
Petrie, Sir W. M. Flinders, 29, 45, 53,      Seamer, §2, 100
   68, 104, 106-7, I12, 142, 209 ff.         Sections, interpretation of, 22 ff;
Phillips, C. W., 101 ff, 121-2                  labelling of, 71 ff.; recording of,
Photography, 166, 200 ff.                          74 ff.
Piggott, Mrs Stuart, 231                     Sialk, 32
Piggott, Professor Stuart, 150, 216          Silchester, 150
Piltdown skull, so                           Simpson, F. G., 45, 63
Pindar, 239                                  Sisupalgarh, 148
Pitt Rivers, 13, 18, 25 ff, 34, 78,          Site-supervisors, 162 ff.
   I2I, 151, 209 ff., 216, 217, 218-19       Skendleby long-barrow, rorff., 121-3
Plenderleith, Dr H. J., 132, 195             Smith, William (‘Strata’), $7
Pollen, 44                                   Society of Antiquaries of Scotland,
Pondicherry, 59, 142, 143                          20
Pottery-assistant, 164 ff                    Soils, 192
Pottery-drawing, 171 £212                    Solar radiation, 48
Pottery-shed, 182 ff                             Sondages, 81-2, 106-7
Publication, 209 ff                              Spengler, Oswald, 235
Publicity, 218 ff                                ‘Square’ layout, 64 ff, 82 ff.
                                                 Stael, Madame de, 242
                       of    excavation,         Staff of an excavation, 153 ff.
Quadrant     method
  714 £                                          Stanwick sword and scabbard, 131-2
                                                 Stoffel, Colonel, 23, 25, 82
Quiller-Couch, Sir Arthur, 222, 224
                                                 Storage-pits, 62
                                                 Straight-joints, 98-9
Ras Shamra, 42                                   ‘Strategy’ of excavation, 135 ff.
Recording, 68-9, 86, 211-12                      Stratification, 44-5, 56 ff.
Richborough, 100                                 Structures, excavation of, 91 ff.
Richmond, Professor L A., 34, 93,                Stukeley, 232
  232                                            Sumner, Heywood, 170
River-gravels, 48                                Surveying, 166 ff.
Roman Britain, 37                                Sutton-Hoo ship-burial, 102 ff.,126 ff.
Roman coins, 139 (Beech Bottom),                 Swanscombe skull, 49
  142, 147-8 (India), 211 (record-
  ing)                                           “Tactics” of excavation, 135 ff.
Roof-trusses, 54-5
                                                 Tarsus, 42
Rouletted ware from India, 144 its
                                                 Taxila, 44-5, 86, 108
Roy, General, 18
                                           251
                                 INDEX

Taylor, Captain Meadows,     22, 34,    Van Giffen, Dr, 34, 100, I19
  146                                    Varved clays, 43-4
Tel Brak, 42                             Vegetation, 63-4
Tell el Ajjul, 32                        Verulamium, 97-8, 99, 136 ff.
Tell el Amarna, 42                       Virginia, 58
Tell en-Nasbeh, 53-4
Tells, 109, I1I—12                       ‘Wheathampstead oppidum, 140, 141
Tepe Gawra, 42                           Wheeler, Mrs T. V., 132
Timberwork, 99-103                       Whitman, Walt, 73
Tools, 178 ff.                           Winkelbury camp, 28-9
Town-sites, 106 ff.                      Wisconsin glaciation, 52
Toynbee, Arnold, 232                     Woodward, Sir Llewellyn, 230, 238
Trenches, 86 ff.                         Woolley, Sir Leonard, 124, 125, 130,
Trevelyan, G. M., 214-15, 219, 223,          223
  237                                    Wor barrow, 29, 121
Trial-trenches, 63 f., 106
Troy, 42, 59                             Xerxes, 15
Typology, 53

Ugarit, 42                               Ysceifiog, 115
Ur, 130
Ussher, Archbishop, 41                   Zeuner, Professor F. E., 47, 242
                    “




                                       252
         age eee             —
       ates
       f    mi     -,
                        re   r

      ov




                                      i
Some other Pelican Books         —_


   are described on the
      next few pages
  /
                 EARLY ANATOLIA
                       SETON LLOYD
                              4354
Asia Minor is a land-bridge between two continents. On a
score of occasions in historical times, it has seen the passage of
invading armies: Europeans bent upon the conquest of the
ast or oriental conquerors marching against Europe. Earlier
it had been populated by migrations from both continents,
and in our own time much light has been thrown upon the
character and behaviour of its ancient inhabitants by excava-
tions and archaeological exploration. From the establishment
in the Stone Age of the first settled communities, the progress
of human achievement has been traced in detail, through a
period of increasing sophistication in the third millennium
3.C., to the pomp or squalor of the Bronze Age kingdoms and
the advent of enlightenment from Greece. Schliemann, un-
earthing the predecessors of Homeric Troy; Woolley and Law-
rence among the sculptures and hieroglyphs of Carchemish;
Turkish archaeologists recovering strange emblems of gold
and bronze from the tombs of Alaja or tablets from the offices
of Assyrian merchants at Kultepe: all these have contributed
to the creation of a historical saga, in which the rise and fall of
a Hittite dynasty was no more than an isolated incident.
 ’ The author presents in a comprehensible pattern the raw
material of archaeological discovery, from which the ancient
history of Anatolia is now being painstakingly reconstructed.
     Volume One in The Pelican History ofEngland
                 ROMAN          BRITAIN
                     I, A. RICHMOND

                             A315

This book provides a general picture of the Roman province _
of Britain during the period from a.p. 43 until the fifth cen-
tury. It does not attempt to furnish a continuous historical
account, for which neither the written sources nor the archaeo-
logical material can provide enough evidence. The nearest ap-
proach to this is in the description of the military subjugation
and organization of the province, dealt with here in consider-
able detail in an attempt to relate it to general policy, and to
give a closer account of its changes than is usually attempted.
The towns are considered analytically, with emphasis on their
social function in the several communities of which they were
the centres, and upon their connexions both with the Roman
state and the native tribe, and attention is given to the smaller
centres both in civil and military areas. Religious cults, their
buildings and their artistic expression are brought into relation
with the provincial social order. Commerce and the country-
side are the themes of other chapters, and the development of
provincial resources in agriculture and raw products is de-
cribed. The book is illustrated by 8 pages of plates.
   The Listener said of the Pelican History of England - “As a
portent in the broadening of popular culture the influence of
this wonderful series has yet to receive full recognition and
precise assessment.’
    ALSO     BY    SIR   MORTIMER          WHEELER


                          ROME
   BEYOND         THE    IMPERIAL        FRONTIERS

                            A 335


 The Roman Empire extended from the Clyde to the
 Tigris, but far beyond these boundaries Roman goods
 penetrated through trade, diplomacy, and ‘drift’. The
 extent of this penetration is illustrated by the occurrence
 of wares from the same Italic factories in Britain on the
 one hand, and in southern India, 6,000 miles away, on the
 other. For the Indian material, the author’s own excava-
  tions are in an important measure responsible, notably in
  the discovery of a Romano-Indian trading-station on the
  shores of the Bay of Bengal. To this trading-station
  Roman table-wares and wines were carried in large quan-
  tities by sea and land during the first century a.D.; while
  in Central Asia contacts of a comparable kind profoundly
  affected the development of an important school of art.
  In Africa, south of the Roman provinces, French and
  Italian exploration has revealed Roman relics in the depths
_ of the Sahara, and in Europe, beyond the frontiers of the
  Rhine and Danube, rich deposits of Roman glass and
  metal-wares have long been known. The book brings
  these far-flung discoveries up to date in a succinct and
  readable form, with the aid of many plates and maps.

    ‘Sir Mortimer Wheeler gallantly professes indebtedness
 to his predecessors . . . but his claim to have added occa-
 sionally to their material and to “give it perhaps a new
 actuality and a new perspective” is altogether too modest.’
 — The Times Literary Supplement.
                                 Lotte Meitner-Graf


       Sir Mortimer Wheeler, who has been Director of
       the National Museum of Wales and Keeper of the
       London Museum, was the first Director of the Insti-
       tute of Archaeology in the University of London,
       and later Director-General of Archaeology in India
       and Adviser in Archaeology to the Government of
       Pakistan. In the intervals of war service, during
       which he attained the rank of Brigadier in the,
       Eighth Army, he excavated Roman forts in Wales,
       the Roman city of Verulamium, the famous pre-
       historic fortress-town of Maiden Castle in Dorset,
       and other sites both in this country and in northern
       France. Whilst in India, he discovered the site of a
       Roman trading-station on the coast of the Bay of
       Bengal and carried out a series of excavations on
       prehistoric and early historic sites, including those
       of the Indus Civilization of the third millennium
       B.C, He is President of the Society of Antiquaries °
       of London. In addition to his more academic work,
       he has broadcast widely on archaeological sub-
       jects, particularly in the well-known television pro-
       gramme, Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral.




Less
