        Chapter 5
1111
2
        Eventful contexts
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1011
1
2
3       Pompeii, in common with many places on the Grand Tour of the nineteenth
4       century, attracted the attention of many literary ﬁgures, including Madame
5       de Staël; in her novel Corinne, published in 1807, she conjures an image
6       of Pompeii that has become almost archetypal:
7
8           In Rome you simply ﬁnd relics of antiquity, and in these you just trace the
9           political history of past ages; but at Pompeii the private life of the ancients
20111       offers itself to your reﬂection. The volcano which covered this city with
1           cinders has preserved it from the ravages of time. If the buildings had been
2           exposed to air, they would have decayed, but this buried remembrance is
3           perfectly preserved. Pictures and bronzes have all their ﬁrst beauty, and
4           vessels of domestic use are in entire preservation. The amphoras stand
5           ready for the coming feast, and the corn which was being ground is there.
6           The remains of a lady, still ornamented with the decorations she wore on
7           the day the volcano interrupted the feast, are seen, with her dried arms
8           ﬁlling no longer the bracelets of precious stones which encircle them –
9           you realise how this ﬁgure was struck down in the midst of life.
30111                                  (From Corinne, ou l’Italie by Madame de Staël,
1                                                     quoted in Leppmann 1966: 106)
2
3       This ‘buried remembrance’ is, in a way, a description of the archaeological
4       record; and even though the circumstances of preservation at Pompeii are
5       rare, Madame de Staël’s description is interesting because of the contrast
6       she draws with isolated relics, a contrast one might say between archae-
7       ology and art history. In the same passage, she further reﬂects on this
8       distinction and in particular the imagination needed to ‘penetrate the past;
9       to interrogate the human heart across the ages’. And yet, of course, this
40111   concept of the archaeological record as being a fossilised moment in time
1       came under great criticism in the New Archaeology, being dubbed the
2       ‘Pompeii Premise’ (see p. 148). At the same time there is clearly a recog-
3       nition that the remains are somehow indicative of events and not simply
44111   a repository of facts, events in which human beings are caught up.
                                                              Eventful contexts   147

1111       One of the major consequences of conceptualising the archaeological
2       record explicitly in terms of actions and/or events has been the development
3       of a whole series of studies which attempt to understand the relationship
4       between what is found archaeologically and the events which produced
5       that record. But this conceptualisation has changed since Madame de Staël’s
6       day, even since the early archaeologists of the late nineteenth century.
7       Wheeler’s description of the sacking of Maiden Castle in the site report is
8       not something commonly encountered today, or indeed among most of his
9       contemporaries – it is an interpretation of the archaeological record through
1011    unique, narrative events, closer to Madame de Staël than to Gordon Childe:
1
2           What happened there is plain to read, the regiment of artillery, which
3111        normally accompanied a legion on campaign, was ordered into action,
4           and put down a barrage of iron-shod ballista-arrows over the eastern
5           part of the site. Following this barrage the infantry advanced up the
6           slope, cutting its way from rampart to rampart, tower to tower. In the
7           innermost bay of the entrance, close outside the actual gates, a number
8           of huts had recently been built; these were now set alight, and under
9           the rising clouds of smoke the gates were stormed and the position
20111       carried. But resistance had been obstinate and the fury of the attackers
1           was roused. For a space, confusion and massacre dominated the scene.
2           Men and women, young and old, were savagely cut down, before the
3           legionaries were called to heel and the work of systematic destruction
4           begun.
5                                                              (Wheeler 1943: xx)
6
7       This kind of ‘ﬁctionalised’ re-creation is not how we would generally under-
8       stand events in the past in archaeology today; the difference is not so much
9       in the rejection of unique or speciﬁc events (see discussion in Chapter 4),
30111   but rather with its ﬁctional rhetoric (but see Spector 1991). When we
1       approach the archaeological record today, we generally think of events in
2       terms of structured activity or behaviour. This change marks a kind of
3       ‘behavioural turn’ in archaeology linked to the developments in the 1950s
4       and 1960s and can be illustrated by two examples. In Britain, the site of
5       Glastonbury discussed in Chapter 2 and excavated by Bulleid and Gray at
6       the beginning of the twentieth century was presented in terms of its ﬁnds
7       – site plans invariably marked ﬁnds locations and little more. David Clarke’s
8       re-interpretation of it in the 1970s shows quite clearly how conceptions
9       had changed – he looked at the site in terms of social units and the organ-
40111   isation of space (Clarke 1972). Regardless of how valid his interpretation
1       is (for it has been subject to later critique – e.g. Barrett 1987), the very
2       nature of it marks a radical change of perspective. Similarly, in the USA
3       the site of Snaketown was excavated in the early part of the twentieth
44111   century, and was presented in the manner of the day in terms of artefact
        148   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    sequence and chronology. In 1981 it was re-examined by Wilcox who pasted
2       disparate plans together and found all kinds of features and was able to
3       look at the site’s internal organisation and spatial variation (Wilcox 1981).
4          These examples show how new perceptions of the archaeological record
5       have shifted to issues of how sites, features and artefacts are structured in
6       relation to each other because of the interest in the behavioural facet of
7       material culture. How is this contemporary approach characterised, though?
8       In Chapter 2 we discussed in a historical perspective how things are found
9       – the methods used and the concepts behind those methods. In this penul-
1011    timate chapter, I want to return to the ﬁeld and look more closely at the con-
1       temporary relationship between our methods and such broader concepts. In
2       general, the nature of this relationship has a dual aspect. On the one hand
3       lies a starting point of the archaeological remains themselves and a working
4       up to the behaviour or events which produced them (e.g. stratigraphy, geo-
5       morphology, micromorphology) – what, in discussion of analogies, might be
6       called subject-side studies. On the other hand there is research, working from
7       observed human behaviour or natural processes to analogous material
8       remains (e.g. ethnoarchaeology, experimental archaeology) – what might be
9       called source-side or actualistic study. Rarely does any study of the archaeo-
20111   logical record not involve both sides of this equation at some level, either
1       explicitly or referentially. I want to discuss this equation and critically
2       explore the nature of the bridge made between both sides. Ultimately, I will
3       ask what status the source-side or actualistic studies have in relation to
4       archaeology and, indeed, what status archaeology has as a discipline.
5
6
        The formation of the archaeological record
7
8
        The nature of the archaeological record
9
30111   Madame de Staël’s interpretation can be described as a classic example of
1       the ‘Pompeii Premise’ – that is, reading events directly from remains as if
2       they had just been left yesterday. It is worth brieﬂy delving into the
3       Binford–Schiffer debate about the ‘Pompeii Premise’ because I believe it
4       has ramiﬁcations beyond the internal quarrels of processualists (Binford
5       1981; Schiffer 1977). Schiffer famously argued that the archaeological record
6       is not a direct representation of past events but has undergone various
7       changes which result from two broad kinds of process, called C- and N-
8       transforms. C-transforms indicate cultural processes which affect the record
9       such as re-use of objects, discard practices, reclamation and disturbance
40111   activities, while N-transforms refer to natural or environmental processes
1       such as weathering or larger-scale climatic changes (Schiffer 1987).
2       However, as Binford notes, the very idea of C-transforms does not make
3       much sense – it implies that the archaeological record is distorted – and
44111   one can only uphold this if one views that record as, at the point of its
                                                                Eventful contexts   149

1111    formation, a kind of ‘Pompeii’, that is a fossilised record of a living cultural
2       system (Binford 1981). How can a C-transform be distinguished from the
3       cultural system on which it is supposed to act?
4          To give an example: a recently ploughed ﬁeld might bring a scatter of
5       artefacts to the surface. If we wanted to say anything about this, particu-
6       larly about the composition of the ﬁnds, we need to understand that this
7       scatter may be a product of natural processes such as slopewash rather than
8       the residue of an in situ activity area. This much is ﬁne, and one can legit-
9       imately talk of N-transforms; but if the artefact scatter is the result of
1011    middening, for example, then it is more problematic. On the one hand,
1       the ﬁnds – say potsherds – are not in what we would call their usual context
2       (for example as whole vessels in a domestic structure) but broken up and
3111    far away from the settlement core. To read off information about pottery
4       use and vessel function, etc., we have to understand the processes which
5       have affected the pottery and removed them from their ‘normal’ context
6       into the ﬁeld – in this case, breakage, deposition and middening. All exam-
7       ples of C-transforms. Yet, on the other hand, all these processes are equally
8       part of the cultural or systemic context as vessel use, all equally ‘normal’
9       uses of pottery – to separate these C-transforms from the broader systemic
20111   context is very dubious indeed.
1          Binford’s point is well made – and yet there is a sense in which he still
2       retains a notion of the archaeological record as a ‘fossil’ – not necessarily
3       as a Pompeii, but of the cultural system itself. Where Binford and Schiffer
4       agree is on the notion of distinguishing the archaeological context from
5       the systemic context (of the living culture), and for Binford in particular
6       this means that the former is a static representation of something dynamic
7       (Binford 1981). It is a representational model of the archaeological record,
8       as something which stands for something else. Moreover it does appear that
9       Binford would at least recognise with Schiffer that such representation is
30111   open to distortion – although not from the system which it supposedly
1       represents (for how can the ‘original’ distort the ‘copy’ – this is what
2       Schiffer’s C-transforms amount to), but from external, natural/environ-
3       mental processes – with which Binford has no problem (Binford 1981).
4          Binford’s critique was very much directed at the concept of transforms
5       and not formation processes in general, although Schiffer’s later book
6       Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record largely reafﬁrms the distinc-
7       tion between systemic and archaeological context and asserts that moving
8       from one to the other requires the study of formation processes (Schiffer
9       1987: 3–7). In it he also criticises other views, in particular earlier and
40111   more simplistic formulations such as an entropy theory or sampling bias
1       theory (ibid.: 8–11). In the former, propounded by Ascher, the older the
2       site, the more affected it will be, three phases being deﬁned: inhabited (i.e.
3       occupation), ghost (i.e. abandonment) and archaeological (i.e. excavation)
44111   (Ascher 1968). The latter view (ascribed to Cowgill) appears as a slightly
        150     Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    more sophisticated version of this, where an artefact population is said to
2       undergo various processes which increasingly affect its composition so that
3       the archaeological sample ﬁnally retrieved is not necessarily representative
4       of the original population.
5          This view has been repeated in British archaeology, in particular through
6       discussions of sampling theory and ﬁeld survey techniques; for example
7       Haselgrove gives a four-level structure to the archaeological record, where
8       the target population refers to the extant remains and the sampled popula-
9       tion, the accessible remains (Haselgrove 1985). In contrast, Schiffer argued
1011    for a transformation theory which rather than making probabilistic assump-
1       tions about how the systemic context differs from the archaeological one,
2       actually studies analogous processes and attempts to make generalisations
3       about these processes. A critical difference between this view and many of
4       the others is that formation processes do not just degrade artefact patterns
5       but might actually create them (ibid.).
6          There is little doubt that no other work has superseded Schiffer’s for its
7       detail and breadth, but it also seems true that the book has not generated
8       as much debate as the original formulation. Much of this relates to the
9       development of post-processualism and the shift towards a different issue.
20111   Discussion of the archaeological record since the 1980s has increasingly
1       been focusing on the broader interpretation of cultural formation processes
2       (CFP), having accepted Binford’s rejection of the distinction between C-
3       transforms and the living system/context (e.g. systems vs. texts/practices;
4       see Patrik 1985). Thus all the examples Schiffer gives of CFP – re-use,
5       deposition, reclamation and disturbance – can be seen as facets of a cultural
6       context indistinguishable from production or primary use. In particular, his
7       distinction of primary or de facto from secondary refuse is dubious. It is
8       misleading and arbitrary to draw a line between any of these. Indeed the
9       very linearity of the process – production → use → discard – is question-
30111   able; one can almost see this tripartite structure as a metaphor for the
1       conventional archaeological process, but in reverse (see Table 6).
2          Ascher actually says as much in his entropic view: ‘The path of disor-
3       ganisation from “inhabited”, through “ghost” and on to archaeological dis-
4       turbance is irreversible, but it must be ﬁguratively reversed when inferring
5       past human behaviour’ (Ascher 1968: 47). However, despite these criticisms,
6       the debate seems to have ignored the question of natural formation processes
7
8             Table 6 Models of artefact cycle and the
9             archaeological process compared
40111         Life cycle        Study cycle
1
2             Production        Retrieval
3             Use               Contextual analysis
              Discard           Artefact analysis
44111
                                                                  Eventful contexts    151

1111    with the implication that the distinction between the archaeological and
2       living/systemic context is still viable at a base level. Most ﬁeld archaeolo-
3       gists, I believe, still tacitly accept this distinction albeit basing it solely on
4       natural formation processes. Consequently, ﬁeld interpretation of deposits
5       and stratigraphy has largely been ignored by post-processualists, at least
6       until very recently (e.g. Barrett 1995; Richards 1995; Hodder 1997). I think
7       there is a strong reason for this, and that is the necessity to retain an aspect
8       which is non-cultural against which the cultural formation processes can
9       still be checked. Without a baseline in natural processes, one has no measure
1011    for cultural processes; in brief, the archaeological record becomes viewed
1       as a natural phenomenon in the ﬁrst instance (see Chapter 3).
2          I am not saying that archaeologists perceive the archaeological record as
3111    the product of natural processes, only that they view it as being constrained –
4       and contained – by a larger natural system. Schiffer actually describes the
5       archaeological context as totally part of an environmental system (Schiffer
6       1987: 3–4), as does Binford through the idea that the archaeological record is
7       static. Schiffer in this respect seems a little more aware of the dynamic nature
8       of the archaeological record, yet he still views it essentially as a natural system
9       which is a transformation or distortion of an original cultural or behavioural
20111   system. However, even if we disagree with this, arguing for example for cases
1       where an archaeological site might remain or be re-incorporated into cultural
2       systems (e.g. monuments such as Stonehenge), there is still a sense in which
3       we treat it as a natural phenomenon. When we study it, all the things we con-
4       ventionally record on archaeological sites employ a naturalistic nomencla-
5       ture, as if they were natural phenomena. We measure, we make soil
6       descriptions – in short, we talk about features in terms of their physical prop-
7       erties – these provide the baseline of our archaeological interpretation.
8          We recognise that an archaeological site is primarily a human creation,
9       the product of human presence and activity, and we may use the term
30111   ‘anthropogenic’ to identify any constituent of a site which has this char-
1       acter. But what does this actually translate into? How might our record of
2       a feature differ if it was seen as the result of a human rather than non-
3       human event? Of course we recognise a wall as a human product, an alluvial
4       layer as a natural event, and perhaps a hollow as ambiguous – pit or solution
5       hole? And of course the identiﬁcation of something as anthropogenic or
6       natural will have signiﬁcant consequences for interpreting a site. But while
7       we may point to certain details (constituents, spatial and stratigraphic
8       boundaries) as helping to decide whether something is anthropogenic or
9       not in more ambiguous situations, the fact that both natural and anthro-
40111   pogenic records are commensurable, use the very same parameters and
1       categories of description, says a great deal about the way we conceptualise
2       the archaeological record.
3          Although linked to the issue of objectivity, it is not simply a case of
44111   a solid objective recording used to construct more tentative subjective
        152   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    interpretations; most archaeologists today recognise that subjectivity enters
2       into even these basic descriptions and that the distinction between objec-
3       tivity and subjectivity is hard, if impossible, to identify. No, rather the
4       point is that physical or naturalistic attributes are used rather than anything
5       else, attributes deriving largely from the natural sciences and invariably
6       conforming to a measurable scale. A typical deposit description on an
7       archaeological site in Britain, for example, will include dimensions, colour,
8       compactness, texture and inclusions, all of which are usually described
9       according to standardised criteria. Of course herein lies the rejoinder –
1011    without standardisation one cannot compare, and without comparison one
1       cannot analyse or interpret. But standardisation is not the issue; the issue
2       is rather the naturalistic way in which we describe the archaeological record.
3       I want now to move on and discuss some of the problems and debates
4       surrounding this naturalistic view of formation processes and ﬁeld descrip-
5       tions, and then link them into the broader issue of interpretation and
6       cultural formation processes.
7
8
        A matter of form: the nature of archaeological deposits
9
20111   There have been two broadly opposing views on the basic description of
1       archaeological deposits and stratigraphy (Farrand 1984; Barham 1995). On
2       the one hand there is the geoarchaeological or geological school which
3       views archaeological deposits in terms of soil science/sedimentology, and
4       on the other is the Harris matrix/unit and its variants. Archaeological work
5       on soils and sediments only began in the 1950s with the work of Ian
6       Cornwall and others, although this was largely focused on palaeosols and
7       large-scale anthropogenic effects on the landscape (Macphail and Goldberg
8       1995: 2; Rapp and Hill 1998: 4–17). Earlier, most work was primarily geolog-
9       ical and linked either to issues of human antiquity as in the later nineteenth
30111   century, or of broad environmental change as in the earlier twentieth
1       century (Rapp and Hill 1998: 4–17). As a result, it does not appear to have
2       had such a direct impact on the way deposits are routinely excavated and
3       recorded in the ﬁeld because of the scale. A similar concern for studying
4       in situ sediments on archaeological sites is reﬂected in the USA from the
5       same time, although directed much more to cave and rockshelter sites (Stein
6       and Farrand 1985). Here, the work of such geoarchaeologists has had a
7       much greater inﬂuence on ﬁeld excavation and recording.
8          This approach appears to contain the basic premise that the archaeo-
9       logical record is primarily a natural datum which incorporates cultural
40111   material – for example Gasche and Tunca’s classiﬁcation of stratigraphic
1       units in which the most fundamental unit is the lithologic while the
2       chronostratigraphic and ethnostratigraphic units are lithologic units grouped
3       by time or artefact type (Gasche and Tunca 1983; also see Courty et al.
44111   1989: ﬁgure 3.3). Equally bold is Stein’s belief that archaeological deposits
                                                                 Eventful contexts   153

1111    are no different from geological sediments, for ‘culture is only one of the
2       many types of biological or mechanical agents of transport and deposition’
3       (Stein 1987: 378; also see Harris 1991 for critique). It was not until the
4       development of micro-morphology in the 1980s that more detailed work
5       could be done on the kinds of features which are more like archaeological
6       than geological deposits, such as ﬂoors, and it is in this area that the greatest
7       clashes are likely to be met with, with the Harris method. Some of the
8       major ramiﬁcations are discussed below, but it is important to note that
9       micro-morphology is also adding to the older conventional soil studies such
1011    as ditch silting and the ‘dark earths’ as well as opening up new horizons
1       (Courty et al. 1989; Macphail and Goldberg 1995).
2          In contrast to these geoarchaeological approaches is Harris’s discussion
3111    of stratigraphic units and its descendants, now in common use throughout
4       most of ﬁeld archaeology in Britain and elsewhere (Harris 1989). Here,
5       there is much less explicit reference to the natural basis to a deposit; rather
6       the deposit is deﬁned ﬁrst and foremost as a topological entity. The event
7       which produced it could be natural or cultural or a mixture, but this in
8       itself is not directly relevant to the deﬁnition of a stratigraphic unit. What
9       is relevant is the single quality of the interface, the edge, the surface (Harris
20111   1989, 1991). The Harris unit is deﬁned solely in terms of spatial extension
1       (i.e. dimensions and co-ordinates within the site grid). Qualities such as
2       the particular shape of a cut or the constituents of a deposit are secondary
3       in so far as they describe the singular nature of the feature, but it is its
4       spatial extension which deﬁnes it primarily as a unit in itself.
5          In a way, the differences between Harris and the geological school could
6       be summed up by a distinction of form and content. Gasche and Tunca,
7       for example, focus almost exclusively on the content (or lithologic homo-
8       geneity) of the deposit (Gasche and Tunca 1983), while for Harris it is the
9       interface between units that is important stratigraphically, not the constitu-
30111   tion of the units themselves (i.e. what they are composed of), especially as
1       this above all is what identiﬁes the possibility of negative units (Harris
2       1991). This, he sees, is the biggest failing of the ‘geological’ approach to
3       stratigraphy – that it is focused solely on solids, on deposits, and more
4       speciﬁcally the contents of those deposits rather than their topology (ibid.).
5       A cut or levelling event removes material and as an event it leaves a nega-
6       tive trace – e.g. the hole in a deposit (what Harris calls ‘feature interfaces’;
7       Harris 1989: 59). For negative units, the interface is the unit – it has no
8       depth or substance. A deposit, however, such as a ﬂoor, has both an inter-
9       face (surface) and depth/substance (what Harris calls ‘layer interfaces’; Harris
40111   1989: 54–5).
1          This is perhaps a crude opposition, especially as others in the geological
2       school such as Fedele and Stein also stress a deposit’s form or boundaries
3       (Stein 1987: 348). Fedele for example deﬁnes his elementary sediment
44111   unit (ESU) in terms of both discontinuities (boundaries) and lithological
        154   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    homogeneity (Fedele 1984), while Stein also argues for the signiﬁcance of
2       boundaries, both conformable (surface) and unconformable (cut) (Stein
3       1987). And yet although it may be an overstated opposition, the very
4       distinction between form and content in interpreting stratigraphy and
5       deposits does present serious problems. On the one hand, by ignoring form
6       as Harris says, a whole type of stratigraphic event is ignored, namely negative
7       events – cuts. Many archaeologists outside Britain simply do not recognise
8       the cut as a signiﬁcant stratigraphic entity – in a pit, for example, it is
9       enough to distinguish the layers in the pit (i.e. the ﬁll) from the surrounding
1011    layers through which it is cut. If one is only interested in positive events,
1       solids, in soil, one just will not see a cut – for example I have heard one
2       archaeologist describe a pit cut as the hole left by the archaeologist after
3       removing the ﬁll. On this perception, it seemed quite ludicrous to record
4       it, although to most British archaeologists this seems ludicrous. I think the
5       best example to illustrate the importance of the negative feature is not a
6       pit but a levelling or terracing event.
7          Here one might see in section a whole series of layers one on top of the
8       other – such as in a ﬂoor; now between any two ﬂoors there are two ways
9       of seeing the interface or edge – one as the contiguity of two surfaces, an
20111   upper and lower of two adjacent deposits, the other as a levelling cut which
1       truncates a lower layer and, resting on this, the lower surface of the upper
2       layer. These two ways of seeing have quite different consequences for the
3       interpretation of the stratigraphy. For example, at Çatalhöyük, ﬂoors near
4       the centre of a room were noted as having many fewer ﬂoor layers than
5       those at the edges of the room; either this means people replastered the
6       edges of the room more frequently than the middle, or – more plausibly –
7       that the middle received more wear and erosion, which could in itself
8       account for the fewer ﬂoor layers; alternatively, because of this wear and
9       resultant unevenness, it may have required levelling before replastering.
30111      This example should be familiar to geologists through the law of uncon-
1       formity, and certainly it seems strange that such negative events should be
2       ignored by some in the geological school. However, an equal criticism can
3       be made of Harris for ignoring the constitution of stratigraphic units; by
4       divorcing content from form, problems of indistinct interfaces are brushed
5       under the carpet as anomalous or unusual depositional properties. But every
6       excavator knows that it can be difﬁcult sometimes to follow an edge to a
7       deposit; there are many reasons why edges may be unclear – such as the rapid-
8       ity with which a deposit is laid, its constituent difference from contiguous
9       deposits or the effects of post-depositional activities. Behind this issue of clar-
40111   ity or sharpness of a boundary between deposits is the general question of
1       visibility and scale; a more common problem perhaps is not that a deposit
2       may grade into another over a large distance (that might appear sharper for
3       example if viewed from a larger scale/more distant perspective), but that the
44111   boundary may be too small to be seen by the naked eye. Micro-morphology,
                                                               Eventful contexts   155

1111    a relatively recent branch of soil science, is making huge contributions in
2       the ﬁeld of micro-stratigraphy and formation processes (Courty et al. 1989;
3       Macphail and Goldberg 1995; Matthews et al. 1997). However, even when
4       interfaces are visible macroscopically, they may be too small to excavate; for
5       example at the late Bronze Age site of Runnymede in England such a deposit
6       was excavated using an arbitrary strategy in order to identify patterning in
7       the ﬁnds and thereby demonstrate a succession of discrete dumps (Needham
8       and Sørensen 1988: 113–26). What might have been treated as a single unit
9       of deposition was in fact comprised of multiple units.
1011       Similarly, in recent excavations at Çatalhöyük in Turkey there were
1       problems of how to excavate ﬂoors which might be no thicker than a
2       millimetre and extend across several metres of space; one could see the
3111    differences, and over small areas even attempt to excavate them singly, but
4       to do so systematically was impractical. On the other hand, it was crucial
5       to have the stratigraphic information of these individual ﬂoors, particularly
6       as large numbers of burials were associated with the room and it would be
7       extremely informative to know exactly at what level a grave was cut. A
8       compromise was to dig the ﬂoors in ‘groups’ divided by major packing/level-
9       ling episodes but to have running sections over the ﬂoor so some idea of
20111   the micro-stratigraphic sequence was not lost.
1          The problems at Çatalhöyük highlight a crucial issue – the relation of
2       micro- to macro-stratigraphy. As Ian Hodder has suggested (pers. comm.),
3       the scale at which one wishes to excavate or record something as a unit
4       depends on the prior interpretation we have of it and the signiﬁcance we see
5       of bounding any ﬁnds (whether macro- or micro-artefacts) at a certain scale.
6       It was because the excavators at Runnymede saw the deposit as potentially
7       a midden or at least composed of sub-deposits, that they decided to impose
8       an arbitrary control to recover any patterning that might demonstrate this.
9       If they had regarded it solely as a single event such as alluviation in which
30111   everything was redeposited, such careful excavation would not have been
1       justiﬁed. The same principle lies behind the excavation of midden deposits
2       at Çatalhöyük. However, the question of scale is not simply one of space but
3       of visibility – that is, some deposit boundaries may not be visible at ‘normal’
4       light wavelengths but only at greater (infrared, radar) or lesser (ultraviolet,
5       X-ray) wavelengths (Barham 1995: 148–9). For example, micro-morphology
6       might use UV light in studying thin-sections, while geoprospection or remote
7       sensing can pick up larger-scale deposits (see Figure 16).
8          From this discussion it seems quite clear that a conception of archaeo-
9       logical deposits which focuses predominantly either on interfaces or
40111   composition presents problems for interpretation. On the one hand, not
1       recognising negative events has serious consequences for understanding the
2       stratigraphy, but perhaps more serious is ignoring the signiﬁcance of invis-
3       ibility and clarity of edges. Are there ways of trying to bring form and
44111   content closer together in our understanding of stratigraphy and deposit
        156   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1011
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
20111
        Figure 16 Visibility of stratigraphic/soil interfaces according to different electro-
1                 magnetic wavelengths
2
3
4       formation in the ﬁeld? Some ways have been explored, such as in the system
5       used by the University of Durham ﬁeld unit which explicitly tries to bring
6       in a recognition of formation processes to the stratigraphic unit on its record
7       sheet (Adams and Brooke 1995; also see Barham 1995: 162–4). Yet the
8       problem of how to excavate a site stratigraphically with ‘invisible stratig-
9       raphy’ presents great difﬁculties. In such cases, a combined strategy of
30111   arbitrary and stratigraphic excavation has to be usefully employed, along
1       with sampling of the deposits either of the disaggregated matrix or of an
2       undisturbed column taken with monoliths or Kubiena tins (Barham 1995:
3       163). However, while such new information might aid understanding, there
4       is a lurking worry that this route also increases the extent to which a unit
5       is objectiﬁed through more complex recording criteria. We should perhaps
6       be reconsidering the basic assumption of what the stratigraphic entity refers
7       to: the event.
8
9
        The construction site: contexts as objects
40111
1       Consider the problem of surface discoloration, such as burning. For example,
2       the ﬁring or burning of a feature on a site might not necessarily be assigned
3       as a separate unit under single-context recording (see Chapter 2). Rather,
44111   the burning would represent a secondary attribute of the unit – though
                                                                 Eventful contexts    157

1111    clearly a difference has to be noted as to whether that burnt nature of the
2       unit is actually part of it or whether it happened later. For example is a
3       burnt ﬁll burnt in situ or not? If it is, does the burning qualify as a separate
4       unit? Surely it must and perhaps we can even delimit it, that is, ﬁx it
5       spatially – it may for example only cover a part of the deposit or it may
6       cross over and affect other units. Fire or any surface modiﬁcation should
7       count, then, as a separate unit and in this sense it might be legitimate to
8       talk of a surface as a separate unit, although the burning, no matter how
9       slight, will always have depth and is not therefore just a surface (also see
1011    Harris 1989: 55).
1          This does, however, raise an important question about the meaning of such
2       units – whatever they are (e.g. see Adams 1992; Clark 1992). Despite the
3111    difﬁculties surrounding the edges of more ambiguous units, there is the more
4       intransigent issue of linking a bounded unit with a bounded event. One of
5       the crucial assumptions of single-context recording as we have said is that
6       each unit is representative of a single action or event – that its spatial limits
7       also deﬁne temporal limits. Schiffer questions this equation of a single event
8       to a single deposit; as he says, one depositional event can give rise to materials
9       is different deposits, while conversely a single deposit can contain multiple
20111   depositional events (Schiffer 1987: 266). But even beyond this, do we in the
1       ﬁeld routinely relate an event at all to our stratigraphic unit or do we rather
2       not just give it some shorthand term such as pit, ditch, etc. – in other words,
3       treat it like an object? Why should this reduction of a feature from a human
4       action to an object come about? Perhaps it is because we ignore or postpone
5       the interpretation of how a deposit has formed and focus on its spatial extent.
6       And yet, is there a conﬂict between the focus on the limits of a unit, that is
7       treating it as a discrete entity or object, and its representation as an event?
8          Returning to the issue of treating surfaces as separate units to be included
9       in a matrix, consider another problem: how does one distinguish the matrix
30111   of the ﬂoor and objects in it, from objects lying on its surface and associ-
1       ated with activities occurring on that surface? In this case, the actual material
2       or ﬂoor matrix might be distinguished from its surface, one being associated
3       with construction the other with use. But is this a legitimate distinction
4       to make? Does the surface physically exist independently of the material
5       to which it is associated? But, more pertinently, if a unit is supposed to
6       represent an event, is it really the surface of the ﬂoor which signals events,
7       or the objects and other deposits lying on that surface? This problem raises
8       many issues regarding the relationship of events to units, but more signif-
9       icantly, I think, it exposes a deep dichotomy in the way archaeological
40111   events are conceptualised – between acts of production and acts of use.
1          Because the stratigraphic unit is invariably seen as part of a larger picture,
2       the site stratigraphy, the ‘event’ nature of such units is dominated by the
3       notion of their contribution to how the site is built up rather than how
44111   the deposit itself is formed. In other words, it is the formation process of the
        158    Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    site rather than the unit which determines how we understand the unit as an
2       event, the temporality of the site rather than the unit which is paramount.
3       What this means is that the unit itself has no temporality, merely spatial
4       extension – hence the emphasis on unit demarcation rather than formation.
5       The site itself, through the matrix, has a rich temporality but its elements,
6       its stratigraphic units, comprise homogeneous ‘moments’, equivalent and of
7       no speciﬁc duration; their only temporality is their place in a sequence.
8          By actually thinking of units as objects, a whole series of connotations
9       is drawn in, not just the notion of the cartesian extension, but capitalist
1011    notions of the object as a commodity, of its dual nature as product and
1       consumable (see Chapter 3). What this seems to come down to is that the
2       unit is a formation event deﬁned primarily in terms of production – it is
3       the temporal horizon of production that is employed to delimit it and in
4       this it is almost identical to the conception of an artefact. Indeed the unit
5       can be seen as the objectiﬁcation of a person or people, the material product
6       of their labour which then stands independent of them.
7          The notion that a site can be viewed in terms of production can be
8       extended so that the formation process of a site is akin to building con-
9       struction; the analogy reﬂects a deeper metaphor for the nature of the
20111   archaeological site, as a cultural site – a site of culture; the model of its
1       formation derives from contemporary capitalist notions of what a cultural
2       site is: the building, the city over against the ﬁeld, the countryside. Wheeler,
3       for example, explicitly recommends knowledge of building construction for
4       the director in interpreting a site (Wheeler 1954: 72, 133). The work Harris
5       quotes in his comparison of the matrix to critical path analysis (see p. 57),
6       interestingly suggests that the ‘builders of Stonehenge, Salisbury cathedral
7       and the Empire State building presumably used some comparable procedure.’
8       (Cole and King 1968: 570). This construction analogy is signiﬁcant with
9       its implication that the matrix is very much reﬂective of a constructional
30111   notion of a site, as if it were a building.
1          Perhaps more prevalent, however, than speciﬁc analogies with buildings
2       is the notion that excavation is destruction. Pick up almost any ﬁeld manual
3       from the twentieth century and this idea will be repeated – from Petrie
4       (1904: 48) to Coles (1972: 133). Here is Atkinson, for example:
5
6             It is the excavator’s task to remove all these deposits in the reverse
7             order to that in which they were laid down, so that each successive
8             stage in the history of the site may be revealed. . . . For excavation is,
9             more than anything, destructive, and evidence not seen and recorded
40111         when ﬁrst uncovered will be destroyed forever when digging proceeds.
1                                                                (Atkinson 1946: 16)
2
3       Offsetting this, as Atkinson implies, is the concomitant notion that recording
44111   negates this destructive element. The way he phrases it is that unless the
                                                                Eventful contexts   159

1111    evidence is recorded, excavation is destruction. Indeed the modern concept
2       of excavation in Britain is imbued with the idea that it is preservation by
3       record (in contrast to preservation in situ). The reasoning behind this was
4       concisely summed up by Droop: ‘An excavation should be so conducted
5       that it would be possible in theory to build up the site again with every
6       object replaced exactly in its original position’ (Droop 1915: 7). This has
7       remained the basic justiﬁcation for all excavation ever since.
8          This reconstruction of the site is carried in the written, and particularly
9       the graphic, record made. Indeed there is almost the idea that archaeologists
1011    are producing architectural plans in reverse, that the whole process of
1       archaeology in the ﬁeld is one which takes its metaphors from construction,
2       but inverted. Taking off the layers in reverse order, working from the
3111    constructed site back to the plans and design, which are the end result and
4       not the beginning of an archaeological project. One might even wish to
5       explore ways in which the graphic representation of a site (plans, sections,
6       elevations) mimics an architect’s design. Of course this is not to argue that
7       archaeologists regard the site as having been actually constructed this way,
8       that is from plans etc.; but we do record it as if it had been.
9          As a result of this ‘constructional’ view of a unit, post-formation processes
20111   affecting that unit are separated from it, as is the post-formation temporality.
1       Indeed one might say that the very distinction of formation from post-
2       formation processes models itself on the notion of an original artefact or
3       object, its primary production and secondary modiﬁcations and use. The
4       problem this causes for identifying units in the ﬁeld has been highlighted
5       by Barham in the context of the geological perspective; he argues that three
6       distinct properties of a unit have to be adequately assessed – properties
7       inherited from pre-existing deposits (e.g. buried soil, natural geology),
8       those acquired during deposition, and those acquired over time post-
9       depositionally (e.g. bioturbation). One of the major ﬂaws in the Harris
30111   system is the failure to distinguish these during recording, which might
1       manifest itself in two particular ways: one, in identifying a stratigraphic
2       boundary which is not primarily depositional at all but the product of post-
3       depositional processes such as decalciﬁcation or bioturbation; the other,
4       failing to identify a stratigraphic boundary because of its ‘invisibility’ (see
5       p. 155; Barham 1995: 155–6).
6          This also brings us back to the question of burning – often it is merely
7       given as a secondary characteristic of another unit, presumably because the
8       event, the ﬁre, only remains as a trace on another, earlier depositional
9       event. The ﬁre becomes, in effect, a post-depositional process of a unit and
40111   not a unit in its own right because it has no clear physical or spatial distinc-
1       tion from its associated deposit. This is a good example of how the perception
2       of stratigraphic units is in fact not through an event but through an object
3       – it is ﬁrst interpreted as an object (though this process is usually called
44111   descriptive or identifying), and then interpreted as an event.
        160   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    Temporalising the stratigraphic unit
2       How might we rethink the stratigraphic unit to get around this inherent
3       tendency to objectify it? A good example to begin with is the ploughsoil.
4       Ploughsoil archaeology is often regarded as a prospecting technique, partic-
5       ularly through ﬁeldwalking, where it is used to detect ‘sites’ under the
6       ploughsoil from the ﬁnds which are lifted out of sub-surface features through
7       ploughing action – indeed it has even been shown that such ﬁnds exhibit
8       very little lateral displacement, suggesting that densities of ﬁnds will more
9       or less accurately overlie archaeological features (Hayﬁeld 1980; Roper
1011    1976). This approach, though entirely valid, is still a prospecting method
1       and treats the ploughsoil as informative not in itself but of other contexts
2       beneath it. A more signiﬁcant recognition in many respects is of the plough-
3
        soil itself as a meaningful context in terms of ﬁnd associations – the crucial
4
        point in this recognition is the difference between ploughed-in and
5
        ploughed-out deposits (Haselgrove 1985). Many of the ﬁnds collected from
6
        the ploughsoil may derive from sub-surface features and have been ploughed
7
        out and are therefore useful prospecting material; however many other ﬁnds
8
        – and this is often the case with ﬂints – do not come from any sub-surface
9
        features but have derived from once upstanding contexts such as middens
20111
1       or hearths.
2          The importance of treating the ploughsoil as informative in itself is a
3       quite recent conception. Its implications are fairly widespread for it raises
4       issues about the very nature of units, especially the distinction between
5       ‘open’ and ‘closed’. The distinction is a very signiﬁcant one and is funda-
6       mental to modern ﬁeldwork and analysis – the overburden of a site or the
7       ploughsoil are commonly regarded as open contexts, that is contexts which
8       are still active and therefore ﬂuid in terms of their ﬁnd associations, which
9       is why one might ﬁnd Roman pottery with mesolithic ﬂints and asbestos
30111   fragments. Often such contexts are not regarded as at all informative and
1       are often not even recorded during an excavation. Yet this is not always
2       the case; many valuable studies have been done on such open contexts,
3       particularly ploughsoils (e.g. Lewarch and O’Brien 1981; Haselgrove 1985;
4       Schoﬁeld 1991; Sullivan 1998). Is it perhaps the case then that the degree
5       of discreteness of a unit might be related to its degree of openness? And
6       that what we call post-depositional effects, which might blur the edge, only
7       denote that in fact the context is still being used/formed – that it is still
8       open? An example may be of a ditch, the upper ﬁll of which is continuous
9       with a general layer which also seems to seal the ditch, a problem which
40111   also links to the question of clarity of edges (see p. 155).
1          Such examples are common on ﬂoodplains where periodic ﬂooding leaves
2       alluvial deposits which not only seal sites but will inﬁll the tops of any
3       features open at the time. To take this example further, we might consider
44111   a buried soil which in some instances, such as the Fenlands of eastern
                                                               Eventful contexts   161

1111    England, is sealed by alluvium, thus representing an ancient or buried soil
2       which might only otherwise be preserved in exceptional circumstances (e.g.
3       under banks or mounds). This can then be sampled in a manner similar
4       to the ploughsoil but requiring slightly different techniques, though strangely
5       it has in one example actually been sampled in the same manner by strip-
6       ping off the alluvium, then ploughing and ﬁeldwalking it (Evans and Knight
7       1997). What buried soil archaeology suggests is that rather than treating
8       units as either open or closed, we should perhaps think of every unit in
9       terms of the degree of its ‘openness’ or ‘closedness’ – that is its duration –
1011    and this has a very clear relationship to the constitution of a deposit.
1          A ploughsoil or buried soil reveals its openness through our understanding
2       of its soil matrix and morphology which would be very different from the
3111    backﬁll of a pit, for example. One needs to consider both form and content,
4       and the concept of openness and temporality is a very useful one in bridging
5       this distinction. Another way of studying openness is to look at artefact
6       patterning within and between contexts; in contrast to the case of, say,
7       Runnymede where such analyses were done to identify different deposits,
8       one might look at attributes which would indicate longevity of formation
9       such as the diversity or condition of an artefact assemblage (Schiffer 1987:
20111   279–87; Gerrard 1991). For instance, an assemblage of a ditch ﬁll may be
1       more fragmented than that from a pit, which suggests greater weathering
2       and therefore longer inﬁlling.
3          There is no sense in a stratigraphic matrix of the duration or longevity
4       of a unit, not only in terms of its formation but also in terms of its post-
5       formation ‘use’ (see Carver 1990 for a similar critique). I mark the word
6       ‘use’ because this is the word one is forced to employ to distinguish use
7       from formation. What is perhaps needed is a supplement to the Harris
8       matrix, a chart which shows the longevity of units not just their place in
9       a sequence. How might this be done? Well Harris himself suggests a way,
30111   for the ‘matrix diagram can be lengthened, shortened or otherwise reordered
1       to give some indication of duration of deposits and interfaces’ (Harris 1991:
2       19). The same procedure was ﬁrst discussed by Dalland in his alternative
3       matrix where the depth of the box could be used to indicate longevity of
4       formation (Dalland 1984). However, there are problems with both of these
5       solutions, problems caused by a production emphasis on stratigraphic units.
6       For example, a ditch is cut; on a matrix the cutting is one unit, succeeded
7       by others, its ﬁlls. The temporality of the ditch cut is reduced to its point
8       in a sequence of other productive acts on the site. On this model, there is
9       no sense that the ditch may have been open for so long, and that even
40111   while it was silting up, it was still active; nor that this fact may help to
1       understand the development or use of a site. All this shows is the tempo-
2       rality of production and not use.
3          There is also the overwhelming practical problem of not being able to
44111   measure such longevity – one can guess or estimate, but not in all cases
        162   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    and not to the same degree. Here the solution must lie in not trying to
2       provide absolute measures of longevity but rather in using the structured
3       temporality of the matrix to produce a relative measure, which could be
4       calibrated – much as one calibrates a traditional phase matrix. Such a chart
5       has an advantage over the traditional phase matrix in that it does not
6       require units or the site to fall neatly into phases, but rather produces a
7       multi-layered temporality with both continuity and change expressed rather
8       than the usual blocks of phase-time.
9          For example, consider the matrix in Figure 17 from a building recently
1011    excavated at Çatalhöyük; what we do is ﬁrst create a chart with the neces-
1       sary time zones derived from the number of steps on the matrix diagram; then
2       we take each unit in turn for which we have a given inception in time zone
3       N. What is now required is an evaluation of its longevity – that is, to isolate
4       the latest point at which it could still function. For a ditch cut for example,
5       the cut continues to function until either it is recut or its latest ﬁll seals the
6       top. This has close similarities to, but was reached independently of, Carver’s
7       ‘matrix’ which he developed in criticism of Harris’s lack of temporality
8       (Carver 1990). Moreover this representation is not intended to replace the
9       Harris matrix but indeed actually utilises it in its construction. Consequently,
20111   one has a much more complex model of the site with something approach-
1       ing a real-time development rather than phase-time. The importance of this
2       is to bring to the fore the event-character of units rather than just seeing
3       them as objects, conjoining the temporalities of succession and duration in
4       understanding formation processes on archaeological sites.
5          This is not quite the end, however, because there is another problem,
6       so far ignored in that neither the geological school nor Harris addresses it.
7       This is the problem of events which do not correlate with a soil deposit
8       or a cut; is there not a bias in the whole conception of seeing archaeo-
9       logical stratigraphy solely in terms of deposits and cuts, both of which
30111   ultimately derive from geology? For all Harris’s discussion of the differences
1       between archaeological and geological stratiﬁcation, the basic units of strat-
2       iﬁcation do derive from geology through the concepts of beds (layers),
3       conformities (layer surfaces) and unconformities (cuts). The question I wish
4       to ask is what the status of the object or ﬁnd in relation to stratigraphic
5       events is (also see Roskams 1992). Both Harris and the geological school
6       only discuss them in so far as they relate to understanding the formation
7       of sediments, soil and other deposits – for example from simple date fossils
8       to more complex seriation and taphonomic studies (see p. 161). But can
9       they be seen as something more?
40111
1
        Artefact patterning: objects as contexts
2
3       There are many ways in which excavation can be (and usefully) arbitrary,
44111   and there are two principal reasons why an arbitrary method might be
                                                                Eventful contexts   163

1111    employed. First, when there are no clear/visible differences in the deposit
2       (e.g. a midden) and yet such are suspected – and might be demonstrated
3       through micro-morphological sectioning (see p. 155); in such a case one
4       might excavate in spits (vertically arbitrary). Second, where the limits to
5       the unit are known (e.g. a ﬂoor), whether macroscopically or microscopi-
6       cally, but for sampling reasons (e.g. phosphates, artefact distribution) a grid
7       is imposed to detect patterning (horizontally arbitrary). In both cases, arbi-
8       trary excavation is employed to reveal artefact/ecofact patterning within
9       the deposit, but in one it is to demonstrate the existence of several different
1011    deposits while in the other it is to demonstrate the existence of different
1       activities associated with a deposit (see Figure 18).
2          And yet if this is the case – that artefact/ecofact patterning can be used
3111    to differentiate deposits and activities within deposits, there is a certain
4       problem with our deﬁnition of a stratigraphic unit/deposit as a single event;
5       why not call all the activities identiﬁed within a deposit also stratigraphic
6       units – events which take place on the ﬂoor, after the ﬂoor’s construction
7       (a point raised earlier)? Even considering the post facto nature of ascribing
8       such units, how sharply can we delimit them? What if an event does not
9       leave a discrete trace – a scatter of potsherds, micro-debitage, or charred
20111   seeds? How do these relate to the identiﬁcation of stratigraphic units? Are
1       there problems with the way the stratigraphic unit is deﬁned – fundamental
2       problems which have an effect on the way we interpret a site?
3          If we consider a site which consists primarily of artefacts in sedimentary
4       deposits, such as on palaeolithic excavations, interpretation will invariably
5       focus on the ﬁnds and their distribution. Indeed, the sub-ﬁeld of intra-site
6       spatial analysis largely developed from these contexts, especially in France
7       (see Chapter 4). Throughout, there does seem to have been a strong bias
8       in such studies towards earlier prehistoric sites, which undoubtedly relates
9       to the relative paucity of features compared to later prehistory. In contrast,
30111   many of the spatial studies on later prehistoric or historic sites is based less
1       on a ‘pure’ distribution across two- or three-dimensional space and more
2       on a ‘contextualised’ association, using architectural and other features as
3       a function of spatial variability. Among the earliest examples of these are
4       studies of Pueblo villages in the American Southwest by Longacre and Hill
5       during the 1960s (e.g. Longacre 1968; Hill 1968). For example, at the site
6       of Broken K, Hill compared variability in room morphology with artefact
7       patterning to identify three different types of room and associated activity
8       (habitation, storage and ceremony).
9          Such studies have become perhaps the most commonly used type of inter-
40111   pretive analysis today, and the same methodology, although with different
1       theoretical perspectives, lies at the heart of many post-processual and
2       contextual studies. In Britain, the 1980s saw the development of many such
3       studies on prehistoric sites, which are particularly associated with the
44111   concept of structured deposition, that is intentional, patterned associations
        164   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1011
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
20111
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
30111
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
40111                                            Figure 17a
1                                                Harris matrix (a) and
                                                 alternative graphic represen-
2                                                tation of site temporality
3                                                (b), based on a sequence at
44111                                            Çatalhöyük, Turkey
                     Eventful contexts   165

1111
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1011
1
2
3111
4
5
6
7
8
9
20111
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
30111
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
40111
1
2
3
44111   Figure 17b
Figure 18 Objects as contexts: pottery refits at the Romano-British site of Haddenham
                                                               Eventful contexts   167

1111    of artefact assemblages with speciﬁc features or parts of features. A classic
2       example is of high densities of cultural material in ditch terminals associ-
3       ated with a range of Neolithic monuments such as long barrows and henges,
4       and usually interpreted as a ritual deposit linked to feasting (e.g. Thomas
5       1991). However, there are problems with the interpretation of such spatial
6       analyses, both of point pattern distributions of artefacts and contextual asso-
7       ciations of assemblages. For example, some of the original interpretations
8       of spatial variability at Broken K have recently been compromised by a re-
9       assessment of the formation processes in the rooms (Schiffer 1987), while
1011    the earlier attempts to ﬁnd correlations between artefact types (‘tool kits’)
1       and spatial distribution in palaeolithic sites have rarely been successful
2       (Kroll and Price 1991b: 304).
3111       Nevertheless, the ﬁrst thing to reiterate is that what the studies of intra-
4       spatial patterning do demonstrate, regardless of any methodological ﬂaws,
5       is that meaningful actions and events can and often do occur both above
6       and below the level of depositional or stratigraphic units. In other words,
7       the stratigraphic entity recorded in the ﬁeld may be actually meaningless
8       in terms of human behaviour and of understanding the site. Indeed, the
9       very same issue arises over the question of the site itself, for human activity
20111   may be just as structured and meaningful over an even larger space, namely
1       the landscape. The distribution of features or artefacts might occur on a
2       much larger scale than on a site – for example, the distribution of prehis-
3       toric stone axes in Britain across the landscape reveals ﬂuctuating densities
4       which correlate with landscape features such as riversides or other wet
5       places. Here, the ‘site’ is the whole landscape and it is only on this scale
6       that we can begin to understand the distribution of material culture in
7       terms of human activity – in this example, in terms of ritual deposition.
8       The very concept of the site as the locus of human activity is therefore
9       ambiguous.
30111      At the same time as the new spatial archaeology emerged (see Chapter 4),
1       archaeologists involved in ﬁeld survey and sampling techniques were ﬁnding
2       that the old view of sites as dots on a map was equally inadequate (Thomas
3       1975; Cherry et al. 1978: 11; Dunnell and Dancey 1983; Gaffney and Tingle
4       1984). Such a view was reinforced by the predominance of excavation as a
5       ﬁeld technique with its site-oriented perspective, but the increase in ﬁeld
6       surveys which occurred after the 1960s (integrated with earlier aerial pho-
7       tographic surveys) were producing an image of the archaeological record as
8       a continuous landscape rather than isolated sites (Cherry and Shennan 1978:
9       17). The idea of treating sites as discrete entities was seen as very anachro-
40111   nistic, and it was thought that that intensive rather than extensive surveys
1       were needed to better understand the archaeological record. Such surveys
2       moreover ought to be coupled with a more explicit approach to sampling
3       which is not simply a technique but integral to research design (Redman and
44111   Watson 1970; Flannery 1976: 51–62; Cherry et al. 1978: 4–6).
        168   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111       This approach led to a critique of the concept of the site, ﬁrst by David
2       Thomas but most extensively by Robert Dunnell in the USA (Thomas 1975;
3       Dunnell and Dancy 1983; Dunnell 1992; also see Foley 1981). Dunnell
4       argues that sites are nothing more than high densities or concentrations in
5       an otherwise continuous distribution of artefacts over the landscape.
6       Emphasising the site as the key concept in archaeological survey or excava-
7       tion ignores this fact and misrepresents the nature of the archaeological
8       record. There has been some reaction to Dunnell’s view, particularly from
9       Binford who seems to agree with Dunnell’s conception of the archaeological
1011    record as a variable continuum, but does not see what harm there is in
1       employing the concept of site to refer to concentrations within the contin-
2       uum, on whatever scale (Binford 1992). The real disagreements between
3       Dunnell and Binford are sometimes hard to see, but the primary one seems
4       to be epistemological. Binford criticises Dunnell for a naive empiricism in
5       trying to link spatial patterning directly to meaningful behaviour without
6       independent theory in the form of middle range research. The notion of site,
7       understood as ‘place’, is a very useful methodological concept in middle range
8       research (e.g. Binford 1982). Dunnell on the other hand argues that there
9       are theoretical implications in retaining the notion of ‘site’, even as an oper-
20111   ational concept contra Binford; he thinks that a site is simply an inadequate
1       unit of analysis to cover all examples of spatial activity. Dunnell does have
2       a point – the site concept in emphasising ‘place’ as the spatial paradigm of
3       human activity ignores other forms (such as journeys, for example). Indeed,
4       it is a very ﬁxed, non-mobile, non-temporal concept.
5          Concepts such as the site or the stratigraphic unit, through which archae-
6       ology works, are clearly problematic for the interpretation of human activity.
7       While one might argue that many of the problems in identifying mean-
8       ingful actions are due to an uncritical view of spatial distributions without
9       consideration of ‘distortions’ from the cultural context to the archaeolog-
30111   ical context, I think this is only partially true. Certainly it is a question of
1       considering formation processes, but equally it is a question of reconsid-
2       ering the general nature of actions/events which are identiﬁed in the
3       archaeological record and their relation to the archaeological concepts of
4       object and context. I have shown how distributions of objects can spill over
5       traditional concepts of analysis such as the stratigraphic unit or the site
6       and mark events, but equally single objects can also denote events. Indeed,
7       almost every artefact is a palimpsest of events – its manufacture, its use/wear,
8       its breakage, etc. (see Chapter 3). Just as stratigraphic units such as a pit
9       or a wall can be treated as objects/artefacts, so objects can be treated as
40111   eventful contexts; indeed, there are many instances where there are real
1       overlaps between deposits and objects, for example where an artefact might
2       contain deposits, such as cremation urns (see Figure 19). One could thus
3       argue that the very distinction between objects and contextual units such
44111   as deposits, features and sites is ambiguous, and is certainly relative.
                                                                 Eventful contexts   169

1111
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1011
1
2
3111
4
5
6
7
8
9
20111
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
30111
1
2       Figure 19 Objects as contexts: half-sectioned Bronze Age cremation urn
3
4
5          The crucial point in the foregoing discussion is that without reﬂexivity,
6       without a concern for how our concepts and practices affect interpretation,
7       the routinised methodologies usually employed in the ﬁeld can become very
8       constraining. The key point is the importance of foregrounding the event
9       nature of the archaeological record from a single artefact to a landscape –
40111   it is the product of temporal phenomena, whether cultural or natural. This
1       is not to be confused with Binford’s distinction between a dynamic past
2       cultural system and a static archaeological record. Firstly, the archaeolog-
3       ical record is not static, as Schiffer has demonstrated; but secondly, the
44111   temporality I am talking about affects methodological concepts such as
        170    Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    object and context, not simply a general concept such as society. In the
2       next section, I will address how such events or activity are theorised in
3       terms of human action or behaviour, and then discuss how this compares
4       with the conception of actions and events in actualistic studies such as
5       ethnoarchaeology and experimental archaeology.
6
7
        Archaeological events
8
9
        Agency and material culture
1011
1       The idea that, although archaeology deals with artefacts, it is always the
2       people behind the artefacts who matter, is as old as archaeology. Pitt Rivers
3       explicitly pointed this out, and what he understood by ‘people’ was chieﬂy
4       their minds or rather the contents of their minds – ideas:
5
6             Human ideas, as represented by the various products of human industry,
7             are capable of classiﬁcation into genera, species and varieties, in the
8             same manner as the products of the vegetable and animal kingdoms,
9             and in their development from the homogeneous to the heterogeneous
20111         they obey the same laws.
1                                                             (Pitt Rivers 1906: 18)
2
3       The relation between language and ideas is quite closely linked to this
4       history so I shall make references to it. Pitt Rivers considered language as
5       basically similar to artefacts, as both were outward signs of inner ideas. The
6       chief difference is that language is better able to express complex ideas,
7       and thus there will be an inverse relation between the degree of evolution
8       and the importance of material culture:
9
30111         In endeavouring to trace back prehistoric culture to its root forms, we
1             ﬁnd that in proportion as the value of language and the ideas conveyed
2             by language diminishes, that of ideas embodied in material forms
3             increases in stability and permanence.
4                                                              (Pitt Rivers 1906: 13)
5
6       With Childe, however, a rather different view emerges, one which stresses
7       a materialism rather than an idealism, where anything that is of real or
8       lasting consequence has, by the nature of history, to be materially expressed:
9
40111         For all culture ﬁnds expression in action – action in the material world.
1             It is indeed through action alone that culture is maintained and trans-
2             mitted; a belief that exists only in somebody’s head forms no part of
3             culture and has no existence for history or anthropology. Some of the
44111         actions dictated by, and expressive of, culture effect durable changes
                                                                Eventful contexts    171

1111        in the material world. All such fall within the purview of archaeology.
2           It is indeed just these human actions that have provided the material
3           out of which archaeological cultures are constructed.
4                                                                (Childe 1951: 33)
5
6       For Childe, the absence of access to past language is then also not neces-
7       sarily cause for despair. Both Pitt Rivers and Childe express the possibility
8       of understanding past people in real ways through their material culture,
9       though for different reasons; Pitt Rivers because prehistoric material culture
1011    was more expressive of their (simple) ideas than language (unlike today),
1       Childe because all signiﬁcant actions have material manifestation.
2          Both Pitt Rivers and Childe, however, saw material culture as ultimately
3111    referring to something else – ideas, thoughts, etc. Even Walter Taylor essen-
4       tially expressed the same view when he regarded material culture as not
5       really culture, but the material expression of culture. In his seminal text,
6       he distinguished three orders of phenomena – culture, behaviour and objects;
7       culture is ﬁrst and foremost a mental phenomenon:
8
9           It also follows from this that the concept of material culture is fallacious.
20111       Culture is unobservable, is non-material . . . . Even behaviour, though
1           observable, is non-material . . . . Therefore the term material culture is a
2           misnomer and the dichotomy between material and non-material relates
3           only to observable results of cultural behaviour, not to culture itself.
4                                                                  (Taylor 1948: 102)
5
6       Taylor’s conception of culture as mental was similar to that of his contem-
7       poraries such as Kroeber (e.g. Watson 1995: 685), and it was clearly a
8       notion which was shared on both sides of the Atlantic as the previous
9       examples show. The importance of this understanding of culture lies not
30111   so much in the distinction between mental and material but in the notion
1       that ideas formed the basis of culture – not behaviour, practices or objects,
2       all of which were derivative of ideas. It is this which also explains why the
3       concerns of the culture-historical period were heavily focused on classiﬁ-
4       cation and other expressions of normativism. It was not until the 1960s
5       and the New Archaeology that a new turn was given to this conception,
6       and behaviour in particular came to take on much greater signiﬁcance –
7       indeed, one might say that in Taylor’s three orders the position of ideas
8       and behaviour was reversed in terms of importance.
9          Binford’s classic statement of the New Archaeology, ‘Archaeology as
40111   anthropology’, adopted Leslie White’s deﬁnition of culture as ‘man’s extra-
1       somatic means of adaption’ (Binford 1962). Binford and New Archaeology
2       in general paid very little attention to the mental realm, to ideas; his main
3       focus was on behaviour and material culture and how they related through
44111   this conception of culture:
        172    Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111          Granted we cannot excavate a kinship terminology or a philosophy,
2             but we can and do excavate the material items which functioned
3             together with these more behavioural elements within the appropriate
4             cultural subsystems. The formal structure of artifact assemblages together
5             with the between element contextual relationships should and do
6             present a systematic and understandable picture of the total extinct
7             cultural system.
8                                                                   (Binford 1962: 218)
9
1011    Under this functional interpretation of material culture, interpretation of
1       the archaeological record in terms of behaviour rather than normative ideas
2       changed the whole perception of that record. By taking the ‘mental’ out
3       of the equation, behaviour was no longer an expression of something else
4       (i.e. beliefs) but a primary element in society, functioning to maintain the
5       viability of that society. Beliefs were now in fact just one sub-system (ideo-
6       logical) among others (the social and the technological), each having quite
7       different frames of reference but subordinate to the more basic concepts of
8       behaviour and material culture. A classic example, and one I have intro-
9       duced elsewhere in the book, is Binford’s study of inter-assemblage variability
20111   among Mousterian stone tools (Binford 1973). Here variability of material
1       culture which was previously interpreted in terms of mental templates (i.e.
2       culture), is now re-interpreted in behavioural terms expressing different
3       types of activities.
4          A major critique of the functional interpretation of material culture was
5       precisely its failure to fully address the ‘mental’ dimension of culture
6       (Johnson 1989: 191). The post-processual reaction pioneered by Hodder
7       re-asserted its signiﬁcance and, in particular, its relation to behaviour (e.g.
8       Hodder 1985). For Binford, the mental realm or beliefs remain just a sub-
9       system, and one largely irrelevant, as well as often dismissed as ‘palaeo-
30111   psychology’ despite his early acceptance through the notion of ‘ideotechnic
1       subsystem’ (cf. Binford 1962 and 1987). Yet for Hodder, ideas or beliefs are
2       not just a sub-system but inextricably part of behaviour (and material
3       culture) – you cannot justiﬁably ignore them. Whether it is making a pot
4       or growing crops, the beliefs surrounding that action (e.g. about why it is
5       being done) are not epiphenomenal but affect to the deepest level how the
6       action is performed and therefore its consequences. Moreover, the action
7       itself helps to reinforce that belief – thus while Hodder is partially restoring
8       Taylor’s tripartite scheme instead of Binford’s reduced two, it is not a return
9       to the hierarchical implications of that model. Hodder does not see behav-
40111   iour or material culture as expressive or derivative of beliefs, but rather all
1       form part of a whole, each constituting the other. Thus of prime impor-
2       tance is the active nature of human behaviour and material culture.
3       Moreover, despite the behavioural emphasis in the New Archaeology, such
44111   behaviour was usually interpreted on a macro-level, in terms of how a
                                                                Eventful contexts   173

1111    society or a community behaved, with little importance attached to indi-
2       viduals. Post-processualism, in highlighting the active nature of individuals,
3       also raised the question of agency, that individuals can make a difference
4       (see Bell 1992 for an alternative view on these issues).
5          To give an example of the post-processual approach, I will describe
6       Matthew Johnson’s study on the transformation of English medieval housing
7       in the sixteenth century (Johnson 1989). He argues that individual houses
8       should not be seen merely as expressions of broad normative structures but
9       the result of interplay between the individuals who constructed and/or lived
1011    in them and the wider social habitus they inherited. Comparing two houses,
1       similarities and differences emerged, one expressive of the wider trends, the
2       other of the individual nature of the site and people involved. Thus both
3111    houses were sited away from the main village and used similar reorganisa-
4       tion of architectural elements such as back-to-back ﬁreplaces, staircases and
5       ostentatious ceilings, but differed in that one was a new building, the other
6       on the site of an older moated hall, and used different details associated
7       with the ﬁreplaces. It is this conjunction of shared and individual elements
8       which can be linked to the theoretical articulation of social structures and
9       agency, as exempliﬁed in structuration theory.
20111      Much post-processual archaeology has been criticised for espousing the
1       active nature of human behaviour or agency in theory, but falling short in
2       practice (Johnson 1989; Barrett 1988); the critics usually invoke Giddens’
3       structuration theory as an attempt to overcome this problem and articu-
4       late in greater detail the role of action and agency in archaeology (Giddens
5       1984; Barrett 1988). Barrett’s criticism in particular encapsulates a debate
6       here between different notions of material culture, between regarding it as
7       similar to a text (Hodder 1989a) or as practice (Barrett 1988). In many
8       respects, though, the difference between Hodder’s and Barrett’s positions
9       may be exaggerated; both use very similar language in describing the rela-
30111   tion between individuals and society and both reference similar theorists
1       (e.g. Giddens, Bourdieu).
2          Nevertheless, in the light of post-processual critique, archaeologists from
3       within the processual mainstream began to rethink their views on behav-
4       iour, of which two main strands might be picked up: cognitive archaeology
5       as presented by Renfrew and the behavioural archaeology of Earle and
6       Preucel.1 A growing range of studies under the name of cognitive archae-
7       ology sees itself as part of, and a continuation of, processualism (e.g. Renfrew
8       1994). Cognitive archaeology is concerned to understand ‘how people used
9       their minds, and formulated and utilised useful concepts’ regardless of the
40111   philosophical standpoint (Renfrew 1994: 5). For Renfrew, cognitive archae-
1       ology is a science, the science of how humans have constructed and used
2       symbols. Examples include the study of measuring systems (e.g. tally sticks,
3       weights), representative or iconic art (e.g. rock carving/painting) or design
44111   templates for artefact production.
        174   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111       The kinds of studies included under cognitive archaeology vary and it
2       may be misleading to give them a theoretical consensus, but it is quite clear
3       that despite apparent convergence they differ quite radically from post-
4       processual approaches (e.g. see ‘Viewpoint’ in Cambridge Archaeological
5       Journal (1993) 3: 247–70). On the one hand, they adopt the importance
6       of the mental as a key component alongside behaviour and material culture,
7       instead of viewing it simply as a sub-system; on the other hand, however,
8       cognitive archaeology seems to argue against any conﬂation of these, with
9       beliefs, behaviour and material culture – although all interacting – still
1011    occupying discrete realms. Thus while Renfrew and others such as Flannery
1       and Marcus argue for a holism where the cognitive realm affects behaviour
2       or more speciﬁcally, where religious beliefs may affect subsistence practices,
3       there is still a sense in which the two can be separated. In doing so, such
4       an approach misunderstands the key point of post-processualism – that
5       belief, behaviour and material culture are not just related but intertwined
6       and mutually constitutive. The very idea of ‘an archaeology of the mind’
7       as a separate ﬁeld is highly dubious under post-processualism.
8          A major problem seems to be a misunderstanding over the concept of
9       ‘meaning’ – processual-cognitive approaches afﬁrm an objective method-
20111   ology and thus distinguish cognition as a process from its subjective
1       experience – as Renfrew puts it, between how they thought and what they
2       thought (Renfrew 1993: 249). But meaning is not about getting inside
3       people’s minds for it pervades all aspects of human existence. Renfrew seems
4       to be conﬂating two issues here – the subjective and the objective with
5       the mental and material – and regards meaning as somehow a subjective
6       property of the mind, while thought processes and structures are somehow
7       objective in so far as they manifest themselves in behaviour and material
8       culture. Despite the recognition of the active nature of material culture,
9       cognitive archaeology sustains a divide between the mental, behavioural
30111   and the material. As Hodder says, one cannot separate these out; the content
1       and the structure of cognition are intertwined, a good example being the
2       presumption of rationality in studies of decision-making which ignores the
3       fact that such rationality may be culturally or socially speciﬁc (Hodder
4       1993b: 257).
5          This point leads directly on to the other development in processual
6       archaeology, loosely termed ‘behavioural’, which has focused on decision-
7       making processes (Earle and Preucel 1987; Earle 1991). Against earlier
8       approaches which tended to view decision-making in ‘rational’ terms, Earle
9       has proposed the addition of cultural rules (Earle 1991).2 He thus distin-
40111   guishes three types of rationality, all seen as mutually reinforcing rather
1       than mutually exclusive: the ﬁrst two, economic, and evolutionary, are those
2       used normally in processualism and usually expressed through optimisation
3       theory. Deriving from micro-economics, this theory assumes that decisions
44111   will be derived from optimising the results based on a weighing of the costs
                                                               Eventful contexts   175

1111    and beneﬁts involved. As a speciﬁc theory it is weak and open to criticisms
2       of ethnocentrism; as a general theory it might be described as trite. To
3       reﬁne it, the notion of cultural rationality is introduced which provides the
4       relative measure of success – success being determined though group iden-
5       tiﬁcation or association. Essentially, the basis of this behavioural approach
6       is the interplay of choices determined by pragmatics (economic/
7       evolutionary rationality) and society (cultural rationality). Another version
8       of this approach is in the use of operations research in archaeology, which
9       looks at behaviour in terms of multi-linear event trees, mapping behav-
1011    ioural choices and consequences through a dendrogram (Bleed 1991). Again,
1       while optimisation theory lies at the origin of this, it is claimed that such
2       an approach can be modiﬁed through the inclusion of cultural factors inﬂu-
3111    encing decisions.
4          While this might seem a fruitful union of processual and post-processual
5       concerns, from a post-processual perspective the very distinction between
6       pragmatic and cultural choices might be suspect. However, rather than focus
7       on this distinction (which has partly been discussed in Chapter 3 under
8       the topic of production), I want to draw back and recapitulate the main
9       issues. For all their differences, processual and post-processual approaches
20111   focus on behaviour or actions as the critical concept to be articulated with
1       material culture. Unlike the earlier part of the twentieth century in which
2       culture was seen as primarily a mental phenomenon, since the New
3       Archaeology it is seen as a behavioural one – whether we choose to deﬁne
4       behaviour as rational/functional or as meaningfully constituted. To what
5       extent is material culture, though, still supplemental to the concept of
6       culture – not so much to ideas any more as to human behaviour or action?
7          The subject has been most widely addressed in post-processual discourse,
8       partly because, under processualism, material culture patterning came to
9       stand in for behavioural patterning – it represented or expressed it, just as
30111   earlier it expressed beliefs, ideas, etc. Indeed the very distinction of behav-
1       iour and material culture lay at the basis of middle range theory (see p. 183).
2       Thus the important shift for processualists was from ideas to behaviour. It
3       is only under post-processualism that the passivity of this view vis-à-vis ma-
4       terial culture has been criticised, although there are differences about how
5       to articulate the relation between material culture and behaviour, as exem-
6       pliﬁed in the views of Ian Hodder and John Barrett (also see p. 173). Barrett
7       is quite speciﬁc about the importance of the material world for human
8       agency: it acts as a locale, an arena within which practice takes place, yet
9       the derivative role of material culture is quite explicit: ‘The material world
40111   contains acculturated structures drawn upon and invested with meaning by
1       human action’ (Barrett 1988: 9). But the concern for looking at practices
2       implies the primacy of the agent and the supplementarity of the artefact.
3       After all, one can perform actions without artefacts – artefacts come after
44111   (both historically and logically) agents.3 Is this acceptable? Indeed Hodder
        176   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    makes just this kind of point in criticising Barrett for sustaining a distinc-
2       tion between practice and thought (Hodder 1989a),
3          Despite the signiﬁcant development of Hodder’s notion of an active ma-
4       terial culture, there are still residual problems, and I think that ultimately
5       both he and Barrett perpetuate something of the idea of the person as the
6       ‘origin’ of meaning, the absent presence in the archaeological record (see
7       Hodder 1989a). Even though the meaning of material culture does not
8       derive from ideas or thoughts, one sees in the position of both Hodder and
9       Barrett the tacit notion that it at least derives from people, and more partic-
1011    ularly, agents. We tend to see the subject as the origin of material culture
1       – material culture as supplemental to the basic fact of the human person.
2       In this sense, the subject or agent is the fundamental datum of any social
3       science – meaning derives from this subject which transforms the world.
4       The agent as origin. But can we really privilege the agent in this way as
5       the origin of meaning? Is there not almost a contradiction in asserting both
6       a theory of agency (in the strong sense critiqued here) and the active nature
7       of material culture?
8          It is important to clear up what the concept of agency means. When
9       the issue arose in post-processual archaeology, proponents were quick to
20111   point out that agency and the individual are not the same and thus objec-
1       tions to reinstating people were misguided. But consider what an agent is,
2       against an individual: it is an abstraction or reduction from the individual,
3       a person distilled into their essence (as Western philosophy teaches) – the
4       essence being freedom. What marks the essence of Man (sic) is his capacity
5       for free will, to act. The whole notion of agency is based on this Protestant-
6       capitalist notion of the individual as a free agent. Individuals like Julius
7       Caesar are generally not what archaeology is about, but it can take into
8       account the fact that Caesar, not in his particular being but his essential
9       being, is free and can alter history through this freedom, and in this he is
30111   the same as every other individual, potentially. I do not need to dwell on
1       the essentialism and archaism of this view, but it is strange that the concep-
2       tion of agency has not been more critically examined.
3          If the individual is the source of meaning, where does this lie? What are
4       the limits of the individual and her action? Raising an arm to signal is a
5       meaningful gesture, but what makes it different from a pot? What makes
6       the action different from the artefact? Is it that an action relies on the
7       body, whereas an artefact is physically separate? Yet most actions clearly
8       incorporate physically separate things, such as opening a door, so do we
9       call such an action a combination of action and artefact or is it irreducible?
40111   Or, if we have an armless person with an artiﬁcial limb who opens a door,
1       does she simply perform an action or is that a mixture of an action-plus-
2       artefact? What I am trying to draw out in these questions is the role the
3       body plays in this distinction between actions and artefacts. The tendency
44111   is to implicitly use the body as the dividing line, yet explicitly deny the
                                                               Eventful contexts   177

1111    body, in fact to focus on intentionality or other such things which use the
2       body or manifest themselves in the body. Bodily alterations such as circum-
3       cision, ear or nose piercing, or a tattoo are revealing in this respect for
4       they are both of the body and not of the body.
5          From the other angle one might ask whether the body is such a stable
6       or bounded entity either. Lynn Meskell has written extensively on the issue
7       of the body in relation to archaeology and, drawing on broader philo-
8       sophical and feminist debates, convincingly argues for a ﬂuidity to
9       corporeality (Meskell 1999: ch. 1). Not only is the body open to modiﬁ-
1011    cation in the ways mentioned above, but it is an ‘open system’ in so far as
1       all kinds of material exchanges take place, substances both leaving and
2       entering the body such as faeces, semen, food, etc. More generally, there-
3111    fore, the body is not so much a given entity as a process, a materialising
4       of social or cultural phenomena such as sex/gender.
5          Meskell’s discussion of the body is tied in to the broader issue of iden-
6       tity and she eloquently discusses a whole range of terms such as the
7       individual, agency and personhood, in relation to archaeology. As she rightly
8       remarks, the key issue is to reconcile the multiplicity of social identities
9       (i.e. gender, race, ethnicity, class, etc.) with the singularity of individual
20111   experience (Meskell 1999: 50). An important site for such a reconciliation
1       lies in the body, or more accurately, perhaps, in embodiment or material-
2       isation. The usefulness of this conception is evident if one considers the
3       idea of material culture – what is it in distinction to? Ideal culture? What
4       does the ‘material’ refer to? As Walter Taylor said – but from a different
5       perspective – the term material culture is fallacious (see p. 171). It is an
6       undiscussed concept, with both implications of physicality (Yates 1991),
7       and extra-corporeality, that is, outside the body.
8          We can relate it to a very Hegelian conception of human agency which
9       Daniel Miller has already made interesting use of in his discussion of the
30111   nature of material culture, particularly of the concept of objectiﬁcation
1       (Entausserung). Like Hegel he places the process of objectiﬁcation between
2       a subject and an object, and while he frequently states that each consti-
3       tutes the other, that is neither is prior – the impression is that this process
4       still has its ultimate origin in the subject. Thus the process of objectiﬁca-
5       tion is one in which ‘a subject externalises itself in a creative act of
6       differentiation, and in turn re-appropriates this externalisation through an
7       act which Hegel terms sublation (aufhebung)’ (Miller 1987: 28). What
8       maintains this impression is the phrasing of the dialectics in terms of
9       (human) subject and (material) object, a distinction which, I believe, is
40111   harmful – perhaps the concept of material culture should be put under
1       erasure to signify this.
2          The critical point to come from this, is that if people are not agents but
3       bodies, then actions cannot be viewed from a simplistic causal model which
44111   posits the agent as the cause of an event. Similar critiques have been
        178   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    levelled from within the sociology of technology which employs the term
2       actant rather than agent to signify the fact that agency can be nonhuman
3       as well as human (e.g. see Latour 1992; also Boast 1997 for its relevance
4       to archaeology). Just as the material boundaries to an action cannot be
5       split, nor can the causative links in history be split. Many of the concerns
6       for presenting a more human narrative of the past may not necessarily be
7       served by invoking agency, which is, as I have already said, a very abstract
8       notion anyway. Indeed I think there are two separate issues here which
9       have got conﬂated in the concept of agency – one being the particularity
1011    of history and social life, the other, the presence of a human dimension,
1       archaeology with a face. Johnson’s study of agency and structure in English
2       housing related above could ultimately be seen as a conjunction of the
3       particular and the general – the speciﬁc articulation of a more general set
4       of concepts. The particulars in question which are subsumed under the
5       concept of agency could just as easily be explained in terms of more local
6       (i.e. family, village, parish) concepts or structures, as opposed to broader
7       national or European concepts. The structure–agency dichotomy subsumes
8       a great deal more variety of spatial and temporal scales which may be more
9       informative. On the other hand, if the issue is ‘humanising the past’, then
20111   agency is a red herring; there are far more exciting ways, which focus more
1       on an archaeology of the body and an archaeology of the senses – an archae-
2       ology which engages with emotion, for example. An excellent example of
3       this is Sarah Tarlow’s recent re-examination of death from the point of
4       view of experience. Ironically, most archaeological work on death has looked
5       at it in terms of everything except death itself – status, ideology, power.
6       No one has actually studied what death means as a part of human experi-
7       ence (Tarlow 1999). Drawing on metaphors of death on tombstones, she
8       introduces an emotional component to the interpretation of mortality.
9       Approaches such as this offer a far more humanised presentation of the
30111   past than abstract agents.
1          From this discussion, I think it is important to reassert the intercon-
2       nected nature of material culture, behaviour and belief; the question of
3       agency is the last lingering vestige of a processual, even pre-processual
4       notion of culture which is divided into separate realms. Belief, or the mental,
5       was fully integrated with behaviour under post-processualism but behaviour
6       in the guise of agency remained distinct as a concept from material culture,
7       despite assertions on the active nature of material culture. All three of the
8       Taylorian realms should be seen as merging into each other and it is
9       misleading to try and separate them (as in cognitive archaeology, for
40111   example). This of course implies the need for a much more complex under-
1       standing of causality and events in the archaeological record that does not
2       base itself on the notion that material culture is distinct from behaviour.
3       And yet, there is a deep epistemological reason for keeping this distinc-
44111   tion, which ties in to the role of actualistic studies. Before discussing this
                                                              Eventful contexts   179

1111    reason, I want to contrast the theoretical complexity presented here with
2       a very simple model of causality and events used in such actualistic studies
3       as well as site reports and other ‘descriptions’ of the archaeological record.
4
5
        Ethnoarchaeology, experimental archaeology and the
6
        basic event
7
8       We often use the term ‘palimpsest’ to describe archaeological sites, but what
9       does this really mean? At one level, in excavating a multi-phase or multi-
1011    period site, particularly present in urban contexts, the archaeology consists
1       of several superimposed activity areas or ‘sites’ even. But the language we
2       use is revealing, because we do tend to think in terms of phases of activity
3111    as if any one phase had a clear beginning and end. I have always thought
4       that one of the best things about the Harris matrix is its multi-linearity,
5       and yet at the end of the day its very virtue is often hidden through coarse-
6       grained phasing as if the site consisted of a series of geological layers.
7       Ironically, the image of the site presented in the ﬁnal synthesis often shows
8       little difference from pre-matrix days. At a more complex level, a palimpsest
9       might be the superimposition of artefact distributions, each associated with
20111   a different activity; the resulting pattern is therefore not the product of a
1       single event but of several, each potentially obscuring the other (e.g. see
2       Carr 1987 for an interesting study of dissecting such palimpsests).
3          This situation is very analogous to the superimposion of features with all
4       the concomitant disturbances and blurring it can effect. However, as in
5       that case, here too the record is treated as if it was composed of several
6       discrete actions, which, if only they could be dissected, would reveal their
7       individual patterning. In both cases, the perception is of a simple sequence
8       of discrete events which only needs to be pulled apart by careful strati-
9       graphic excavation or spatial ﬁltering, to produce an event chain. But if,
30111   as we have argued, such an image is overly simple and misleading, what is
1       the alternative? One of the advantages in the supplementary chart to the
2       Harris matrix I discussed earlier in the chapter is that it shows the duration
3       as well as the sequence of stratigraphic entities, without separating produc-
4       tion from use. Another advantage is that it shows a site as a palimpsest of
5       activities occurring at different rates or scales of duration and that instead
6       of having to phase a site, one can retain a sense of multi-temporality. At
7       any one time or place on a site, a whole series of events may be taking
8       place simultaneously, but not necessarily at the same rate or ‘speed’.
9          For example, consider one feature on a site such as a compound ditch
40111   around a prehistoric farmstead; what a rich temporality it must have from
1       when it was ﬁrst cut, to the gradual weathering of the sides and the rain
2       washing soil into its base, the windborne pollen which falls into the silts,
3       a broken pot dumped one day. The throwing of the pot may take merely
44111   seconds, the cutting of the ditch a day, while the silting up takes years.
        180   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    How can a matrix display this, and how should we separate the act of
2       throwing away the pot from the cumulative silting up? Maybe such an act
3       would never have been done on a freshly cut ditch; all these events are
4       implicated with each other even though they take place at different scales
5       of duration, and even the ditch itself does not contain these events. The
6       same summer pollen also falls in a pit or a well, the same cutting of the
7       ditch later sees a human burial, part of the same broken pot ends up as lid
8       to another pot. It is the interconnectedness of events which are so repressed
9       in conventional conceptions of the archaeological record, unless that inter-
1011    connectedness is expressed merely in terms of a causal chain.
1          Traditional intra-site spatial analysis and stratigraphic recording have, by
2       focusing on a single activity at any one time and following its depositional
3       patterns, perpetuated the idea that life consists of a sequence of discrete
4       events. This is not to say that we do not envisage different activities occur-
5       ring contemporaneously in different locales on a site or even at the same
6       locale, but rather that we envisage the activity itself as a discrete entity,
7       which has its own space–time zone – as if it can and does exist indepen-
8       dently of other activities. On such a perception, the overlapping of any
9       activities will always be interpreted as interference, as pathological. It is as
20111   if we recognise that the archaeological record is a palimpsest but that the
1       phenomenon of the palimpsest is something which distorts or obscures the
2       original actions or events behind the record which exist as discrete enti-
3       ties. But maybe the palimpsest is in the very nature of actions and events
4       – in history. Rather than treat it as a pathology to be dissected, we should
5       embrace it as the heart of a living site.
6          Unfortunately, ethnoarchaeology and experimental archaeology have
7       only exacerbated this perception and sustained the idea of simple event
8       sequences in the archaeological record. This is due, as I will argue, to their
9       role in epistemological issues of archaeology. The difference between the
30111   two sub-disciplines has been debated – for some, both are forms of exper-
1       imental archaeology (e.g. Ingersoll et al. 1977), but generally a distinction
2       is maintained (e.g. Skibo 1992: 24). In many ways, the distinction is rela-
3       tive to whether one is looking at the purposes of the study or the means;
4       both sub-disciplines share a concern for material culture–behaviour corre-
5       lates, although they use different means. Ethnoarchaeology, as distinct from
6       ethnographic analogy (Hodder 1982c: 28; Kent 1987: 39–43) developed as
7       a speciﬁc ﬁeld of study with the New Archaeology in the late 1960s/1970s
8       in order to aid understanding of the patterning found in the archaeolog-
9       ical record. It also forms a core part of what is known as middle range
40111   theory or research (see p. 183). In this role, ethnoarchaeology is ultimately
1       a ﬁeld study which typically examines speciﬁc activities in terms of their
2       material patterning so these can be contrasted with an analogous archae-
3       ological context, either directly or indirectly through generalising statements
44111   (cf. Skibo 1992: 16–17). Whether this comparison is formal, lawlike or
                                                                Eventful contexts   181

1111    relational, in either case the aim is to associate a particular behaviour with
2       a particular material correlate. Of course, ethnoarchaeology can feed into
3       more general theories of material culture, but then this might not be
4       described as ethnoarchaeology but as archaeological anthropology (Hodder
5       1982c: 212). I do not want to get embroiled in a discussion of deﬁnitions
6       since the point I want to make chieﬂy concerns the way studies of modern
7       material culture (of Western or non-Western societies) are used in a direct
8       way towards the archaeological record. As an example, I will choose a
9       familiar case study, Binford’s smudge pits (Binford 1967).
1011       Binford’s paper looked at the various attributes of a certain type of archae-
1       ological feature on Mississippian sites in the USA, a pit ﬁlled with carbonised
2       corncobs (Binford 1967). He compares these to ethnographic examples of
3111    similar pits which are known to have been used for smoking hides, and
4       then supports the analogy with a set of associated variables such as season-
5       ality and female labour. Whether or not Binford’s argument is convincing
6       or sufﬁciently supported by explanatory links between the similarities, a key
7       question must hang over the idea that it is valid to focus on a speciﬁc
8       activity. Hodder raises the importance of the wider cultural context in which
9       such an activity occurs (Hodder 1982c: 20–3). Indeed, this is the very heart
20111   of his critique and approach to analogy, but the point needs to be pushed;
1       there is a difference between arguing that a certain material patterning/
2       activity is related to other patterns/activities and arguing that any material
3       patterning/activity may not be so discrete or distinct. This notion of discrete
4       activities can be seen in another classic ethnoarchaeological study, ‘Millie’s
5       Camp’ (Bonnichsen 1972).
6          In this study, Bonnichsen analysed the layout and distribution of objects
7       in a recently abandoned Indian camp in the Canadian Rockies and then
8       tested his inferences by consulting a former occupant, Millie. Central to
9       his analysis was the concept of activity area, the site being divided up and
30111   numbered into different parts based on features, features with objects and
1       clusters of objects (Bonnichsen 1972: 277). Now what is interesting about
2       this study is not so much the testability of it, or that he got some things
3       right and others wrong, but that in a way, by asking Millie about the site
4       in terms of activity areas, the notion of discrete events relating to discrete
5       material deposits is never in question – either the inference is right or
6       wrong. Bonnichsen seems to recognise that activity areas did overlap, but
7       in his list of four successive inferential errors, the idea that activities and
8       the functions of objects are discrete is maintained.
9          If ethnoarchaeology overemphasises the discreteness of activities/patterns,
40111   then experimental archaeology is even more culpable. Experimental archae-
1       ology has as long a history as the use of ethnographic analogy – Pitt Rivers
2       conducted various experiments in using prehistoric tools and the study of
3       ditch weathering, but there have been many more studies, especially in the
44111   replication of ancient artefacts or structures (Ascher 1961a; Ingersoll et al.
        182   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    1977; Coles 1979). Coles sees the basis of any experimental archaeology
2       as a ‘test of quality’ for anything from sites to weapons; by quality he means
3       any of three levels: basic appearance, production technology and function
4       (Coles 1979: 35–41). It is quite clear that these levels are all framed by a
5       certain conception of the archaeological record – that is, it is primarily
6       a material or physical record which has certain basic, given, physical prop-
7       erties which both constrain and determine form and function. For Ascher,
8       this fact restrained the scope of imitative experiments to aspects of tech-
9       nology and subsistence, yet to him this is more or less all that the
1011    archaeological record consists of anyway (Ascher 1961a: 793–4). Coles
1       makes a similar point: ‘Experimental archaeology has the virtue that it deals
2       with the basic sources of archaeological data, the material remains of stone,
3       bone, wood and metal’ (Coles 1979: 243).
4          The idea of testing goes hand in hand with this concept; it is a question
5       of evaluating the quality of form or function for a particular aspect of the
6       archaeological record, and such tests can only make sense against universal,
7       non-cultural criteria. The Scandinavian projects on clearance and cultiva-
8       tion by Steensberg and Iversen, or the British studies on earthwork erosion
9       at Overton Down, or even ‘living’ experiments such as at Butser Farm, are
20111   all characterised by this belief. The problem is, what do they really tell us?
1       Such objects, their form and function, are only meaningful in a cultural
2       context. The fact that we can use Neolithic axes to chop down trees
3       efﬁciently tells us nothing about the Neolithic; all it tells us is that we can
4       chop down trees with such axes. Of course micro-wear comparisons might
5       strengthen the claim that Neolithic axes were used to chop down trees but
6       this still does not tell us why.
7          The problem with experimental archaeology is that it pulls an action or
8       event out of any cultural context, and presents it as an isolated action as
9       if it had meaning outside a cultural milieu. This is very misleading and
30111   helps to perpetuate notions we have of actions or events as discrete entities,
1       which can be sub-divided or conjoined as an event chain. Cutting down
2       a tree is never just that; it is not for the experimental archaeologist since
3       they are doing it within the milieu of Western academic science, and nor
4       was it for a Neolithic person. The danger here also is that one can assume
5       there is a basic action which underlies both the archaeologist’s experiment
6       and the Neolithic person’s forest clearance – but even this confuses the
7       physical act involving a human body, an axe and a tree with an inten-
8       tional and meaningful act. It is quite possible to envisage all kinds of
9       intentions in someone hacking away at a tree which do not involve forest
40111   clearance or even tree-felling although this may be a consequence – the
1       very experimental act is just one of them.
2          Both ethnoarchaeology and experimental archaeology rely on this atom-
3       istic view of human actions – indeed it is the basis for their use in middle
44111   range theory, for if one cannot separate out distinct sequences of behav-
                                                                Eventful contexts   183

1111    iour from the wider cultural context, then all such patternings and studies
2       cannot be applied to other cultural contexts such as the archaeological
3       record. This is most obvious in Schiffer’s behavioural archaeology which
4       studies the relation of behaviour to material culture in terms of discrete
5       behavioural chains; indeed it is a condition of his whole theoretical system
6       that such behavioural chains are distinct and potentially separable from
7       each other (Schiffer and Skibo 1997). A similar approach is used in oper-
8       ations research which, although it employs multi-linear sequences, still
9       presumes that actions and events can be broken down naturally into discrete
1011    elements and decision forks (Bleed 1991). I want to ﬁnish with a recent
1       example which illustrates this theme and the close relationship between
2       ethnoarchaeology and experimental archaeology – Skibo’s work on the use
3111    of temper in cooking pots (Skibo 1992: 28–30).
4          Beginning with controlled laboratory experiments, the heating effec-
5       tiveness and performance of differently tempered vessels was tested to
6       explain the transition from organic to sand-tempered pottery in the Late
7       Archaic–Early Woodland period of the eastern USA. To strengthen this
8       inference, ethnoarchaeological work was done to ﬁnd out how people
9       become aware of performance characteristics and which ones were noticed.
20111   It was found that in use (i.e. cooking, washing-up), features such as heat
1       effectiveness and ease of cleaning were important in selecting different types
2       of vessels. This study combines both approaches to unravel correlates
3       between the use of pottery and its form – between behaviour and material
4       culture. The trouble is, it assumes that a basic event or property (i.e. perfor-
5       mativity) can be distilled from the particular context of the study – both
6       in the experiment and the pottery-using group. The post-processual critique
7       of behaviour in so far as it is viewed as situated in speciﬁc historical and
8       cultural contexts clearly argues against this, and in doing so provides quite
9       damaging consequences for the role of actualistic studies in archaeology.
30111   In the next section, I examine the whole question of middle range theory,
1       its status in archaeology, and the consequences of its rejection.
2
3
        Middle range theory and the identity of
4
        archaeology
5
6
        Middle range theory and middle range research
7
8       Middle range theory developed directly out of the early theoretical writings
9       of the New Archaeology in North America, in particular of Lewis Binford
40111   who argued for the development of a speciﬁcally archaeological theory
1       distinct from general social theory (Binford 1977; Raab and Goodyear 1984:
2       258–62). A speciﬁcally archaeological theory was one which focused on
3       the archaeological record and how to make inferences from it, or, as Binford
44111   characterised it, how to move from the static archaeological record to the
        184   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    past dynamic cultural system. He characterised MRT as a ‘Rosetta Stone’,
2       a means of translating or decoding the static into the dynamic, and, else-
3       where, as a tool for diagnosing the ‘disease’ from its ‘symptoms’ (Binford
4       1982: 130; 1981: 23–4). All these metaphors essentially capture the fact
5       that, unlike most social sciences, archaeology has only indirect access to
6       behaviour and therefore requires a method for inferring behaviour from
7       material correlates. A good example and one commonly employed is the
8       ascription of a certain function to a certain artefact, such as the use of a
9       pointed stone as an arrowhead. Through experimental work, analogies and
1011    use–wear analysis, such an inference can be at least partially substantiated.
1       All these studies are examples of middle range research. On this basis, MRT
2       is a body of theory (or methodology – see p. 186) which bridges the gap
3       between our observation of the archaeological record and our interpreta-
4       tion of it as a cultural system – it provides the middle ground between
5       unreﬂective observation and general theory. It is middle range in a pro-
6       cedural sense, not in the sense (as originally used in sociology) of its
7       applicability (e.g. Raab and Goodyear 1984; Kosso 1991: 622–3). Thus an
8       MRT might have very general cross-cultural applicability, but its role in
9       interpreting the past is as a bridge or methodological tool and is quite
20111   distinct from general social theory.
1          The distinction which Binford upholds is quite important for this discus-
2       sion, but, ironically, much of what he says – in particular in terms of the
3       debate with Schiffer on this subject – seems to contradict this distinction.
4       I have already partially discussed the Binford–Schiffer debate at the begin-
5       ning of this chapter, but one of the main differences is over the relation
6       between MRT and general theory (Tschauner 1996: 8–10). For Binford, as
7       I have said, MRT is distinct from general theory, but Schiffer tries to reclaim
8       something of the original sociological meaning of the term as something
9       occupying a middle ground of abstraction (Schiffer 1988: 462–3). Thus,
30111   while for Binford all of Schiffer’s work constitutes middle range theory,
1       Schiffer’s main distinction is between general or social theory and recon-
2       struction theory (ibid.). Is this simply a semantic difference or a different
3       way of dividing up the same realms of theory (cf. Schiffer 1988: ﬁgure 1)?
4       Partly, but there is a deeper issue emerging from the differences between
5       Binford and Schiffer, particularly about the separation of social or general
6       theory from middle range or reconstruction theory. The issue hinges on
7       Binford’s critique of Schiffer’s notion of C-transforms.
8          Schiffer’s transformational or reconstruction theory makes a similar
9       distinction as MRT does between what he calls the archaeological context
40111   and the systemic (i.e. past cultural) context; but, importantly, Schiffer adds
1       that archaeological theory needs to distinguish the correlates between behav-
2       iour and material residues, from those processes, or transforms which distort
3       the residues, and which he divides into two types – natural and cultural
44111   (hence N-transforms and C-transforms). Until recently, Schiffer wrote much
                                                              Eventful contexts   185

1111    more on transforms, giving the impression that his behavioural archaeology
2       is simply about formation processes (e.g. Schiffer 1976, 1987), but current
3       work, particularly his latest text on material culture as a theory of commu-
4       nication, shows how formation processes are just one side of his theoretical
5       perspective (Schiffer and Miller 1999). The disagreement between Binford
6       and Schiffer would seem to revolve around this distinction between trans-
7       forms and correlates – in short, Binford appears to see this distinction as
8       spurious, or at the very least ambiguous, especially when it comes to C-
9       transforms, as I discussed earlier in the chapter.
1011       Thus, on this point Binford has a more integrated conception of forma-
1       tion processes, where the distinction between them and the systemic con-
2       text or cultural system is more ﬂuid. He criticises Schiffer’s programme which
3111    detaches them and sets them up as ‘absolute formation processes’ (Binford
4       1983: 162); for Binford, they are necessarily limited in scope and generality
5       because they are partially contingent on the cultural system. For Schiffer, on
6       the other hand, this is not so – he regards the study of formation processes
7       as providing independent, cross-cultural generalizations about the relation-
8       ship between the archaeological and systemic context, separate from general
9       theories about the systemic context. And, ironically, Schiffer’s position is
20111   more consistent – for if Binford is right, and the distinction between trans-
1       forms and systemic context is ﬂuid, then so necessarily is the distinction
2       between MRT and general theory (Tschauner 1996: 9). For the differ-
3       ence between MRT and general theory hinges on the one being concerned
4       with the relation between the archaeological record and the cultural con-
5       text, and the other with just the cultural context, and yet if the archaeolog-
6       ical record is not distinct from the cultural context, then it follows that
7       general theory cannot be that distinct from MRT. The consequences of this
8       have a strong bearing on philosophical issues about the status of archaeo-
9       logical inference and generalisation. To show this it is necessary to go back
30111   a little and describe why, especially for Binford, it is so important to keep
1       MRT distinct from general theory.
2          The role of MRT, you will recall, was to act as a bridge, a methodological
3       tool to move from observation to interpretation – it helped to ground inter-
4       pretation by providing an independent check against general theory. It marks
5       the processual acceptance of the theory-ladenness of data. In themselves,
6       therefore, middle range theories are as theoretical as any other theory and
7       no more or less general than ‘general’ social theory – indeed in another con-
8       text, say a study of middening practice, they might constitute interpretation
9       and require their own, other middle range theory (e.g. Kosso 1991: 623).
40111   This is a critical epistemological point – because middle range theories are
1       theories like any other, they can stand independently, and it is this inde-
2       pendence which acts as a check on the interpretative process.
3          This however is precisely the point on which post-processual critique
44111   targets MRT: the assumption of independence:
        186    Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111          While the idea of Middle Range Theory in relation to physical processes
2             (e.g. decay of C-14) is feasible, it is difﬁcult to see how there can ever
3             be universal laws of cultural process which are independent of one’s
4             higher-level cultural theories. Of course, within these high-level theo-
5             ries there is a great need for research on material culture, processes of
6             deposition and the like – one can call this Middle Range research.
7             What is quite different, and denied in this volume, is that the type of
8             measuring device discussed by Binford and termed Middle Range Theory
9             can exist independent of cultural context.
1011                                                                 (Hodder 1986: 103)
1
2       For Hodder and indeed most post-processualists, MRT is thus a misguided
3       enterprise. Interestingly, however, in two recent publications MRT is
4       redeﬁned as the background knowledge or assumptions to more general
5       interpretations of the past (Kosso 1991; Tschauner 1996; also see Saitta
6       1992 for a Marxist MRT). Comparisons are made between MRT and
7       hermeneutics, arguing that in practice both processual and post-processual
8       interpretations rely on the same kinds of independent, background assump-
9       tions or theory. Just as processual explanation uses MRT to bridge obser-
20111   vation and theory, so post-processual interpretation makes use of a number
1       of similar assumptions (such as analogies, formation processes). Tschauner’s
2       paper in particular goes through some examples in a very detailed way to
3       demonstrate this.
4          Their arguments are very convincing and there is no doubt that both
5       processual and post-processual studies do make use of a similar range of
6       assumptions and background theory which we might call MRT. However,
7       I ﬁnd one problem here which has not been fully addressed and perhaps
8       misses the central difference between processualists and post-processualists
9       – that is, the status of middle range research and its distinction from middle
30111   range theory. If we accept Kosso’s and Tschauner’s arguments about MRT,
1       then it must stand as quite independent from middle range research – the
2       explicit study of formation processes, ethnoarchaeology, experimental
3       archaeology, etc. MRT, as they describe it, is a procedural or epistemic title,
4       something which refers not to the content of a theory but simply to its
5       status in archaeological inference or generalisation. In the example quoted
6       above from Kosso, a study of manuring does not constitute MRT, it only
7       becomes MRT when it is incorporated into an interpretation of archaeo-
8       logical ﬁeld systems for example. But this begs the question, what is it then
9       prior to MRT?
40111      The obvious answer is middle range research; indeed Hodder himself in
1       the quote above suggests this. However, to call it middle range research is
2       to imply that MRT is not simply a relative appellation but that content does
3       matter. The very idea of conducting research speciﬁcally to resolve linking
44111   arguments suggests that MRT deriving from such sources has no other
                                                               Eventful contexts   187

1111    function but to be MRT, and in fact most research of this kind is conducted
2       for this reason. And this is what is slightly troubling in Hodder’s espousal
3       of middle range research as distinct from MRT, for if middle-range research
4       is conducted solely in order to act as middle-range theory, it implies that
5       such research and MRT in general does not have the independent status
6       claimed for it – MRT is not just a theory like any other, but one speciﬁ-
7       cally designed as a methodological tool. The alternative is to redeﬁne what
8       such middle range research is – that it does stand alone as a separate enter-
9       prise, as many would now describe ethno-archaeology, for example, which
1011    has become largely an independent sub-discipline. Indeed, despite the earlier
1       quote, Hodder does seem to uphold this view later on when he talks about
2       ethnoarchaeology as ‘the study of archaeology in ethnographic contexts in
3111    order to throw light on the ethnographic present’ (Hodder 1986: 105).
4       Ethnoarchaeology is more a part of anthropology or ethnohistory than
5       archaeology, and certainly not a methodological ﬁeld of research. This would
6       also mean that the study of non-natural formation processes should really
7       be part of ethnoarchaeology or an archaeology of the present rather than
8       methodological research. Moreover, to continue calling any of these studies
9       middle range research is thus a serious misnomer.
20111      This is really the logical outcome of Binford’s critique of Schiffer too,
1       for it accepts the situated nature of formation processes (at least C-trans-
2       forms), and rather a source of cross-cultural generalisations, their status
3       becomes closer to that of analogies. Indeed, raising the question of analogy
4       alongside middle range research goes to the heart of the issue. There is no
5       question that middle range research forms a major part in archaeological
6       inference, either explicitly or implicitly, but if its methodological status is
7       challenged, what is left but its use analogically. But this of course begs the
8       question of the status of analogy in archaeological interpretation. To
9       conclude this section and at the same time broach some fundamental ques-
30111   tions about what archaeology as a discipline is supposed to be, I will address
1       this issue of analogy.
2
3
        Analogy and archaeological generalisation
4
5       In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, analogy – speciﬁcally
6       ethnographic analogy – was central to cultural evolutionism. It provided
7       the whole justiﬁcation for cultural evolution in so far as non-Western soci-
8       eties were consistently used as examples of a certain type of society which
9       throughout Europe had become extinct – or rather had evolved into modern
40111   Western civilisation:
1
2           The existing races, in their respective stages of progression, may be taken
3           as the bona ﬁde representatives of the races of antiquity. . . . They thus
44111       afford us living illustrations of the social customs, forms of government,
        188    Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111          laws and warlike practices, which belong to the ancient races from which
2             they remotely sprang, whose implements, resembling, with but little
3             difference, their own, are now found low down in the soil. . . .
4                                                               (Pitt Rivers 1906: 53)
5
6       Such ‘survivals’ as they were often called were not simply illustrations of
7       prehistoric communities but were themselves prehistoric, even though they
8       existed as contemporaries of their Victorian observers. Works such as Sven
9       Nilsson’s Primitive Inhabitants of Scandinavia (1868), David Wilson’s
1011    Prehistoric Man (1862), John Lubbock’s Prehistoric Times (1865) and Lewis
1       Henry Morgan’s Ancient Society (1877) all worked on this premise. At the
2       extreme is Sollas’ Ancient Hunters (1911) where direct comparisons are
3       made between palaeolithic cultures and contemporary societies with
4       suggested historical connections: Mousterians became Tasmanians, Aurign-
5       acians became Bushmen and Magdalenians became the Eskimo (Sollas 1924:
6       591 ff.). The role of analogy is perhaps accentuated here if we remember
7       that archaeology and anthropology, even in Europe, were for much of the
8       nineteenth century effectively the same discipline with the same subject
9       (Orme 1981: 15). With the divergence of these disciplines by the twen-
20111   tieth century and the rise of culture history in archaeology, the use of
1       analogies in the explicit manner of nineteenth-century evolutionists was
2       much more moderate and of less interest. Its role did not become a subject
3       of discussion in archaeology until the 1950s and 1960s when more behav-
4       ioural and functional interpretations of the archaeological record were
5       starting to appear. The role of analogy in contemporary archaeology is thus
6       very closely allied with this ‘behavioural turn’.
7          In Britain, both Gordon Childe and Grahame Clark addressed the ques-
8       tion of ethnographic analogies. Childe was generally sceptical and saw them
9       as of primarily heuristic value unless some continuity could be demonstrated
30111   (Childe 1956: 48–9; Clark 1951; 1953). Clark made the same points in his
1       paper ‘Folk-culture and the study of European prehistory’, and questioned the
2       nineteenth-century notion of ‘survivals’, arguing that present non-Western
3       societies have a history as long as ours and they have not simply remained
4       ‘stuck in time’ (Clark 1951: 52). Like Childe, he initially preferred the use
5       of analogies with some historical continuity over exotic ones, arguing that
6       ‘analogies between phenomena torn from their historical contexts may be
7       very deceptive’ (Clark 1951: 55). However, only two years later he goes a
8       little further, arguing that ‘it seems legitimate to attach greater signiﬁcance
9       to analogies drawn from societies existing under ecological conditions which
40111   approximate those reconstructed for the prehistoric culture under investiga-
1       tion than those adapted to markedly different environments’ (Clark 1953:
2       355). However, he still qualiﬁes this with a cautionary note, and prefaces
3       this statement with the suggestion that its applicability is best conﬁned to
44111   palaeolithic archaeology because of the lack of historical continuity.
                                                               Eventful contexts   189

1111       The implicit idea that ‘history’ only really started in the Neolithic over-
2       lies a more tacit notion that the status of a society in terms of cultural
3       development is linked to our ability to comprehend it. Christopher Hawkes’
4       paper on the ladder of inference, a notion shared by many of his contem-
5       poraries including Childe, is highly informative in this respect (Hawkes
6       1954). Put brieﬂy, the paper states that the extent to which we can know
7       about past societies is graded according to a scheme which places economy
8       and subsistence at the bottom (strongly grounded inference) to ideology at
9       the top (weakly grounded inference). But, and it is something we usually
1011    forget, this ladder was shadowed by another, that of an evolutionary view
1       of prehistory (Wylie 1985: 74; Evans 1998). Signiﬁcantly, this implied that
2       our ability to ascend the ladder of inference is directly related to the extent
3111    to which the culture group had ascended the ladder of civilisation, for
4       which Hawkes proposed his own periodisation (Hawkes 1951). In other
5       words, we can understand the more ideological aspects of more developed
6       societies than less developed ones – Iron Age beliefs are more accessible
7       than palaeolithic ones. Another twist on this, though, is that the ecolog-
8       ical and economic component of a society is stronger in a less developed
9       culture and therefore more important. I believe this is why Clark regards
20111   the use of comparative analogies (as opposed to direct historical approaches)
1       for the Palaeolithic as more acceptable than for the Neolithic. To some
2       extent, the same prejudice continues today in so far as the distinction
3       between hot and cold societies is often overlain by differences in inter-
4       pretation – for example the greater degree to which hunter-gatherers
5       are explained in functional/ecological terms while farming societies
6       receive much more in the way of social and ideological interpretations
7       (Duke 1991: 8–9).
8          In the USA, where the use of direct historical approaches had a longer
9       history, there was far more criticism of this – indeed, even where cultural
30111   continuity and environmental continuity could be demonstrated, analogies
1       may be misleading (Wylie 1985: 75). However, such failures of analogy
2       were not necessarily viewed sceptically but rather seen as a challenge for
3       ﬁnding ways to strengthen their use. The ﬁrst systematic study of analogy
4       and one which attempted to do just this was conducted by Ascher. In
5       ‘Analogy in archaeological interpretation’ (1961b), as well as reviewing the
6       use of the concept and earlier literature, Ascher proposed a strategy for
7       strengthening the use of analogy in both its historical and comparative/cross-
8       cultural modes. Three suggestions were made: ﬁrst, following Clark and
9       others, he suggested selecting analogies based on a similar economic or
40111   subsistence level, and also on close historical continuity as well as close
1       formal similarity. Second, the stock of analogies needed to be expanded by
2       drawing more intensively from ethnographic sources. Third, and most impor-
3       tantly, the archaeologist should go out and study the processes which create
44111   archaeological records ﬁrst-hand (Ascher 1961b).
        190   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111       Ascher’s last point is clearly a call for ethnoarchaeology and other actu-
2       alistic studies discussed in the last section. Some work had already been
3       done in this area by Thompson although he viewed it much more scepti-
4       cally than Ascher (Thompson 1956). The main point of all these discussions
5       of analogy in the 1950s, however, is the ‘chronic ambivalence’ surrounding
6       the use of analogy: as Alison Wylie remarks in her critical study, ‘analogy
7       seems to be both indispensable to interpretation and always potentially
8       misleading’ (Wylie 1985: 81). She goes to the heart of the matter, which
9       lies in the ampliative nature of analogy – that it necessarily goes beyond
1011    what we can be certain of; there is always a leap made. It was precisely
1       this which caused the reaction to analogy she documents in the 1960s and
2       1970s, when the issue of securing inferences became of critical importance.
3          The reaction to analogy took three forms. In the ﬁrst instance there was
4       simply an informal reaction, often in the shape of cautionary tales, and
5       mostly from Europe. Both Laming and Leroi-Gourhan, for example, argued
6       that the use of analogies was on the whole unproductive for it stiﬂed the
7       archaeological imagination and made the past merely a shadow of the
8       present (Orme 1974: 203–4). Ucko, in trying to recapture some use for
9       analogies in the light of their critique, was still very cautious but argued
20111   for their use as an aid to interpretation (ibid.: 206–7; Ucko 1969). The
1       other reactions from the USA were far more systematic in their presenta-
2       tion. The second reaction, with the adoption of the hypothetico-deductive
3       model of archaeological inference, argued that analogies could not be used
4       to test the validity of an explanation although they could still inform the
5       construction of hypotheses. Thus, against Ascher, Binford claimed that no
6       amount of improvement could strengthen the reliability of analogies; what
7       one could do, however, was to test a hypothesis which might be informed
8       by an analogy (Binford 1968). This whole stance of course rested on the
9       distinction between induction and deduction, between contexts of discovery
30111   or theory-construction and contexts of justiﬁcation or theory-evaluation
1       (Wylie 1985: 85–6).
2          Such distinctions are now regarded as untenable, even by Binford, and
3       consequently he shifted ground towards the third position; this involves
4       the use of actualistic research to construct generalisations which can then
5       be applied to the archaeological record. Such a position was ﬁrst fully artic-
6       ulated by Gould who argued for the construction of uniformitarian
7       principles, largely based on eco-utilitarian models of human behaviour,
8       which could be derived from actualistic research (Gould 1980). Gould of
9       course recognised that such principles would not cover all aspects of the
40111   archaeological record but their use could provide a baseline from which
1       anomalies could be perceived; it was left to the archaeologist to explain
2       these anomalies in similar eco-utilitarian terms as far as possible. Gould’s
3       work is effectively of the same order as middle range research and compa-
44111   rable to Binford’s later studies as well as those of others such as Schiffer.
                                                                Eventful contexts   191

1111    It is this third strand, exempliﬁed through middle range research (see
2       p. 183) which has remained the dominant model. Thus, while the ﬁrst and
3       second reactions retained analogy as a useful source of hypothesis construc-
4       tion, the third reaction abandoned it altogether in favour of generalisations.
5          However, as Wylie points out, the very nature of such generalisations
6       made in actualistic research is itself analogical; the failure to see this was
7       partly the result of a very simple understanding of what analogy means. For
8       many, analogy was simply a formal point of resemblance between a source
9       (ethnography) and a subject (archaeology), where similarities in some prop-
1011    erties were taken to signify similarities in others. However, in distinction
1       to such formal analogies, relational analogies stress that similar relations
2       must hold between the properties, not just the presence or absence of such
3111    properties (Wylie 1985: 94–5). Clark’s use of ecological or subsistence
4       patterns as a dimension of relationality is a good example, even though he
5       provides no explicit justiﬁcation for it. To go forward, however, work is
6       needed to strengthen such analogies, both on the source side and subject
7       side through substantiating principles of connection (see also Stahl 1993
8       for a similar discussion in connection with historical analogies).
9          Wylie’s own arguments for the use of analogy and in particular for
20111   strengthening their relevance actually seem to be exempliﬁed in middle
1       range research, although she does not make the association explicit. Indeed,
2       the whole enterprise of trying to strengthen analogies can be seen as a facet
3       of middle range theory as it is conventionally articulated. However, while
4       I agree with her characterisation of the role of analogy and its relationship
5       to the kind of inferences or generalisations made in actualistic and subject-
6       side research, I ﬁnd there is also an inherent contradiction between the
7       whole endeavour to strengthen such analogies and the nature of analogy.
8       Wylie herself points out that analogy is not just about similarities but also
9       about differences – the fallacy of the ‘perfect analogy’ is that such a thing
30111   is not an analogy at all (Wylie 1985: 94). The point about an analogy in
1       other words is that it does not mark an equivalence between two terms
2       (source and subject) but merely a resemblance.
3          Yet the use of analogy in archaeology, especially in actualistic research,
4       is to posit just such an equivalence; the whole issue of control over the
5       ampliative or expansive nature of analogy through boundary conditions and
6       connecting principles is a strategy for increasing the security of the analogy.
7       Even granted, as Wylie argues, that total security or certainty is not possible,
8       the attempt to strengthen analogies is done through the subordination of
9       the analogy to equivalences – namely shared boundary conditions and
40111   connecting principles. Yet doing this, I believe, it takes the very heart out
1       of analogy. While there is a recognition of differences, the very fact that
2       the use of analogy in archaeology is accompanied by an obsessive need to
3       increase the similarities over the differences through these equivalences is
44111   an attempt to suppress what is special about analogy. Indeed, one might
        192   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    suggest that the very relevance of an analogy comes from positing it – not
2       from the quality or quantity of similarities. The distinction between formal
3       and relational analogies pulls us away from what is really characteristic of
4       analogy in contrast to other types of generalisation: that the subject is both
5       the same and not the same as the source. The tension between these two
6       terms is not open to qualiﬁcation in terms of the degree of similarity, whether
7       formal or relational. To become obsessed about such degrees of similarity,
8       is to substitute analogy for equivalence. In many ways, I see analogies in
9       archaeology as comparable to metaphors, and metaphors take their strength
1011    precisely from the fact that the similarity is in tension with the (often
1       greater) difference.4
2          What are the implications of this for the role of analogy in archaeology?
3       I would go so far as to say that there is nothing wrong with using analo-
4       gies where the differences seem greater than the similarities; the important
5       point is that analogy, as analogy, should not be preﬁgured by equivalances
6       in the form of boundary connections or connecting principles, as this robs
7       it of its very nature. It suggests moreover that our use of analogies does not
8       need strengthening. This is not to say their use cannot be subject to critique,
9       but their ‘strength’ as deﬁned by Wylie should not be the focus of this
20111   critique, any more than actualistic studies should have any special episte-
1       mological status in archaeological arguments.
2          Where has this left us? I think it is important to return to the point we
3       made at the end of the last section, namely that actualistic studies such as
4       ethnoarchaeology can no longer be seen as methodological. First and fore-
5       most, an ethnoarchaeological study of butchery discard among a
6       hunter-gatherer group, or mortuary ritual among horticulturalists, informs
7       us only about the material culture among those groups. Any use of these
8       studies in other contexts is purely analogical, and in the sense I have just
9       tried to argue, and no amount of ‘strengthening’ will change this. If we
30111   recognise this, then this whole topic shifts ground quite dramatically – the
1       issue is not about the internal, methodological status of middle range
2       research but a much broader, external one about the boundaries and rela-
3       tions between different academic disciplines. If ethnoarchaeology is more
4       ethnohistory or social anthropology than archaeology, the real question
5       about its status moves into the realm of inter-disciplinary divisions.
6
7
        Archaeology is . . .
8
9       In the North American system, archaeology is one of the four divisions of
40111   the broad science of anthropology (which also includes cultural anthro-
1       pology, linguistics and physical anthropology) as outlined by Boas at the
2       turn of the twentieth century. In European countries, the relation of archae-
3       ology to other disciplines is less closely deﬁned and while in most cases it
44111   does share a common historical link with anthropology, over the course of
                                                              Eventful contexts   193

1111    the twentieth century this link has loosened as archaeology has pulled closer
2       to history. However, regardless of the differences between North America
3       and Europe over the disciplinary afﬁnities of archaeology, there are some
4       more general issues I would like to discuss. We can all recognise the differ-
5       ences between archaeology and other disciplines such as anthropology,
6       sociology or history, yet we are also aware that they overlap, not only in
7       terms of their subject matter but in terms of general theory. For example,
8       archaeology overlaps with history when it deals with historic periods; with
9       anthropology when it conducts ethnoarchaeology; and with sociology when
1011    it deals with the ‘archaeology of us’. Similarly, however, archaeology also
1       overlaps with these disciplines in sharing the same broad range of theories
2       about culture, society or knowledge: post-modernism, Marxism, hermeneu-
3111    tics can all be found discussed and employed in these disciplines. There
4       are thus two ways in which other disciplines can be seen to interact conven-
5       tionally with archaeology: theoretically and substantively.
6          Theoretically, archaeology has a tradition of drawing on other disciplines
7       – social anthropology for perhaps the longest because of the shared disci-
8       plinary origins – but the association with geography goes back to the early
9       part of the twentieth century. Ecology was drawn upon from the mid-
20111   century on, and since the 1980s literary theory and sociology have provided
1       a strong source of ideas. It is mostly in the theoretical realm that such
2       interaction is actively sought, while substantive links usually seem to be
3       downplayed in an attempt to distance archaeology from other disciplines
4       in order to demonstrate its independence. A case in point is the relation
5       between archaeology and history; theoretically, archaeologists have avidly
6       drawn on historical theory such as from the Annales school or the narra-
7       tivism of Hayden White, Paul Ricoeur or Paul Veyne, but the substantive
8       association has been more often than not described as a millstone where
9       archaeology is characterised as ancillary to history. One historian, for
30111   example, famously summed up archaeology as an expensive way of telling
1       us what we already know.5 Of course, to counter this, archaeologists draw
2       on theoretical arguments to show how archaeology can provide quite
3       different evidence and interpretation from history, indeed might even serve
4       to critique certain historical orthodoxies.
5          There is then a tension between these two relations which is rarely if
6       ever explored. The question of middle range research, however, lies right
7       at this juncture, because it deals with both substantive and theoretical
8       issues. One way of articulating the tension is to argue from a methodolog-
9       ical stance, which is what MRT does – it mediates between general social
40111   theory and substantive research. But if we deny this role, middle range
1       research is perforce either ejected from archaeology or becomes a sub-
2       specialism as an archaeology of the contemporary world. We are then forced
3       to rethink the tension as one which expands to cover the relationship
44111   between sub-specialisms within archaeology and also between archaeology
        194   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    and other disciplines in general. The issue relates to the nature of specialisms
2       within archaeology as well as to archaeology itself as a disciplinary special-
3       isation, in the sense of being distinct from history, sociology, geography
4       etc. Indeed, how coherent is archaeology? To begin answering this, I think
5       it is important to question the distinction between theoretical and substan-
6       tive work – is it viable?
7          The distinction in many ways is tied in to a positivist philosophy of
8       science which distinguishes theory from data, interpretation or explanation
9       from observation or description. Given the critique of positivism, accepted
1011    by processualists and post-processualists alike, is it not ironic then that such
1       a distinction between methodological and substantive research is still used
2       in archaeology? It is interesting – and ironic – to consider that in the same
3       breath as cultural taxonomies were being rejected in North America, the
4       same kind of classiﬁcatory thinking was applied to the archaeological process
5       and its relation to other disciplines by the same critics of those taxonomic
6       methods. Most of the new approaches espoused in the late 1940s/1950s,
7       from Walter Taylor, Irving Rouse and Gordon Willey and Philip Phillips
8       maintained the need for cultural-historical or descriptive synthesis, which
9       they sustained within an epistemological hierarchy resting between obser-
20111   vation (ﬁeldwork) and explanation (evolutionary or processual inter-
1       pretation). Indeed, such hierarchies played on broader disciplinary divisions
2       made very explicit by Taylor and, later on, Rouse; for both, archaeology
3       was a fact-gathering exercise at the bottom of a procedural and epistemo-
4       logical ladder which culminated in the unifying discipline and enterprise
5       of anthropology (Taylor 1948: ch. 6; Rouse 1972: ch. 1).
6          David Clarke, in response to such disciplinary deﬁnitions, wrote that
7       ‘archaeology is archaeology is archaeology’, to afﬁrm its holistic status against
8       these views (Clarke 1978: 11). The same point has been re-asserted by
9       Hodder in the wake of a perceived divide between theoretical and ‘prac-
30111   tical’ archaeology (Hodder 1992: 1–6). For granted that few archaeologists
1       today might construct such a hierarchy as that of Taylor or Rouse, there
2       still remains an implicit sub-disciplinary division between theoretical archae-
3       ology on the one hand and, on the other, the whole range of speciﬁc area
4       and period researches which constitute its material, the very ‘stuff’ of archae-
5       ology. We might legitimately ask whether the concept of theoretical
6       archaeology (especially since post-processualism) is not something of a
7       contradiction? Hodder of course tackles the issue from the other side and
8       questions whether there can be such a thing as an a-theoretical archae-
9       ology. Either way, the implication is that archaeology should be viewed as
40111   a holistic discipline in terms of its substantive and theoretical realms.
1          If we accept this, though, on what basis do we distinguish archaeology
2       from other disciplines such as science? Should we perhaps not see all disci-
3       plines as holistic enterprises? At ﬁrst glance this might seem to be nothing
44111   more than a question about the unity of the sciences, and many would
                                                                 Eventful contexts   195

1111    no doubt say that in this sense archaeology is part of a wider endeavour.
2       But the issue is really not that all the disciplines are united – or even
3       divided (e.g. into arts and sciences) – but the question is the grounds on
4       which they are carved up – on what grounds does each have its separate
5       identity? This is a major historical and theoretical issue which I cannot
6       pretend to deal with here (cf. Foucault 1970); but we can at least ask this
7       of archaeology. Indeed, this is an often forgotten link between archaeo-
8       logical epistemology and disciplinary history – as archaeology changes its
9       theoretical and philosophical perspectives, its shape and deﬁnition will also
1011    change.
1          Yet, ironically, conventional archaeological histories often consolidate an
2       identity for our discipline. If you pick up most texts today on archaeological
3111    methods or general introductions to the discipline, there is usually always a
4       historical background which places these methods in perspective (e.g.
5       Greene 1983; Renfrew and Bahn 1991). While this is undoubtedly impor-
6       tant, there is something slightly unsettling about these presentations; it is
7       almost as if a historical sketch is sufﬁcient to justify the way we do things
8       and it is usually implicit in such presentations that the relation between
9       archaeology’s history and its contemporary practice is one of progression.
20111   This may not always be explicitly stated, but then it is a tricky thing to
1       state in these postmodern times: is it simply a case of better techniques and
2       knowledge today compared with a hundred years ago or is there perhaps
3       something a little more complex occurring, a question of different ways of
4       seeing? It may seem rather perverse to argue for totally different perceptions,
5       as if Pitt Rivers for example belonged to an alien discipline, yet can archae-
6       ological historiography paint a simple picture of progress in methods and
7       techniques without risk of ridicule?
8          Usually the issue is sidestepped in favour of generalising statements such
9       that studying a discipline’s history puts it in perspective, helps to clarify why
30111   we do things in this way and this of course is undeniable (e.g. Meltzer 1989:
1       12). Sometimes the implication is bolder, that the history of archaeology is
2       a history of improvement, although even here it is not directly stated but
3       suggested. Whether it is too obvious to state or too provocative, though, is
4       it adequate? Surely we must demand that looking at the history of archaeol-
5       ogy itself requires some justiﬁcation? Meltzer discusses the view of Glyn
6       Daniel, perhaps the ﬁrst historian of archaeology in English, who regarded a
7       historiographic perspective as useful in so far as it increased our knowledge
8       of the discipline – the more we know, the less we are likely to repeat the
9       errors of the past (Daniel 1981; Meltzer 1989). This view sounds just like
40111   the schoolbook view of history in general and is of course naive in the
1       extreme. Meltzer’s own view is more general and is referred to at the start of
2       this paragraph: ‘the best way to understand why we do what we do is to unfold
3       the beliefs that have structured, and continue to structure, our work’ (Meltzer
44111   1989: 12). Why this is important is not as explicitly addressed but Meltzer
        196    Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    does appear to believe that progress is better served by being able to tran-
2       scend one’s own history through self-knowledge (ibid.: 19).
3          If we turn to Bruce Trigger who is one of the major living writers in
4       English of the history of the discipline, he too asks what a history of the
5       discipline serves:
6
7             A ﬁnal question is whether a historical study can measure progress in
8             interpretation of archaeological data. Are steady advances being made
9             towards a more objective and comprehensive understanding of archae-
1011          ological ﬁndings, as many archaeologists assume? Or is the interpretation
1             of such data largely a matter of fashion and the accomplishments of a
2             later period not necessarily more comprehensive or objective than those
3             of an earlier one?
4                                                                  (Trigger 1989: 25)
5
6       Trigger’s answer is essentially for the former, and his reason also serves to
7       explain why studying history is so important. Because he sees the problem
8       as one of recognising social bias in interpretation, only history can offer
9       the perspective which disentangles enduring truth from the historically/
20111   socially contingent; even if it cannot erase all bias, ‘it almost certainly
1       increases the chances of gaining more rounded insights into what has
2       happened in the past’ (Trigger 1989: 4).
3          Trigger essentially states more explicitly what Meltzer alluded to, and in
4       the end such histories validate current practice in terms of scientiﬁc progress;
5       regarding this, Hinsley makes an important point:
6
7             most [histories] still look inward for a logic of progress in data gathering
8             and in theoretical modelling. However one modiﬁes such history – intro-
9             ducing notions of paradigmatic structures, admitting occasional wrong
30111         turns or even the exclusive nature of the scientiﬁc community under
1             conditions of ‘normal science’ – it still remains essentially Whig history,
2             an Enlightenment legacy that assumes what it purports to illustrate: an
3             upward trajectory toward more accurate, cumulative knowledge.
4                                                                     (Hinsley 1989: 80)
5
6       If presenting the history of the discipline has become almost synonymous
7       with justifying the status quo (but cf. Taylor 1948 and more recently, Kehoe
8       1998), theory has taken almost the inverse role, standing for the critique
9       of contemporary practice. Major theoretical texts of the past twenty to
40111   thirty years have typically looked at the broad spectrum of archaeological
1       work as it is done today and showed ways in which it is lacking and ways
2       in which it can be developed. The epithet ‘new’ has commonly been linked
3       to changes in archaeological perspective, especially in the USA – the new
44111   stratigraphic methods developed in the second decade of the twentieth
                                                                 Eventful contexts    197

1111    century announced a ‘New Archaeology’ in a paper of that title by Clark
2       Wissler in 1917, while a collection of papers which drew on evolutionary
3       and environmental themes espoused by Steward or White were published
4       in 1955 as New Interpretations of Aboriginal American Culture History
5       (Anthropological Society of Washington). All this before Binford and his
6       students proclaimed their New Archaeology.
7          However such critique and ‘newness’ can only go so far without under-
8       mining the very existence of archaeology. As Wylie says, remarking on this
9       recurrent phenomenon of ‘new archaeologies’, each time a break is urged
1011    with the past, there has been an equally vociferous opposition and support
1       for traditional approaches (Wylie 1993: 20). Thus today it has been argued
2       the New Archaeology is not really ‘new’ at all. Kent Flannery was an early
3111    detractor (Flannery 1973, 1982), but the French archaeologist Paul Courbin
4       has written what is probably the most extensive and scathing critique,
5       arguing that there is very little in it which is in fact new:
6
7           In reality, the real progress made in the past three decades has not
8           been in theory, as the New Archaeology would have us believe: it has
9           been in techniques, whether it be contributions of the ‘sciences’ to
20111       archaeology or the help of statistics, and especially computer studies.
1           These advances are very real. But they are completely independent of
2           the New Archaeology. . . .
3                                                             (Courbin 1988: 159)
4
5       Courbin’s critiques may be too extreme, but they represent the same funda-
6       mental view of history and theory in the end, simply stressing continuity
7       over change. Since, for all the critique theory offers, it still needs to preserve
8       the integrity of the discipline or else it becomes self-defeating, I doubt any
9       theoretical archaeologist, however radical, would deny all links with the
30111   past of their discipline. Theoretical archaeology is never simply pursued as
1       critique but also as productive development; in questioning current ways
2       of interpreting the past, alternative ways are offered in the process. The
3       same dual aspect to theory is brought out in the relatively new ﬁeld of
4       metaarchaeology, a term coined by the philosopher Lester Embree in the USA,
5       and which he deﬁnes as a ‘critical reﬂection upon the science of archae-
6       ology’ (Embree 1992a: 3). Much of his work has looked speciﬁcally at the
7       sub-discipline of theoretical archaeology, which he sees as a rather loose
8       term to cover broadly any kind of reﬂexive or critical archaeology, some of
9       which may reﬂect on archaeology as a whole (therefore falling under
40111   what he calls metaarchaeology), some of which is more methodological/
1       problem oriented (therefore falling under what he calls substantive research)
2       (Embree 1989: 68).
3          Embree raises a number of signiﬁcant questions which metaarchaeology
44111   can address, including the status of archaeology as a science, and its relation
        198   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    to society, to the historiography of archaeology and to philosophy (Embree
2       1992a, ff.41). However, much of his emphasis lies on how (theoretical)
3       archaeology is done rather than on its value. In his analysis of Gordon
4       Willey’s work on the Virú valley in Peru, for example, he separates out the
5       question of whether Willey’s work was an improvement or not, from
6       the question of whether or not it effected a change in how archaeology
7       was done, and only gives the former question a few sentences at the end
8       of the paper (Embree 1992b: 191). Tellingly, he says that the question can
9       also be historiographic, and indeed the very framing of it in terms of
1011    ‘improvement’ merely conﬁrms that he sees the value of theoretical archae-
1       ology ultimately in progressive terms – progress being deﬁned by ‘a new
2       mode of evidencing’, that is, new ways of collecting, analysing and synthe-
3       sising data. Quite how this is assessed though is left rather vague.
4          From a bold perspective, theory/critique is part of the same process of
5       progression presented in history; without it, there would be no advances,
6       no developments – no history in effect. In this view, history and theory
7       are interlinked in the grand narrative of scientiﬁc progress. An alternative
8       view might simply highlight the importance of change, with the critical
9       term not being theory or history but practice; practice lies between them,
20111   supported by history, undermined by theory; but in keeping them apart, it
1       also enables them to complement each other through an ongoing her-
2       meneutic. Histories of archaeology do not have to afﬁrm any progress, or
3       even any disciplinary identity – especially as history and theory are inte-
4       grated through practice. I hope that this book has demonstrated this. But
5       whatever archaeology is, it is not static. The very processes of archaeolog-
6       ical interpretation which seem to represent a ‘new consensus’ (e.g. Preucel
7       1991; Wylie 1992), namely the interdependency of interpretation and data,
8       must also affect the shape of the discipline as well as the shape of our repre-
9       sentations of the past. The power of this dialectic is reﬂexive as well as
30111   dynamic – its effects rebound back on the discipline, how it is constituted,
1       as well as articulating its focus, its subject matter.
2          Another way of characterising this is to say that archaeology is not just
3       a mental or theoretical exercise – it is a practice as well. Hodder discusses
4       this in terms of the concept of praxis, a term used to denote the socially
5       and historically situated nature of archaeology – it is not passively contem-
6       plative but active and creative (Hodder 1992: 3; also see Hodder 1984).
7       The notion that archaeology is a social practice has been a recurrent theme,
8       especially but not exclusively, of post-processualism (e.g. Shanks and Tilley
9       1987a; Gero 1995). But I think there is still something missing from this
40111   equation – something which archaeology itself is all about: material culture.
1       Recall Taylor’s three orders of phenomena – ideas, behaviour and material
2       culture. I argued that one of the major innovations of post-processual theory
3       was how it integrated these previously disjunctive categories into a whole
44111   – each constituted the other. The stress on praxis as the conjunction of
                                                             Eventful contexts   199

1111    theory and practice could be seen as incomplete in the light of post-
2       processualists’ own formulation of their subject matter. If material culture
3       is so important and active, equally constituting as constituted by beliefs/
4       theory and behaviour/practice, then we need to include this in our concep-
5       tion of archaeology. Archaeology is not just contemplative, nor is it just a
6       social practice, it is also a material praxis.
7
8
9
1011
1
2
3111
4
5
6
7
8
9
20111
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
30111
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
40111
1
2
3
44111
        Chapter 6
1111
2
        Conclusion
3       Material archaeologies
4
5
6
7
8
9
1011
1
2
3       In reﬂecting on what has been written so far, I would like to try and reit-
4       erate the directions in which this book has travelled. I began by establishing
5       the theme as an investigation into several key historical and conceptual
6       issues in archaeological practice. The development of practice was studied
7       initially through the changes in ﬁeldwork, and three major conceptual
8       trends were identiﬁed: a focus on ﬁnds or artefacts, a focus on assemblages
9       of ﬁnds and ﬁnally the concern for the social or behavioural context of
20111   ﬁnds/assemblages. It was argued that these foci are not necessarily exclu-
1       sive to any one particular point in the history of archaeology but rather
2       that, as foci, they provided a major orientation on the nature of the archae-
3       ological record and one which was linked in to the ways in which
4       archaeological ﬁeldwork was conducted. These foci in turn became the basis
5       for discussion in subsequent chapters – on ﬁnds analysis, culture classiﬁca-
6       tion and middle range theory. From the discussion of these foci, both from
7       a historical and conceptual perspective, it was seen that they exhibited a
8       practical dimension in the form of disciplinary specialisations. In the case
9       of ﬁnds analysis, such issues were tied back into ﬁnds specialisms; similarly,
30111   in the case of culture classiﬁcation, the issue of area/period specialisms was
1       questioned; and ﬁnally for middle range theory, the status of archaeology
2       itself as a ‘specialised’ discipline distinct from others such as anthropology
3       or history was highlighted.
4          In this book, therefore, I hope I have raised what I think are relevant
5       issues about the nature of archaeology, issues which have clear consequences
6       for the way we do archaeology both theoretically and practically. They
7       affect not just our interpretations of the past but the structure of our disci-
8       pline. In many ways, this book is a study of archaeology which embraces
9       the hermeneutic discussed at the end of the last chapter between theory
40111   and practice and applies it to the way archaeology itself functions – to
1       the archaeological process. In conclusion, I would like, unfortunately all
2       too brieﬂy, to take up the issue left hanging at the end of the last chapter
3       – the relation between this hermeneutic of theory and practice, and
44111   materiality.
                                               Conclusion: material archaeologies    201

1111       In the summer of 1998 I was excavating a Viking period farmstead called
2       Hofstaðir in northeast Iceland, of which the main turf longhouse had been
3       excavated previously in 1908 by a Danish archaeologist called Daniel Bruun.
4       It took several people several days to remove the backﬁll of Bruun’s trench
5       by hand, using spades and shovels, the weather was variable and there were
6       blackﬂies in abundance, crawling into every open part of the face – eyes,
7       nose, ears and mouth. At the beginning, the edge of the earlier trench cut
8       was not always very clear and it took some time before we realised how
9       the trench had been cut. As we moved down, we also had to be careful
1011    to stop at the level of the earlier cut since we knew that the excavator
1       had stopped at the ﬂoor but that he might have cut through it too and its
2       survival could be patchy. Another thing we were looking for was traces of
3111    a wall which the earlier excavator said was missing. As we cleaned up the
4       trench, we found indeed that the ﬂoors were patchy and that the exca-
5       vator had gone too deep, and that there was in fact a wall, a very clear
6       wall. The excavator had cut quite a way into it, as on other walls but had
7       still missed it, and yet by all accounts he was good for his day. There was
8       much speculation on why he excavated the way he did and why he did
9       not see the things we could . . .
20111      In re-excavating the 1908 trench at Hofstaðir, the questions were always
1       in terms of what Bruun or his workmen were doing, or why they had dug
2       like this. When I compare this with my thoughts on, for example, another
3       feature on the site such as a silo pit, they are similar but there is also a
4       difference. Throughout the process of excavation of the silo pit, the same
5       questions recurred but were always being posed in term of what the pit was
6       doing, how the edges were behaving. And this is my more typical reaction
7       to archaeological features, to see them as purely material objects which
8       generate problems of interpretation – they have no face, no person, they
9       are anonymous. One can easily see why this happens. With most archae-
30111   ology we have no personal associations with features, and even if we can
1       link some historical person with a site, it is unlikely we can actually join
2       that person with any particular feature, let alone its production. But this
3       difference is misleading for it is not really about attaching a face or person
4       to a particular feature – it is about attaching an intention. This means
5       understanding the feature in terms of some purpose; understanding what
6       the edges were doing with the pit was all part of my understanding of it –
7       in the ﬁrst instance as a pit dug by a person deliberately; and in the second,
8       as a pit dug for a particular purpose, in this case hay storage. If I had started
9       to see it as a different kind of pit, I might have had different expectations
40111   of what the edges would do.
1          This story provides a way into an alternative view of the relationship
2       between history, theory and practice. Excavating Bruun’s trench and the
3       interpretive process involved is in a way like using archaeological methods
44111   to understand the history of archaeology. Encountering the trenches of
        202   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    earlier excavators is not uncommon, especially on famous sites, and one
2       may learn things about the previous excavator and his or her record which
3       could not be gleaned from any written sources. An Icelandic friend, and
4       the person who initiated the project on the Viking farm mentioned in the
5       story, once told me that he wanted to do just this (Adolf Fridriksson, pers.
6       comm.). What could it mean to turn our methods back on to ourselves? I
7       ﬁnd this a tantalising possibility – it offers a reﬂexivity which is not simply
8       a questioning of why and how we do things, but a questioning that employs
9       the very methods we seek to interrogate. Putting it like this is interesting
1011    because it brings out the material nature of archaeological practice – it not
1       only studies material culture but uses and produces material culture in this
2       process. From this perspective, archaeology and its object begin to merge
3       (Figure 20).
4          Excavating an excavation might seem like a special case, and in most
5       cases archaeology and its object remain distinct. Are they though? What
6       if we see excavation as part of the archaeology of the site – and not just
7       any earlier excavation, but the one happening now. Thus as we uncover
8       the site we also add to it. The dominant ethos sees excavation as destruc-
9       tion, the ‘unrepeatable experiment’ at Barker once put it (Barker 1982:
20111   11–12). Now, it may be that we remove features, but this does not neces-
1       sarily have to be viewed as a subtractive process but rather as a transformative
2       one. An excavation trench is part of the history or archaeology of the site,
3       as much as anything else there. History does not stop – it is ongoing, and
4       when we come to a site we should not see ourselves as coming to some-
5       thing halted but as being part of something continuous. It is a little too
6       obvious that we write ourselves out of the sequence of events on a site,
7       that the top of a stratigraphic matrix is not our trenches and excavations
8       but the topsoil. It is very telling of our perception of the site as something
9       separate from us and our actions, pulling ourselves out of its history. To
30111   this extent, we are perhaps not being as true to the linearity of time we
1       portray, either in the past or in the development of archaeology.
2          But excavation is more than just another part of the history of a site –
3       it is special in the sense that it is reﬂexive, it reiterates everything that has
4       left a trace on the site. Inasmuch as excavating an excavation can be called
5       repetitive, all archaeological practice could be ascribed the same character;
6       it is an encounter which has taken place before. A friend once expressed
7       it this way – that every time we excavate a ditch or pit on a site, we are
8       in fact re-excavating it, we are repeating an act performed maybe thousands
9       of years ago, in exactly the same place (M. Knight, pers. comm.). This
40111   event is so commonplace in archaeology, yet it is an experience I had never
1       before heard expressed in this way and it makes the physical process of
2       excavation extremely signiﬁcant. It is very common, on the other hand, to
3       hear how holding an artefact that has not seen the light of day for thousands
44111   of years brings the past alive, is maybe even the closest one can get in
1111
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1011
1
2
3111
4
5
6
7
8
9
20111
1
2       (a)
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
30111
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
40111
1
2       (b)
3
44111   Figure 20 Excavation at a Viking farmstead in Iceland in 1908 (a) and 1995 (b)
        204   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    experiencing the past. But the mere holding of something, the touch and
2       the gaze it involves surely does not come anywhere close to the act of re-
3       excavation, an act involving the whole body, a productive act, not simply
4       a contemplative one.
5          Of course this perception of excavation only applies in a very restricted
6       sense since we are not removing the same kind of soil when excavating
7       the ditch, nor are we repeating the events of its ﬁlling up which may not
8       even be the result of human but of natural processes. But in a way, the
9       relevance here is not in faithful reproduction or duplication but in repetition;
1011    it is through repetition that a sense of difference is generated. Excavating
1       Bruun’s trench was also an act of repetition, yet while he was trying to
2       understand the edges of walls and ﬂoors, we were trying to understand his
3       attempt at understanding. What is this, if not an archaeology of archae-
4       ology? Or just archaeology for that matter? In the rest of this chapter I
5       want to explore ways in which archaeology is a material practice, or rather,
6       shall we say, a materialising practice. In so doing, this is perhaps less of a
7       conclusion, a closure, as an opening, a looking forward. By materialising,
8       I mean the ways in which we produce or create physical products in the
9       course of doing archaeology, two of which dominate – texts and images.
20111   Thus I will not be discussing the management of museums or heritage sites
1       here, which although they are certainly material practices, do not in them-
2       selves routinely create new objects. They are not materialising, although
3       they are linked to materialising practices such as the production of display
4       boards and captions, guidebooks, etc. It is this general ﬁeld of textual and
5       graphic production that I want to examine.
6
7
        Writing archaeology
8
9       The theme of archaeology as a textual practice has of course received much
30111   attention recently, especially in the wake of a similar turn in anthropology
1       (Clifford and Marcus 1986; Baker and Thomas 1990; Tilley 1993; Pluciennik
2       1999). Hodder in particular has questioned narrative styles in site reports
3       and more general syntheses (Hodder 1989b, 1993a). To paraphrase Marcus,
4       textualisation is at the heart of archaeology. How does this manifest itself?
5       Right at the beginning, if we can use such a term, we textualise archae-
6       ology in ﬁeld notebooks and context sheets. I discussed in the introduction
7       the ways in which context sheets affect practice through a system of checks,
8       controls and standardisation. The adoption of sheets, particularly in
9       replacing the ﬁeld notebook (as in Britain) where there were no prompts
40111   but just blank pages, is very telling of how perceptions of textualisation
1       have changed, particularly as this shift occurred alongside the New
2       Archaeology. Not that writing in notebooks was, or is, necessarily a free
3       or undisciplined affair – students learn what should and should not be
44111   placed in notebooks.
                                               Conclusion: material archaeologies    205

1111       Hodder’s study of the narrative form of site reports takes us into another
2       realm of textual production (Hodder 1989b). He shows how early reports
3       of excavations were often in the form of letters, and only later gradually
4       shifted to articles, many of which were read at some meeting or other. The
5       use of the ﬁrst person and the construction of the narrative around the act
6       of discovery was a predominant feature again, until by the end of the nine-
7       teenth century and the beginning of the twentieth, a form more familiar
8       to us emerged: writing in the passive voice, descriptive rather than narra-
9       tive. Hodder links these changes to broader shifts in the way science is
1011    conducted and authority established, away from individuals to institutions.
1       Indeed it is not hard to see how the form of textualisation in archaeology
2       relates to wider historical trends, especially in the shift from letters to
3111    articles (also see Hamilton 1999 for a similar, more recent critique). To
4       some extent, Hodder’s reservations against the dryness of modern site reports
5       have received a new twist, as journals become less and less willing to publish
6       site reports at all, unless they are framed within a suitably academic, research
7       agenda (C. Evans, pers. comm.).
8          Turning ﬁnally to more general works, in light of Hodder’s comments
9       we can interestingly compare his most inﬂuential theoretical text, Reading
20111   the Past, with David Clarke’s Analytical Archaeology in terms of textual style.
1       Clarke’s is a massive text, the second edition cut down to over 500 pages
2       with justiﬁed text, highly structured chapters and numbered sections
3       reﬂecting the philosophy he is putting forward: a very systematic book. By
4       contrast, Hodder has written a fairly brief work of under 200 pages with
5       unjustiﬁed text, each chapter treating an almost separate theme, themes
6       which are, nevertheless, interwoven by various connecting ideas. The differ-
7       ences in the two styles are clearly linked to their authors’ theoretical outlook,
8       their perspectives clearly affecting the mode of textualisation.
9          The three examples of textualisation – ﬁeldnotes, site reports and general
30111   works – all show how the process of textual production is mediated by and
1       inﬂuences the way we perceive archaeology. Moreover, just as we can think
2       about the rhetoric or poetics of texts, it is equally important to think of
3       them as material products – as books or digital displays. Indeed, the wide-
4       spread adoption of computers and word-processing software has undoubtedly
5       altered the way we write – the ease with which we can self-edit our texts
6       on computers compared with written or typed manuscripts may have affected
7       the whole process of textual production. Perhaps of equal interest, however,
8       is to consider the form of a text – its structure in terms of layout and typog-
9       raphy. We can all instantly tell the difference between a serious academic
40111   text and a coffee-table book for lay consumption – format size, text to
1       image ratio, layout of the text and images and so on. Would a site report
2       look more interesting if it was in the style of the fashion magazine Vogue
3       I wonder? More importantly, perhaps, what would thinking about using this
44111   format do to the way we write the site report?
        206    Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    Imaging archaeology
2       If textual production pervades all areas of the archaeological process, the
3       same is true of image production through drawings and photographs. Just
4       as forms of textual production have altered, so archaeological illustration
5       has seen some interesting changes over the past century (Piggott 1965). In
6       1828 E. T. Artis excavated a series of Roman sites near Peterborough in
7       eastern England, which he published as a series of plates (Artis 1828). It
8       is an interesting example because it reveals something of how archaeolog-
9       ical sites were perceived in the early nineteenth century – as part of a
1011    Historical/Romantic landscape. It is worth quoting Piggott at length on this
1       issue, because he reinforces this observation:
2
3             One cannot say that any discernible archaeological style of draughts-
4             manship came into being in the eighteenth, or really the nineteenth
5             century, and one would be surprised if it had. . . . Not unnaturally, the
6             delineation of antiquities, sites or architecture conformed to the conven-
7             tions of non-specialised draughtsmanship at large. Perspective views of
8             ﬁeld monuments – ‘prospects’, the equivalent of modern photographs
9             – fell naturally within the developing traditions of the topographical
20111         artists of the day, and indeed the depiction of antiquities played an
1             important part with almost all the early landscape painters. . . . Plans
2             were drawn and engraved according to the prescriptions of estate
3             surveyors and cartographers; small antiquities were illustrated as if they
4             were butterﬂies or petrifactions or prodigies of nature which might well
5             have accompanied them in the cabinet of curiosities of an ingenious
6             gentlemen.
7                                                                    (Piggott 1965: 171)
8
9       However, such a series of ‘prospects’, is not what Petrie or Pitt Rivers would
30111   have had in mind. Their concern was more abstract – to represent an
1       object, not a view. It is the visual equivalent of Hodder’s example of the
2       passive voice – while the view retains a sense of a viewer, the plan and
3       section erase it.
4          This even spills over into the ﬁnds; earlier depictions were usually per-
5       spective ﬁgures, often painted, much in the style of curios as Piggott remarks.
6       One might also venture that such depictions could have been inﬂuenced
7       by contemporary retail catalogues of goods (see Figure 21). However, with
8       Pitt Rivers there is great concern for scale and accuracy and each sherd is
9       accompanied by its section, which anticipated present-day illustrations; here
40111   the standard half-section of pottery so familiar today derives from
1       Dragendorff’s famous typology of Samian (1895), which became widely
2       adopted by the early part of the twentieth century (Piggott 1965: 175). Such
3       representations have, however, come to be contested recently – for example,
44111
                                               Conclusion: material archaeologies   207

1111
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1011
1
2
3111
4
5
6
7
8
9
20111
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
30111
1
2
3
4
5
6
7       Figure 21 Late nineteenth-century advertisement for gas brackets
8
9
40111   many of the conventions derive from nineteenth- and early twentieth-
1       century reproduction technology (e.g. engraving, lithography), while the
2       scope of contemporary computer-aided design is only just beginning to be
3       exploited (Hughes 1999).
44111
        208   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111       With the establishment of scale drawings, new concerns emerged over
2       what was the best way to draw the site. The most famous debate about graph-
3       ics in British ﬁeld archaeology was over ﬁeld drawings and between those
4       who favoured a ‘naturalistic’ approach after Bersu or a more schematic one
5       after Wheeler (Piggott 1965: 175–6; Bradley 1997: 68–70). While Bersu’s
6       sections (and plans) attempted to show a pit ﬁll ‘as it was’, Wheeler used
7       more stylistic conventions, most importantly a hard or sharp line to distin-
8       guish different layers and cuts (Figure 22). In general, Wheeler’s approach
9       has dominated because of the way British ﬁeld archaeology adopted the idea
1011    of discrete stratigraphic units in its excavation procedure. Again, the current
1       use of computers in combination with total-stations changes the whole way
2       the graphic record on site is made – potentially, one does not need to draw
3       any plans at all as the whole process is automated and can be linked in to
4       ﬁnd spots, etc. (e.g. Biswell et al. 1995). However, such a method, while
5       increasing speed and accuracy, loses in its inability to deal with ambiguity –
6       it is the graphic record reduced to a series of lines and dots.
7          Other forms of imaging include mathematical ﬁgures – graphs, charts and
8       tables. As Clark and Stafford (1982) showed with respect to North American
9       archaeology, simple descriptive quantiﬁcation is as old as the discipline.
20111   The same undoubtedly applies to British archaeology – basic tabular presen-
1       tation of data can be seen in many studies from the later nineteenth century
2       onwards (e.g. Greenwell’s British Barrows, published in 1877, or Pitt Rivers’
3       Relic Tables), and it is still a commonly used representation of quantitative
4       data. The use of charts or graphs is more recent – in an interesting study
5       of graphic representation of seriation between the 1920s and 1960s it was
6       shown how there was a gradual shift from the use of tables to charts, but
7       more signiﬁcantly, perhaps, many of the early charts were effectively intu-
8       itive depictions of the data rather than accurate representations (Lyman et
9       al. 1998). Indeed, good graphs are far more persuasive rhetorical devices
30111   than tables, which are now frequently conﬁned to appendices or micro-
1       ﬁche. As the 1960s ushered in a new wave of more complex, inferential
2       statistics based on probability theory and testing, a whole new range of
3       graphic images was introduced into archaeological texts to aid arguments
4       – indeed, one might say that in many instances they are an essential compo-
5       nent of any data analysis.
6          A common assumption of much of the imaging discussed here – partic-
7       ularly drawings and photography – is the importance of objectivity. While
8       their selective nature is recognised, there is still a strong sense that accuracy
9       and precision are critical – the use of scales and proper measuring equipment
40111   is an important component in the materialisation of such images. The
1       objectivity of these kinds of images is accentuated when they are juxtaposed
2       with artistic reconstructions. In archaeology, the question of reconstruc-
3       tions of past life has recently received considerable attention, particularly
44111
                                          Conclusion: material archaeologies   209

1111
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1011
1
2
3111
4
5
6
7
8
9
20111
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
30111
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
40111
1
2
3
44111   Figure 22 Wheeler’s and Bersu’s section drawings
        210    Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    in the realm of early hominids and how gender stereotypes are represented
2       (Moser 1992; Moser and Gamble 1997; Wiber 1998). While this issue is
3       about the political and social nature of such images, it also raises the ques-
4       tion of their objectivity. Alongside these critiques lie internal debates about
5       how to reconstruct an image without going too far beyond the evidence
6       (e.g. James 1997). A recent textbook on archaeological illustration recom-
7       mends that the artist use the archaeological evidence to the full, and exploit
8       devices such as obstacles of perspective which can cover up any gaps in
9       our knowledge (Adkins and Adkins 1989: 145–7). Thus although their
1011    status as artistic impressions is recognised, there is still an important ethic
1       of constraint. However, the history of models illustrates how such recon-
2       structions can shift in meaning.
3          The use of models today is generally as museum pieces showing the site
4       as it might have looked in the past, a kind of three-dimensional version
5       of artistic impressions. However, it was not always like this (Evans n.d.).
6       Pitt Rivers’ use of models for example was quite different. He employed a
7       carpenter to render many of his sites in this form; these models were not
8       simply artistic recreations, but a part of his actual excavation archive, a
9       record of the archaeology in three dimensions instead of the usual two. It
20111   cannot be too far-fetched to suggest that he perceived these as being the
1       best representation he had of the sites he excavated. From the 1930s and
2       1940s full-scale models or re-creations of structures were also considered an
3       important part of understanding the archaeology, but not as a record so
4       much as an experiment revealing information on the constructional prop-
5       erties of, say, roundhouses, allowing for guided interpretation on things such
6       as the pitch of a roof. This kind of work too has more or less gone out of
7       vogue, and models today have a status similar to that of artistic impressions.
8          This tension over objectivity in imaging is evocatively illustrated in
9       Cook’s voyage to the Paciﬁc:
30111
1             [C]onsidering that such expeditions left Europe each time with an
2             anticipation of confronting the unknown, one can readily imagine
3             the difﬁculties inherent in having to decide, in advance, what one’s
4             criteria might be for representing something of which, at present,
5             one has no experience – that is, for apprehending the exotic. When
6             Joseph Banks was charged by the Royal Society to ﬁnd illustrators
7             for Cook’s ﬁrst voyage to the Paciﬁc in 1768, he resolved the
8             problem as both the scientist and the gentleman that he was. He
9             would have one illustrator, Sidney Parkinson, provide faithful
40111         copies of plants and animals, and another artist, Alexander Buchan,
1             provide him pictures of savages and scenery that would delight his
2             friends back home.
3                                                                 (Napier 1992: 9)
44111
                                              Conclusion: material archaeologies   211

1111    Archaeology reproduces this dilemma, not just between the site plan and
2       the artist’s reconstruction, but even within these modes. The same tension
3       is played up by Shanks in a recent paper concerning photography (Shanks
4       1997). Shanks argues for viewing photography as photowork, in which it
5       mediates between its role as a record and as a creation through techniques
6       of collage and montage (Shanks 1997: 83–4). I ﬁnd his discussion here
7       extremely useful when thinking about the nature of imaging, in that through
8       the selectivity of the frame and the juxtaposition of fragments, photography
9       makes a new reality, one which does not refer outside of itself as suggested
1011    in the record or the artistic impression. It is particularly in the idea that
1       photoworks create their own reality that they circumvent the whole tension
2       of objectivity in representation, and it seems to me that they do this because
3111    they are viewed as materialising practices, not simply as passive represen-
4       tations. A good example is the use of photography with computer-designed
5       images to make ‘reconstructions’ – much like the technology used in ﬁlms
6       to juxtapose actors with computer-generated dinosaurs (Lamb 1999).
7
8
        Materialising archaeology
9
20111   Despite the production of texts and images having been discussed sepa-
1       rately, they have always been used together in archaeology. However, the
2       relationship between the two has changed, just as each mode of material-
3       isation has changed. In Chapter 2, we discussed the esteem in which Pitt
4       Rivers was held by later archaeologists (especially Wheeler) for his recording.
5       What is really interesting about his record, especially the four volumes on
6       Cranbourne Chase, is that they are all arranged around the plates. All the
7       text is (albeit often extended) annotations to the ﬁgures, and this includes
8       not just the ﬁnds but also the site features. It is as if, in his conception,
9       the site was best represented by drawings and only secondarily by text. This
30111   is supported by a saying attributed to him: ‘Describe your illustrations, do
1       not illustrate your descriptions’ (Piggott 1965: 174). This is almost the
2       inverse of today’s approach which is heavily textually dominated. Is Pitt
3       Rivers unusual, though? Not really, for Petrie felt the same and indeed
4       actually spelt it out: ‘the text is to show the meaning and relation of the
5       facts already expressed by form’ (Petrie 1904: 115). For Petrie, it was
6       the lack of ﬁgures in older archaeological work that was their chief failing
7       – Greenwell’s British Barrows, for example, he felt could be reduced almost
8       entirely to a series of plans – it was too text-laden (ibid.: 114).
9          The visual record was thus perhaps seen as the most important part of the
40111   archaeological record in the latter part of the nineteenth century, as that
1       which most accurately represents it. To further support this, one might cite
2       Petrie’s effusive recommendation on the use of photography and, perhaps
3       even more tellingly, Pitt Rivers’ use of scale models. Despite the preference
44111
        212   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    for seeing the visual record as the best way of representing the archaeology,
2       Petrie’s ideal of a site report consisting solely of ﬁgures was never realised.
3       Instead, by the 1920s and 1930s the standard site report was established and
4       has changed little up to the present except in detail. In effect, a balance of
5       interlinked graphic and textual representation is offered. However, with the
6       advent of computer-aided publication, this balance may be about to change.
7       The very boundaries between text and image can be broken down, through
8       the use of annotated and ‘cartoon’ style graphics in conventional publica-
9       tions (e.g. Hamilton 1996), but even more so in the ﬁeld of hypermedia. This
1011    will certainly have consequences for the way archaeology is presented and,
1       ultimately perhaps, feed back into the way it is practised – certainly the use
2       of hypertext can be linked to non-linear types of narrative for example
3       (Hodder 1999).
4           I want to close with a reminder as to what is perhaps the most basic
5       materialising practice in archaeology – the creation of the archaeological
6       record. By this, I am saying nothing more than that we actually have to
7       go out and actively ﬁnd our data – primarily by digging, but also through
8       surface, aerial and geophysical survey. What perhaps distinguishes archae-
9       ology from other disciplines such as history, anthropology or even other
20111   material culture studies, is that it involves an operation of materialisation.
1       In all these other disciplines, the material or data is already there – only
2       in archaeology is there a performance of presencing, materialising the data.1
3       Beyond this, of course, all disciplines create their data in the qualiﬁed sense
4       of data being theory-dependent, but this other aspect, of materialisation, is
5       something rarely raised. I am not so sure it is unique to archaeology, but
6       I will leave this for the moment; instead, I want to ask what relationship
7       this mode of materialisation in archaeology has to those of textualisation
8       and imaging already discussed.
9           To answer this, I will use as an example a formulation of the archaeo-
30111   logical record made in Britain in the 1970s, which employed a hierarchy
1       of different levels distilling a process of representation (see Table 7; Frere
2       1975). First there is the Level I archive, the site itself, which exists inde-
3       pendently of and prior to any investigation. Beyond Level I lie the various
4       representations we make of that site: the primary archive, analyses and
5       ﬁnally publication. Critically, the ﬂow is reversible in most cases except
6       usually between Levels I and II – we can go back to the primary archive
7       or the analyses, but we can never re-excavate. Fundamentally, the
8       reversibility of the lowest levels justiﬁes the irreversibility of the upper, that
9       is, excavation. That the hierarchy permits iteration, repeatability, is a funda-
40111   mental axiom of scientiﬁc ‘ﬁeldwork’, and in a way this barrier between
1       Level I and the others validates the whole schema, because if it was not
2       there, there would be no stopping point or point of rest. This point is Level
3       I, archaeological reality, Archaeology Degree Zero.
44111
                                                     Conclusion: material archaeologies          213

1111    Table 7 Levels of archaeological data as proposed by the Frere and Cunliffe report
        (Frere, 1975)
2
3       Level Site description                            Loose material
4
5       I     The site itself and general notes, old      Excavated finds
              letters, previous accounts, etc.
6
7       II    Site notebooks, recording forms,            Finds records, X-rays, photographs,
8             drawings, sound-recorded tapes              negatives, colour transparencies
9       III   Full illustration and description of        Classified finds – lists and finds –
1011          all structural relationships                drawings, all analyses
1       IV    Synthesis of descriptions with              Selected finds and specialist reports
2             supporting data                             relevant to synthesis
3111
4          But consider a geophysical survey. It might show perhaps an enclosure
5       ditch, without us ever having seen or felt it. The enclosure exists only
6       in the greyscale plot and we can read it precisely because we have seen
7       this kind of representation a thousand times before on site plans of
8       excavated features. How does the geophysical plot differ from the measured
9       plan? Both are representations – in the former of something which
20111   has never been seen and in the latter of something which can never be
1       seen again. What is the difference? With excavation, we might argue that
2       the site is real, was actually there, and we can claim to make a distinction
3       between the record we make of it and the site itself – but with the
4       geophysical survey, the site remains a virtual site, the record and the site
5       itself are no longer distinct. How could you argue that the site exists
6       independently of your record in a geophysical survey, when the only proof
7       you have of its existence is that survey? This is an interesting paradox
8       but it perhaps also confuses another issue – our use of material culture in
9       materialising the past. The resistivity meter is an ‘artiﬁcial eye’; it
30111   sees where we cannot. I think the important point here is that the
1       proof of a geophysical survey would come through repetition – either through
2       comparison with another survey or with an excavation plan. In this it
3       highlights an important point which in fact goes against the whole ethos
4       of this model: that the very validity of archaeological interpretation is
5       not based on the independence of an archaeological reality (Level I, the
6       site or objects themselves), but on the iterability of the representations
7       we give it.
8          For example, even in those cases where old sites can be re-excavated,
9       it is the comparison of plans that assesses the validity of the ﬁrst
40111   interpretation – we can never compare their perception directly with our
1       own, only the materialisations of that perception. It is these materialisa-
2       tions – of texts and images – which guarantee the validity of archaeological
3       interpretation, not the site itself. These materialising practices are not simply
44111
        214   Critical approaches to fieldwork

1111    representations but materialising strategies for enabling the archaeological
2       record to be subject to repeated investigation. They create the possibility
3       of iterability. And, like any materialisation, they have a certain indepen-
4       dence, a certain life of their own – indeed this is a cornerstone of
5       post-structuralist theory in relation to texts. This is why archaeologists can
6       re-examine old sites and come up with new interpretations, as in the exam-
7       ples given in the last chapter of Glastonbury or Snaketown.
8          Image and textual materialisation enable comparison, but, more signiﬁ-
9       cantly, repeatable comparison. The records we make in archaeology are our
1011    answer to the scientiﬁc experiment – it is a way of re-excavating a site, re-
1       analysing an object over and over again. This is why we call excavation
2       destruction – we have to, otherwise the record we make is of no value.
3       Without these materialising practices, there would be no archaeology –
4       they allow its discourse to develop. Indeed, the archaeologists’ facts are
5       primarily not sites or artefacts, but the textual and graphic materialisations
6       which stand in for them – from ﬁeldnotes to site reports, from drawings to
7       photographs (see Duke 1991). In this way, the concept of materiality and
8       material culture is introduced into the previously closed dualism of theory
9       and practice. It is this materiality which actually enables the hermeneutic
20111   to function as an iterable process.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
30111
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
40111
1
2
3
44111
