CHAPTER FIVE





Language and Place

The Location of the Proto-Indo-European Homeland


The Indo-European homeland is like the Lost Dutchman’s Mine, a legend of the American West, discovered almost everywhere but confirmed nowhere. Anyone who claims to know its real location is thought to be just a little odd—or worse. Indo-European homelands have been identified in India, Pakistan, the Himalayas, the Altai Mountains, Kazakhstan, Russia, Ukraine, the Balkans, Turkey, Armenia, the North Caucasus, Syria/Lebanon, Germany, Scandinavia, the North Pole, and (of course) Atlantis. Some homelands seem to have been advanced just to provide a historical precedent for nationalist or racist claims to privileges and territory. Others are enthusiastically zany. The debate, alternately dryly academic, comically absurd, and brutally political, has continued for almost two hundred years.1

This chapter lays out the linguistic evidence for the location of the Proto-Indo-European homeland. The evidence will take us down a well-worn path to a familiar destination: the grasslands north of the Black and Caspian Seas in what is today Ukraine and southern Russia, also known as the Pontic-Caspian steppes (figure 5.1). Certain scholars, notably Marija Gimbutas and Jim Mallory, have argued persuasively for this homeland for the last thirty years, each using criteria that differ in some significant details but reaching the same end point for many of the same reasons.2 Recent discoveries have strengthened the Pontic-Caspian hypothesis so significantly, in my opinion, that we can reasonably go forward on the assumption that this was the homeland.





PROBLEMS WITH THE CONCEPT OF “THE HOMELAND”


At the start I should acknowledge some fundamental problems. Many of my colleagues believe that it is impossible to identify any homeland for Proto-Indo-European, and the following are their three most serious concerns.



Figure 5.1 The Proto-Indo-European homeland between about 3500–3000 BCE.

Problem #1. Reconstructed Proto-Indo-European is merely a linguistic hypothesis, and hypotheses do not have homelands.



This criticism concerns the “reality” of reconstructed Proto-Indo-European, a subject on which linguists disagree. We should not imagine, some remind us, that reconstructed Proto-Indo-European was ever actually spoken anywhere. R.M.W. Dixon commented that if we cannot have “absolute certainty” about the grammatical type of a reconstructed language, it throws doubt over “every detail of the putative reconstruction.”3 But this is an extreme demand. The only field in which we can find absolute certainty is religion. In all other activities we must be content with the best (meaning both the simplest and the most data-inclusive) interpretation we can advance, given the data as they now stand. After we accept that this is true in all secular inquiries, the question of whether Proto-Indo-European can be thought of as “real” boils down to three sharper criticisms:

Reconstructed Proto-Indo-European is fragmentary (most of the language it represents never will be known).



The part that is reconstructed is homogenized, stripped of many of the peculiar sounds of its individual dialects, by the comparative method (although in reconstructed Proto-Indo-European some evidence of dialect survives).



Proto-Indo-European is not a snapshot of a moment in time but rather is “timeless”: it averages together centuries or even millennia of development. In that sense, it is an accurate picture of no single era in language history.





These seem to be serious criticisms. But if their effect is to make Proto-Indo-European a mere fantasy, then the English language as presented in the Merriam-Webster Dictionary is a fantasy, too. My dictionary contains the English word ombre (a card game popular in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries) as well as hard disk (a phrase that first appeared in the 1978 edition). So its vocabulary averages together at least three hundred years of the language. And its phonology, the “proper” pronuciation it describes, is quite restricted. Only one pronunciation is given for hard disk, and it is not the Bostonian hard [haahd]. The English of Merriam-Webster has never been spoken in its entirety by any one person. Nevertheless we all find it useful as a guide to real spoken English. Reconstructed Proto-Indo-European is similar, a dictionary version of a language. It is not, in itself, a real language, but it certainly refers to one. And we should remember that Sumerian cuneiform documents and Egyptian hieroglyphs present exactly the same problems as reconstructed Proto-Indo-European: the written scripts do not clearly indicate every sound, so their phonology is uncertain; they contain only royal or priestly dialects; and they might preserve archaic linguistic forms, like Church Latin. They are not, in themselves, real languages; they only refer to real languages. Reconstructed Proto-Indo-European is not so different from cuneiform Sumerian.

If Proto-Indo-European is like a dictionary, then it cannot be “timeless.” A dictionary is easily dated by its most recent entries. A dictionary containing the term hard disk is dated after 1978 in just the way that the wagon terminology in Proto-Indo-European dates it to a time after about 4000–3500 BCE. It is more dangerous to use negative information as a dating tool, since many words that really existed in Proto-Indo-European will never be reconstructed, but it is at least interesting that Proto-Indo-European does not contain roots for items like spoke, iron, cotton, chariot, glass, or coffee—things that were invented after the evolution and dispersal of the daughter languages, or, in the metaphor we are using, after the dictionary was printed.

Of course, the dictionary of reconstructed Proto-Indo-European is much more tattered than my copy of Merriam-Webster’s. Many pages have been torn out, and those that survive are obscured by the passage of time. The problem of the missing pages bothers some linguists the most. A reconstructed proto-language can seem a disappointing skeleton with a lot of bones missing and the placement of others debated between experts. The complete language the skeleton once supported certainly is a theoretical construct. So is the flesh-and-blood image of any dinosaur. Nevertheless, like the paleontologist, I am happy to have even a fragmentary skeleton. I think of Proto-Indo-European as a partial grammar and a partial set of pronunciation rules attached to the abundant fragments of a very ancient dictionary. To some linguists, that might not add up to a “real” language. But to an archaeologist it is more valuable than a roomful of potsherds.

Problem #2. The entire concept of “reconstructed Proto-Indo-European” is a fantasy: the similarities between the Indo-European languages could just as well have come about by gradual convergence over thousands of years between languages that had very different origins.



This is a more radical criticism then the first one. It proposes that the comparative method is a rigged game that automatically produces a proto-language as its outcome. The comparative method is said to ignore the linguistic changes that result from inter-language borrowing and convergence. Gradual convergence between originally diverse tongues, these scholars claim, might have produced the similarities between the Indo-European languages.4 If this were true or even probable there would indeed be no reason to pursue a single parent of the Indo-European languages. But the Russian linguist who inspired this line of questioning, Nikolai S. Trubetzkoy, worked in the 1930s before linguists really had the tools to investigate his startling suggestion.

Since then, quite a few linguists have taken up the problem of convergence between languages. They have greatly increased our understanding of how convergence happens and what its linguistic effects are. Although they disagree strongly with one another on some subjects, all recent studies of convergence accept that the Indo-European languages owe their essential similarities to descent from a common ancestral language, and not to convergence.5 Of course, some convergence has occurred between neighboring Indo-European languages—it is not a question of all or nothing—but specialists agree that the basic structures that define the Indo-European language family can only be explained by common descent from a mother tongue.

There are three reasons for this unanimity. First, the Indo-European languages are the most thoroughly studied languages in the world—simply put, we know a lot about them. Second, linguists know of no language where bundled similarities of the kinds seen among the Indo-European languages have come about through borrowing or convergence between languages that were originally distinct. And, finally, the features known to typify creole languages—languages that are the product of convergence between two or more originally distinct languages—are not seen among the Indo-European languages. Creole languages are characterized by greatly reduced noun and pronoun inflections (no case or even single/plural markings); the use of pre-verbal particles to replace verb tenses (“we bin get” for “we got”); the general absence of tense, gender, and person inflections in verbs; a severely reduced set of prepositions; and the use of repeated forms to intensify adverbs and adjectives. In each of these features Proto-Indo-European was the opposite of a typical creole. It is not possible to classify Proto-Indo-European as a creole by any of the standards normally applied to creole languages.6

Nor do the Indo-European daughter languages display the telltale signs of creoles. This means that the Indo-European vocabularies and grammars replaced competing languages rather than creolizing with them. Of course, some back-and-forth borrowing occurred—it always does in cases of language contact—but superficial borrowing and creolization are very different things. Convergence simply cannot explain the similarities between the Indo-European languages. If we discard the mother tongue, we are left with no explanation for the regular correspondences in sound, morphology, and meaning that define the Indo-European language family.

Problem #3. Even if there was a homeland where Proto-Indo-European was spoken, you cannot use the reconstructed vocabulary to find it because the reconstructed vocabulary is full of anachronisms that never existed in Proto-Indo-European.



This criticism, like the last one, reflects concerns about recent inter-language borrowing, focused here on just the vocabulary. Of course, many borrowed words are known to have spread through the Indo-European daughter languages long after the period of the proto-language—recent examples are coffee (borrowed from Arabic through Turkish) and tobacco (from Carib). The words for these items sound alike and have the same meanings in the different Indo-European languages, but few linguists would mistake them for ancient inherited words. Their phonetics are non—Indo-European, and their forms in the daughter branches do not represent what would be expected from inherited roots.7 Terms like coffee are not a significant source of contamination.

Historical linguists do not ignore borrowing between languages. An understanding of borrowing is essential. For example, subtle inconsistencies embedded within German, Greek, Celtic, and other languages, including such fleeting sounds as the word-initial [kn-] (knob) can be identified as phonetically uncharacteristic of Indo-European. These fragments from extinct non—Indo-European languages are preserved only because they were borrowed. They can help us create maps of pre—Indo-European place-names, like the places ending with [-ssos] or [-nthos] (Corinthos, Knossos, Parnassos), borrowed into Greek and thought to show the geographic distribution of the pre-Greek language(s) of the Aegean and western Anatolia. Borrowed non—Indo-European sounds also were used to reconstruct some aspects of the long-extinct non—Indo-European languages of northern and eastern Europe. All that is left of these tongues is an occasional word or sound in the Indo-European languages that replaced them. Yet we can still identify their fragments in words borrowed thousands of years ago.8

Another regular use of borrowing is the study of “areal” features like Sprachbunds. A Sprachbund is a region where several different languages are spoken interchangeably in different situations, leading to their extensive borrowing of features. The most famous Sprachbund is in southeastern Europe, where Albanian, Bulgarian, Serbo-Croat, and Greek share many features, with Greek as the dominant element, probably because of its association with the Greek Orthodox Church. Finally, borrowing is an ever-present factor in any study of “genetic” relatedness. Whenever a linguist tries to decide whether cognate terms in two daughter languages are inherited from a common source, one alternative that must be excluded is that one language borrowed the term from the other. Many of the methods of comparative linguistics depend on the accurate identification of borrowed words, sounds, and morphologies.

When a root of similar sound and similar meaning shows up in widely separated Indo-European languages (including an ancient language), and phonological comparison of its forms yields a single ancestral root, that root term can be assigned with some confidence to the Proto-Indo-European vocabulary. No single reconstructed root should be used as the basis for an elaborate theory about Proto-Indo-European culture, but we do not need to work with single roots; we have clusters of terms with related meanings. At least fifteen hundred unique Proto-Indo-European roots have been reconstructed, and many of these unique roots appear in multiple reconstructed Proto-Indo-European words, so the total count of reconstructed Proto-Indo-European terms is much greater than fifteen hundred. Borrowing is a specific problem that affects specific reconstructed roots, but it does not cancel the usefulness of a reconstructed vocabulary containing thousands of terms.

The Proto-Indo-European homeland is not a racist myth or a purely theoretical fantasy. A real language lies behind reconstructed Proto-Indo-European, just as a real language lies behind any dictionary. And that language is a guide to the thoughts, concerns, and material culture of real people who lived in a definite region between about 4500 and 2500 BCE. But where was that region?





FINDING THE HOMELAND: ECOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT


Regardless of where they ended up, most investigators of the Indo-European problem all started out the same way. The first step is to identify roots in the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European vocabulary referring to animal and plant species or technologies that existed only in certain places at particular times. The vocabulary itself should point to a homeland, at least within broad limits. For example, imagine that you were asked to identify the home of a group of people based only on the knowledge that a linguist had recorded these words in their normal daily speech:



You could identify them fairly confidently as residents of the American southwest, probably during the late nineteenth or early twentieth centuries (six-gun and the absence of words for trucks, cars, and highways are the best chronological indicators). They probably were cowboys—or pretending to be. Looking closer, the combination of armadillo, sagebrush, and cactus would place them in west Texas, New Mexico, or Arizona.

Linguists have long tried to find animal or plant names in the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European vocabulary referring to species that lived in just one part of the world. The reconstructed Proto-Indo-European term for salmon, *lók*s, was once famous as definite proof that the “Aryan” homeland lay in northern Europe. But animal and tree names seem to narrow and broaden in meaning easily. They are even reused and recycled when people move to a new environment, as English colonists used robin for a bird in the Americas that was a different species from the robin of England. The most specific meaning most linguists would now feel comfortable ascribing to the reconstructed term *lók*s- is “trout-like fish.” There are fish like that in the rivers across much of northern Eurasia, including the rivers flowing into the Black and Caspian Seas. The reconstructed Proto-Indo-European root for beech has a similar history. Because the copper beech, Fagus silvatica, did not grow east of Poland, the Proto-Indo-European root *bháo- was once used to support a northern or western European homeland. But in some Indo-European languages the same root refers to other tree species (oak or elder), and in any case the common beech (Fagus orientalis) grows also in the Caucasus, so its original meaning is unclear. Most linguists at least agree that the fauna and flora designated by the reconstructed vocabulary are temperate-zone types (birch, otter, beaver, lynx, bear, horse), not Mediterranean (no cypress, olive, or laurel) and not tropical (no monkey, elephant, palm, or papyrus). The roots for horse and bee are most helpful.

Bee and honey are very strong reconstructions based on cognates in most Indo-European languages. A derivative of the term for honey, *medhu-, was also used for an intoxicating drink, mead, that probably played a prominent role in Proto-Indo-European rituals. Honeybees were not native east of the Ural Mountains, in Siberia, because the hardwood trees (lime and oak, particularly) that wild honeybees prefer as nesting sites were rare or absent east of the Urals. If bees and honey did not exist in Siberia, the homeland could not have been there. That removes all of Siberia and much of northeastern Eurasia from contention, including the Central Asian steppes of Kazakhstan. The horse, *ek*wo-, is solidly reconstructed and seems also to have been a potent symbol of divine power for the speakers of Proto-Indo-European. Although horses lived in small, isolated pockets throughout prehistoric Europe, the Caucasus, and Anatolia between 4500 and 2500 BCE, they were rare or absent in the Near East, Iran, and the Indian subcontinent. They were numerous and economically important only in the Eurasian steppes. The term for horse removes the Near East, Iran, and the Indian subcontinent from serious contention, and encourages us to look closely at the Eurasian steppes. This leaves temperate Europe, including the steppes west of the Urals, and the temperate parts of Anatolia and the Caucasus Mountains.9





FINDING THE HOMELAND: THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL SETTING


The speakers of Proto-Indo-European were farmers and stockbreeders: we can reconstruct words for bull, cow, ox, ram, ewe, lamb, pig, and piglet. They had many terms for milk and dairy foods, including sour milk, whey, and curds. When they led their cattle and sheep out to the field they walked with a faithful dog. They knew how to shear wool, which they used to weave textiles (probably on a horizontal band loom). They tilled the earth (or they knew people who did) with a scratch-plow, or ard, which was pulled by oxen wearing a yoke. There are terms for grain and chaff, and perhaps for furrow. They turned their grain into flour by grinding it with a hand pestle, and cooked their food in clay pots (the root is actually for cauldron, but that word in English has been narrowed to refer to a metal cooking vessel). They divided their possessions into two categories: movables and immovables; and the root for movable wealth (*peku-, the ancestor of such English words as pecuniary) became the term for herds in general.10 Finally, they were not averse to increasing their herds at their neighbors’ expense, as we can reconstruct verbs that meant “to drive cattle,” used in Celtic, Italic, and Indo-Iranian with the sense of cattle raiding or “rustling.”

What was social life like? The speakers of Proto-Indo-European lived in a world of tribal politics and social groups united through kinship and marriage. They lived in households (*dómha), containing one or more families (*génh1es-) organized into clans (*wei-), which were led by clan leaders, or chiefs (*weik-potis). They had no word for city. Households appear to have been male-centered. Judging from the reconstructed kin terms, the important named kin were predominantly on the father’s side, which suggests patrilocal marriages (brides moved into the husband’s household). A group identity above the level of the clan was probably tribe (*h4erós), a root that developed into Aryan in the Indo-Iranian branch.11

The most famous definition of the basic divisions in Proto-Indo-European society was the tripartite scheme of Georges Dumézil, who suggested that there was a fundamental three-part division between the ritual specialist or priest, the warrior, and the ordinary herder/cultivator. Colors might have been associated with these three roles: white for the priest, red for the warrior, and black or blue for the herder/cultivator; and each role might have been assigned a specific type of ritual/legal death: strangulation for the priest, cutting/stabbing for the warrior, and drowning for the herder/cultivator. A variety of other legal and ritual distinctions seem to have applied to these three identities. It is unlikely that Dumézil’s three divisions were groups with a limited membership. Probably they were something much less defined, like three age grades through which all males were expected to pass—perhaps herders (young), warriors (older), and lineage elders/ritual leaders (oldest), as among the Maasai in east Africa. The warrior category was regarded with considerable ambivalence, often represented in myth by a figure who alternated between a protector and a berserk murderer who killed his own father (Hercules, Indra, Thor). Poets occupied another respected social category. Spoken words, whether poems or oaths, were thought to have tremendous power. The poet’s praise was a mortal’s only hope for immortality.

The speakers of Proto-Indo-European were tribal farmers and stockbreeders. Societies like this lived across much of Europe, Anatolia, and the Caucasus Mountains after 6000 BCE. But regions where hunting and gathering economies persisted until after 2500 BCE are eliminated as possible homelands, because Proto-Indo-European was a dead language by 2500 BCE. The northern temperate forests of Europe and Siberia are excluded by this stockbreeders-before-2500 BCE rule, which cuts away one more piece of the map. The Kazakh steppes east of the Ural Mountains are excluded as well. In fact, this rule, combined with the exclusion of tropical regions and the presence of honeybees, makes a homeland anywhere east of the Ural Mountains unlikely.





FINDING THE HOMELAND: URALIC AND CAUCASIAN CONNECTIONS


The possible homeland locations can be narrowed further by identifying the neighbors. The neighbors of the speakers of Proto-Indo-European can be identified through words and morphologies borrowed between Proto-Indo-European and other language families. It is a bit risky to discuss borrowing between reconstructed proto-languages—first, we have to reconstruct a phonological system for each of the proto-languages, then identify roots of similar form and meaning in both proto-languages, and finally see if the root in one proto-language meets all the expectations of a root borrowed from the other. If neighboring proto-languages have the same roots, reconstructed independently, and one root can be explained as a predictable outcome of borrowing from the other, then we have a strong case for borrowing. So who borrowed words from, or loaned words into, Proto-Indo-European? Which language families exhibit evidence of early contact and interchange with Proto-Indo-European?





Uralic Contacts


By far the strongest linkages can be seen with Uralic. The Uralic languages are spoken today in northern Europe and Siberia, with one southern off-shoot, Magyar, in Hungary, which was conquered by Magyar-speaking invaders in the tenth century. Uralic, like Indo-European, is a broad language family; its daughter languages are spoken across the northern forests of Eurasia from the Pacific shores of northeastern Siberia (Nganasan, spoken by tundra reindeer herders) to the Atlantic and Baltic coasts (Finnish, Estonian, Saami, Karelian, Vepsian, and Votian). Most linguists divide the family at the root into two super-branches, Finno-Ugric (the western branch) and Samoyedic (the eastern), although Salminen has argued that this binary division is based more on tradition than on solid linguistic evidence. His alternative is a “flat” division of the language family into nine branches, with Samoyedic just one of the nine.12

The homeland of Proto-Uralic probably was in the forest zone centered on the southern flanks of the Ural Mountains. Many argue for a homeland west of the Urals and others argue for the east side, but almost all Uralic linguists and Ural-region archaeologists would agree that Proto-Uralic was spoken somewhere in the birch-pine forests between the Oka River on the west (around modern Gorky) and the Irtysh River on the east (around modern Omsk). Today the Uralic languages spoken in this core region include, from west to east, Mordvin, Mari, Udmurt, Komi, and Mansi, of which two (Udmurt and Komi) are stems on the same branch (Permian). Some linguists have proposed homelands located farther east (the Yenisei River) or farther west (the Baltic), but the evidence for these extremes has not convinced many.13

The reconstructed Proto-Uralic vocabulary suggests that its speakers lived far from the sea in a forest environment. They were foragers who hunted and fished but possessed no domesticated plants or animals except the dog. This correlates well with the archaeological evidence. In the region between the Oka and the Urals, the Lyalovo culture was a center of cultural influences and interchanges among forest-zone forager cultures, with inter-cultural connections extending from the Baltic to the eastern slopes of the Urals during approximately the right period, 4500–3000 BCE.

The Uralic languages show evidence of very early contact with Indo-European languages. How that contact is interpreted is a subject of debate. There are three basic positions. First, the Indo-Uralic hypothesis suggests that the morphological linkages between the two families are so deep (shared pronouns), and the kinds of shared vocabulary so fundamental (words for water and name), that Proto-Indo-European and Proto-Uralic must have inherited these shared elements from some very ancient common linguistic parent—perhaps we might call it a “grandmother-tongue.” The second position, the early loan hypothesis, argues that the forms of the shared proto-roots for terms like name and water, as reconstructed in the vocabularies of both Proto-Uralic and Proto-Indo-European, are much too similar to reflect such an ancient inheritance. Inherited roots should have undergone sound shifts in each developing family over a long period, but these roots are so similar that they can only be explained as loans from one proto-language into the other—and, in all cases, the loans went from Proto-Indo-European into Proto-Uralic.14 The third position, the late loan hypothesis, is the one perhaps encountered most frequently in the general literature. It claims that there is little or no convincing evidence for borrowings even as old as the respective proto-languages; instead, the oldest well-documented loans should be assigned to contacts between Indo-Iranian and late Proto-Uralic, long after the Proto-Indo-European period. Contacts with Indo-Iranian could not be used to locate the Proto-Indo-European homeland.

At a conference dedicated to these subjects held at the University of Helsinki in 1999, not one linguist argued for a strong version of the late-loan hypothesis. Recent research on the earliest loans has reinforced the case for an early period of contact at least as early as the level of the proto-languages. This is well reflected in vocabulary loans. Koivulehto discussed at least thirteen words that are probable loans from Proto-Indo-European (PIE) into Proto-Uralic (P-U):

to give or to sell; P-U *mexe from PIE *h2mey-gw- ‘to change’, ‘exchange’



to bring, lead, or draw; P-U *wetä- from PIE *wedh-e/o- ‘to lead’, ‘to marry’, ‘to wed’



to wash; P-U *mośke- from PIE *mozg-eye/o- ‘to wash’, ‘to submerge’



to fear; P-U *pele- from PIE *pelh1- ‘to shake’, ‘cause to tremble’



to plait, to spin; P-U *puna- from PIE *pn.H-e/o- ‘to plait’, ‘to spin’



to walk, wander, go; P-U *kulke- from PIE *kwelH-e/o- ‘it/he/she walks around’, ‘wanders’



to drill, to bore; P-U *pura- from PIE *bhH- ‘to bore’, ‘to drill’



shall, must, to have to; P-U *kelke- from PIE *skelH- ‘to be guilty’, ‘shall’, ‘must’



long thin pole; P-U *śalka- from PIE *ghalgho- ‘well-pole’, ‘gallows’, ‘long pole’



merchandise, price; P-U *wosa from PIE *wosā ‘merchandise’, ‘to buy’



water; P-U *wete from PIE *wed-er/en, ‘water’, ‘river’



sinew; P-U *sōne from PIE *sneH(u)- ‘sinew’



name; P-U *nime- from PIE *h3neh3mn- ‘name’





Another thirty-six words were borrowed from differentiated Indo-European daughter tongues into early forms of Uralic prior to the emergence of differentiated Indic and Iranian—before 1700–1500 BCE at the latest. These later words included such terms as bread, dough, beer, to winnow, and piglet, which might have been borrowed when the speakers of Uralic languages began to adopt agriculture from neighboring Indo-European—speaking farmers and herders. But the loans between the proto-languages are the important ones bearing on the location of the Proto-Indo-European homeland. And that they are so similar in form does suggest that they were loans rather than inheritances from some very ancient common ancestor.

This does not mean that there is no evidence for an older level of shared ancestry. Inherited similarities, reflected in shared pronoun forms and some noun endings, might have been retained from such a common ancestor. The pronoun and inflection forms shared by Indo-European and Uralic are the following:

Proto-Uralic Proto-Indo-European

*te-nä (thou) *ti (?)

*te (you) *ti (clitic dative)

*me-nä (I) *mi

*tä-/to- (this/that) *te-/to-

*ke-, ku- (who, what) *kwe/o-

*-m (accusative sing.) *-m*

*-n (genitive plural) *-om



These parallels suggest that Proto-Indo-European and Proto-Uralic shared two kinds of linkages.15 One kind, revealed in pronouns, noun endings, and shared basic vocabulary, could be ancestral: the two proto-languages shared some quite ancient common ancestor, perhaps a broadly related set of intergrading dialects spoken by hunters roaming between the Carpathians and the Urals at the end of the last Ice Age. The relationship is so remote, however, that it can barely be detected. Johanna Nichols has called this kind of very deep, apparently genetic grouping a “quasistock.”16 Joseph Greenberg saw Proto-Indo-European and Proto-Uralic as particularly close cousins within a broader set of such language stocks that he called “Eurasiatic.”

The other link between Proto-Indo-European and Proto-Uralic seems cultural: some Proto-Indo-European words were borrowed by the speakers of Proto-Uralic. Although they seem odd words to borrow, the terms to wash, price, and to give or to sell might have been borrowed through a trade jargon used between Proto-Uralic and Proto-Indo-European speakers. These two kinds of linguistic relationship—a possible common ancestral origin and inter-language borrowings—suggest that the Proto-Indo-European homeland was situated near the homeland of Proto-Uralic, in the vicinty of the southern Ural Mountains. We also know that the speakers of Proto-Indo-European were farmers and herders whose language had disappeared by 2500 BCE. The people living east of the Urals did not adopt domesticated animals until after 2500 BC. Proto-Indo-European must therefore have been spoken somewhere to the south and west of the Urals, the only region close to the Urals where farming and herding was regularly practiced before 2500 BCE.





Caucasian Contacts and the Anatolian Homeland


Proto-Indo-European also had contact with the languages of the Caucasus Mountains, primarily those now classified as South Caucasian or Kartvelian, the family that produced modern Georgian. These connections have suggested to some that the Proto-Indo-European homeland should be placed in the Caucasus near Armenia or perhaps in nearby eastern Anatolia. The links between Proto-Indo-European and Kartvelian are said to appear in both phonetics and vocabulary, although the phonetic link is controversial. It depends on a brilliant but still problematic revision of the phonology of Proto-Indo-European proposed by the linguists T. Gamkrelidze and V. Ivanov, known as the glottalic theory.17 The glottalic theory made Proto-Indo-European phonology sound somewhat similar to that of Kartvelian, and even to the Semitic languages (Assyrian, Hebrew, Arabic) of the ancient Near East. This opened the possibility that Proto-Indo-European, Proto-Kartvelian, and Proto-Semitic might have evolved in a region where they shared certain areal phonological features. But by itself the glottalic phonology cannot prove a homeland in the Caucasus, even if it is accepted. And the glottalic phonology still has failed to convince many Indo-European linguists.18

Gamkrelidze and Ivanov have also suggested that Proto-Indo-European contained terms for panther, lion, and elephant, and for southern tree species. These animals and trees could be used to exclude a northern homeland. They also compiled an impressive list of loan words which they said were borrowed from Proto-Kartvelian and the Semitic languages into Proto-Indo-European. These relationships suggested to them that Proto-Indo-European had evolved in a place where it was in close contact with both the Semitic languages and the languages of the Southern Caucasus. They suggested Armenia as the most probable Indo-European homeland. Several archaeologists, prominently Colin Renfrew and Robert Drews, have followed their general lead, borrowing some of their linguistic arguments but placing the Indo-European homeland a little farther west, in central or western Anatolia.

But the evidence for a Caucasian or Anatolian homeland is weak. Many of the terms suggested as loans from Semitic into Proto-Indo-European have been rejected by other linguists. The few Semitic-to-Proto-Indo-European loan words that are widely accepted, words for items like silver and bull, might be words that were carried along trade and migration routes far from the Semites’ Near Eastern homeland. Johanna Nichols has shown from the phonology of the loans that the Proto-Indo-European/Proto-Kartvelian/Proto-Semitic contacts were indirect—all the loan words passed through unknown intermediaries between the known three. One intermediary is required by chronology, as Proto-Kartvelian is generally thought to have existed after Proto-Indo-European and Proto-Semitic.19

The Semitic and Caucasian vocabulary that was borrowed into Proto-Indo-European through Kartvelian therefore contains roots that belonged to some Pre-Kartvelian or Proto-Kartvelian language in the Caucasus. This language had relations, through unrecorded intermediaries, with Proto-Indo-European on one side and Proto-Semitic on the other. That is not a particularly close lexical relationship. If Proto-Kartvelian was spoken on the south side of the North Caucasus Mountain range, as seems likely, it might have been spoken by people associated with the Early Transcaucasian Culture (also known as the Kura-Araxes culture), dated about 3500–2200 BCE. They could have had indirect relations with the speakers of Proto-Indo-European through the Maikop culture of the North Caucasus region. Many experts agree that Proto-Indo-European shared some features with a language ancestral to Kartvelian but not necessarily through a direct face-to-face link. Relations with the speakers of Proto-Uralic were closer.

So who were the neighbors? Proto-Indo-European exhibits strong links with Proto-Uralic and weaker links with a language ancestral to Proto-Kartvelian. The speakers of Proto-Indo-European lived somewhere between the Caucasus and Ural Mountains but had deeper linguistic relationships with the people who lived around the Urals.





THE LOCATION OF THE PROTO-INDO-EUROPEAN HOMELAND


The speakers of Proto-Indo-European were tribal farmers who cultivated grain, herded cattle and sheep, collected honey from honeybees, drove wagons, made wool or felt textiles, plowed fields at least occasionally or knew people who did, sacrificed sheep, cattle, and horses to a troublesome array of sky gods, and fully expected the gods to reciprocate the favor. These traits guide us to a specific kind of material culture—one with wagons, domesticated sheep and cattle, cultivated grains, and sacrificial deposits with the bones of sheep, cattle, and horses. We should also look for a specific kind of ideology. In the reciprocal exchange of gifts and favors between their patrons, the gods, and human clients, humans offered a portion of their herds through sacrifice, accompanied by well-crafted verses of praise; and the gods in return provided protection from disease and misfortune, and the blessings of power and prosperity. Patron-client reciprocity of this kind is common among chiefdoms, societies with institutionalized differences in prestige and power, where some clans or lineages claim a right of patronage over others, usually on grounds of holiness or historical priority in a given territory.

Knowing that we are looking for a society with a specific list of material culture items and institutionalized power distinctions is a great help in locating the Proto-Indo-European homeland. We can exclude all regions where hunter-gatherer economies survived up to 2500 BCE. That eliminates the northern forest zone of Eurasia and the Kazakh steppes east of the Ural Mountains. The absence of honeybees east of the Urals eliminates any part of Siberia. The temperate-zone flora and fauna in the reconstructed vocabulary, and the absence of shared roots for Mediterranean or tropical flora and fauna, eliminate the tropics, the Mediterranean, and the Near East. Proto-Indo-European exhibits some very ancient links with the Uralic languages, overlaid by more recent lexical borrowings into Proto-Uralic from Proto-Indo-European; and it exhibits less clear linkages to some Pre— or Proto-Kartvelian language of the Caucasus region. All these requirements would be met by a Proto-Indo-European homeland placed west of the Ural Mountains, between the Urals and the Caucasus, in the steppes of eastern Ukraine and Russia. The internal coherence of reconstructed Proto-Indo-European—the absence of evidence for radical internal variation in grammar and phonology—indicates that the period of language history it reflects was less than two thousand years, probably less than one thousand. The heart of the Proto-Indo-European period probably fell between 4000 and 3000 BCE, with an early phase that might go back to 4500 BCE and a late phase that ended by 2500 BCE.

What does archaeology tell us about the steppe region between the Caucasus and the Urals, north of the Black and Caspian Seas—the Pontic-Caspian region—during this period? First, archaeology reveals a set of cultures that fits all the requirements of the reconstructed vocabulary: they sacrificed domesticated horses, cattle, and sheep, cultivated grain at least occasionally, drove wagons, and expressed institutionalized status distinctions in their funeral rituals. They occupied a part of the world—the steppes—where the sky is by far the most striking and magnificent part of the landscape, a fitting environment for people who believed that all their most important deities lived in the sky. Archaeological evidence for migrations from this region into neighboring regions, both to the west and to the east, is well established. The sequence and direction of these movements matches the sequence and direction suggested by Indo-European linguistics and geography (figure 5.2). The first identifiable migration out of the Pontic-Caspian steppes was a movement toward the west about 4200–3900 BCE that could represent the detachment of the Pre-Anatolian branch, at a time before wheeled vehicles were introduced to the steppes (see chapter 4). This was followed by a movement toward the east (about 3700–3300 BCE) that could represent the detachment of the Tocharian branch. The next visible migration out of the steppes flowed toward the west. Its earliest phase might have separated the Pre-Germanic branch, and its later, more visible phase detached the Pre-Italic and Pre-Celtic dialects. This was followed by movements to the north and east that probably established the Baltic-Slavic and Indo-Iranian tongues. The remarkable match between the archaeologically documented pattern of movements out of the steppes and that expected from linguistics is fascinating, but it has absorbed, for too long, most of the attention and debate that is directed at the archaeology of Indo-European origins. Archaeology also adds substantially to our cultural and economic understanding of the speakers of Proto-Indo-European. Once the homeland has been located with linguistic evidence, the archaeology of that region provides a wholly new kind of information, a new window onto the lives of the people who spoke Proto-Indo-European and the process by which it became established and began to spread.



Figure 5.2 A diagram of the sequence and approximate dates of splits in early Indo-European as proposed in this book, with the maximal window for Proto-Indo-European indicated by the dashed lines. The dates of splits are determined by archaeological events described in chapters 11 (Anatolian) through 16 (Iranian and Indic).

Before we step into the archaeology, however, we should pause and think for a moment about the gap we are stepping across, the void between linguistics and archaeology, a chasm most Western archaeologists feel cannot be crossed. Many would say that language and material culture are completely unrelated, or are related in such changeable and complicated ways that it is impossible to use material culture to identify language groups or boundaries. If that is true, then even if we can identify the place and time of the Indo-European homeland using the reconstructed vocabulary, the link to archaeology is impossible. We cannot expect any correlation with material culture. But is such pessimism warranted? Is there no predictable, regular link between language and material culture?





CHAPTER SIX





The Archaeology of Language


A language homeland implies a bounded space of some kind. How can we define those boundaries? Can ancient linguistic frontiers be identified through archaeology?

Let us first define our terms. It would be helpful if anthropologists used the same vocabulary used in geography. According to geographers, the word border is neutral—it has no special or restricted meaning. A frontier is a specific kind of border—a transitional zone with some depth, porous to cross-border movement, and very possibly dynamic and moving. A frontier can be cultural, like the Western frontier of European settlement in North America, or ecological. An ecotone is an ecological frontier. Some ecotones are very subtle and small-scale—there are dozens of tiny ecotones in any suburban yard—and others are very large-scale, like the border between steppe and forest running east-west across central Eurasia. Finally, a sharply defined border that limits movement in some way is a boundary; for example, the political borders of modern nations are boundaries. But nation-like political and linguistic boundaries were unknown in the Pontic-Caspian region between 4500 and 2500 BCE. The cultures we are interested in were tribal societies.1

Archaeologists’ interpretations of premodern tribal borders have changed in the last forty years. Most pre-state tribal borders are now thought to have been porous and dynamic—frontiers, not boundaries. More important, most are thought to have been ephemeral. The tribes Europeans encountered in their colonial ventures in Africa, South Asia, the Pacific, and the Americas were at first assumed to have existed for a long time. They often claimed antiquity for themselves. But many tribes are now believed to have been transient political communities of the historical moment. Like the Ojibwa, some might have crystallized only after contact with European agents who wanted to deal with bounded groups to facilitate the negotiation of territorial treaties. And the same critical attitude toward bounded tribal territories is applied to European history. Ancient European tribal identities—Celt, Scythian, Cimbri, Teuton, and Pict—are now frequently seen as convenient names for chameleon-like political alliances that had no true ethnic identity, or as brief ethnic phenomena that were unable to persist for any length of time, or even as entirely imaginary later inventions.2

Pre-state language borders are thought to have been equally fluid, characterized by intergrading local dialects rather than sharp boundaries. Where language and material culture styles (house type, town type, economy, dress, etc.) did coincide geographically to create a tribal ethnolinguistic frontier, we should expect it to have been short-lived. Language and material culture can change at different speeds for different reasons, and so are thought to grow apart easily. Historians and sociologists from Eric Hobsbawm to Anthony Giddens have proposed that there were no really distinct and stable ethnolinguistic borders in Europe until the late eighteenth century, when the French Revolution ushered in the era of nation-states. In this view of the past only the state is accorded both the need and the power to warp ethnolinguistic identity into a stable and persistent phenomenon, like the state itself. So how can we hope to identify ephemeral language frontiers in 3500 BCE? Did they even exist long enough to be visible archaeologically?3

Unfortunately this problem is compounded by the shortcomings of archaeological methods. Most archaeologists would agree that we do not really know how to recognize tribal ethnolinguistic frontiers, even if they were stable. Pottery styles were often assumed by pre—World War II archaeologists to be an indicator of social identity. But we now know that no simple connection exists between pottery types and ethnicity; as noted in chapter 1, every modern archaeology student knows that “pots are not people.” The same problem applies to other kinds of material culture. Arrow-point types did seem to correlate with language families among the San hunter-gatherers of South Africa; however, among the Contact-period Native Americans in the northeastern U.S., the “Madison”-type arrow point was used by both Iroquoian and Algonkian speakers—its distribution had no connection to language. Almost any object could have been used to signal linguistic identity, or not. Archaeologists have therefore rejected the possibility that language and material culture are correlated in any predictable or recognizable way.4

But it seems that language and material culture are related in at least two ways. One is that tribal languages are generally more numerous in any long-settled region than tribal material cultures. Silver and Miller noticed, in 1997, that most tribal regions had more languages than material cultures. The Washo and Shoshone in the Great Basin had very different languages, of distinct language families, but similar material cultures; the Pueblo Indians had more languages than material cultures; the California Indians had more languages than stylistic groups; and the Indians of the central Amazon are well known for their amazing linguistic variety and broadly similar material cultures. A Chicago Field Museum study of language and material culture in northern New Guineau, the most detailed of its type, confirmed that regions defined by material culture were crisscrossed with numerous materially invisible language borders.5 But the opposite pattern seems to be rare: a homogeneous tribal language is rarely separated into two very distinct bundles of material culture. This regularity seems discouraging, as it guarantees that many prehistoric language borders must be archaeologically invisible, but it does help to decide such questions as whether one language could have covered all the varied material culture groups of Copper Age Europe (probably not; see chapter 4).

The second regularity is more important: language is correlated with material culture at very long-lasting, distinct material-culture borders.





PERSISTENT FRONTIERS


Persistent cultural frontiers have been ignored, because, I believe, they were dismissed on theoretical grounds.6 They are not supposed to be there, since pre-state tribal borders are interpreted today as ephemeral and unstable. But archaeologists have documented a number of remarkably long-lasting, prehistoric, material-culture frontiers in settings that must have been tribal. A robust, persistent frontier separated Iroquoian and Algonkian speakers along the Hudson Valley, who displayed different styles of smoking pipes, subtle variations in ceramics, quite divergent house and settlement types, diverse economies, and very different languages for at least three centuries prior to European contact. Similarly the Linear Pottery/Lengyel farmers created a robust material-culture frontier between themselves and the indigenous foragers in northern Neolithic Europe, a moving border that persisted for at least a thousand years; the Criş/Tripolye cultures were utterly different from the Dnieper-Donets culture on a moving frontier between the Dniester and Dnieper Rivers in Ukraine for twenty-five hundred years during the Neolithic and Eneolithic; and the Jastorf and Halstatt cultures maintained distinct identities for centuries on either side of the lower Rhine in the Iron Age.7 In each of these cases cultural norms changed; house designs, decorative aesthetics, and religious rituals were not frozen in a single form on either side. It was the persistent opposition of bundles of customs that defined the frontier rather than any one artifact type.

Persistent frontiers need not be stable geographically—they can move, as the Romano-Celt/Anglo-Saxon material-culture frontier moved across Britain between 400 and 700 CE, or the Linear Pottery/forager frontier moved across northern Europe between 5400 and 5000 BCE. Some material-culture frontiers, described in the next chapters, survived for millennia, in a pre-state social world governed just by tribal politics—no border guards, no national press. Particularly clear examples defined the edges of the Pontic-Caspian steppes on the west (Tripolye/Dnieper), on the north (Russian forest forager/steppe herder), and on the east (Volga-Ural steppe herder/Kazakh steppe forager). These were the borders of the region that probably was the homeland of Proto-Indo-European. If ancient ethnicities were ephemeral and the borders between them short-lived, how do we understand premodern tribal material-culture frontiers that persisted for thousands of years? And can language be connected to them?

I think the answer is yes. Language is strongly associated with persistent material-culture frontiers that are defined by bundles of opposed customs, what I will call robust frontiers.8 The migrations and frontier formation processes that followed the collapse of the Roman Empire in western Europe provide the best setting to examine this association, because documents and place-names establish the linguistic identity of the migrants, the locations of newly formed frontiers, and their persistence over many centuries in political contexts where centralized state governments were weak or nonexistent. For example, the cultural frontier between the Welsh (Celtic branch) and the English (Germanic branch) has persisted since the Anglo-Saxon conquest of Romano-Celtic Britain during the sixth century. Additional conquests by Norman-English feudal barons after 1277 pushed the frontier back to the landsker, a named and overtly recognized ethnolinguistic frontier between Celtic Welsh-speaking and Germanic English-speaking populations that persisted to the present day. They spoke different languages (Welsh/English), built different kinds of churches (Celtic/Norman English), managed agriculture differently and with different tools, used diverse systems of land measurement, employed dissimilar standards of justice, and maintained a wide variety of distinctions in dress, food, and custom. For many centuries men rarely married across this border, maintaining a genetic difference between modern Welsh and English men (but not women) in traits located on the male Y chromosome.

Other post-Roman ethnolinguistic frontiers followed the same pattern. After the fall of Rome German speakers moved into the northern cantons of Switzerland, and the Gallic kingdom of Burgundy occupied what had been Gallo-Roman western Switzerland. The frontier between them still separates ecologically similar regions within a single modern state that differ in language (German-French), religion (Protestant-Catholic), architecture, the size and organization of landholdings, and the nature of the agricultural economy. Another post-Roman migration created the Breton/French frontier across the base of the peninsula of Brittany, after Romano-Celts migrated to Brittany from western Britain around 400–600 CE, fleeing the Anglo-Saxons. For more than fifteen hundred years the Celtic-speaking Bretons have remained distinct from their French-speaking neighbors in rituals, dress, music, and cuisine. Finally, migrations around 900–1000 CE brought German speakers into what is now northeastern Italy, where the persistent frontier between Germans and Romance speakers inside Italy was studied by Eric Wolf and John Cole in the 1960s. Although in this case both cultures were Catholic Christians, after a thousand years they still maintained different languages, house types, settlement organizations, land tenure and inheritance systems, attitudes toward authority and cooperation, and quite unfavorable stereotypes of each other. In all these cases documents and inscriptions show that the ethnolinguistic oppositions were not recent or invented but deeply historical and persistent.9

These examples suggest that most persistent, robust material-culture frontiers were ethnolinguistic. Robust, persistent, material-culture frontiers are not found everywhere, so only exceptional language frontiers can be identified. But that, of course, is better than nothing.





Population Movement across Persistent Frontiers


Unlike the men of Wales and England, most people moved back and forth across persistent frontiers easily. A most interesting fact about stable ethnolinguistic frontiers is that they were not necessarily biological; they persisted for an extraordinarily long time despite people regularly moving across them. As Warren DeBoer described in his study of native pottery styles in the western Amazon basin, “ethnic boundaries in the Ucayali basin are highly permeable with respect to bodies, but almost inviolable with respect to style.”10 The back-and-forth movement of people is indeed the principal focus of most contemporary borderland studies. The persistence of the borders themselves has remained understudied, probably because modern nation-states insist that all borders are permanent and inviolable, and many nation-states, in an attempt to naturalize their borders, have tried to argue that they have persisted from ancient times. Anthropologists and historians alike dismiss this as a fiction; the borders I have discussed frequently persist within modern nation-states rather than corresponding to their modern boundaries. But I think we have failed to recognize that we have internalized the modern nation-state’s basic premise by insisting that ethnic borders must be inviolable boundaries or they did not really exist.

If people move across an ethno-linguistic frontier freely, then the frontier is often described in anthropology as, in some sense, a fiction. Is this just because it was not a boundary like that of a modern nation? Eric Wolf used this very argument to assert that the North American Iroquois did not exist as a distinct tribe during the Colonial period; he called them a multiethnic trading company. Why? Because their communities were full of captured and adopted non-Iroquois. But if biology is independent of language and culture, then the simple movement of Delaware and Nanticoke bodies into Iroquoian towns should not imply a dilution of Iroquoian culture. What matters is how the immigrants acted. Iroquoian adoptees were required to behave as Iroquois or they might be killed. The Iroquoian cultural identity remained distinct, and it was long established and persistent. The idea that European nation-states created the Iroquois “nation” in their own European image is particularly ironic in view of the fact that the five nations or tribes of the pre-European Northern Iroquois can be traced back archaeologically in their traditional five tribal territories to 1300 CE, more than 250 years before European contact. An Iroquois might argue that the borders of the original five nations of the Northern Iroquois were demonstrably older than those of many European nation-states at the end of the sixteenth century.11

Language frontiers in Europe are not generally strongly correlated with genetic frontiers; people mated across them. But persistent ethnolinguistic frontiers probably did originate in places where relatively few people moved between neighboring mating and migration networks. Dialect borders usually are correlated with borders between socioeconomic “functional zones,” as linguists call a region marked by a strong network of intra-migration and socioeconomic interdependence. (Cities usually are divided into several distinct socioeconomic-linguistic functional zones.) Labov, for example, showed that dialect borders in central Pennsylvania correlated with reduced cross-border traffic flow densities at the borders of functional zones. In some places, like the Welsh/English border, the cross-border flow of people was low enough to appear genetically as a contrast in gene pools, but at other persistent frontiers there was enough cross-border movement to blur genetic differences. What, then, maintained the frontier itself, the persistent sense of difference?12

Persistent, robust premodern ethnolinguistic frontiers seem to have survived for long periods under one or both of two conditions: at large-scale ecotones (forest/steppe, desert/savannah, mountain/river bottom, mountain/coast) and at places where long-distance migrants stopped migrating and formed a cultural frontier (England/Wales, Britanny/France, German Swiss/French Swiss). Persistent identity depended partly on the continuous confrontation with Others that was inherent in these kinds of borders, as Frederik Barth observed, but it also relied on a home culture behind the border, a font of imagined tradition that could continuously feed those contrasts, as Eric Wolf recognized in Italy.13 Let us briefly examine how these factors worked together to create and maintain persistent frontiers. We begin with borders created by long-distance migration.





MIGRATION AS A CAUSE OF PERSISTENT MATERIAL-CULTURE FRONTIERS


During the 1970s and 1980s the very idea of folk migrations was avoided by Western archaeologists. Folk migrations seemed to represent the boiled-down essence of the discredited idea that ethnicity, language, and material culture were packaged into neatly bounded societies that careened across the landscape like self-contained billiard balls, in a famously dismissive simile. Internal causes of social change—shifts in production and the means of production, in climate, in economy, in access to wealth and prestige, in political structure, and in spiritual beliefs—all got a good long look by archaeologists during these decades. While archaeologists were ignoring migration, modern demographers became very good at picking apart the various causes, recruiting patterns, flow dynamics, and targets of modern migration streams. Migration models moved far beyond the billiard ball analogy. The acceptance of modern migration models in the archaeology of the U.S. Southwest and in Iroquoian archaeology in the Northeast during the 1990s added new texture to the interpretation of Anasazi/Pueblo and Iroquoian societies, but in most other parts of the world the archaeological database was simply not detailed enough to test the very specific behavioral predictions of modern migration theories.14 History, on the other hand, contains a very detailed record of the past, and among modern historians migration is accepted as a cause of persistent cultural frontiers.

The colonization of North America by English speakers is one prominent example of a well-studied, historical connection between migration and ethnolinguistic frontier formation. Decades of historical research have shown, surprisingly, that while the borders separating Europeans and Native Americans were important, those that separated different British cultures were just as significant. Eastern North America was colonized by four distinct migration streams that originated in four different parts of the British Isles. When they touched down in eastern North America, they created four clearly bounded ethnolinguistic regions between about 1620 and 1750. The Yankee dialect was spoken in New England. The same region also had a distinctive form of domestic architecture—the salt-box clapboard house—as well as its own barn and church architecture, a distinctive town type (houses clustered around a common grazing green), a peculiar cuisine (often baked, like Boston baked beans), distinct fashions in clothing, a famous style of gravestones, and a fiercely legalistic approach to politics and power. The geographic boundaries of the New England folk-culture region, drawn by folklorists on the basis of these traits, and the Yankee dialect region, drawn by linguists, coincide almost exactly. The Yankee dialect was a variant of the dialect of East Anglia, the region from which most of the early Pilgrim migrants came; and New England folk culture was a simplified version of East Anglian folk culture. The other three regions also exhibited strongly correlated dialects and folk cultures, as defined by houses, barn types, fence types, the frequency of towns and their organization, food preferences, clothing styles, and religion. One was the mid-Atlantic region (Pennsylvania Quakers from the English Midlands), the third was the Virginia coast (Royalist Anglican tobacco planters from southern England, largely Somerset and Wessex), and the last was the interior Appalachians (borderlanders from the Scotch-Irish borders). Both dialect and folk culture are traceable in each case to a particular region in the British Isles from which the first effective European settlers came.15

The four ethnolinguistic regions of Colonial eastern North America were created by four separate migration streams that imported people with distinctive ethnolinguistic identities into four different regions where simplified versions of their original linguistic and material differences were established, elaborated, and persisted for centuries (table 6.1). In some ways, including modern presidential voting patterns, the remnants of these four regions survive even today. But can modern migration patterns be applied to the past, or do modern migrations have purely modern causes?

TABLE 6.1

Migration Streams to Colonial North America





The Causes of Migration


Many archaeologists think that modern migrations are fueled principally by overpopulation and the peculiar boundaries of modern nation-states, neither of which affected the prehistoric world, making modern migration studies largely irrelevant to prehistoric societies.16 But migrations have many causes besides overpopulation within state borders. People do not migrate, even in today’s crowded world, simply because there are too many at home. Crowding would be called a “push” factor by modern demographers, a negative condition at home. But there are other kinds of “push” factors—war, disease, crop failure, climate change, institutionalized raiding for loot, high bride-prices, the laws of primogeniture, religious intolerance, banishment, humiliation, or simple annoyance with the neighbors. Many causes of today’s migrations and those in the past were social, not demographic. In ancient Rome, feudal Europe, and many parts of modern Africa, inheritance rules favored older siblings, condemning the younger ones to find their own lands or clients, a strong motive for them to migrate.17 Pushes could be even more subtle. The persistent outward migrations and conquests of the pre-Colonial East African Nuer were caused, according to Raymond Kelley, not by overpopulation within Nuerland but rather by a cultural system of bride-price regulations that made it very expensive for young Nuer men to obtain a socially desirable bride. A bride-price was a payment made by the groom to the bride’s family to compensate for the loss of her labor. Escalation in bride-prices encouraged Nuer men to raid their non-Nuer neighbors for cattle (and pastures to support them) that could be used to pay the elevated bride-price for a high-status marriage. Tribal status rivalries supported by high brideprices in an arid, low-productivity environment led to out-migration and the rapid territorial expansion of the Nuer.18 Grassland migrations among tribal pastoralists can be “pushed” by many things other than absolute resource shortages.

Regardless of how “pushes” are defined, no migration can be adequately explained by “pushes” alone. Every migration is affected as well by “pull” factors (the alleged attractions of the destination, regardless of whether they are true), by communication networks that bring information to potential migrants, and by transport costs. Changes in any of these factors will raise or lower the threshold at which migration becomes an attractive option. Migrants weigh these dynamics, for far from being an instinctive response to overcrowding, migration is often a conscious social strategy meant to improve the migrant’s position in competition for status and riches. If possible, migrants recruit clients and followers among the people at home, convincing them also to migrate, as Julius Caesar described the recruitment speeches of the chiefs of the Helvetii prior to their migration from Switzerland into Gaul. Recruitment in the homeland by potential and already departed migrants has been a continuous pattern in the expansion and reproduction of West African clans and lineages, as Igor Kopytoff noted. There is every reason to believe that similar social calculations have inspired migrations since humans evolved.





Effects: The Archaeological Identification of Ancient Migrations


Large, sustained migrations, particularly those that moved a long distance from one cultural setting into a very different one, or folk migrations, can be identified archaeologically. Emile Haury knew most of what to look for already in his excavations in Arizona in the 1950s: (1) the sudden appearance of a new material culture that has no local antecedents or prototypes; (2) a simultaneous shift in skeletal types (biology); (3) a neighboring territory where the intrusive culture evolved earlier; and (4) (a sign not recognized by Haury) the introduction of new ways of making things, new technological styles, which we now know are more “fundamental” (like the core vocabulary in linguistics) than decorative styles.

Smaller-scale migrations by specialists, mercenaries, skilled craft workers, and so on, are more difficult to identify. This is partly because archaeologists have generally stopped with the four simple criteria just described and neglected to analyze the internal workings even of folk migrations. To really understand why and how folk migrations occurred, and to have any hope of identifying small-scale migrations, archaeologists have to study the internal structure of long-distance migration streams, both large and small. The organization of migrating groups depends on the identity and social connections of the scouts (who select the target destination); the social organization of information sharing (which determines who gets access to the scouts’ information); transportation technology (cheaper and more effective transport makes migration easier); the targeting of destinations (whether they are many or few); the identity of the first effective settlers (also called the “charter group”); return migration (most migrations have a counterflow going back home); and changes in the goals and identities of migrants who join the stream later. If we look for all these factors we can better understand why and how migrations happened. Sustained migrations, particularly by pioneers looking to settle in new homes, can create very long-lasting, persistent ethnolinguistic frontiers.





The Simplification of Dialect and Culture among Long-distance Migrants


Access to the scouts’ information defines the pool of potential migrants. Studies have found that the first 10% of new migrants into a region is an accurate predictor of the social makeup of the population that will follow them. This restriction on information at the source produces two common behaviors: leapfrogging and chain migration. In leapfrogging, migrants go only to those places about which they have heard good things, skipping over other possible destinations, sometimes moving long distances in one leap. In chain migration, migrants follow kin and co-residents to familiar places with social support, not to the objectively “best” place. They jump to places where they can rely on people they know, from point to targeted point. Recruitment usually is relatively restricted, and this is clearly audible in their speech.

Colonist speech generally is more homogeneous than the language of the homeland they left behind. Dialectical differences were fewer among Colonial-era English speakers in North America than they were in the British Isles. The Spanish dialects of Colonial South America were more homogeneous than the dialects of Southern Spain, the home region of most of the original colonists. Linguistic simplification has three causes. One is chain migration, where colonists tend to recruit family and friends from the same places and social groups that the colonists came from. Simplification also is a normal linguistic outcome of mixing between dialects in a contact situation at the destination.19 Finally, simplification is encouraged among long-distance migrants by the social influence of the charter group.

The first group to establish a viable social system in a new place is called the charter group, or the first effective settlers.20 They generally get the best land. They might claim rights to perform the highest-status rituals, as among the Maya of Central America or the Pueblo Indians of the American Southwest. In some cases, for example, Puritan New England, their councils choose who is permitted to join them. Among Hispanic migrants in the U.S. Southwest, charter groups were called apex families because of their structural position in local prestige hierarchies. Many later migrants were indebted to or dependent on the charter group, whose dialect and material culture provided the cultural capital for a new group identity. Charter groups leave an inordinate cultural imprint on later generations, as the latter copy the charter group’s behavior, at least publicly. This explains why the English language, English house forms, and English settlement types were retained in nineteenth-century Ohio, although the overwhelming majority of later immigrants was German. The charter group, already established when the Germans arrived, was English. It also explains why East Anglian English traits, typical of the earliest Puritan immigrants, continued to typify New England dialectical speech and domestic architecture long after the majority of later immigrants arrived from other parts of England or Ireland. As a font of tradition and success in a new land, the charter group exercised a kind of historical cultural hegemony over later generations. Their genes, however, could easily be swamped by later migrants, which is why it is often futile to pursue a genetic fingerprint associated with a particular language.

The combination of chain migration, which restricted the pool of potential migrants at home, and the influence of the charter group, which encouraged conformity at the destination, produced a leveling of differences among many colonists. Simplification (fewer variants than in the home region) and leveling (the tendency toward a standardized form) affected both dialect and material culture. In material culture, domestic architecture and settlement organization—the external form and construction of the house and the layout of the settlement—particularly tended toward standardization, as these were the most visible signals of identity in any social landscape.21 Those who wished to declare their membership in the mainstream culture adopted its external domestic forms, whereas those who retained their old house and barn styles (as did some Germans in Ohio) became political, as well as architectural and linguistic, minorities. Linguistic and cultural homogeneity among long-distance migrants facilitated stereotyping by Others, and strengthened the illusion of shared interests and origins among the migrants.





ECOLOGICAL FRONTIERS: DIFFERENT WAYS OF MAKING A LIVING


Franz Boas, the father of American anthropology, found that the borders of American Indian tribes rarely correlated with geographic borders. Boas decided to study the diffusion of cultural ideas and customs across borders. But a certain amount of agreement between ecology and culture is not at all surprising, particularly among people who were farmers and animal herders, which Boas’s North American tribes generally were not. The length of the frost-free growing season, precipitation, soil fertility, and topography affect many aspects of daily life and custom among farmers: herding systems, crop cultivation, house types, the size and arrangement of settlements, favorite foods, sacred foods, the size of food surpluses, and the timing and richness of public feasts. At large-scale ecotones these basic differences in economic organization, diet, and social life can blossom into oppositional ethnic identities, which sometimes are complementary and mutually supportive, sometimes are hostile, and often are both. Frederick Barth, after working among the societies of Iran and Afghanistan, was among the first anthropologists to argue that ethnic identity was continuously created, even invented, at frontiers, rather than residing in the genes or being passively inherited from the ancestors. Oppositional politics crystallize who we are not, even if we are uncertain who we are, and therefore play a large role in the definition of ethnic identities. Ecotones were places where contrasting identities were likely to be reproduced and maintained for long periods because of structural differences in how politics and economics were played.22

Ecotones coincide with ethnolinguistic frontiers at many places. In France the Mediterranean provinces of the South and the Atlantic provinces of the North have been divided by an ethnolinguistic border for at least eight hundred years; the earliest written reference to it dates to 1284. The flat, tiled roofs of the South sheltered people who spoke the langue d’oc, whereas the steeply pitched roofs of the North were home to people who spoke the langue d’oil. They had different cropping systems, and different legal systems as well until they were forced to conform to a national legal standard. In Kenya the Nilotic-speaking pastoralist Maasai maintained a purely cattle-herding economy (or at least that was their ideal) in the dry plains and plateaus, whereas Bantu-speaking farmers occupied moister environments on the forested slopes of the mountains or in low wetlands. Probably the most famous anthropological example of this type was described by Sir Edmund Leach in his classic Political Systems of Highland Burma. The upland Kachin forest farmers, who lived in the hills of Burma (Myanmar), were distinct linguistically, and also in many aspects of ritual and material culture, from the Thai-speaking Shan paddy farmers who occupied the rich bottomlands in the river valleys. Some Kachin leaders adopted Shan identities on certain occasions, moving back and forth between the two systems. But the broader distinction between the two cultures, Kachin and Shan, persisted, a distinction rooted in different ecologies, for example, the contrasting reliability and predictability of crop surpluses, the resulting different potentials for surplus wealth, and the dissimilar social organizations required for upland forest and lowland paddy farming. Cultural frontiers rooted in ecological differences could survive for a long time, even with people regularly moving across them.23





Language Distributions and Ecotones


Why do some language frontiers follow ecological borders? Does language just ride on the coattails of economy? Or is there an independent relationship between ecology and the way people speak? The linguists Daniel Nettle at Oxford University and Jane Hill at the University of Arizona proposed, in 1996 (independently, or at least without citing each other), that the geography of language reflects an underlying ecology of social relationships.24

Social ties require a lot of effort to establish and maintain, especially across long distances, and people are unlikely to expend all that energy unless they think they need to. People who are self-sufficient and fairly sure of their economic future tend to maintain strong social ties with a small number of people, usually people very much like themselves. Jane Hill calls this a localist strategy. Their own language, the one they grew up with, gets them everything they need, and so they tend to speak only that language—and often only one dialect of that language. (Most college-educated North Americans fit nicely in this category.) Secure people like this tend to live in places with productive natural ecologies or at least secure access to pockets of high productivity. Nettles showed that the average size of language groups in West Africa is inversely correlated with agricultural productivity: the richer and more productive the farmland, the smaller the language territory. This is one reason why a single pan-European Proto-Indo-European language during the Neolithic is so improbable.

But people who are moderately uncertain of their economic future, who live in less-productive territories and have to rely on multiple sources of income (like the Kachin in Burma or most middle-class families with two income earners), maintain numerous weak ties with a wider variety of people. They often learn two or more languages or dialects, because they need a wider network to feel secure. They pick up new linguistic habits very rapidly; they are innovators. In Jane Hill’s study of the Papago Indians in Arizona, she found that communities living in rich, productive environments adopted a “localist” strategy in both their language and social relations. They spoke just one homogeneous, small-territory Papago dialect. But communities living in more arid environments knew many different dialects, and combined them in a variety of nonstandard ways. They adopted a “distributed” strategy, one that distributed alliances of various kinds, linguistic and economic, across a varied social and ecological terrain. She proposed that arid, uncertain environments were natural “spread zones,” where new languages and dialects would spread quickly between communities that relied on diverse social ties and readily picked up new dialects from an assortment of people. The Eurasian steppes had earlier been described by the linguist Johanna Nichols as the prototypical linguistic spread zone; Hill explained why. Thus the association between language and ecological frontiers is not a case of language passively following culture; instead, there are independent socio-linguistic reasons why language frontiers tend to break along ecological frontiers.25





Summary: Ecotones and Persistent Ethnolinguistic Frontiers


Language frontiers did not universally coincide with ecological frontiers or natural geographic barriers, even in the tribal world, because migration and all the other forms of language expansion prevented that. But the heterogeneity of languages—the number of languages per 1,000 km2— certainly was affected by ecology. Where an ecological frontier separated a predictable and productive environment from one that was unpredictable and unproductive, societies could not be organized the same way on both sides. Localized languages and small language territories were found among settled farmers in ecologically productive territories. More variable languages, fuzzier dialect boundaries, and larger language territories appeared among mobile hunter-gatherers and pastoralists occupying territories where farming was difficult or impossible. In the Eurasian steppes the ecological frontier between the steppe (unproductive, unpredictable, occupied principally by hunters or herders) and the neighboring agricultural lands (extremely productive and reliable, occupied by rich farmers) was a linguistic frontier through recorded history. Its persistence was one of the guiding factors in the history of China at one end of the steppes and of eastern Europe at the other.26





SMALL-SCALE MIGRATIONS, ELITE RECRUITMENT, AND LANGUAGE SHIFT


Persistent ecological and migration-related frontiers surrounded the Proto-Indo-European homeland in the Pontic-Caspian steppes. But the spread of the Indo-European languages beyond that homeland probably did not happen principally through chain-type folk migrations. A folk movement is not required to establish a new language in a strange land. Language change flows in the direction of accents that are admired and emulated by large numbers of people. Ritual and political elites often introduce and popularize new ways of speaking. Small elite groups can encourage widespread language shift toward their language, even in tribal contexts, in places where they succeed at introducing a new religion or political ideology or both while taking control of key territories and trade commodities. An ethnohistorical study of such a case in Africa among the Acholi illustrates how the introduction of a new ideology and control over trade can result in language spread even where the initial migrants were few in number.27

The Acholi are an ethnolinguistic group in northern Uganda and southern Sudan. They speak Luo, a Western Nilotic language. In about 1675, when Luo-speaking chiefs first migrated into northern Uganda from the south, the overwhelming majority of people living in the area spoke Central Sudanic or Eastern Nilotic languages—Luo was very much a minority language. But the Luo chiefs imported symbols and regalia of royalty (drums, stools) that they had adopted from Bantu kingdoms to the south. They also imported a new ideology of chiefly religious power, accompanied by demands for tribute service. Between about 1675 and 1725 thirteen new chiefdoms were formed, none larger than five villages. In these islands of chiefly authority the Luo-speaking chiefs recruited clients from among the lineage elders of the egalitarian local populations, offering them positions of prestige in the new hierarchy. Their numbers grew through marriage alliances with the locals, displays of wealth and generosity, assistance for local families in difficulty, threats of violence, and, most important, control over the inter-regional trade in iron prestige objects used to pay bride-prices. The Luo language spread slowly through recruitment.28 Then an external stress, a severe drought beginning in 1790–1800, affected the region. One ecologically favored Lou chiefdom—an old one, founded by one of the first Luo charter groups—rose to paramount status as its wealth was maintained through the crisis. The Luo language then spread rapidly. When European traders arrived from Egypt in the 1850s they designated the local people by the name of this widely spoken language, which they called Shooli, which became Achooli. The paramount chiefs acquired so much wealth through trade with the Europeans that they quickly became an aristocracy. By 1872 the British recorded a single Luo-speaking tribe called the Acholi, an inter-regional ethnic identity that had not existed two hundred years earlier.

Indo-European languages probably spread in a similar way among the tribal societies of prehistoric Europe. Out-migrating Indo-European chiefs probably carried with them an ideology of political clientage like that of the Acholi chiefs, becoming patrons of their new clients among the local population; and they introduced a new ritual system in which they, in imitation of the gods, provided the animals for public sacrifices and feasts, and were in turn rewarded with the recitation of praise poetry—all solidly reconstructed for Proto-Indo-European culture, and all effective public recruiting activities. Later Proto-Indo-European migrations also introduced a new, mobile kind of pastoral economy made possible by the combination of ox-drawn wagons and horseback riding. Expansion beyond a few islands of authority might have waited until the new chiefdoms successfully responded to external stresses, climatic or political. Then the original chiefly core became the foundation for the development of a new regional ethnic identity. Renfrew has called this mode of language shift elite dominance but elite recruitment is probably a better term. The Normans conquered England and the Celtic Galatians conquered central Anatolia, but both failed to establish their languages among the local populations they dominated. Immigrant elite languages are adopted only where an elite status system is not only dominant but is also open to recruitment and alliance. For people to change to a new language, the shift must provide a key to integration within the new system, and those who join the system must see an opportunity to rise within it.29

A good example of how an open social system can encourage recruitment and language shift, cited long ago by Mallory, was described by Frederik Barth in eastern Afghanistan. Among the Pathans (today usually called Pashtun) on the Kandahar plateau, status depended on agricultural surpluses that came from circumscribed river-bottom fields. Pathan landowners competed for power in local councils (jirga) where no man admitted to being subservient and all appeals were phrased as requests among equals. The Baluch, a neighboring ethnic group, lived in the arid mountains and were, of necessity, pastoral herders. Although poor, the Baluch had an openly hierarchical political system, unlike the Pathan. The Pathan had more weapons than the Baluch, more people, more wealth, and generally more power and status. Yet, at the Baluch-Pathan frontier, many dispossessed Pathans crossed over to a new life as clients of Baluchi chiefs. Because Pathan status was tied to land ownership, Pathans who had lost their land in feuds were doomed to menial and peripheral lives. But Baluchi status was linked to herds, which could grow rapidly if the herder was lucky; and to political alliances, not to land. All Baluchi chiefs were the clients of more powerful chiefs, up to the office of sardar, the highest Baluchi authority, who himself owed allegiance to the khan of Kalat. Among the Baluch there was no shame in being the client of a powerful chief, and the possibilities for rapid economic and political improvement were great. So, in a situation of chronic low-level warfare at the Pathan-Baluch frontier, former agricultural refugees tended to flow toward the pastoral Baluch, and the Baluchi language thus gained new speakers. Chronic tribal warfare might generally favor pastoral over sedentary economies as herds can be defended by moving them, whereas agricultural fields are an immobile target.





Migration and the Indo-European Languages


Folk migrations by pioneer farmers brought the first herding-and-farming economies to the edge of the Pontic-Caspian steppes about 5800 BCE. In the forest-steppe ecological zone northwest of the Black Sea the incoming pioneer farmers established a cultural frontier between themselves and the native foragers. This frontier was robust, defined by bundles of cultural and economic differences, and it persisted for about twenty-five hundred years. If I am right about persistent frontiers and language, it was a linguistic frontier; if the other arguments in the preceding chapters are correct, the incoming pioneers spoke a non—Indo-European language, and the foragers spoke a Pre-Proto-Indo-European language. Selected aspects of the new farming economy (a little cattle herding, a little grain cultivation) were adopted by the foragers who lived on the frontier, but away from the frontier the local foragers kept hunting and fishing for many centuries. At the frontier both societies could reach back to very different sources of tradition in the lower Danube valley or in the steppes, providing a continuously renewed source of contrast and opposition.

Eventually, around 5200–5000 BCE, the new herding economy was adopted by a few key forager groups on the Dnieper River, and it then diffused very rapidly across most of the Pontic-Caspian steppes as far east as the Volga and Ural rivers. This was a revolutionary event that transformed not just the economy but also the rituals and politics of steppe societies. A new set of dialects and languages probably spread across the Pontic-Caspian steppes with the new economic and ritual-political system. These dialects were the ancestors of Proto-Indo-European.

With a clearer idea of how language and material culture are connected, and with specific models indicating how migrations work and how they might be connected with language shifts, we can now begin to examine the archaeology of Indo-European origins.





PART TWO





The Opening of the Eurasian Steppes





CHAPTER SEVEN





How to Reconstruct a Dead Culture


The archaeology of Indo-European origins usually is described in terms that seem arcane to most people, and that even archaeologists define differently. So I offer a short explanation of how I approach the archaeological evidence. To begin at the beginning, surprisingly enough, we must start out in Denmark.

In 1807 the kingdom of Denmark was unsure of its prospects for survival. Defeated by Britain, threatened by Sweden, and soon to be abandoned by Norway, it looked to its glorious past to reassure its citizens of their greatness. Plans for a National Museum of Antiquities, the first of its type in Europe, were developed and promoted. The Royal Cabinet of Antiquities quickly acquired vast collections of artifacts that had been plowed or dug from the ground under a newly expanded agricultural policy. Amateur collectors among the country gentry, and quarrymen or ditch diggers among the common folk, brought in glimmering hoards of bronze and boxes of flint tools and bones.

In 1816, with dusty specimens piling up in the back room of the Royal Library, the Royal Commission for the Preservation of Danish Antiquities selected Christian J. Thomsen, a twenty-seven-year-old without a university degree but known for his practicality and industry, to decide how to arrange this overwhelming trove of strange and unknown objects in some kind of order for its first display. After a year of cataloguing and thinking, Thomsen elected to put the artifacts in three great halls. One would be for the stone artifacts, which seemed to come from graves or sediments belonging to a Stone Age, lacking any metals at all; one for the bronze axes, trumpets, and spears of the Bronze Age, which seemed to come from sites that lacked iron; and the last for the iron tools and weapons, made during an Iron Age that continued into the era of the earliest written references to Scandinavian history. The exhibit opened in 1819 and was a triumphant success. It inspired an animated discussion among European intellectuals about whether these three ages truly existed in this chronological order, how old they were, and whether a science of archaeology, like the new science of historical linguistics, was possible. Jens Worsaae, originally an assistant to Thomsen, proved, through careful excavation, that the Three Ages indeed existed as distinct prehistoric eras, with some qualifications. But to do this he had to dig much more carefully than the ditch diggers, borrowing stratigraphic methods from geology. Thus professional field archaeology was born to solve a problem, not to acquire things.1

It was no longer possible, after Thomsen’s exhibit, for an educated person to regard the prehistoric past as a single undifferentiated era into which mammoth bones and iron swords could be thrown together. Forever after time was to be divided, a peculiarly satisfying task for mortals, who now had a way to triumph over their most implacable foe. Once chronology was discovered, tinkering with it quickly became addictive. Even today chronological arguments dominate archaeological discussions in Russia and Ukraine. Indeed, a chief problem preventing Western archaeologists from really understanding steppe archaeology is that Thomsen’s Three Ages are defined differently in the steppes than in western Europe. The Bronze Age seems like a simple concept, but if it began at different times in places very close to each other, it can be complicated to apply.

The Bronze Age can be said to begin when bronze tools and ornaments began to appear regularly in excavated graves and settlements. But what is bronze? It is an alloy, and the oldest bronze was an alloy of copper and arsenic. Arsenic, recognized by most of us simply as a poison, is in fact a naturally occurring whitish mineral typically in the form of arsenopyrite, which is frequently associated with copper ores in quartzitic copper deposits, and is probably how the alloy was discovered. In nature, arsenic rarely comprises more than about 1% of a copper ore, and usually much less than that. Ancient metalsmiths discovered that, if the arsenic content was boosted to about 2–8% of the mixture, the finished metal was lighter in color than pure copper, harder when cool, and, when molton, less viscous and easier to cast. A bronze alloy even lighter in color, harder, and more workable was copper and about 2–8% tin, but tin was rare in the ancient Old World, so tin-bronzes only appeared later, after tin deposits were discovered. The Bronze Age, therefore, marks that moment when metalsmiths regularly began to mix molten minerals to make alloys that were superior to naturally occurring copper. From that perspective, it immediately becomes clear that the Bronze Age would have started in different places at different times.





THE THREE AGES IN THE PONTIC-CASPIAN STEPPES


The oldest Bronze Age in Europe began about 3700–3500 BCE, when smiths started to make arsenical bronze in the North Caucasus Mountains, the natural frontier between the Near East and the Pontic-Caspian steppes. Arsenical bronzes, and the Bronze Age they signaled, appeared centuries later in the steppes and eastern Europe including the lower Danube valley, beginning about 3300–3200 BCE; and the beginning of the Bronze Age in central and western Europe was delayed a thousand years after that, starting only about 2400–2200 BCE. Yet, an archaeologist trained in western Europe may commonly ask why a Caucasian culture dated 3700 BCE is called a Bronze Age culture, when this would be the Stone Age (or Neolithic) in Britain or France. The answer is that bronze metallurgy appeared first in eastern Europe and then spread to the west, where it was adopted only after a surprisingly long delay. The Bronze Age began in the Pontic-Caspian steppes, the probable Indo-European homeland, much earlier than in Denmark.

The age preceding the Bronze Age in the steppes is called the Eneolithic; Christian Thomsen did not recognize that period in Denmark. The Eneolithic was a Copper Age, when metal tools and ornaments were used widely but were made of unalloyed copper. This was the first age of metal, and it lasted a long time in southeastern Europe, where European copper metallurgy was invented. The Eneolithic did not appear in northern or western Europe, which skipped directly from the Neolithic to the Bronze Age. Experts in southeastern Europe disagree on how to divide the Eneolithic internally; the chronological boundaries of the Early, Middle, and Late Eneolithic are set at different times by different archaeologists in different regions. I have tried to follow what I see as an emerging inter-regional consensus among Russian and Ukrainian archaeologists, and between them and the archaeologists of eastern Poland, Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, and the former Yugoslavia.2

Before the Eneolithic was the Neolithic, the later end of Thomsen’s Stone Age. Eventually the Stone Age was divided into the Old, Middle, and New Stone Ages, or the Paleolithic, Mesolithic, and Neolithic. In Soviet archaeology and in current Slavic or post-Soviet terminology the word Neolithic is applied to prehistoric societies that made pottery but had not yet discovered how to make metal. The invention of ceramics defined the beginning of the Neolithic. Pottery, of course, was an important discovery. Fire-resistant clay pots made it possible to cook stews and soups all day over a low fire, breaking down complex starches and proteins so that they were easier to digest for people with delicate stomachs—babies and elders. Soups that simmered in clay pots helped infants survive and kept old people alive longer. Pottery also is a convenient “type fossil” for archaeologists, easily recognized in archaeological sites. But Western archaeologists defined the Neolithic differently. In Western archaeology, societies can only be called Neolithic if they had economies based on food production—herding or farming or both. Hunters and gatherers who had pottery are called Mesolithic. It is oddly ironic that capitalist archaeologists made the mode of production central to their definition of the Neolithic, and Marxist archaeologists ignored it. I’m not sure what this might say about archaeologists and their politics, but here I must use the Eastern European definition of the Neolithic—which includes both foragers and early farmers who made pottery but used no metal tools or ornaments—because this is what Neolithic means in Russian and Ukrainian archaeology.





DATING AND THE RADIOCARBON REVOLUTION


Radiocarbon dating created a revolution in prehistoric archaeology. From Christian Thomsen’s museum exhibit until the mid-twentieth century archaeologists had no clear idea how old their artifacts were, even if they knew how to place them in a sequence of types. The only way even to guess their age was to attempt to relate dagger or ornament styles in Europe to similar styles of known age in the Near East, where inscriptions provided dates going back to 3000 BCE. These long-distance stylistic comparisons, risky at best, were useless for dating artifacts older than the earliest Near Eastern inscriptions. Then, in 1949, Willard Libby demonstrated that the absolute age (literally the number of years since death) of any organic material (wood, bone, straw, shell, skin, hair, etc.) could be determined by counting its 14C content, and thus radiocarbon dating was born. A radiocarbon date reveals when the dated sample died. Of course, the sample had to have been alive at some point, which disqualified Libby’s discovery for dating rocks or minerals, but archaeologists often found charred wood from ancient fireplaces or discarded animal bones in places where humans had lived. Libby was awarded a Nobel Prize, and Europe acquired its own prehistory independent of the civilizations of the Near East. Some important events such as the invention of copper metallurgy were shown to have happened so early in Europe that influence from the Near East was almost ruled out.3

Chronological schemes based on radiocarbon dates have struggled through several significant changes in methods since 1949 (see the appendix in this volume). The most significant changes were the introduction of a new method (Accelerator Mass Spectrometry, or AMS) for counting how much 14C remained in a sample, which made all dates much more accurate; and the realization that all radiocarbon dates, regardless of counting method, had to be corrected using calibration tables, which revealed large errors in old, uncalibrated dates. These periodic changes in methods and results slowed the scientific reception of radiocarbon dates in the former Soviet Union. Many Soviet archaeologists resisted radiocarbon dating, partly because it sometimes contradicted their theories and chronologies; partly because the first radiocarbon dates were later proved wrong by changes in methods, making it possible that all radiocarbon dates might soon be proved wrong by a newer refinement; and partly because the dates themselves, even when corrected and calibrated, sometimes made no sense—the rate of error in radiocarbon dating in Soviet times seemed high.

A new problem affecting radiocarbon dates in the steppes is that old carbon in solution in river water is absorbed by fish and then enters the bones of people who eat a lot of fish. Many steppe archaeological sites are cemeteries, and many radiocarbon dates in steppe archaeology are from human bones. Analysis of 15N isotopes in human bone can tell us how much fish a person ate. Measurements of 15N in skeletons from early steppe cemeteries show that fish was very important in the diet of most steppe societies, including cattle herders, often accounting for about 50% of the food consumed. Radiocarbon dates measured on the bones of these humans might come out too old, contaminated by old carbon in the fish they ate. This is a newly realized problem, one still without a solution widely agreed on. The errors should be in the range of 100–500 radiocarbon years too old, meaning that the person actually died 100–500 years after the date given by the count of 14C. I note in the text places where old carbon contamination might be a problem making the dates measured on human bones too old, and, in the appendix, I explain my own interim approach to fixing the problem.4

Attitudes toward radiocarbon dating in the CIS have changed since 1991. The major universities and institutes have thrown themselves into new radiocarbon dating programs. The field collection of samples for dating has become more careful and more widespread, laboratories continuously improve their methods, and the error rate has fallen. It is difficult now to keep up with the flow of new radiocarbon dates. They have overthrown many old ideas and chronologies, including my own. Some of the chronological relationships outlined in my 1985 Ph.D. dissertation have now been proved wrong, and entire cultures I barely knew about in 1985 have become central to any understanding of steppe archaeology.5

But to understand people we need to know more than just when they lived; we also need to know something about their economy and culture. And in the specific case of the people of the Pontic-Caspian region, some of the most important questions are about how they lived—whether they were wandering nomads or lived in one place all year, whether they had chiefs or lived in egalitarian groups without formal full-time leaders, and how they went about getting their daily bread, if indeed they ate bread at all. But to talk about these matters I first need to introduce some additional methods archaeologists use.





WHAT DID THEY EAT?


One of the most salient signals of cultural identity is food. Long after immigrants give up their native clothing styles and languages, they retain and even celebrate their traditional food. How the members of a society get food is, of course, a central organizing fact of life for all humans. The supermarkets we use so casually today are microcosms of modern Western life: they would not exist without a highly specialized, capital-financed, market-based economic structure; a consumer-oriented culture of profligate consumption (Do we really need fifteen kinds of mushrooms?); interstate highways; suburbs; private automobiles; and dispersed nuclear families lacking a grandma at home who could wash, chop, process, and prepare meat and produce. Long ago, before all these modern conveniences appeared, getting food determined how people spent much of their day, every day: what time they woke in the morning, where they went to work, what skills and knowledge they needed there, whether they could live in independent family homes or needed the much larger communal labor resources of a village, how long they were away from home, what kind of ecological resources they needed, what cooking and food-preparation skills they had to know, and even what foods they offered to the gods. In a world dominated by the rhythms and values of raising crops and caring for animals, clans with productive fields or large herds of cattle were the envy of everyone. Wealth and the political power it conveyed were equated with cultivated land and pasture.

To understand ancient agricultural and herding economies, archaeologists have to collect the animal bones from ancient garbage dumps with the same care they devote to broken pottery, and they must also make special efforts to recover carbonized plant remains. Luckily ancient people often buried their food trash in dumps or pits, restricting it to one place where archaeologists can find it more easily. Although cow bones and charred seeds cannot easily be displayed in the national museum, archaeology is not about collecting pretty things but about solving problems, so in the following pages much attention is devoted to animal bones and charred seeds.

Archaeologists count animal bones in two principal ways. Many bones in garbage dumps had been broken into such small pieces for cooking that they cannot be assigned to a specific animal species. Those that are big enough or distinctive enough to assign to a definite species constitute the NISP, or the “number of identified specimens,” where identified means assignable to a species. Thus, the NISP count, which describes the number of bones found for each species, is the first way to count bones: three hundred cattle, one hundred sheep, five horse. The second counting method is to calculate the MNI, or the “minimum number of individuals” those bones represent. If the five horse bones were each from a different animal, they would represent five horses, whereas the hundred sheep bones might all be from a single skeleton. The MNI is used to convert bones into minimum meat weights—how much beef, for example, would be represented, minimally, by a certain number of cattle bones. Meat weight, comprised of fat and muscle, in most adult mammals averages about half the live body weight, so by identifying the minimum number, age, and species of animals butchered at the site, the minimum meat weight, with some qualifications, can be estimated.

Seeds, like wheat and barley, were often parched by charring them lightly over a fire to help preserve them for storage. Although many charred seeds are accidentally lost in this process, without charring they would soon rot into dust. The seeds preserved in archaeological sites have been charred just enough to carbonize the seed hull. Seeds tell us which plant foods were eaten, and can reveal the nature of the area’s gardens, fields, forests, groves, and vineyards. The recovery of charred seeds from excavated sediments requires a flotation tank and a pump to force water through the tank. Excavated dirt is dumped into the tank and the moving water helps the seeds to float to the surface. They are then collected in screens as the water flows out the top of the tank through an exit spout. In the laboratory the species of plants are identified and counted, and domesticated varieties of wheat, barley, millet, and oats are distinguished from wild plant seeds. Flotation was rarely used in Western archaeology before the late 1970s and was almost never used in Soviet archaeology. Soviet paleobotanical experts relied on chance finds of seeds charred in burned pots or on seed impressions preserved in the damp clay of a pot before it had been fired. These lucky finds occur rarely. A true understanding of the importance of plant foods in the steppes will come only after flotation methods are widely used in excavations.





ARCHAEOLOGICAL CULTURES AND LIVING CULTURES


The story that follows is populated rarely by individuals and more often by cultures, which, although created and reproduced by people, act quite differently than people do. Because “living cultures” contain so many subgroups and variants, anthropologists have difficulty describing them in the abstract, leading many anthropologists to discard the concept of a “unitary culture” entirely. However, when cultural identities are contrasted with other bordering cultures, they are much easier to describe.

Frederik Barth’s investigations of border identities in Afghanistan suggested that the reproduction and perhaps even the invention of cultural identities often was generated by the continuous confrontation with Others inherent in border situations. Today many anthropologists find this a productive way to understand cultural identities, that is, as responses to particular historical situations rather than as long-term phenomena, as noted in the previous chapter. But cultural identities also carry emotional and historical weight in the hearts of those who believe in them, and the source of this shared emotional attachment is more complicated. It must be derived from a shared set of customs and historical experiences, a font of tradition that, even if largely imagined or invented, provides the fuel that feeds border confrontations. If that font of tradition is given a geographic location or a homeland it is often away from the border, dispersed, for example, across shrines, burial grounds, coronation sites, battlefields, and landscape features like mountains and forests, all thought to be imbued with culture-specific spiritual forces.6

Archaeological cultures are defined on the basis of potsherds, grave types, architecture, and other material remains, so the relationship between archaeological cultures and living cultures might seem tenuous. When Christian Thomsen and Jens Worsaae first began to divide artifacts into types, they were trying to arrange them in a chronological sequence; they soon realized, however, that a lot of regional variation also cut across the chronological types. Archaeological cultures are meant to capture and define that regional variation. An archaeological culture is a recurring set of artifact types that co-occur in a particular region during a set time period.

In practice, pottery types are often used as the key identifiers of archaeological cultures, as they are easy to find and recognize even in small excavations, whereas the recognition of distinct house types, for example, requires much larger exposures. But archaeological cultures should never be defined on the basis of pottery alone. What makes an archaeological culture interesting, and meaningful, is the co-occurrence of many similar customs, crafts, and dwelling styles across a region, including, in addition to ceramics, grave types, house types, settlement types (the arrangement of houses in the typical settlement), tool types, and ritual symbols (figurines, shrines, and deities.) Archaeologists worry about individual types changing through time and shifting their areas of distribution, and we should worry about these things, but we should not let problems with defining individual tree species and ranges convince us that the forest is not there. Archaeological cultures (like forests) are particularly recognizable and definable at their borders, whereas regional variation in the back country, away from the borders, might often present a more confusing picture. It is at robust borders, defined by bundles of material-culture contrasts, where archaeological cultures and living cultures or societies might actually correspond. As I argued in the previous chapter, robust borders that persist for centuries probably were not just archaeological or cultural but also linguistic.

Within archaeological cultures a few traits, archaeologists have learned, are particularly important as keys to cultural identity. Most Western archaeologists accept that technological style, or the way an object is made, is a more fundamental indicator of craft tradition than the way it is decorated, its decorative style. The technology of production is more culture-bound and resistant to change, rather like the core vocabulary in linguistics. So clay tempering materials and firing methods usually are better indicators of a potter’s cultural origin than the decorative styles the potter produced, and the same probably was true for metallurgy, weaving, and other crafts.7

One important alternative to archaeological cultures is the archaeological horizon. A horizon, more like a popular fashion than a culture, can be defined by a single artifact type or cluster of artifact types that spreads suddenly over a very wide geographic area. In the modern world the blue jeans and T-shirt complex is a horizon style, superimposed on diverse populations and cultures around the planet but still representing an important diffusion of cultural influence, particularly youth culture, from an area of origin in the United States. It is important, as it tells us something about the place the United States occupied in world youth culture at the moment of initial diffusion (the 1960s and 1970s), but it is not a migration or cultural replacement. Similarly the Beaker horizon in Late Neolithic Europe is defined primarily by a widespread style of decorated drinking cups (beakers) and in many places by a few weapon types (copper daggers, polished stone wrist-guards) that diffused with a new fashion in social drinking. In most places these styles were superimposed on preexisting archaeological cultures. A horizon is different from an archaeological culture because it is less robust—it is defined on the basis of just a few traits—and is often superimposed on local archaeological cultures. Horizons were highly significant in the prehistoric Eurasian steppes.





THE BIG QUESTIONS AHEAD


We will proceed on the assumption that Proto-Indo-European probably was spoken in the steppes north of the Black and Caspian Seas, the Pontic-Caspian steppes, broadly between 4500 and 2500 BCE. But we have to start somewhat earlier to understand the evolution of Indo-European—speaking societies. The speakers of Proto-Indo-European were a cattle-keeping people. Where did the cattle come from? Both cattle and sheep were introduced from outside, probably from the Danube valley (although we also have to consider the possibility of a diffusion route through the Caucasus Mountains). The Neolithic pioneers who imported domesticated cattle and sheep into the Danube valley probably spoke non—Indo-European languages ultimately derived from western Anatolia. Their arrival in the eastern Carpathians, northwest of the Black Sea, around 5800 BCE, created a cultural frontier between the native foragers and the immigrant farmers that persisted for more than two thousand years.

The arrival of the first pioneer farmers and the creation of this cultural frontier is described in chapter 8. A recurring theme will be the development of the relationship between the farming cultures of the Danube valley and the steppe cultures north of the Black Sea. Marija Gimbutas called the Danubian farming cultures “Old Europe.” The agricultural towns of Old Europe were the most technologically advanced and aesthetically sophisticated in all of Europe between about 6000 and 4000 BCE.

Chapter 9 describes the diffusion of the earliest cattle-and-sheep-herding economy across the Pontic-Caspian steppes after about 5200–5000 BCE. This event laid the foundation for the kinds of power politics and rituals that defined early Proto-Indo-European culture. Cattle herding was not just a new way to get food; it also supported a new division of society between high-status and ordinary people, a social hierarchy that had not existed when daily sustenance was based on fishing and hunting. Cattle and the cleavage of society into distinct statuses appeared together. Right away, cattle, sheep—and horses—were offered together in sacrifices at the funerals of a select group of people, who also carried unusual weapons and ornamented their bodies in unique and ostentatious ways. They were the new leaders of a new kind of steppe society.

Chapter 10 describes the discovery of horseback riding—a subject of intense controversy—by these archaic steppe herding societies, probably before 4200 BCE. The intrusion into Old Europe of steppe herders, probably mounted on horses, who either caused or took advantage of the collapse of Old Europe, is the topic of chapter 11. Their spread into the lower Danube valley about 4200–4000 BCE likely represented the initial expansion of archaic Proto-Indo-European speakers into southeastern Europe, speaking dialects that were ancestral to the later Anatolian languages.

Chapter 12 considers the influence of the earliest Mesopotamian urban civilizations on steppe societies—and vice versa—at a very early age, about 3700–3100 BCE. The chiefs who lived in the North Caucasus Mountains overlooking the steppes grew incredibly rich from long-distance trade with the southern civilizations. The earliest wheeled vehicles, the first wagons, probably rolled into the steppes through these mountains.

The societies that probably spoke classic Proto-Indo-European—the herders of the Yamnaya horizon—are introduced in chapter 13. They were the first people in the Eurasian steppes to create a herding economy that required regular seasonal movements to new pastures throughout the year. Wagons pulled by cattle allowed them to carry tents, water, and food into the deep steppes, far from the river valleys, and horseback riding enabled them to scout rapidly and over long distances and to herd on a large scale, necessities in such an economy. Herds were spread out across the enormous grasslands between the river valleys, making those grasslands useful, which led to larger herds and the accumulation of greater wealth.

Chapters 14 through 16 describe the initial expansions of societies speaking Proto-Indo-European dialects, to the east, the west, and finally to the south, to Iran and the Indian subcontinent. I do not attempt to follow what happened after the initial migrations of these groups; my effort is just to understand the development and the first dispersal of speakers of Proto-Indo-European and, along the way, to investigate the influence of technological innovations in transportation—horseback riding, wheeled vehicles, and chariots—in the opening of the Eurasian steppes.





