CHAPTER EIGHT





First Farmers and Herders The Pontic-Caspian Neolithic


At the beginning of time there were two brothers, twins, one named Man (*Manu, in Proto-Indo-European) and the other Twin (*Yemo). They traveled through the cosmos accompanied by a great cow. Eventually Man and Twin decided to create the world we now inhabit. To do this, Man had to sacrifice Twin (or, in some versions, the cow). From the parts of this sacrificed body, with the help of the sky gods (Sky Father, Storm God of War, Divine Twins), Man made the wind, the sun, the moon, the sea, earth, fire, and finally all the various kinds of people. Man became the first priest, the creator of the ritual of sacrifice that was the root of world order.

After the world was made, the sky-gods gave cattle to “Third man” (*Trito). But the cattle were treacherously stolen by a three-headed, six-eyed serpent (*Ngwhi, the Proto-Indo-European root for negation). Third man entreated the storm god to help get the cattle back. Together they went to the cave (or mountain) of the monster, killed it (or the storm god killed it alone), and freed the cattle. *Trito became the first warrior. He recovered the wealth of the people, and his gift of cattle to the priests insured that the sky gods received their share in the rising smoke of sacrificial fires. This insured that the cycle of giving between gods and humans continued.1

These two myths were fundamental to the Proto-Indo-European system of religious belief. *Manu and *Yemo are reflected in creation myths preserved in many Indo-European branches, where *Yemo appears as Indic Yama, Avestan Yima, Norse Ymir, and perhaps Roman Remus (from *iemus, the archaic Italic form of *yemo, meaning “twin”); and Man appears as Old Indic Manu or Germanic Mannus, paired with his twin to create the world. The deeds of *Trito have been analyzed at length by Bruce Lincoln, who found the same basic story of the hero who recovered primordial lost cattle from a three-headed monster in Indic, Iranian, Hittite, Norse, Roman and Greek myths. The myth of Man and Twin established the importance of the sacrifice and the priest who regulated it. The myth of the “Third one” defined the role of the warrior, who obtained animals for the people and the gods. Many other themes are also reflected in these two stories: the Indo-European fascination with binary doublings combined with triplets, two’s and three’s, which reappeared again and again, even in the metric structure of Indo-European poetry; the theme of pairs who represented magical and legal power (Twin and Man, Varuna-Mitra, Odin-Tyr); and the partition of society and the cosmos between three great functions or roles: the priest (in both his magical and legal aspects), the warrior (the Third Man), and the herder/cultivator (the cow or cattle).2

For the speakers of Proto-Indo-European, domesticated cattle were basic symbols of the generosity of the gods and the productivity of the earth. Humans were created from a piece of the primordial cow. The ritual duties that defined “proper” behavior revolved around the value, both moral and economic, of cattle. Proto-Indo-European mythology was, at its core, the worldview of a male-centered, cattle-raising people—not necessarily cattle nomads but certainly people who held sons and cattle in the highest esteem. Why were cattle (and sons) so important?





DOMESTICATED ANIMALS AND PONTIC-CASPIAN ECOLOGY


Until about 5200–5000 BCE most of the people who lived in the steppes north of the Black and Caspian Seas possessed no domesticated animals at all. They depended instead on gathering nuts and wild plants, fishing, and hunting wild animals; in other words, they were foragers. But the environment they were able to exploit profitably was only a small fraction of the total steppe environment. The archaeological remains of their camps are found almost entirely in river valleys. Riverine gallery forests provided shelter, shade, firewood, building materials, deer, aurochs (European wild cattle), and wild boar. Fish supplied an important part of the diet. Wider river valleys like the Dnieper or Don had substantial gallery forests, kilometers wide; smaller rivers had only scattered groves. The wide grassy plateaus between the river valleys, the great majority of the steppe environment, were forbidding places occupied only by wild equids and saiga antelope. The foragers were able to hunt the wild equids, including horses. The wild horses of the steppes were stout-legged, barrel-chested, stiff-maned animals that probably looked very much like modern Przewalski horses, the only truly wild horses left in the world.3 The most efficient hunting method would have been to ambush horse bands in a ravine, and the easiest opportunity would have been when they came into the river valleys to drink or to find shelter. In the steppe regions, where wild horses were most numerous, wild equid hunting was common. Often it supplied most of the foragers’ terrestrial meat diet.

The Pontic-Caspian steppes are at the western end of a continuous steppe belt which rolls east all the way to Mongolia. It is possible, if one is so inclined, to walk, 5,000 km from the Danube delta across the center of the Eurasian continent to Mongolia without ever leaving the steppes. But a person on foot in the Eurasian steppes feels very small. Every footfall raises the scent of crushed sage, and a puff of tiny white grasshoppers skips ahead of your boot. Although the flowers that grow among the fescue and feathergrass (Festuca and Stipa) make a wonderful boiled tea, the grass is inedible, and outside the forested river valleys there is not much else to eat. The summer temperature frequently rises to 110‐120°F (43‐49°C), although it is a dry heat and usually there is a breeze, so it is surprisingly tolerable. Winter, however, kills quickly. The howling, snowy winds drive temperatures below −35°F (−37°C). The bitter cold of steppe winters (think North Dakota) is the most serious limiting factor for humans and animals, more restricting even than water, since there are shallow lakes in most parts of the Eurasian steppes.

The dominant mammal of the interior steppes at the time our account begins was the wild horse, Equus caballus. In the moister, lusher western steppes of Ukraine, north of the Black Sea (the North Pontic steppes), there was another, smaller equid that ranged into the lower Danube valley and down to central Anatolia, Equus hydruntinus, the last one hunted to extinction between 4000 and 3000 BCE. In the drier, more arid steppes of the Caspian Depression was a third ass-like, long-eared equid, the onager, Equus hemionus, now endangered in the wild. Onagers then lived in Mesopotamia, Anatolia, Iran, and in the Caspian Depression. Pontic-Caspian foragers hunted all three.

The Caspian Depression was itself a sign of another important aspect of the Pontic-Caspian environment: its instability. The Black and Caspian Seas were not placid and unchanging. Between about 14,000 and 12,000 BCE the warming climate that ended the last Ice Age melted the northern glaciers and the permafrost, releasing their combined meltwater in a torrential surge that flowed south into the Caspian basin. The late Ice-Age Caspian ballooned into a vast interior sea designated the Khvalynian Sea. For two thousand years the northern shoreline stood near Saratov on the middle Volga and Orenburg on the Ural River, restricting east-west movement south of the Ural Mountains. The Khvalynian Sea separated the already noticeably different late-glacial forager cultures that prospered east and west of the Ural Mountains.4 Around 11,000–9,000 BCE the water finally rose high enough to overflow catastrophically through a southwestern outlet, the Manych Depression north of the North Caucasus Mountains, and a violent flood poured into the Black Sea, which was then well below the world ocean level. The Black Sea basin filled up until it overflowed, also through a southwestern outlet, the narrow Bosporus valley, and finally poured into the Aegean. By 8000 BCE the Black Sea, now about the size of California and seven thousand feet deep, was in equilibrium with the Aegean and the world ocean. The Caspian had fallen back into its own basin and remained isolated thereafter. The Black Sea became the Pontus Euxeinos of the Greeks, from which we derive the term Pontic for the Black Sea region in general. The North Caspian Depression, once the bottom of the northern end of the Khvalynian Sea, was left an enormous flat plain of salty clays, incongruous beds of sea shells, and sands, dotted with brackish lakes and covered with dry steppes that graded into red sand deserts (the Ryn Peski) just north of the Caspian Sea. Herds of saiga antelopes, onagers, and horses were hunted across these saline plains by small bands of post-glacial Mesolithic and Neolithic hunters. But, by the time the sea receded, they had become very different culturally and probably linguistically on the eastern and western sides of the Ural-Caspian frontier. When domesticated cattle were accepted by societies west of the Urals, they were rejected by those east of the Urals, who remained foragers for thousands of years.5

Domesticated cattle and sheep started a revolutionary change in how humans exploited the Pontic-Caspian steppe environment. Because cattle and sheep were cultured, like humans, they were part of everyday work and worry in a way never approached by wild animals. Humans identified with their cattle and sheep, wrote poetry about them, and used them as a currency in marriage gifts, debt payments, and the calculation of social status. And they were grass processors. They converted plains of grass, useless and even hostile to humans, into wool, felt, clothing, tents, milk, yogurt, cheese, meat, marrow, and bone—the foundation of both life and wealth. Cattle and sheep herds can grow rapidly with a little luck. Vulnerable to bad weather and theft, they can also decline rapidly. Herding was a volatile, boom-bust economy, and required a flexible, opportunistic social organization.

Because cattle and sheep are easily stolen, unlike grain crops, cattle-raising people tend to have problems with thieves, leading to conflict and warfare. Under these circumstances brothers tend to stay close together. In Africa, among Bantu-speaking tribes, the spread of cattle raising seems to have led to the loss of matrilineal social organizations and the spread of male-centered patrilineal kinship systems.6 Stockbreeding also created entirely new kinds of political power and prestige by making possible elaborate public sacrifices and gifts of animals. The connection between animals, brothers, and power was the foundation on which new forms of male-centered ritual and politics developed among Indo-European-speaking societies. That is why the cow (and brothers) occupied such a central place in Indo-European myths relating to how the world began.

So where did the cattle come from? When did the people living in the Pontic-Caspian steppes begin to keep and care for herds of dappled cows?





THE FIRST FARMER-FORAGER FRONTIER IN THE PONTIC-CASPIAN REGION


The first cattle herders in the Pontic-Caspian region arrived about 5800–5700 BCE from the Danube valley, and they probably spoke languages unrelated to Proto-Indo-European. They were the leading edge of a broad movement of farming people that began around 6200 BCE when pioneers from Greece and Macedonia plunged north into the temperate forests of the Balkans and the Carpathian Basin (figure 8.1). Domesticated sheep and cattle had been imported from Anatolia to Greece by their ancestors centuries before, and now were herded northward into forested southeastern Europe. Genetic research has shown that the cattle did interbreed with the native European aurochs, the huge wild cattle of Europe, but only the male calves (traced on the Y chromosome) of aurochs were kept, perhaps because they could improve the herd’s size or resistance to disease without affecting milk yields. The cows, probably already kept for their milk, all were descended from mothers that had come from Anatolia (traced through MtDNA). Wild aurochs cows probably were relatively poor milk producers and might have been temperamentally difficult to milk, so Neolithic European farmers made sure that all their cows were born of long-domesticated mothers, but they did not mind a little crossbreeding with native wild bulls to obtain larger domestic bulls.7

Comparative studies of chain migration among recent and historical pioneer farmers suggest that, in the beginning, the farming-and-herding groups that first moved into temperate southeastern Europe probably spoke similar dialects and recognized one another as cultural cousins. The thin native population of foragers was certainly seen as culturally and linguistically Other, regardless of how the two cultures interacted.8 After an initial rapid burst of exploration (sites at Anzabegovo, Karanovo I, Gura Baciului, Cirçea) pioneer groups became established in the Middle Danube plains north of Belgrade, where the type site of Starčevo and other similar Neolithic settlements are located. This central Danubian lowland produced two streams of migrants that leapfrogged in one direction down the Danube, into Romania and Bulgaria, and in the other up the Mureş and Körös Rivers into Transylvania. Both migration streams created similar pottery and tool types, assigned today to the Criş culture (figure 8.2).9



Figure 8.1 The migrations of pioneer farmers into Greece and across Europe between 6500 and 5500 BCE, including the colonization of the eastern Carpathian piedmont by the Criş, culture.





First Farmers in the Pontic Region: The Criş Culture


The names Criş in Romania and Körös in eastern Hungary are two variants of the same river name and the same prehistoric culture. The northern Criş people moved up the Hungarian rivers into the mountains of Transylvania and then pushed over the top of the Carpathian ridges into an ecologically rich and productive piedmont region east of the Carpathians. They herded their cattle and sheep down the eastern slopes into the upper valleys of the Seret and Prut rivers about 5800–5700 BCE. (Cris radiocarbon dates are unaffected by reservoir effects because they were not measured on human bone; see table 8.1.) The other migration stream in the lower Danube valley moved into the same eastern Carpathian piedmont from the south. These two groups created a northern and a southern variant of the East Carpathian Cris culture, which survived from about 5800 to about 5300 BCE. Cris farms in the East Carpathian piedmont were the source of the first domesticated cattle in the North Pontic region. The Criş pioneers moved eastward through the forest-steppe zone in the piedmont northwest of the Black Sea, where rainfall agriculture was possible, avoiding the lowland steppes on the coast and the lower courses of the rivers that ran through them into the sea.



Figure 8.2 Criş.-culture ceramic shapes and decorative motifs (top half), flint blades and cores (left), antler and bone tools (right), and ceramic rings (bottom) dated 5700–5300 BCE. After Dergachev 1999; and Ursulescu 1984.

TABLE 8.1 Radiocarbon Dates for the Late Mesolithic and Early Neolithic of the Pontic- Caspian Region.





Archaeologists have identified at least thirty Criş settlement sites in the East Carpathian piedmont, a region of forests interspersed with natural meadows cut by deep, twisting river valleys (figure 8.3). Most Criş farming hamlets were built on the second terraces of rivers, overlooking the floodplain; some were located on steep-sided promontories above the floodplain (Suceava); and a few farms were located on the high forested ridges between the rivers (Sakarovka I). Houses were one room, built with timber posts and beams, plaster-on-wattle walls, and probably reed-thatched roofs. Larger homes, sometimes oval in outline, were built over dug-out floors and contained a kitchen with a domed clay oven; lighter, smaller structures were built on the surface with an open fire in the center. Most villages consisted of just a few families living in perhaps three to ten smoky thatched pit-dwellings, surrounded by agricultural fields, gardens, plum orchards, and pastures for the animals. No Criş cemeteries are known. We do not know what they did with their dead. We do know, however, that they still prized and wore white shell bracelets made from imported Spondylus, an Aegean species that was first made into bracelets by the original pioneers in Early Neolithic Greece.10

Criş families cultivated barley, millet, peas, and four varieties of wheat (emmer, einkorn, spelt, and bread wheats). Wheat and peas were not native to southeastern Europe; they were exotics, domesticated in the Near East, carried into Greece by sea-borne immigrant farmers, and propagated through Europe from Greece. Residues inside pots suggest that grains were often eaten in the form of a soup thickened with flour. Charred fragments of Neolithic bread from Germany and Switzerland suggest that wheat flour was also made into a batter that was fried or baked, or the grains were moistened and pressed into small whole-grain baked loaves. Criş harvesting sickles used a curved red deer antler inset with flint blades 5–10 cm long, angled so that their corners formed teeth. Their working corners show “sickle gloss” from cutting grain. The same type of sickle and flint blade is found in all the Early Neolithic farming settlements of the Danube-Balkans-Carpathians. Most of the meat in the East Carpathian Criş diet was from cattle and pigs, with red deer a close third, followed by sheep—a distribution of species reflecting their largely forested environment. Their small-breed cows and pigs were slightly different from the local wild aurochs or wild boar but not markedly so. The sheep, however, were exotic newcomers, an invasive species like wheat and peas, brought into the steep Carpathian valleys by strange people whose voices made a new kind of sound.11



Figure 8.3 Mesolithic and Neolithic sites from the Carpathian Mountains to the Ural River.

Criş ceramic vessels were hand-made by the coiling method, and included plain pots for cooking and storage, and a variety of fine wares with polished reddish-brown surfaces—tureens, bowls, and cups on pedestals (figure 8.2). Decorative designs were incised with a stick on the clay surface before firing or were impressed with a fingernail. Very rarely they were painted in broad brown stripes. The shapes and designs made by Criş settlers in the East Carpathians were characteristic of periods III and IV of the Criş culture; older sites of stages I and II are found only in eastern Hungary, the Danube valley, and Transylvania.

Criş farmers never penetrated east of the Prut-Dniester watershed. In the Dniester valley they came face-to-face with a dense population of local foragers, known today as the Bug-Dniester culture, named after the two river valleys (Dniester and South Bug) where most of their sites are found. The Bug-Dniester culture was the filter through which farming and stockbreeding economies were introduced to Pontic-Caspian societies farther east (figure 8.3).

The Criş people were different from their Bug-Dniester neighbors in many ways: Criş flint tool kits featured large blades and few scrapers, whereas the foragers used microlithic blades and many scrapers; most Criş villages were on the better-drained soils of the second terrace, convenient for farming, and most foragers lived on the floodplain, convenient for fishing; whereas Criş woodworkers used polished stone axes, the foragers used chipped flint axes; Criş pottery was distinct both in the way it was made and its style of decoration; and Criş farmers raised and ate various exotic foods, including mutton, which has a distinctive taste. Four forged cylindrical copper beads were found at the Criş site of Selishte, dated 5800–5600 BCE (6830 ± 100 BP).12 They show an early awareness of the metallic minerals in the mountains of Transylvania (copper, silver, gold) and the Balkans (copper), something the foragers of southeastern Europe had never noticed.

Some archaeologists have speculated that the East Carpathian Criş culture could have been an acculturated population of local foragers who had adopted a farming economy, rather than immigrant pioneers.13 This is unlikely given the numerous similarities between the material culture and economy of Criş sites in the Danube valley and the East Carpathians, and the sharp differences between the East Carpathian Criş culture and the

local foragers. But it really is of no consequence—no one seriously believes that the East Carpathian Criş people were genetically “pure” anyway. The important point is that the people who lived in Criş villages in the East Carpathians were culturally Criş in almost all the material signs of their identity, and given how they got there, almost certainly in nonmaterial signs like language as well. The Criş culture came, without any doubt, from the Danube valley.





The Language of the Criş Culture


If the Starcevo—Criş—Karanovo migrants were at all similar to pioneer farmers in North America, Brazil, southeast Asia, and other parts of the world, it is very likely that they retained the language spoken in their parent villages in northern Greece. Forager languages were more apt to decline in the face of agricultural immigration. Farmers had a higher birth rate; their settlements were larger, and were occupied permanently. They produced food surpluses that were easier to store over the winter. Owning and feeding “cultured” animals has always been seen as an utterly different ethos from hunting wild ones, as Ian Hodder emphasized. The material and ritual culture and economy of the immigrant farmers were imposed on the landscapes of Greece and southeastern Europe and persisted there, whereas the external signs of forager identity disappeared. The language of the foragers might have had substrate effects on that of the farmers, but it is difficult to imagine a plausible scenario under which it could have competed with the farmers’ language.14

What languages were spoken by Starčevo, Criş, and Karanovo I pioneers? The parent language for all of them was spoken in the Thessalian plain of Greece, where the first Neolithic settlements were founded about 6700–6500 BCE probably by seafarers who island-hopped from western Anatolia in open boats. Katherine Perlés has convincingly demonstrated that the material culture and economy of the first farmers in Greece was transplanted from the Near East or Anatolia. An origin somewhere in western Anatolia is suggested by similarities in pottery, flint tools, ornaments, female figurines, pintadera stamps, lip labrets, and other traits. The migrants leapfrogged to the Thessalian plain, the richest agricultural land in Greece, almost certainly on the basis of information from scouts (probably Aegean fishermen) who told their relatives in Anatolia about the destination. The population of farmers in Thessaly grew rapidly. At least 120 Early Neolithic settlements stood on the Thessalian plain by 6200–6000 BCE, when pioneers began to move north into the temperate forests of southeastern Europe. The Neolithic villages of Thessaly provided the original breeds of domesticated sheep, cattle, wheat, and barley, as well as red-on-white pottery, female-centered domestic rituals, bracelets and beads made of Aegean Spondylus shell, flint tool types, and other traditions that were carried into the Balkans. The language of Neolithic Thessaly probably was a dialect of a language spoken in western Anatolia about 6500 BCE. Simplification and leveling should have occurred among the first colonist dialects in Thessaly, so the 120 villages occupied five hundred years later spoke a language that had passed through a bottleneck and probably was just beginning to separate again into strongly differentiated dialects.15

The tongue spoken by the first Criş farmers in the East Carpathian foothills about 5800–5600 BCE was removed from the parent tongue spoken by the first settlers in Thessaly by less than a thousand years—the same interval that separates Modern American English from Anglo-Saxon. That was long enough for several new Old European Neolithic languages to have emerged from the Thessalian parent, but they would have belonged to a single language family. That language family was not Indo-European. It came from the wrong place (Anatolia and Greece) at the wrong time (before 6500 BCE). Curiously a fragment of that lost language might be preserved in the Proto-Indo-European term for bull, *tawro—s, which many linguists think was borrowed from an Afro-Asiatic term. The Afro-Asiatic super-family generated both Egyptian and Semitic in the Near East, and one of its early languages might have been spoken in Anatolia by the earliest farmers. Perhaps the Criş people spoke a language of Afro-Asiatic type, and as they drove their cattle into the East Carpathian valleys they called them something like *tawr-.16





FARMER MEETS FORAGER: THE BUG-DNIESTER CULTURE


The first indigenous North Pontic people to adopt Criş cattle breeding and perhaps also the Criş word for bull were the people of the Bug-Dniester culture, introduced a few pages ago. They occupied the frontier where the expansion of the Criş farmers came to a halt, apparently blocked by the Bug-Dniester culture itself. The initial contact between farmers and foragers must have been a fascinating event. The Criş immigrants brought herds of cultured animals that wandered up the hillsides among the deer. They introduced sheep, plum orchards, and hot wheat-cakes. Their families lived in the same place all year, year after year; they cut down the trees to make houses and orchards and gardens; and they spoke a foreign language. The foragers’ language might have been part of the broad language family from which Proto-Indo-European later emerged, although, since the ultimate fate of the Bug-Dniester culture was extinction and assimilation, their dialect probably died with their culture.17

The Bug-Dniester culture grew out of Mesolithic forager cultures that dwelt in the region since the end of the last Ice Age. Eleven Late Mesolithic technological-typological groups have been defined by differences in flint tool kits just in Ukraine; other Late Mesolithic flint tool-based groups have been identified in the Russian steppes east of the Don River, in the North Caspian Depression, and in coastal Romania. Mesolithic camps have been found in the lower Danube valley and the coastal steppes northwest of the Black Sea, not far from the Criş settlement area. In the Dobruja, the peninsula of rocky hills skirted by the Danube delta at its mouth, eighteen to twenty Mesolithic surface sites were found just in one small area northwest of Tulcea on the southern terraces of the Danube River. Late Mesolithic groups also occupied the northern side of the estuary. Mirnoe is the best-studied site here. The Late Mesolithic hunters at Mirnoe hunted wild aurochs (83% of bones), wild horse (14%), and the extinct Equus hydruntinus (1.1%). Farther up the coast, away from the Danube delta, the steppes were drier, and at Late Mesolithic Girzhevo, on the lower Dniester, 62% of the bones were of wild horses, with fewer aurochs and Equus hydruntinus. There is no archaeological trace of contact between these coastal steppe foragers and the Criş farmers who were advancing into the upland forest-steppe.18

The story is different in the forest-steppe. At least twenty-five Bug-Dniester sites have been excavated in the forest-steppe zone in the middle and upper parts of the South Bug and Dniester River valleys, in the transitional ecological zone where rainfall was sufficient for the growth of forests but there were still open meadows and some pockets of steppe. This environment was favored by the Criş immigrants. In it the native foragers had for generations hunted red deer, roe deer, and wild boar, and caught riverine fish (especially the huge river catfish, Siluris glanis). Early Bug-Dniester flint tools showed similarities both to coastal steppe groups (Grebenikov and Kukrekskaya types of tool kits) and northern forest groups (Donets types).





Pottery and the Beginning of the Neolithic


The Bug-Dniester culture was a Neolithic culture; Bug-Dniester people knew how to make fired clay pottery vessels. The first pottery in the Pontic-Caspian region, and the beginning of the Early Neolithic, is associated with the Elshanka culture in the Samara region in the middle Volga River valley. It is dated by radiocarbon (on shell) about 7000–6500 BCE, which makes it, surprisingly, the oldest pottery in all of Europe. The pots were made of a clay-rich mud collected from the bottoms of stagnant ponds. They were formed by the coiling method and were baked in open fires at 450–600°C (figure 8.4).19 From this northeastern source ceramic technology diffused south and westward. It was adopted widely by most foraging and fishing bands across the Pontic-Caspian region about 6200–6000 BCE, before any clear contact with southern farmers. Early Neolithic pottery tempered with vegetal material and crushed shells appeared at Surskii Island in the Dnieper Rapids in levels dated about 6200–5800 BCE. In the lower Don River valley a crude vegetal-tempered pottery decorated with incised geometric motifs appeared at Rakushechni Yar and other sites such as Samsonovka in levels dated 6000–5600 BCE.20 Similar designs and vessel shapes, but made with a shell-tempered clay fabric, appeared on the lower Volga, at Kair Shak III dated about 5700–5600 BCE (6720 ± 80 BP). Older pottery was made in the North Caspian at Kugat, where a different kind of pottery was stratified beneath Kair Shak-type pottery, possibly the same age as the pottery at Surskii Island. Primitive, experimental ceramic fragments appeared about 6200 BCE also at Matveev Kurgan in the steppes north of the Sea of Azov. The oldest pottery south of the middle Volga appeared at the Dnieper Rapids (Surskii), on the lower Don (Rakushechni Yar), and on the lower Volga (Kair Shak III, Kugat) at about the same time, around 6200–6000 BCE (figure 8.4).

The earliest pottery in the South Bug valley was excavated by Danilenko at Bas’kov Ostrov and Sokolets II, dated by five radiocarbon dates about 6200–6000 BCE, about the same age as Surskii on the Dnieper.21 In the Dniester River valley, just west of the South Bug, at Soroki II, archaeologists excavated two stratified Late Mesolithic occupations (levels 2 and 3) dated by radiocarbon to about 6500–6200 BCE. They contained no pottery. Pottery making was adopted by the early Bug-Dniester culture about 6200 BCE, probably the same general time it appeared in the Dnieper valley and the Caspian Depression.





Farmer-Forager Exchanges in the Dniester Valley


After about 5800–5700 BCE, when Criş farmers moved into the East Carpathian foothills from the west, the Dniester valley became a frontier between two very different ways of life. At Soroki II the uppermost occupation level (1) was left by Bug-Dniester people who clearly had made contact with the incoming Criş farmers, dated by good radiocarbon dates at about 5700–5500 BCE. Some of the ceramic vessels in level 1 were obvious copies of Criş vessels—round-bodied, narrow-mouthed jars on a ring base and bowls with carinated sides. But they were made locally, using clay tempered with sand and plant fibers. The rest of the pottery in level 1 looked more like indigenous bag-shaped South Bug ceramics (figure 8.5). Continuity in the flint tools between level 1 and the older levels 2 and 3 suggests that it was the same basic culture, and all three levels are traditionally assigned to the Bug-Dniester culture.



Figure 8.4 Top: Early Neolithic ceramics of Elshanka type on the middle Volga (7000–6500 BCE); middle: ceramics and flint tools from Kugat (perhaps 6000 BCE), North Caspian; bottom: ceramics and flint tools from Kair-Shak III (5700–5600 BCE) North Caspian. After (top) Mamonov 1995; and (middle and bottom) Barynkin and Kozin 1998.

The Bug-Dniester people who lived at Soroki II in the level 1 camp copied more than just Criş pottery. Botanists found seed impressions in the clay vessels of three kinds of wheat. Level 1 also yielded a few bones from small domesticated cattle and pigs. This was the beginning of a significant shift—the adoption of an imported food-production economy by the native foragers. It is perhaps noteworthy that the exotic ceramic types copied by Soroki II potters were small Criş pedestaled jars and bowls, probably used to serve drink and food rather than to store or cook it. Perhaps Criş foods were served to visiting foragers in jars and bowls like these inside Criş houses, inspiring some Bug-Dniester families to re-create both the new foods and the vessels in which they were served. But the original decorative motifs on Bug-Dniester pottery, the shapes of the largest pots, the vegetal and occasional shell temper in the clay, and the low-temperature firing indicate that early Bug-Dniester potters knew their own techniques, clays, and tempering formulas. The largest pots they made (for cooking? storage?) were shaped like narrow-mouthed baskets, unlike any shape made by Criş potters.

Three kinds of wheat impressions appeared in the clay of early Bug-Dniester pots at two sites in the Dniester valley: Soroki II/level 1 and Soroki III. Both sites had impressions of emmer, einkorn, and spelt.22 Was the grain actually grown locally? Both sites had a variety of wheats, with impressions of chaff and spikelets, parts removed during threshing. The presence of threshing debris suggests that at least some grain was grown and threshed locally. The foragers of the Dniester valley seem to have cultivated at least small plots of grain very soon after their initial contact with Criş farmers. What about the cattle?

In three Early Bug-Dniester Neolithic sites in the Dniester valley occupied about 5800–5500 BCE, domesticated cattle and swine averaged 24% of the 329 bones recovered from garbage pits, if each bone is counted for the NISP; or 20% of the animals, if the bones are converted into a minimum number of individuals, or MNI. Red deer and roe deer remained more important than domesticated animals in the meat diet. Middle Bug-Dniester sites (Samchin phase), dated about 5600–5400 BCE, contained more domesticated pigs and cattle: at Soroki I/level 1a, a Middle-phase site, cattle and swine made up 49% of the 213 bones recovered (32% MNI). By the Late (Savran) phase, about 5400–5000 BCE, domesticated pigs and cattle totaled 55% of the animal bones (36% MNI) in two sites.23 In contrast, the Bug-Dniester settlement sites in the South Bug valley, farther away from the source of the domesticated animals, never showed more than 10% domesticated animal bones. But even in the South Bug valley a few domesticated cattle and pigs appeared at Bas’kov Ostrov and Mit’kov Ostrov very soon after the Criş farmers entered the Eastern Carpathian foothills. The “availability” phase, in Zvelebil’s three-phase description of farmer-forager interactions, was very brief.24 Why? What was so attractive about Criş foods and even the pottery vessels in which they were served?



Figure 8.5 Pottery types of the Bug-Dniester culture. The four vessels in the top row appear to have been copied after Cris types seen in Figure 8.2. After Markevich 1974; and Dergachev 1999.

There are three possibilities: intermarriage, population pressure, and status competition. Intermarriage is an often-repeated but not very convincing explanation for incremental changes in material culture. In this case, imported Criş-culture wives would be the vehicle through which Criş-culture pottery styles and foods should have appeared in Bug-Dniester settlements. But Warren DeBoer has shown that wives who marry into a foreign tribe among tribal societies often feel so exposed and insecure that they become hyper-correct imitators of their new cultural mores rather than a source of innovation. And the technology of Bug-Dniester ceramics, the method of manufacture, was local. Technological styles are often better indicators of ethnic origin than decorative styles. So, although there may have been intermarriage, it is not a persuasive explanation for the innovations in pottery or economy on the Dniester frontier.25

Was it population pressure? Were the pre-Neolithic Bug-Dniester foragers running out of good hunting and fishing grounds, and looking for ways to increase the amount of food that could be harvested within their hunting territories? Probably not. The forest-steppe was an ideal hunting territory, with maximal amounts of the forest-edge environment preferred by deer. The abundant tree pollen in Criş-period soils indicates that the Criş pioneers had little impact on the forest around them, so their arrival did not greatly reduce deer populations. A major component of the Bug-Dniester diet was riverine fish, some of which supplied as much meat as a small adult pig, and there is no evidence that fish stocks were falling. Cattle and pigs might have been acquired by cautious foragers as a hedge against a bad year, but the immediate motive probably was not hunger.

The third possibility is that the foragers were impressed by the abundance of food available for feasting and seasonal festivals among Criş farmers. Perhaps some Bug-Dniester locals were invited to such festivals by the Criş farmers in an attempt to encourage peaceful coexistence. Socially ambitious foragers might have begun to cultivate gardens and raise cattle to sponsor feasts among their own people, even making serving bowls and cups like those used in Criş villages—a political explanation, and one that also explains why Criş pots were copied. Unfortunately neither culture had cemeteries, and so we cannot examine graves to look for evidence of a growing social hierarchy. Status objects seem to have been few, with the possible exception of food itself. Probably both economic insurance and social status played roles in the slow but steady adoption of food production in the Dniester valley.

The importance of herding and cultivation in the Bug-Dniester diet grew very gradually. In Criş settlements domesticated animals contributed 70–80% of the bones in kitchen middens. In Bug-Dniester settlements domesticated animals exceeded hunted wild game only in the latest phase, and only in the Dniester valley, immediately adjacent to Criş settlements. Bug-Dniester people never ate mutton—not one single sheep bone has been found in a Bug-Dniester site. Early Bug-Dniester bakers did not use Criş-style saddle querns to grind their grain; instead, they initially used small, rhomboidal stone mortars of a local style, switching to Criş-style saddle querns only in the middle Bug-Dniester phase. They preferred their own chipped flint axe types to the smaller polished stone Criş axes. Their pottery was quite distinctive. And their historical trajectory led directly back to the local Mesolithic populations, unlike the Criş culture.

Even after 5500–5200 BCE, when a new farming culture, the Linear Pottery culture, moved into the East Carpathian piedmont from southern Poland and replaced the Criş culture, the Dniester valley frontier survived. No Linear Pottery sites are known east of the Dniester valley.26 The Dniester was a cultural frontier, not a natural one. It persisted despite the passage of people and trade goods across it, and through significant cultural changes on each side. Persistent cultural frontiers, particularly at the edges of ancient migration streams, usually are ethnic and linguistic frontiers. The Bug-Dniester people may well have spoken a language belonging to the language family that produced Pre-Proto-Indo-European, while their Criş neighbors spoke a language distantly related to those of Neolithic Greece and Anatolia.





BEYOND THE FRONTIER: PONTIC-CASPIAN FORAGERS BEFORE CATTLE ARRIVED


The North Pontic societies east of the Dniester frontier continued to live as they always had, by hunting, gathering wild plants, and fishing until about 5200 BCE. Domesticated cattle and hot wheatcakes might have seemed irresistibly attractive to the foragers who were in direct contact with the farmers who presented and legitimized them, but, away from that active frontier, North Pontic forager-fishers were in no rush to become animal tenders. Domesticated animals can only be raised by people who are committed morally and ethically to watching their families go hungry rather than letting them eat the breeding stock. Seed grain and breeding stock must be saved, not eaten, or there will be no crop and no calves the next year. Foragers generally value immediate sharing and generosity over miserly saving for the future, so the shift to keeping breeding stock was a moral as well as an economic one. It probably offended the old morals. It is not surprising that it was resisted, or that when it did begin it was surrounded by new rituals and a new kind of leadership, or that the new leaders threw big feasts and shared food when the deferred investment paid off. These new rituals and leadership roles were the foundation of Indo-European religion and society.27

The most heavily populated part of the Pontic-Caspian steppes was the place where the shift to cattle keeping happened next after the Bug-Dniester region. This was around the Dnieper Rapids. The Dnieper Rapids started at modern Dnepropetrovsk, where the Dnieper River began to cut down to the coastal lowlands through a shelf of granite bedrock, dropping 50 m in elevation over 66 km. The Rapids contained ten major cascades, and in early historical accounts each one had its own name, guardian spirits, and folklore. Fish migrating upstream, like the sudak (Lucioperca), could be taken in vast quantities at the Rapids, and the swift water between the cascades was home to wels (Silurusg lanis), a type of catfish that grows to 16 feet. The bones of both types of fish are found in Mesolithic and Neolithic camps near the Rapids. At the southern end of the Rapids there was a ford near Kichkas where the wide Dnieper could be crossed relatively easily on foot, a strategic place in a world without bridges.

The Rapids and many of the archaeological sites associated with them were inundated by dams and reservoirs built between 1927 and 1958. Among the many sites discovered in connection with reservoir construction was Igren 8 on the east bank of the Dnieper. Here the deepest level F contained Late Mesolithic Kukrekskaya flint tools; levels E and E1 above contained Surskii Early Neolithic pottery (radiocarbon dated 6200–5800 BCE); and stratum D1 above that contained Middle Neolithic Dnieper-Donets I pottery tempered with plant fibers and decorated with incised chevrons and small comb stamps (probably about 5800–5200 BCE but not directly dated by radiocarbon). The animal bones in the Dnieper-Donets I garbage were from red deer and fish. The shift to cattle keeping had not yet begun. Dnieper-Donets I was contemporary with the Bug-Dniester culture.28



Figure 8.6 Dnieper-Donets I camp at Girli, Ukraine, probably about 5600–5200 BCE. After Neprina 1970, Figures 3, 4, and 8.

Campsites of foragers who made Dnieper-Donets I (DDI) pottery have been excavated on the southern borders of the Pripet Marshes in the northwest and in the middle Donets valley in the east, or over much of the forest-steppe and northern steppe zone of Ukraine. At Girli (figure 8.6) on the upper Teterev River near Zhitomir, west of Kiev, a DDI settlement contained eight hearths arranged in a northeast-southwest line of four pairs, each pair about 2–3 m apart, perhaps representing a shelter some 14 m long for four families. Around the hearths were thirty-six hundred flint tools including microlithic blades, and sherds of point-based pots decorated with comb-stamped and pricked impressions. The food economy depended on hunting and gathering. Girli was located on a trail between the Dnieper and South Bug rivers, and the pottery was similar in shape and decoration to some Bug-Dniester ceramics of the middle or Samchin phase. But DDI sites did not contain domesticated animals or plants, or even polished stone axes like those of the Criş and late Bug-Dniester cultures; DDI axes were still chipped from large pieces of flint.29





Forager Cemeteries around the Dnieper Rapids


Across most of Ukraine and European Russia post-glacial foragers did not create cemeteries. The Bug-Dniester culture was typical: they buried their dead by ones and twos, often using an old campsite, perhaps the one where the death occurred. Graveside rituals took place but not in places set aside just for them. Cemeteries were different: they were formal plots of ground reserved just for funerals, funeral monuments, and public remembrance of the dead. Cemeteries were visible statements connecting a piece of land with the ancestors. During reservoir construction around the Dnieper Rapids archaeologists found eight Mesolithic and forager Neolithic cemeteries, among them Vasilievka I (twenty-four graves), Vasilievka II (thirty-two graves), Vasilievka III (forty-five graves), Vasilievka V (thirty-seven graves), Marievka (fifteen graves), and Volos’ke (nineteen graves). No comparable cluster of forager cemeteries exists anywhere else in the Pontic-Caspian region.

Several different forager populations seem to have competed with one another around the Dnieper Rapids at the end of the Ice Age. Already by about 8000 BCE, as soon as the glaciers melted, at least three skull-and-face types, a narrow-faced gracile type (Volos’ke), a broad-faced medium-weight type (Vasilievka I), and a broad-faced robust type (Vasilievka III) occupied different cemeteries and were buried in different poses (contracted and extended). Two of the nineteen individuals buried at Volos’ke and two (perhaps three) of the forty-five at Vasilevka III were wounded by weapons tipped with Kukrekskaya-type microlithic blades. The Vasilievka III skeletal type and burial posture ultimately spread over the whole Rapids during the Late Mesolithic, 7000–6200 BCE. Two cemeteries that were assumed to be Early Neolithic (Vasilievka II and Marievka) because of the style of the grave now are dated by radiocarbon to 6500–6000 BCE, or the Late Mesolithic.

Only one of the Dnieper Rapids cemeteries, Vasilievka V, is dated to the Middle Neolithic DDI period by radiocarbon dates (5700–5300 BCE). At Vasilevka V thirty-seven skeletons were buried in supine positions (on their backs) with their hands near the pelvis, with their heads to the northeast. Some were buried singly in individual pits, and others apparently were layered in reused graves. Sixteen graves in the center of the cemetery seem to represent two or three superimposed layers of burials, the first hint of a collective burial ritual that would be elaborated greatly in the following centuries. Eighteen graves out of thirty-seven were sprinkled with red ochre, again a hint of things to come. The grave gifts at Vasilievka V, however, were very simple, limited to microlithic flint blades and flint scrapers. These were the last people on the Dnieper Rapids who clung to the old morality and rejected cattle keeping.30





Foragers on the Lower Volga and Lower Don


Different styles of pottery were made among the Early Neolithic foragers who lived even farther east, a longer distance away from the forager/farmer frontier on the Dniester. Forager camps on the lower Volga River dated between 6000 and 5300 BCE contained flat-based open bowls made of clay tempered with crushed shell and vegetal material, and were decorated by stabbing rows of impressions with a triangular-ended stick or drawing incised diamond and lozenge shapes. These decorative techniques were different from the comb-stamps used to decorate DDI pottery in the Dnieper valley. Flint tool kits on the Volga contained many geometric microliths, 60–70% of the tools, like the flint tools of the earlier Late Mesolithic foragers. Important Early Neolithic sites included Varfolomievka level 3 (radiocarbon dated about 5900–5700 BCE) and Kair-Shak III (also dated about 5900–5700 BCE) in the lower Volga region; and the lower levels at Rakushechni Yar, a dune on the lower Don (dated 6000–5600 BCE).31 At Kair Shak III, located in an environment that was then semi-desert, the economy was based almost entirely on hunting onagers (Equus hemionus). The animal bones at Varfolomievka, located in a small river valley in the dry steppe, have not been reported separately by level, so it is impossible to say what the level 3 Early Neolithic economy was, but half of all the animal bones at Varfolomievka were of horses (Equus caballus), with some bones of aurochs (Bos primigenius). Fish scales (unidentified) were found on the floors of the dwellings. At Rakushechni Yar, then surrounded by broad lower-Don valley gallery forests, hunters pursued red deer, wild horses, and wild pigs. As I noted in several endnotes in this chapter, some archaeologists have claimed that the herding of cattle and sheep began earlier in the lower Don-Azov steppes, but this is unlikely. Before 5200 BCE the forager-farmer frontier remained confined to the Dniester valley.32





THE GODS GIVE CATTLE


The Criş colonization of the Eastern Carpathians about 5800 BCE created a robust and persistent cultural frontier in the forest-steppe zone at the Dniester valley. Although the Bug-Dniester culture quickly acquired at least some domesticated cereals, pigs, and cattle, it retained an economy based primarily on hunting and gathering, and remained culturally and economically distinct in most ways. Beyond it, both in the forest-steppe zone and the steppe river valleys to the east, no other indigenous societies seem to have adopted cereal cultivation or domesticated animals until after about 5200 BCE.

In the Dniester valley, native North Pontic cultures had direct, face-to-face contact with farmers who spoke a different language, had a different religion, and introduced an array of invasive new plants and animals as if they were something wonderful. The foragers on the frontier itself rapidly accepted some cultivated plants and animals but rejected others, particularly sheep. Hunting and fishing continued to supply most of the diet. They did not display obvious signs of a shift to new rituals or social structures. Cattle keeping and wheat cultivation seem to have been pursued part-time, and were employed as an insurance policy against bad years and perhaps as a way of keeping up with the neighbors, not as a replacement of the foraging economy and morality. For centuries even this halfway shift to partial food production was limited to the Dniester valley, which became a narrow and well-defined frontier. But after 5200 BCE a new threshold in population density and social organization seems to have been crossed among European Neolithic farmers. Villages in the East Carpathian piedmont adopted new customs from the larger towns in the lower Danube valley, and a new, more complex culture appeared, the Cucuteni-Tripolye culture. Cucuteni-Tripolye villages spread eastward. The Dniester frontier was breached, and large western farming communities pushed into the Dniester and South Bug valleys. The Bug-Dniester culture, the original frontier society, disappeared into the wave of Cucuteni-Tripolye immigrants.

But away to the east, around the Dnieper Rapids, the bones of domesticated cattle, pigs, and, remarkably, even sheep began to appear regularly in garbage dumps. The Dnieper Rapids was a strategic territory, and the clans that controlled it already had more elaborate rituals than clans elsewhere in the steppes. When they accepted cattle keeping it had rapid economic and social consequences across the steppe zone.





CHAPTER NINE





Cows, Copper, and Chiefs


The Proto-Indo-European vocabulary contained a compound word (*weik-potis) that referred to a village chief, an individual who held power within a residential group; another root (*re-) referred to another kind of powerful officer. This second root was later used for king in Italic (rēx), Celtic (rīx), and Old Indic (raj-), but it might originally have referred to an official more like a priest, literally a “regulator” (from the same root) or “one who makes things right” (again the same root), possibly connected with drawing “correct” (same root) boundaries. The speakers of Proto-Indo-European had institutionalized offices of power and social ranks, and presumably showed deference to the people who held them, and these powerful people, in return, sponsored feasts at which food and gifts were distributed.1 When did a hierarchy of social power first appear in the Pontic-Caspian region? How was it expressed? And who were these powerful people?

Chiefs first appeared in the archaeological record of the Pontic-Caspian steppes when domesticated cattle, sheep, and goats first became widespread, after about 5200–5000 BCE.2 An interesting aspect of the spread of animal keeping in the steppes was the concurrent rapid rise of chiefs who wore multiple belts and strings of polished shell beads, bone beads, beaver-tooth and horse-tooth beads, boars tusk pendants, boars-tusk caps, boars-tusk plates sewed to their clothing, pendants of crystal and porphyry, polished stone bracelets, and gleaming copper rings. Their ornaments must have clacked and rustled when they walked. Older chiefs carried maces with polished stone mace-heads. Their funerals were accompanied by the sacrifice of sheep, goats, cattle, and horses, with most of the meat and bones distributed to the celebrants so only a few symbolic lower leg pieces and an occasional skull, perhaps attached to a hide, remained in the grave. No such ostentatious leaders had existed in the old hunting and gathering bands of the Neolithic. What made their sudden rise even more intriguing is that the nitrogen levels in their bones suggest that more than 50% of their meat diet continued to come from fish. In the Volga region the bones of horses, the preferred wild prey of the earlier hunters, still outnumbered cattle and sheep in kitchen trash. The domesticated cattle and sheep that played such a large ritual role were eaten only infrequently, particularly in the east.

What seems at first to be the spread of a new food economy on second look appears to be deeply interwined in new rituals, new values associated with them, and new institutions of social power. People who did not accept the new animal currency, who remained foragers, did not even use formal cemeteries, much less sponsor such aggrandizing public funeral feasts. Their dead still were buried simply, in plain clothing, in their old camping places. The cultural gap widened between those who tended domesticated animals, including foreign sheep and goats, and those who hunted native wild animals.

The northern frontier of the new economy coincided with the ecological divide between the forests in the north and the steppes in the south. The northern hunters and fishers refused to be shackled to domesticated animals for another two thousand years. Even in the intervening zone of forest-steppe the percentage of domesticated animal bones declined and the importance of hunted game increased. In contrast, the eastern frontier of the new economy did not coincide with an ecotone but instead ran along the Ural River, which drained the southern flanks of the Ural Mountains and flowed south through the Caspian Depression into the Caspian Sea. East of the Ural River, in the steppes of northern Kazakhstan, steppe foragers of the Atbasar type continued to live by hunting wild horses, deer, and aurochs. They lived in camps sheltered by grassy bluffs on low river terraces or on the marshy margins of lakes in the steppes. Their rejection of the new western economy possibly was rooted in ethnic and linguistic differences that had sharpened during the millennia between 14,000 and 9,000 BCE, when the Khvalynian Sea had divided the societies of the Kazakh and the Russian steppes. Regardless of its cause, the Ural valley became a persistent frontier dividing western steppe societies that accepted domesticated animals from eastern steppe societies that rejected them.

Copper ornaments were among the gifts and baubles traded eastward across the steppes from the Danube valley to the Volga-Ural region with the first domesticated animals. The regular, widespread appearance of copper in the Pontic-Caspian steppes signals the beginning of the Eneolithic. The copper was Balkan in origin and probably was obtained with the animals through the same trade networks. From this time forward Pontic-Caspian steppe cultures were drawn into increasingly complicated social, political, and economic relations with the cultures of the Balkans and the lower Danube valley. The gulf between them, however, only intensified. By 4400–4200 BCE, when the Old European cultures were at their peak of economic productivity, population size, and stability, their frontier with the Pontic-Caspian herding cultures was the most pronounced cultural divide in prehistoric Europe, an even starker contrast than that between the northern forest hunters and the steppe herders. The Neolithic and Eneolithic cultures of the Balkans, Carpathians, and middle and lower Danube valley had more productive farming economies in an age when that really mattered, their towns and houses were much more substantial, and their craft techniques, decorative aesthetics, and metallurgy were more sophisticated than those of the steppes. The Early Eneolithic herding cultures of the steppes certainly were aware of the richly ornamented and colorfully decorated people of Old Europe, but steppe societies developed in a different direction.3





THE EARLY COPPER AGE IN OLD EUROPE


There is an overall rhythm to the Eneolithic over most of southeastern Europe: a rise to a new level of social and technological complexity, its flourishing, and its subsequent disintegration into smaller-scale, more mobile, and technologically simpler communities at the opening of the Bronze Age. But it began, developed, and ended differently in different places. Its beginning is set at about 5200–5000 BCE in Bulgaria, which was in many ways the heart and center of Old Europe. Pontic-Caspian steppe societies were pulled into the Old European copper-trade network at least as early as 4600 BCE, more than six hundred years before copper was regularly used in Germany, Austria, or Poland.4

The scattered farming hamlets of Bulgaria and southern Romania, about 5200–5000 BCE, blossomed into increasingly large and solidly built agricultural villages of large multiroomed timber and mud-plaster houses, often two-storied, set in cleared and cultivated landscapes surrounded by herds of cattle, pigs, and sheep. Cattle pulled ards, primitive scratch-plows, across the fields.5 In the Balkans and the fertile plains of the lower Danube valley, villages were rebuilt on the same spot generation after generation, creating stratified tells that grew to heights of 30–50 feet, lifting the village above its surrounding fields. Marija Gimbutas has made Old Europe famous for the ubiquity and variety of its goddesses. Household cults symbolized by broad-hipped female figurines were practiced everywhere. Marks incised on figurines and pots suggest the appearance of a notation system.6 Fragments of colored plaster suggest that house walls were painted with the same swirling, curvilinear designs that appeared on decorated pottery. Potters invented kilns that reached temperatures of 800–1100°C. They used a low-oxygen reducing atmosphere to create a black ceramic surface that was painted with graphite to make silver designs; or a bellows-aided high-oxygen atmosphere to create a red or orange surface, intricately painted in white ribbons bordered with black and red.

Pottery kilns led to metallurgy. Copper was extracted from stone by mixing powdered green-blue azurite or malachite minerals (possibly used for pigments) with powdered charcoal and baking the mixture in a bellows-aided kiln, perhaps accidentally at first. At 800°C the copper separated from the powdered ore in tiny shining beads. It could then be tapped out, reheated, forged, welded, annealed, and hammered into a wide variety of tools (hooks, awls, blades) and ornaments (beads, rings, and other pendants). Ornaments of gold (probably mined in Transylvania and coastal Thrace) began to circulate in the same trade networks. The early phase of copper working began before 5000 BCE.

Balkan smiths, about 4800–4600 BCE, learned to fashion molds that withstood the heat of molten copper, and began to make cast copper tools and weapons, a complicated process requiring a temperature of 1,083°C to liquefy copper metal. Molten copper must be stirred, skimmed, and poured correctly or it cools into a brittle object full of imperfections. Wellmade cast copper tools were used and exchanged across southeastern Europe by about 4600–4500 BCE in eastern Hungary with the Tiszapolgar culture; in Serbia with the Vinča D culture; in Bulgaria at Varna and in the Karanovo VI tell settlements; in Romania with the Gumelnitsa culture; and in Moldova and eastern Romania with the Cucuteni-Tripolye culture. Metallurgy was a new and different kind of craft. It was obvious to anyone that pots were made of clay, but even after being told that a shiny copper ring was made from a green-stained rock, it was difficult to see how. The magical aspect of copperworking set metalworkers apart, and the demand for copper objects increased trade. Prospecting, mining, and long-distance trade for ore and finished products introduced a new era in inter-regional politics and interdependence that quickly reached deep into the steppes as far as the Volga.7

Kilns and smelters for pottery and copper consumed the forests, as did two-storied timber houses and the bristling palisade walls that protected many Old European settlements, particularly in northeastern Bulgaria. At Durankulak and Sabla Ezerec in northeastern Bulgaria and at Tîrpeşti in Romania, pollen cores taken near settlements show significant reductions in local forest cover.8 The earth’s climate reached its post-glacial thermal maximum, the Atlantic period, about 6000–4000 BCE, and was at its warmest during the late Atlantic (paleoclimatic zone A3), beginning about 5200 BCE. Riverine forests in the steppe river valleys contracted because of increased warmth and dryness, and grasslands expanded. In the forest-steppe uplands majestic forests of elm, oak, and lime trees spread from the Carpathians to the Urals by 5000 BCE. Wild honeybees, which preferred lime and oak trees for nests, spread with them.9





THE CUCUTENI-TRIPOLYE CULTURE


The Cucuteni-Tripolye culture occupied the frontier between Old Europe and the Pontic-Caspian cultures. More than twenty-seven hundred Cucuteni-Tripolye sites have now been discovered and examined with small excavations, and a few have been entirely excavated (figure 9.1). The Cucuteni-Tripolye culture first appeared around 5200–5000 BCE and survived a thousand years longer than any other part of the Old European world. Tripolye people were still creating large houses and villages, advanced pottery and metals, and female figurines as late as 3000 BCE. They were the sophisticated western neighbors of the steppe people who probably spoke Proto-Indo-European.

Cucuteni-Tripolye is named after two archaeological sites: Cucuteni, discovered in eastern Romania in 1909, and Tripolye, discovered in central Ukraine in 1899. Romanian archaeologists use the name Cucuteni and Ukrainians use Tripolye, each with its own system of internal chronological divisions, so we must use cumbersome labels like Pre-Cucuteni III/Tripolye A to refer to a single prehistoric culture. There is a Borges-like dreaminess to the Cucuteni pottery sequence: one phase (Cucuteni C) is not a phase at all but rather a type of pottery probably made outside the Cucuteni-Tripolye culture; another phase (Cucuteni A1) was defined before it was found, and never was found; still another (Cucteni A5) was created in 1963 as a challenge for future scholars, and is now largely forgotten; and the whole sequence was first defined on the assumption, later proved wrong, that the Cucuteni A phase was the oldest, so later archaeologists had to invent the Pre-Cucuteni phases I, II, and III, one of which (Pre-Cucuteni I) might not exist. The positive side of this obsession with pottery types and phases is that the pottery is known and studied in minute detail.10

The Cucuteni-Tripolye culture is defined most clearly by its decorated pottery, female figurines, and houses. They first appeared about 5200–5000 BCE in the East Carpathian piedmont. The late Linear Pottery people of the East Carpathians acquired these new traditions from the late Boian-Giuleşti and late Hamangia cultures of the lower Danube valley. They adopted Boian and Hamangia design motifs in pottery, Boian-style female figurines, and some aspects of Boian house architecture (a clay floor fired before the walls were raised, called a ploshchadka floor in Russian). They acquired objects made of Balkan copper and Dobrujan flint, again from the Danube valley. The borrowed customs were core aspects of any tribal farming culture—domestic pottery production, domestic architecture, and domestic female-centered rituals—and so it seems likely that at least some Boian people migrated up into the steep, thickly forested valleys at the peakline of the East Carpathians. Their appearance defined the beginning of the Cucuteni-Tripolye culture—phases Pre-Cucuteni I (?) and II (about 5200–4900 BCE).



Figure 9.1 Early Eneolithic sites in the Pontic-Caspian region.

The first places that showed the new styles were clustered near high Carpathian passes, and perhaps attracted migrants partly because they controlled passage through the mountains. From these high Carpathian valleys the new styles and domestic rituals spread quickly northeastward to Pre-Cucuteni II settlements located as far east as the Dniester valley. As the culture developed (during pre-Cucteni III/Tripolye A) it was carried across the Dniester, erasing a cultural frontier that had existed for six hundred to eight hundred years, and into the South Bug River valley in Ukraine. Bug-Dniester sites disappeared. Tripolye A villages occupied the South Bug valley from about 4900–4800 BCE to about 4300–4200 BCE.

The Cucuteni-Tripolye culture made a visible mark on the forest-steppe environment, reducing the forest and creating pastures and cultivated fields over wider areas. At Floreşti, on a tributary of the Seret River, the remains of a late Linear Pottery homestead, radiocarbon dated about 5200–5100 BCE, consisted of a single house with associated garbage pits, set in a clearing in an oak-elm forest—tree pollen was 43% of all pollen. Stratified above it was a late Pre-Cucuteni III village, dated about 4300 BCE, with at least ten houses set in a much more open landscape—tree pollen was only 23%.11

Very few Bug-Dniester traits can be detected in early Cucuteni-Tripolye artifacts. The late Bug-Dniester culture was absorbed or driven away, removing the buffer culture that had mediated interchanges on the frontier.12 The frontier shifted eastward to the uplands between the Southern Bug and Dnieper rivers. This soon became the most clearly defined, high-contrast cultural frontier in all of Europe.





The Early Cucuteni-Tripolye Village at Bernashevka


A good example of an early Cucuteni-Tripolye farming village on that moving frontier is the site of Bernashevka, wholly excavated by V. G. Zbenovich between 1972 and 1975.13 On a terrace overlooking the Dniester River floodplain six houses were built in a circle around one large structure (figure 9.2). The central building, 12 by 8 m, had a foundation of horizontal wooden beams, or sleeper beams, probably with vertical wall posts morticed into them. The walls were wattle-and-daub, the roof thatched, and the floor made of smooth fired clay 8–17 cm thick on a sub-floor of timber beams (a ploshchadka). The door had a flat stone threshold, and inside was the only domed clay oven in the settlement—perhaps a central bakery and work building for the village. The houses ranged from 30m2 to 150m2 in floor area. The population of the village probably was forty to sixty people. Two radiocarbon dates (5500–5300 BCE) seem two hundred years too old (table 9.1), perhaps because the dated wood fragments were from burned heartwood that had died centuries before the village was occupied.



Figure 9.2 Bernashevka settlement on the Dniester River. After Zbenovich 1980, figure 3.

No cemetery was found at Bernashevka or at any other Cucuteni-Tripolye village. Like the Criş people, the Cucuteni-Tripolye people did not ordinarily bury their dead. Parts of human skeletons are occasionally found in ritual deposits beneath house floors, human teeth were used occasionally as beads, and at Drãguşeni (Cucuteni A4, about 4300–4000 BCE) loose human bones were found in the litter between houses. Perhaps bodies were exposed and permitted to return to the birds somewhere near the village. As Gimbutas noted, some Tripolye female figurines seem to be wearing bird masks.

TABLE 9.1 Early Eneolithic Radiocarbon Dates





Half the pottery at Bernashevka was coarse ware: thick-walled, relatively crude vessels tempered with sand, quartz, and grog (crushed ceramic sherds) decorated with rows of stabbed impressions or shallow channels impressed with a spatula in swirling patterns (figure 9.3). Some of these were perforated strainers, perhaps used for making cheese or yogurt. Another 30% were thin-walled, fine-tempered jugs, lidded bowls, and ladles. The last 20% were very fine, thin-walled, quite beautiful lidded jugs and bowls (probably for individual servings of food), ladles (for serving), and hollow-pedestaled “fruit-stands” (perhaps for food presentation), elaborately decorated over the entire surface with stamped, incised, and channeled motifs, some enhanced with white paint against the orange clay. Lidded bowls and jugs imply that food was served in individual containers at some distance from the hearth where it was cooked, and their careful decoration implies that the presentation of food involved an element of social theater, an unveiling.



Figure 9.3 Artifacts of the Pre-Cucuteni II/III-Tripolye A period from the sites of Bernashevka (most), Bernovo (labeled), and Lenkovtsi (labeled). After Zbenovich 1980, figures 55, 57, 61, 69, 71, 75, 79; and Zbenovich 1989, figure 65, 74.

Every house at Bernashevka contained fragmented ceramic female figurines with joined legs, exaggerated hips and buttocks, and schematic rodlike heads, about 10 cm long (figure 9.3). Simple incisions indicated the pubis and a girdle or waistband. Figurines were found at various places on the house floors; there was no obvious domestic shrine or altar. The number of figurines per house ranged from one to twenty-one, but four houses had nine or more. Almost two thousand similar figurines have been found in other Pre-Cucuteni II-III/Tripolye A sites, occasionally arranged in groups seated in chairs. At the Tripolye A site of Luka-Vrublevetskaya on the Dniester, they were made of clay tempered with a mixture of wheat, barley, and millet grains—all the grains cultivated in the village—and with finely ground flour. These, at least, seem to have symbolized the generative fertility of cultivated grain. But they were only one aspect of domestic cults. Under every house at Bernashevka was the skull of a domesticated cow or bull. One house also had wild animal symbols: the skull of a wild aurochs and the antlers of a red deer. Preconstruction foundation deposits of cattle horns and skulls, and occasionally of human skulls, are found in many Tripolye A villages. Bovine and female spirit powers were central to domestic household cults.

The Bernashevka farmers cultivated emmer and spelt wheats, with some barley and millet. Fields were prepared with mattocks made of antler (nineteen examples were found) and polished slate (twenty examples); some of these might have been attached to ards, which were primitive plows. The grain was harvested with flint blades of the Karanovo type (figure 9.3).

The animal bones from Bernashevka are the largest sample from any early Cucuteni-Tripolye site: 12,657 identifiable bones from a minimum of 804 animals. About 50% of the bones (60% of the individuals) were from wild animals, principally red deer (Cervus elaphus) and wild pig. Roe deer (Capreolus capreolus) and the wild aurochs (Bos primigenius) were hunted occasionally. Many early Cucuteni-Tripolye sites have about 50% wild animal bones. Like Bernashevka, most were frontier settlements established in places not previously cleared or farmed. In contrast, at the long-settled locale of Tirpeşti the Pre-Cucuteni III settlement produced 95% domesticated animal bones. And even in frontier settlements like Bernashevka, about 50% of all animal bones were from cattle, sheep/goat, and pigs. Cattle and pigs were more important in heavily forested areas like Bernashevka, where cattle constituted 75% of the domesticated animal bones, whereas sheep and goats were more important in villages closer to the steppe border.

Pre-Cucuteni II Bernashevka was abandoned before copper tools and ornaments became common enough to lose casually; no copper artifacts were left in the settlement. But only a few centuries later small copper artifacts became common. At Tripolye A Luka-Vrublevetskaya, probably occupied about 4800–4600 BCE, 12 copper objects (awls, fishhooks, a bead, a ring) were found among seven houses in piles of discarded shellfish, animal bones, and broken crockery. At Karbuna, near the steppe boundary, probably occupied about 4500–4400 BCE, a spectacular hoard of 444 copper objects was buried in a fine late Tripolye A pot closed with a Tripolye A bowl (figure 9.4). The hoard contained two cast copper hammer-axes 13–14 cm long, hundreds of copper beads, and dozens of flat “idols,” or wide-bottomed pendants made of flat sheet copper; two hammer-axes of marble and slate with drilled shaft-holes for the handle; 127 drilled beads made of red deer teeth; 1 drilled human tooth; and 254 beads, plaques, or bracelets made of Spondylus shell, an Aegean shell used for ornaments continuously from the first Greek Neolithic through the Old European Eneolithic. The Karbuna copper came from Balkan ores, and the Aegean shell was traded from the same direction, probably through the tell towns of the lower Danube valley. By about 4500 BCE social prestige had become closely linked to the accumulation of exotic commodities, including copper.14



Figure 9.4 Part of the Karbuna hoard with the Tripolye A pot and bowl-lid in which it was found. All illustrated objects except the pot and lid are copper, and all are the same scale. After Dergachev 1998.

As Cucuteni-Tripolye farmers moved eastward out of the East Carpathian piedmont they began to enter a more open, gently rolling, drier landscape. East of the Dniester River annual precipitation declined and the forests thinned. The already-old cultural frontier moved to the Southern Bug river valley. The Tripolye A town of Mogil’noe IV, among the first established in the South Bug valley, had more than a hundred buildings and covered 15–20 hectares, with a population of perhaps between four hundred and seven hundred. East of the Southern Bug, in the Dnieper valley, were people of a very different cultural tradition: the Dnieper-Donets II culture.





THE DNIEPER-DONETS II CULTURE


Dimitri Telegin defined the Dnieper-Donets II culture based on a series of excavated cemeteries and settlement sites in the Dnieper valley, in the steppes north of the Sea of Azov, and in the Donets valley. Dnieper-Donets II societies created large, elaborate cemeteries, made no female figurines, had open fires rather than kilns or ovens in their homes, lived in bark-covered huts rather than in large houses with fired clay floors, had no towns, cultivated little or no grain, and their pottery was very different in appearance and technology from Tripolye ceramics. The trajectory of the Cucuteni-Tripolye culture led back to the Neolithic societies of Old Europe, and that of Dnieper-Donets II led to the local Mesolithic foragers. They were fundamentally different people and almost certainly spoke different languages. But around 5200 BCE, the foragers living around the Dnieper Rapids began to keep cattle and sheep.

The bands of fishers and hunters whose cemeteries had overlooked the Rapids since the Early Mesolithic might have been feeling the pinch of growing populations. Living by the rich resources of the Rapids they might have become relatively sedentary, and women, when they live a settled life, generally have more children. They controlled a well-known, strategic area in a productive territory. Their decision to adopt cattle and sheep herding could have opened the way for many others in the Pontic-Caspian steppes. In the following two or three centuries domesticated cattle, sheep, and goats were walked and traded from the Dnieper valley eastward to the Volga-Ural steppes, where they had arrived by about 4700–4600 BCE. The evidence for any cereal cultivation east of the Dnieper before about 4200 BCE is thin to absent, so the initial innovation seems to have involved animals and animal herding.





Dating the Shift to Herding


The traditional Neolithic/Eneolithic chronology of the Dnieper valley is based on several sites near the Dnieper Rapids; the important ones are Igren 8, Pokhili, and Vovchok, where a repeated stratigraphic sequence was found. At the bottom were Surskii-type Neolithic pots and microlithic flint tools associated with the bones of hunted wild animals, principally red deer, wild pigs, and fish. These assemblages defined the Early Neolithic (dated about 6200–5700 BCE). Above them were Dnieper-Donets phase I occupations with comb-impressed and vegetal-tempered pottery, still associated with wild fauna; they defined the Middle Neolithic (probably about 5700–5400 BCE, contemporary with the Bug-Dniester culture). Stratified above these deposits were layers with Dnieper-Donets II pottery, sand-tempered with “pricked” or comb-stamped designs, and large flint blade tools, associated with the bones of domesticated cattle and sheep. These DDII assemblages represented the beginning of the Early Eneolithic and the beginning of herding economies east of the Dnieper River.15

Unlike the dates from DDI and Surskii, most DDII radiocarbon dates were measured on human bone from cemeteries. The average level of 15N in DDII human bones from the Dnieper valley is 11.8%, suggesting a meat diet of about 50% fish. Correcting the radiocarbon dates for this level of 15N, I obtained an age range of 5200–5000 BCE for the oldest DDII graves at the Yasinovatka and Dereivka cemeteries near the Dnieper Rapids. This is probably about when the DDII culture began. Imported pots of the late Tripolye A2 Borisovka type have been found in DDII settlements at Grini, Piliava, and Stril’cha Skelia in the Dnieper valley, and sherds from three Tripolye A pots were found at the DDII Nikol’skoe cemetery. Tripolye A2 is dated about 4500–4200 BCE by good dates (not on human bone) in the Tripolye heartland, and late DDII radiocarbon dates (when corrected for 15N) agree with this range. The DDII period began about 5200–5000 BCE and lasted until about 4400–4200 BCE. Contact with Tripolye A people seems to have intensified after about 4500 BCE.16





The Evidence for Stockbreeding and Grain Cultivation


Four Dnieper-Donets II settlement sites in the Dnieper valley have been studied by zoologists—Surskii, Sredni Stog 1, and Sobachki in the steppe zone near the Rapids; and Buz’ki in the moister forest-steppe to the north (table 9.2). Domesticated cattle, sheep/goat, and pig accounted for 30–75% of the animal bones in these settlements. Sheep/goat contributed more than 50% of the bones at Sredni Stog 1 and 26% at Sobachki. Sheep finally were accepted into the meat diet in the steppes. Perhaps they were already being plucked for felt making; the vocabulary for wool might have first appeared among Pre-Proto-Indo-European speakers at about this time. Wild horses were the most important game (?) animal at Sredni Stog 1 and Sobachki, whereas red deer, roe deer, wild pig, and beaver were hunted in the more forested parts of the river at Buz’ki and Surskii 2–4. Fishing net weights and hooks suggest that fish remained important. This is confirmed by levels of 15N in the bones of people who lived on the Dnieper Rapids, which indicate a meat diet containing more than 50% fish. Domesticated cattle, pig, and sheep bones occurred in all DDII settlements and in several cemeteries, and constituted more than half the bones at two settlement sites (Sredni Stog I and Sobachki) in the steppe zone. Domesticated animals seem indeed to have been an important addition to the diet around the Dnieper Rapids.17

TABLE 9.2

Dnieper- Donets II Animal Bones from Settlements



Flint blades with sickle gloss attest to the harvesting of cereals at DDII settlements. But they could have been wild seed plants like Chenopodium or Amaranthus. If cultivated cereals were harvested there was very little evidence found. Two impressions of barley (Hordeum vulgare) were recovered on a potsherd from a DDII settlement site at Vita Litovskaya, near Kiev, west of the Dnieper. In the forests northwest of Kiev, near the Pripet marshes, there were sites with pottery that somewhat resembled DDII pottery but there were no elaborate cemeteries or other traits of the DDII culture. Some of these settlements (Krushniki, Novosilki, Obolon’) had pottery with a few seed impressions of wheat (T. monococcum and T. dicoccum) and millet (Panicum sativum). These sites probably should be dated before 4500 BCE, since Lengyel-related cultures replaced them in Volhynia and the Polish borderlands after about that date. Some forest-zone farming seems to have been practiced in the southern Pripet forests west of the Dnieper. But in steppe-zone DDII cemeteries east of the Dnieper, Malcolm Lillie recorded almost no dental caries, suggesting that the DDII people ate a low-carbohydrate diet similar to that of the Mesolithic. No cultivated cereal imprints have been found east of the Dnieper River in pots dated before about 4000 BCE.18





Pottery and Settlement Types


Pottery was more abundant in DDII living sites than it had been in DDI, and appeared for the first time in cemeteries (figure 9.5). The growing importance of pottery perhaps implies a more sedentary lifestyle, but shelters were still lightly built and settlements left only faint footprints. A typical DDII settlement on the Dnieper River was Buz’ki. It consisted of five hearths and two large heaps of discarded shellfish and animal bones. No structures were detected, although some kind of shelter probably did exist.19 Pots here and in other DDII sites were made in larger sizes (30–40 cm in diameter) with flat bottoms (pots seen in DDI sites had mainly pointed or rounded bottoms) and an applied collar around the rim. Decoration usually covered the entire outside of the vessel, made by pricking the surface with a stick, stamping designs with a small comb-stamp, or incising thin lines in horizontal-linear and zig-zag motifs—quite different from the spirals and swirls of Tripolye A potters. The application of a “collar” to thicken the rim was a popular innovation, widely adopted across the Pontic-Caspian steppes about 4800 BCE.

Polished (not chipped) stone axes now became common tools, perhaps for felling forests, and long unifacial flint blades (5–15 cm long) also became increasingly common, perhaps as a standardized part of a trade or gift package, since they appeared in graves and in small hoards in settlements.





Dnieper-Donets II Funeral Rituals


DDII funerals were quite different from those of the Mesolithic or Neolithic. The dead usually were exposed, their bones were collected, and they were finally buried in layers in communal pits. Some individuals were buried in the flesh, without exposure. This communal pit type of cemetery, with several treatments of the body in one pit, spread to other steppe regions. The thirty known DDII communal cemeteries were concentrated around the Dnieper Rapids but occurred also in other parts of the Dnieper valley and in the steppes north of the Sea of Azov. The largest cemeteries were three times larger than those of any earlier era, with 173 bodies at Dereivka, 137 at Nikol’skoe, 130 at Vovigny II, 124 at Mariupol, 68 at Yasinovatka, 50 at Vilnyanka, and so on. Pits contained up to four layers of burials, some whole and in an extended supine position, others consisting of only skulls. Cemeteries contained up to nine communal burial pits. Traces of burned structures, perhaps charnel houses built to expose dead bodies, were detected near the pits at Mariupol and Nikol’skoe. At some cemeteries, including Nikol’skoe (figure 9.5), loose human bones were widely scattered around the burial pits.



Figure 9.5 Dnieper-Donets II cemetery at Nikol’skoe with funerary ceramics. Pits A,B,G, and V were in an area deeply stained with red ochre. The other five burial pits were on a slightly higher elevation. Broken pots and animal bones were found near the cluster of rocks in the center. After Telegin 1991, figures 10, 20; and Telegin 1968, figure 27.

At Nikol’skoe and Dereivka some layers in the pits contained only skulls, without mandibles, indicating that some bodies were cleaned to the bone long before final burial. Other individuals were buried in the flesh, but the pose suggests that they were tightly wrapped in some kind of shroud. The first and last graves in the Nikol’skoe pits were whole skeletons. The standard burial posture for a body buried in the flesh was extended and supine, with the hands by the sides. Red ochre was densely strewn over the entire ritual area, inside and outside the grave pits, and pots and animal bones were broken and discarded near the graves.20

The funerals at DDII cemeteries were complex events that had several phases. Some bodies were exposed, and sometimes just their skulls were buried. In other cases whole bodies were buried. Both variants were placed together in the same multilayered pits, strewn with powdered red ochre. The remains of graveside feasts—cattle and horse bones—were thrown in the red-stained soil at Nikol’skoe, and cattle bones were found in grave 38, pit A, at Vilnyanka.21 At Nikol’skoe almost three thousand sherds of pottery, including three Tripolye A cups, were found among the animal bones and red ochre deposited over the graves.





Power and Politics


The people of the DDII culture looked different than people of earlier periods in two significant respects: the profusion of new decorations for the human body and the clear inequality in their distribution. The old fisher-gatherers of the Dnieper Rapids were buried wearing, at most, a few beads of deer or fish teeth. But in DDII cemeteries a few individuals were buried with thousands of shell beads, copper and gold ornaments, imported crystal and porphyry ornaments, polished stone maces, bird-bone tubes, and ornamental plaques made of boar’s tusk (figure 9.6). Boar’s-tusk plaques were restricted to very few individuals. The tusks were cut into rectangular flat pieces (not an easy thing to do), polished smooth, and pierced or incised for attachment to clothing. They may have been meant to emulate Tripolye A copper and Spondylus-shell plaques, but DDII chiefs found their own symbols of power in the tusks of wild boars.



Figure 9.6 Ornaments and symbols of power in the Early Eneolithic, from Dnieper-Donets II graves, Khvalynsk, and Varfolomievka. The photo of grave 50 at Mariupol, skull at the top, is adapted from Gimbutas 1956, plate 8. The beads from Nikol’skoe include two copper beads and a copper ring on the left, and a gold ring on the lower right. The other beads are polished and drilled stone. The maces from Mariupol and Nikol’skoe, and beads from Nikol’skoe are after Telegin 1991, figures 29, 38; and Telegin and Potekhina 1987, figure 39. The Varfolomievka mace (or pestle?) is after Yudin 1988, figure 2; Khvalynsk maces are after Agapov, Vasliev, and Pestrikova 1990, figure 24. Boars-tusk plaques, at the bottom, are after Telegin 1991, figure 38.

At the Mariupol cemetery 310 (70%) of the 429 boar’s-tusk plaques accompanied just 10 (8%) of the 124 individuals. The richest individual (gr. 8) was buried wearing forty boars-tusk plaques sewn to his thighs and shirt, and numerous belts made of hundreds of shell and mother-of-pearl beads. He also had a polished porphyry four-knobbed mace head (figure 9.6), a bull figurine carved from bone, and seven bird-bone tubes. At Yasinovatka, only one of sixty-eight graves had boars-tusk plaques: an adult male wore nine plaques in grave 45. At Nikol’skoe, a pair of adults (gr. 25 and 26) was laid atop a grave pit (B) equipped with a single boar’s-tusk plaque, a polished serpentine mace head, four copper beads, a copper wire ring, a gold ring, polished slate and jet beads, several flint tools, and an imported Tripolye A pot. The copper contained trace elements that identify it as Balkan in origin. Surprisingly few children were buried at Mariupol (11 of 124 individuals), suggesting that a selection was made—not all children who died were buried here. But one was among the richest of all the graves: he or she (sex is indeterminate in immature skeletons) wore forty-one boar’s-tusk plaques, as well as a cap armored with eleven whole boar’s tusks, and was profusely ornamented with strings of shell and bone beads. The selection of only a few children, including some who were very richly ornamented, implies the inheritance of status and wealth. Power was becoming institutionalized in families that publicly advertised their elevated status at funerals.

The valuables that signaled status were copper, shell, and imported stone beads and ornaments; boars-tusk plaques; polished stone mace-heads; and bird-bone tubes (function unknown). Status also might have been expressed through the treatment of the body after death (exposed, burial of the skull/not exposed, burial of the whole body); and by the public sacrifice of domesticated animals, particularly cattle. Similar markers of status were adopted across the Pontic-Caspian steppes, from the Dnieper to the Volga. Boars-tusk plaques with exactly the same flower-like projection on the upper edge (figure 9.6, top plaque from Yasinovatka) were found at Yasinovatka in the Dnieper valley and in a grave at S’yezzhe in the Samara valley, 400 km to the east. Ornaments made of Balkan copper were traded across the Dnieper and appeared on the Volga. Polished stone mace-heads had different forms in the Dnieper valley (Nikol’skoe), the middle Volga (Khvalynsk), and the North Caspian region (Varfolomievka), but a mace is a weapon, and its wide adoption as a symbol of status suggests a change in the politics of power.





THE KHVALYNSK CULTURE ON THE VOLGA


The initial spread of stockbreeding in the Pontic-Caspian steppes was notable for the various responses it provoked. The DDII culture, where the shift began, incorporated domesticated animals not just as a ritual currency but also as an important part of the daily diet. Other people reacted in quite different ways, but they were all clearly interacting, perhaps even competing, with one another. A key regional variant was the Khvalynsk culture.

A prehistoric cemetery was discovered at Khvalynsk in 1977 on the west bank of the middle Volga. Threatened by the water impounded behind a Volga dam, it was excavated by teams led by Igor Vasiliev of Samara (figure 9.7). Its location has since been completely destroyed by bank erosion. Sites of the Khvalynsk type are now known from the Samara region southward along the banks of the Volga into the Caspian Depression and the Ryn Peski desert in the south. The characteristic pottery included open bowls and bag-like, round-bottomed pots, thick-walled and shell-tempered, with very distinctive sharply everted thick “collars” around the rims. They were densely embellished with bands of pricked and comb-stamped decoration that often covered the entire exterior surface. Early Khvalynsk, well documented at the Khvalynsk cemetery, began around 4700–4600 BCE in the middle Volga region (after adjusting the dates downward for the 15N content of the humnan bones on which the dates were measured). Late Khvalynsk on the lower Volga is dated 3900–3800 BCE at the site of Kara-Khuduk but probably survived even longer than this on the lower Volga.22

The first excavation at the Khvalynsk cemetery, in 1977–79 (excavation I), uncovered 158 graves; the second excavation in 1980–85 (excavation II) recovered, I have been told, 43 additional graves.23 Only Khvalynsk I has been published, so all statistics here are based on the first 158 graves (figure 9.7). Khvalynsk was by far the largest excavated Khvalynsk-type cemetery; most others had fewer than 10 graves. At Khvalynsk most of the deceased were layered in group pits, somewhat like DDII graves, but the groups were much smaller, containing only two to six individuals (perhaps families) buried on top of one another. One-third of the graves were single graves, a move away from the communal DDII custom. Only mature males, aged thirty to fifty, were exposed and disarticulated prior to burial, probably an expression of enhanced male status, associated with the introduction of herding economies elsewhere in the world.24 Few children were buried in the cemetery (13 of 158), but those who were included some of the most profusely ornamented individuals, again possibly indicating that status was inherited. The standard burial posture was on the back with the knees raised, a distinctive pose. Most had their heads to the north and east, a consistent orientation that was absent in DDII cemeteries. Both the peculiar posture and the standard orientation later became widespread in steppe funeral customs.



Figure 9.7 Khvalynsk cemetery and grave gifts. Grave 90 contained copper beads and rings, a harpoon, flint blades, and a bird-bone tube. Both graves (90 and 91) were partly covered by Sacrificial Deposit 4 with the bones from a horse, a sheep, and a cow.

Center: grave goods from the Khvalynsk cemetery—copper rings and bracelets, polished stone mace heads, polished stone bracelet, Cardium shell ornaments, boars tusk chest ornaments, flint blades, and bifiacial projectile points. Bottom: shell-tempered pottery from the Khvalynsk cemetery. After Agapov, Vasiliev, and Pestrikova 1990; and Ryndina 1998, Figure 31.

Khvalynsk had many more animal sacrifices than any DDII cemetery: 52 (or 70) sheep/goat, 23 cattle, and 11 horses, to accompany the burials of 158 humans. (The published reports are inconsistent on the number of sheep/goat.) The head-and-hoof form of sacrifice appeared for the first time: at least 17 sheep/goat and 9 cattle were slaughtered and only the skull and lower leg bones were buried, probably still attached to the animal’s hide. In later steppe funerals the custom of hanging a hide containing the head and hooves over the grave or burying it in the grave was very common. The head and hide symbolized a gift to the gods, and the flesh was doled out to guests at the funeral feast. Parts of domesticated animals were offered in all phases of the funerals at Khvalynsk: on the grave floor, in the grave fill, at the edge of the grave, and in twelve special sacrificial deposits stained with red ochre, found above the graves (figure 9.7). The distribution of animal sacrifices was unequal: 22 graves of 158 (14 percent) had animal sacrifices in the grave or above it, and enough animals were sacrificed to supply about half of the graves were they distributed equally. Only 4 graves (100, 127, 139, and 55–57) contained multiple species (cattle and sheep, sheep and horse, etc.) and all four of those also were covered by ochre-stained ritual deposits above the grave, with additional sacrifices. About one in five people had sacrificed domestic animals, and one in forty had multiple domestic animals.

The role of the horse in the Khvalynsk sacrifices is intriguing. The only animals sacrificed at Khvalysnk I were domesticated sheep/goat, domesticated cattle, and horses. Horse leg parts occurred by themselves, without other animal bones, in eight graves. They were included with a sheep/goat head-and-hoof offering in grave 127, and were included with sheep/goat and cattle remains in sacrificial deposit 4 (figure 9.7). It is not possible to measure the bones—they were discarded long ago—but horses certainly were treated symbolically like domesticated animals at Khvalynsk: they were grouped with cattle and sheep/goat in human funeral rituals that excluded obviously wild animals. Carved images of horses were found at other cemeteries dated to this same period (see below). Horses certainly had a new ritual and symbolic importance at Khvalynsk. If they were domesticated, they would represent the oldest domesticated horses.25

There is much more copper at Khvalynsk than is known from the entire DDII culture, and the copper objects there are truly remarkable (figure 9.7). Unfortunately most of it, an astonishing 286 objects, came from the 43 (?) graves of the Khvalynsk II excavation, still unpublished though analyses of some of the objects have been published by Natalya Ryndina. The Khvalynsk I excavation yielded 34 copper objects found in 11 of the 158 published graves. The copper from excavations I and II showed the same trace elements and technology, the former characteristic of Balkan copper. Ryndina’s study of 30 objects revealed three technological groups: 14 objects made at 300–500°C, 11 made at 600–800°C, and 5 made at 900–1,000°C. The quality of welding and forging was uniformly low in the first two groups, indicating local manufacture, but was strongly influenced by the methods of the Tripolye A culture. The third group, which included two thin rings and three massive spiral rings, was technically identical to Old European status objects from the cemeteries of Varna and Durankulak in Bulgaria. These objects were made in Old Europe and were traded in finished form to the Volga. In the 158 graves of Khvalynsk I, adult males had the most copper objects, but the number of graves with some copper was about equal between the sexes, five adult male graves and four adult female graves. An adolescent (gr. 90 in figure 9.7) and a child were also buried with copper rings and beads.26

Polished stone mace-heads and polished serpentine and steatite stone bracelets appeared with copper as status symbols. Two polished stone maces occurred in one adult male grave (gr. 108) and one in another (gr. 57) at Khvalynsk. Grave 108 also contained a polished steatite bracelet. Similar bracelets and mace-heads were found in other Khvalynsk-culture cemeteries on the Volga, for example, at Krivoluchie (Samara oblast) and Khlopkovskii (Saratov oblast). Some mace heads were given “ears” that made them seem vaguely zoomorphic, and some observers have seen horse heads in them. A clearly zoomorphic polished stone mace head appeared at Varfolomievka, part of a different culture group on the lower Volga. Maces, copper, and elaborate decoration of the body appeared with domesticated animals, not before.27

Khvalynsk settlements have been found at Gundurovka and Lebyazhinka I on the Sok River, north of the Samara. But the Khvalynsk artifacts and pottery are mixed with artifacts of other cultures and ages, making it difficult to isolate features or animal bones that can be ascribed to the Khvalynsk period alone. We do know from the bones of the Khvalynsk people themselves that they ate a lot of fish; with an average 15N measurement of 14.8%, fish probably represented 70% of their meat diet. Pure Khvalynsk camps have been found on the lower Volga in the Ryn Peski desert, but these were specialized hunters’ camps where onagers and saiga antelope were the quarry, comprising 80–90 percent of the animal bones. Even here, at Kara Khuduk I, we find a few sheep/goat and cattle bones (6–9 %), perhaps provisions carried by Khvalynsk hunters.

In garbage dumps found at sites of other steppe cultures of the same period east of the Don (see below), horse bones usually made up more than half the bones found, and the percentage of cattle and sheep was usually under 40%. In the east, cattle and sheep were more important in ritual sacrifices than in the diet, as if they were initially regarded as a kind of ritual currency used for occasional (seasonal?) sanctified meals and funeral feasts. They certainly were associated with new rituals at funerals, and probably with other new religious beliefs and myths as well. The set of cults that spread with the first domesticated animals was at the root of the Proto-Indo-European conception of the universe as described at the beginning of chapter 8.





NALCHIK AND NORTH CAUCASIAN CULTURES


Many archaeologists have wondered if domesticated cattle and sheep might have entered the steppes through the Eneolithic farmers of the Caucasus as well as from Old Europe.28 Farming cultures had spread from the Near East into the southern Caucasus Mountains (Shulaveri, Arukhlo, and Shengavit) by 5800–5600 BCE. But these earliest farming communities in the Caucasus were not widespread; they remained concentrated in a few riverbottom locations in the upper Kura and Araxes River valleys. No bridging sites linked them to the distant European steppes, more than 500 km to the north and west. The permanently glaciated North Caucasus Mountains, the highest and most impassable mountain range in Europe, stood between them and the steppes. The bread wheats (Triticum aestivum) preferred in the Caucasus were less tolerant of drought conditions than the hulled wheats (emmer, einkorn) preferred by Criş, Linear Pottery, and Bug-Dniester cultivators. The botanist Zoya Yanushevich observed that the cultivated cereals that appeared in Bug-Dniester sites and later in the Pontic-Caspian steppe river valleys were a Balkan/Danubian crop suite, not a Caucasian crop suite.29 Nor is there an obvious stylistic connection between the pottery or artifacts of the earliest Caucasian farmers at Shulaveri and those of the earliest herders in the steppes off to the north. If I had to guess at the linguistic identity of the first Eneolithic farmers at Shulaveri, I would link them with the ancestors of the Kartvelian language family.

The Northwest Caucasian languages, however, are quite unlike Kartvelian. Northwest Caucasian seems to be an isolate, a survival of some unique language stock native to the northern slopes of the North Caucasus Mountains. In the western part of the North Caucasian piedmont, overlooking the steppes, the few documented Eneolithic communities had stone tools and pottery somewhat like those of their northern steppe neighbors; these communities were southern participants in the steppe world, not northern extensions of Shulaveri-type Caucasian farmers. I would guess they spoke languages ancestral to Northwest Caucasian, but only a few early sites are published. The most important is the cemetery at Nalchik.

Near Nalchik, in the center of the North Caucasus piedmont, was a cemetery containing 147 graves with contracted skeletons lying on their sides in red ochre—stained pits in groups of two or three under stone cairns. Females lay in a contracted pose on the left side and males on their right.30 A few copper ornaments, beads made of deer and cattle teeth, and polished stone bracelets (like those found in grave 108 at Khvalynsk and at Krivoluchie) accompanied them. One grave yielded a date on human bone of 5000–4800 BCE (possibly too old by a hundred to five hundred years, if the dated sample was contaminated by old carbon in fish). Five graves in the same region at Staronizhesteblievsk were provided with boars-tusk plaques of the DDII Mariupol type, animal-tooth beads, and flint blades that seem at home in the Early Eneolithic.31 An undated cave occupation in the Kuban valley at Kamennomost Cave, level 2, which could be of the same date, has yielded sheep/goat and cattle bones stratified beneath a later level with Maikop-culture materials. Carved stone bracelets and ornamental stones from the Caucasus—black jet, rock crystal, and porphyry—were traded into Khvalynsk and Dnieper-Donets II sites, perhaps from people like those at Nal’chik and Kamennomost Cave 2. The Nalchik-era sites clearly represent a community that had at least a few domesticated cattle and sheep/goats, and was in contact with Khvalynsk. They probably got their domesticated animals from the Dnieper, as the Khvalynsk people did.





THE LOWER DON AND NORTH CASPIAN STEPPES


In the steppes between Nalchik and Khvalynsk many more sites, of different kinds, are dated to this period. Rakushechni Yar on the lower Don, near the Sea of Azov, is a deeply stratified settlement site with a cluster of six graves at the edge of the settlement area. The lowest cultural levels, with shell-tempered pottery lightly decorated with incised linear motifs and impressions made with a triangular-ended stick, probably dated about 5200–4800 BCE, contained the bones of sheep/goat and cattle. But in the interior steppes, away from the major river valleys, equid hunting was still the focus of the economy. In the North Caspian Depression the forager camp of Dzhangar, also dated 5200 BCE (on animal bone) and with pottery similar to Rakushechni Yar, yielded only the bones of wild horses and onagers.32

On the eastern side of the lower Volga, sites such as Varfolomievka were interspersed with Khvalynsk hunters’ camps such as Kara Khuduk I.33 The settlement at Varfolomievka is stratified and well dated by radiocarbon, and clearly shows the transition from foraging to herding in the North Caspian Depression. Varfolomievka was first occupied around 5800–5600 BCE by pottery-making foragers who hunted onagers and horses (level 3). The site was reoccupied twice more (levels 2B and 2A). In level 2B, dated about 5200–4800 BCE, people constructed three pit-houses. They used copper (one copper awl and some amorphous lumps of copper were found) and kept domesticated sheep/goats, though “almost half” the animal bones at Varfolomievka were of horses. Bone plaques were carved in the shape of horses, and horse metacarpals were incised with geometric decorations. Three polished stone mace-head fragments were found here. One was carved into an animal head at one end, perhaps a horse (figure 9.6). Four graves were dug rather casually into abandoned house depressions at Varfolomievka, like the similar group of graves at the edge of Rakushechni Yar. Hundreds of beads made of drilled and polished horse teeth were deposited in ochre-stained sacrificial deposits near the human graves. There were also a few deer teeth, several kinds of shell beads, and whole boars’ tusk ornaments.

These sites in the southern steppes, from the lower Don to the lower Volga, are dated 5200–4600 BCE and exhibit the bones of sheep/goat and occasionally cattle, small objects of copper, and casual disposal of the dead. Small settlements provide most of the data, unlike the cemetery-based archaeological record for Khvalynsk. Pots were shell-tempered and decorated with designs incised or pricked with a triangular-ended stick. Motifs included diamond-like lozenges and, rarely, incised meanders filled with pricked ornament. Most rims were simple but some were thickened on the inside. A. Yudin has grouped these sites together under the name of the Orlovka culture, after the settlement of Orlovka, excavated in 1974, on the Volga. Nalchik seems to have existed at the southern fringe of this network.34





THE FOREST FRONTIER: THE SAMARA CULTURE


One other culture interacted with northern Khvalynsk in the middle Volga region, along the forest-steppe boundary (see figure 9.1). The Samara Neolithic culture, distinguished by its own variety of “collared” pots covered with pricked, incised, and rocker-stamped motifs, developed at the northern edge of the steppe zone along the Samara River. The pottery, tempered with sand and crushed plants, was similar to that made on the middle Don River. Dwellings at Gundurovka near Samara had dug-out floors, 20 m by 8 m, with multiple hearths and storage pits in the floors (this settlement also contained Khvalynsk pottery). Domesticated sheep/goat (13% of 3,602 bones) and cattle (21%) were identified at Ivanovskaya on the upper Samara River, although 66% of the bones were of horses. The settlement of Vilovatoe on the Samara River yielded 552 identifiable bones, of which 28.3% were horse, 19.4% were sheep/goat, and 6.3% were cattle, in addition to beaver (31.8%) and red deer (12.9%). The Samara culture showed some forest-culture traits: it had large polished stone adzes like those of forest foragers to the north.

Samara people created formal cemeteries (figure 9.8). The cemetery at S’yezzhe (see-YOZH-yay) contained nine burials in an extended position on their backs, different from the Khvalynsk position and more like that of DDII. Above the graves at the level of the original ground surface was a ritual deposit of red ochre, broken pottery, shell beads, a bone harpoon, and the skulls and lower leg bones (astragali and phalanges) of two horses—funeral-feast deposits like the above-grave deposits at Khvalynsk. S’yezzhe had the oldest horse head-and-hoof deposit in the steppes. Near the horse head-and-hoof deposit, but outside the area of ochre-stained soil, were two figurines of horses carved on flat pieces of bone, similar to others found at Varfolomievka, and one bone figurine of a bull. The S’yezzhe people wore boar’s-tusk plaques like those of the Dnieper-Donets II culture, one of which was shaped exactly like one found at the DDII cemetery of Yasinovatka in the Dnieper valley.35



Figure 9.8 S’yezzhe cemetery, Samara oblast. Graves 1–9 were a cemetery of the Samara culture, Early Eneolithic. Graves 10 and 11 were later. After Vasiliev and Matveeva 1979.





COWS, SOCIAL POWER, AND THE EMERGENCE OF TRIBES


It is impossible to say how much the people buried at Khvalynsk really knew of the societies of Old Europe, but they certainly were connected by a trade network of impressive reach. Cemeteries across the Pontic-Caspian steppes (DDII, Khvalynsk, S’yezzhe, Nalchik) became larger or appeared for the first time, suggesting the growth of larger, more stable communities. Cattle and sheep were important in the diet at some DDII settlements on the Dnieper River, but farther east they seem initially to have been more important in funeral rituals than in the daily diet, which was still dominated by horse meat. In the east, domesticated cattle and sheep seem to have served as a kind of currency in a new set of rituals and religious beliefs.

Participation in long-distance trade, gift exchange, and a new set of cults requiring public sacrifices and feasting became the foundation for a new kind of social power. Stockbreeding is by nature a volatile economy. Herders who lose animals always borrow from those who still have them. The social obligations associated with these loans are institutionalized among the world’s pastoralists as the basis for a fluid system of status distinctions. Those who loaned animals acquired power over those who borrowed them, and those who sponsored feasts obligated their guests. Early Proto-Indo-European included a vocabulary about verbal contracts bound by oaths (*h1óitos-), used in later religious rituals to specify the obligations between the weak (humans) and the strong (gods). Reflexes of this root were preserved in Celtic, Germanic, Greek, and Tocharian. The model of political relations it references probably began in the Eneolithic. Only a few Eneolithic steppe people wore the elaborate costumes of tusks, plaques, beads, and rings or carried the stone maces that symbolized power, but children were included in this exceptional group, suggesting that the rich animal loaners at least tried to see that their children inherited their status. Status competition between regional leaders, *weik-potis or *re- in later Proto-Indo-European, resulted in a surprisingly widespread set of shared status symbols. As leaders acquired followers, political networks emerged around them—and this was the basis for tribes.

Societies that did not accept the new herding economy became increasingly different from those that did. The people of the northern forest zone remained foragers, as did those who lived in the steppes east of the Ural Mountains. These frontiers probably were linguistic as well as economic, given their persistence and clarity. The Pre-Proto-Indo-European language family probably expanded with the new economy during the Early Eneolithic in the western steppes. Its sister-to-sister linguistic links may well have facilitated the spread of stockbreeding and the beliefs that went with it.

One notable aspect of the Pontic-Caspian Early Eneolithic is the importance of horses, in both diet and funeral symbolism. Horse meat was a major part of the meat diet. Images of horses were carved on bone plaques at Varfolomievka and S’yezzhe. At Khvalynsk, horses were included with cattle and sheep in funeral rituals that excluded obviously wild animals. But, zoologically, we cannot say whether they looked very different from wild horses—the bones no longer exist. The domestication of the horse, an enormously important event in human history, is not at all well understood. Recently, however, a new kind of evidence has been obtained straight from the horse’s mouth.





CHAPTER TEN





The Domestication of the Horse and the Origins of Riding The Tale of the Teeth


The importance of the horse in human history is matched only by the difficulties

inherent in its study; there is hardly an incident in the story which is not the

subject of controversy, often of a violent nature.

1—Grahame Clark, 1941

In the summer of 1985 I went with my wife Dorcas Brown, a fellow archaeologist, to the Veterinary School at the University of Pennsylvania to ask a veterinary surgeon a few questions. Do bits create pathologies on horse teeth? If they do, then shouldn’t we be able to see the signs of bitting—scratches or small patches of wear—on ancient horse teeth? Wouldn’t that be a good way to identify early bitted horses? Could he point us toward the medical literature on the dental pathologies associated with horse bits? He replied that there really was no literature on the subject. A properly bitted horse wearing a well-adjusted bridle, he said, really can’t take the bit in its teeth very easily, so contact between the bit and the teeth would have been too infrequent to show up with any regularity. Nice idea, but it wouldn’t work. We decided to get a second opinion.

At the Veterinary School’s New Bolton Center for large mammals, outside Philadelphia, the trainers, who worked every day with horses, responded very differently. Horses chewed their bits all the time, they said. Some rolled the bit around in their mouths like candy. You could hear it clacking against their teeth. Of course, it was a vice—properly trained and harnessed horses were not supposed to do it, but they did. And we should talk to Hilary Clayton, formerly at New Bolton, who had gone to a university job somewhere in Canada. She had been studying the mechanics of bits in horses’ mouths.

We located Hilary Clayton at the University of Saskatchewan and found that she had made X-ray fluoroscopic videos of horses chewing bits (figure 10.1). She bitted horses and manipulated the reins from a standing position behind. An X-ray fluoroscope mounted beside the horses’ heads took pictures of what was happening inside their mouths. No one had done this before. She sent us two articles co-authored with colleagues in Canada.1 Their images showed just how horses manipulated a bit inside their mouths and precisely where it sat between their teeth. A well-positioned bit is supposed to sit on the tongue and gums in the space between the front and back teeth, called bars “the” of the mouth. When the rider pulls the reins, the bit presses the tongue and the gums into the lower jaw, squeezing the sensitive gum tissue between the bit and the underlying bone. That hurts. The horse will dip its head toward a one-sided pull (a turn) or lower its chin into a two-sided pull (a brake) to avoid the bit’s pressure on its tongue and gums.



Figure 10.1 A modern metal bit in a horse’s mouth. Mandible bone tinted gray. (a) jointed snaffle bit; (b) X-ray of jointed snaffle sitting on the tongue in proper position; (c) X-ray of snaffle being grasped in the teeth; (d) bar bit showing chewing wear; (e) X-ray of bar bit sitting on the tongue in proper position; (f) X-ray of bar bit being grasped in the teeth. After Clayton and Lee 1984; and Clayton 1985.

Clayton’s X-rays showed how horses use their tongues to elevate the bit and then retract it, pushing it back into the grip of their premolars, where it can no longer cause pressure on soft tissue no matter how hard the rider pulls on the reins. The soft corners of the mouth are positioned in front of the molars, so in order to get a bit into its teeth the horse has to force it back against the corners of its mouth. These stretched tissues act like a spring. If the bit is not held very firmly between the tips of the teeth it will pop forward again onto the bars of the mouth. It seemed likely to us that this repeated back-and-forth movement over the tips of the front premolars should affect the lower teeth more than the uppers just because of gravity—the bit sat on the lower jaw. The wear from bit chewing should be concentrated on one small part of two teeth (the lower second premolars, or P2s), unlike the wear from chewing anything else. Clayton’s X-rays made it possible, for the first time, to say positively that a specific part of a single tooth was the place to look for bit wear. We found several published photographs of archaeological horse P2s with wear facets or bevels on precisely that spot. Two well-known archaeological zoologists, Juliet Clutton-Brock in London and Antonio Azzaroli in Rome, had described this kind of wear as “possibly” made by a bit. Other zoologists thought it was impossible for horses to get a bit that far back into their mouth with any frequency, like our first veterinary surgeon. No one knew for sure. But they had not seen Clayton’s X-rays.2

Encouraged and excited, we visited the anthropology department at the Smithsonian Museum of Natural History in Washington, and asked Melinda Zeder, then a staff archaeozoologist, if we could study some never-bitted ancient wild horse teeth—a control sample—and if she could offer us some technical advice about how to proceed. We were not trained as zoologists, and we did not know much about horse teeth. Zeder and a colleague who knew a lot about dental microwear, Kate Gordon, sat us down in the staff cafeteria. How would we distinguish bit wear from tooth irregularities caused by malocclusion? Or from dietary wear, created by normal chewing on food? Would the wear caused by a bit survive very long, or would it be worn away by dietary wear? How long would that take? How fast do horse teeth grow? Aren’t they the kind of teeth that grow out of the jaw and are worn away at the crown until they become little stubs? Would that change bit wear facets with increasing age? What about rope or leather bits—probably the oldest kind? Do they cause wear? What kind? Is the action of the bit different when a horse is ridden from when it pulls a chariot? And what, exactly, causes wear—if it exists? Is it the rider pulling the bit into the front of the tooth, or is it the horse chewing on the bit, which would cause wear on the occlusal (chewing) surface of the tooth? Or is it both? And if we did find wear under the microscope, how would we describe it so that the difference between a tooth with and without wear could be quantified?

Mindy Zeder took us through her collections. We made our first molds of ancient equid P2s, from the Bronze Age city of Malyan in Iran, dated about 2000 BCE. They had wear facets on their mesial corners; later we would be able to say that the facets were created by a hard bit of bone or metal. But we didn’t know that yet, and, as turned out, there really was not a large collection of never-bitted wild horse teeth at the Smithsonian. We had to find our own, and we left thinking that we could do it if we took one problem at a time. Twenty years later we still feel that way.3





WHERE WERE HORSES FIRST DOMESTICATED?


Bit wear is important, because other kinds of evidence have proven uncertain guides to early horse domestication. Genetic evidence, which we might hope would solve the problem, does not help much. Modern horses are genetically schizophrenic, like cattle (chapter 8) but with the genders reversed. The female bloodline of modern domesticated horses shows extreme diversity. Traits inherited through the mitochondrial DNA, which passes unchanged from mother to daughter, show that this part of the bloodline is so diverse that at least seventy-seven ancestral mares, grouped into seventeen phylogenetic branches, are required to account for the genetic variety in modern populations around the globe. Wild mares must have been taken into domesticated horse herds in many different places at different times. Meanwhile, the male aspect of modern horse DNA, which is passed unchanged on the Y chromosome from sire to colt, shows remarkable homogeneity. It is possible that just a single wild stallion was domesticated. So horse keepers apparently have felt free to capture and breed a variety of wild mares, but, according to these data, they universally rejected wild males and even the male progeny of any wild stallions that mated with domesticated mares. Modern horses are descended from very few original wild males, and many, varied wild females.4





Why the Difference?


Wildlife biologists have observed the behavior of feral horse bands in several places around the world, notably at Askania Nova, Ukraine, on the barrier islands of Maryland and Virginia (the horses described in the childrens’ classic Misty of Chincoteague), and in northwestern Nevada. The standard feral horse band consists of a stallion with a harem of two to seven mares and their immature offspring. Adolescents leave the band at about two years of age. Stallion-and-harem bands occupy a home range, and stallions fight one another, fiercely, for control of mares and territory. After the young males are expelled they form loose associations called “bachelor bands,” which lurk at the edges of the home range of an established stallion. Most bachelors are unable to challenge mature stallions or keep mares successfully until they are more than five years old. Within established bands, the mares are arranged in a social hierarchy led by the lead mare, who chooses where the band will go during most of the day and leads it in flight if there is a threat, while the stallion guards the flanks or the rear. Mares are therefore instinctively disposed to accept the dominance of others, whether dominant mares, stallions—or humans. Stallions are headstrong and violent, and are instinctively disposed to challenge authority by biting and kicking. A relatively docile and controllable mare could be found at the bottom of the pecking order in many wild horse bands, but a relatively docile and controllable stallion was an unusual individual—and one that had little hope of reproducing in the wild. Horse domestication might have depended on a lucky coincidence: the appearance of a relatively manageable and docile male in a place where humans could use him as the breeder of a domesticated bloodline. From the horse’s perspective, humans were the only way he could get a girl. From the human perspective, he was the only sire they wanted.





Where Did He Live? And When?


Animal domestication, like marriage, is the culmination of a long prior relationship. People would not invest the time and energy to attempt to care for an animal they were unfamiliar with. The first people to think seriously about the benefits of keeping, feeding, and raising tame horses must have been familiar with wild horses. They must have lived in a place where humans spent a lot of time hunting wild horses and learning their behavior. The part of the world where this was possible contracted significantly about ten thousand to fourteen thousand years ago, when the Ice Age steppe—a favorable environment for horses—was replaced by dense forest over much of the Northern Hemisphere. The horses of North America became extinct as the climate shifted, for reasons still poorly understood. In Europe and Asia large herds of wild horses survived only in the steppes in the center of the Eurasian continent, leaving smaller populations isolated in pockets of naturally open pasture (marsh-grass meadows, alpine meadows, arid mesetas) in Europe, central Anatolia (modern Turkey), and the Caucasus Mountains. Horses disappeared from Iran, lowland Mesopotamia, and the Fertile Crescent, leaving these warm regions to other equids (onagers and asses) (figure 10.2).



Figure 10.2 Map of the distribution of wild horses (Equus caballus) in the mid-Holocene, about 5000 BCE. The numbers show the approximate frequencies of horse bones in human kitchen garbage in each region, derived from charts in Benecke 1994 and from various Russian sources.

In western and central Europe, central Anatolia, and the Caucasus the isolated pockets of horses that survived into the Holocene never became important in the human food quest—there just weren’t enough of them. In Anatolia, for example, a few wild horses probably were hunted occasionally by the Neolithic occupants of Catal Hüyök, Pinarbaşi, and other farming villages in the central plateau region between about 7400 and 6200 BCE. But most of the equids hunted at these sites were Equus hydruntinus (now extinct) or Equus hemionus (onagers), both ass-like equids smaller than horses. Only a few bones are large enough to qualify as possible horses. Horses were not present in Neolithic sites in western Anatolia, or in Greece or Bulgaria, or in the Mesolithic and Early Neolithic of Austria, Hungary, or southern Poland. In western and northern Europe, Mesolithic foragers hunted horses occasionally. But horse bones accounted for more than 5% of the animals in only a few post-Glacial sites in the coastal plain of Germany/Poland and in the uplands of southern France. In the Eurasian steppes, on the other hand, wild horses and related wild equids (onagers, E. hydruntinus) were the most common wild grazing animals. In early Holocene steppe archaeological sites (Mesolithic and early Neolithic) wild horses regularly account for more than 40% of the animal bones, and probably more than 40% of the meat diet because horses are so big and meaty. For this reason alone we should look first to the Eurasian steppes for the earliest episode of domestication, the one that probably gave us our modern male bloodline.5

Early and middle Holocene archaeological sites in the Pontic-Caspian steppes contain the bones of three species of equids. In the Caspian Depression, at Mesolithic sites such as Burovaya 53, Je-Kalgan, and Istai IV, garbage dumps dated before 5500 BCE contain almost exclusively the bones of horses and onagers (see site map, figure 8.3). The onager, Equus hemionus, also called a “hemione” or “half-ass,” was a fleet-footed, long-eared animal smaller than a horse and larger than an ass. The natural range of the onager extended from the Caspian steppes across Central Asia and Iran and into the Near East. A second equid, Equus hydruntinus, was hunted in the slightly moister North Pontic steppes in Ukraine, where its bones occur in small percentages in Mesolithic and Early Neolithic components at Girzhevo and Matveev Kurgan, dated to the late seventh millennium BCE. This small, gracile animal, which then lived from the Black Sea steppes westward into Bulgaria and Romania and south into Anatolia, became extinct before 3000 BCE. The true horse, Equus caballus, ranged across both the Caspian Depression and the Black Sea steppes, and it survived in both environments long after both E. hemionus and E. hydruntinus were hunted out. Horse bones contributed more than 50% of the identified animal bones at Late Mesolithic Girzhevo in the Dniester steppes and Meso/Neolithic Matveev Kurgan and Kammenaya Mogila in the Azov steppes; also at Neo/Eneolithic Varfolomievka and Dzhangar in the Caspian Depression, Ivanovskaya on the Samara River, and Mullino in the southern foothills of the Ural Mountains. The long history of human dependence on wild equids in the steppes created a familiarity with their habits that would later make the domestication of the horse possible.6





WHY WERE HORSES DOMESTICATED?


The earliest evidence for possible horse domestication in the Pontic-Caspian steppes appeared after 4800 BCE, long after sheep, goats, pigs, and cattle were domesticated in other parts of the world. What was the incentive to tame wild horses if people already had cattle and sheep? Was it for transportation? Almost certainly not. Horses were large, powerful, aggressive animals, more inclined to flee or fight than to carry a human. Riding probably developed only after horses were already familiar as domesticated animals that could be controlled. The initial incentive probably was the desire for a cheap source of winter meat.

Horses are easier to feed through the winter than cattle or sheep, as cattle and sheep push snow aside with their noses and horses use their hard hooves. Sheep can graze on winter grass through soft snow, but if the snow becomes crusted with ice than their noses will get raw and bloody, and they will stand and starve in a field where there is ample winter forage just beneath their feet. Cattle do not forage through even soft snow if they cannot see the grass, so a snow deep enough to hide the winter grass will kill range cattle if they are not given fodder. Neither cattle nor sheep will break the ice on frozen water to drink. Horses have the instinct to break through ice and crusted snow with their hooves, not their noses, even in deep snows where the grass cannot be seen. They paw frozen snow away and feed themselves and so do not need water or fodder. In 1245 the Franciscan John of Plano Carpini journeyed to Mongolia to meet Güyük Khan (the successor to Genghis) and observed the steppe horses of the Tartars, as he called them, digging for grass from under the snow, “since the Tartars have neither straw nor hay nor fodder.” During the historic blizzard of 1886 in the North American Plains hundreds of thousands of cattle were lost on the open range. Those that survived followed herds of mustangs and grazed in the areas they opened up.7 Horses are supremely well adapted to the cold grasslands where they evolved. People who lived in cold grasslands with domesticated cattle and sheep would soon have seen the advantage in keeping horses for meat, just because the horses did not need fodder or water. A shift to colder climatic conditions or even a particularly cold series of winters could have made cattle herders think seriously about domesticating horses. Just such a shift to colder winters occurred between about 4200 and 3800 BCE (see chapter 11).

Cattle herders would have been particularly well suited to manage horses because cattle and horse bands both follow the lead of a dominant female. Cowherds already knew they needed only to control the lead cow to control the whole herd, and would easily have transferred that knowledge to controlling lead mares. Males presented a similar management problem in both species, and they had the same iconic status as symbols of virility and strength. When people who depended on equid-hunting began to keep domesticated cattle, someone would soon have noticed these similarities and applied cattle-management techniques to wild horses. And that would quickly have produced the earliest domesticated horses.

This earliest phase of horse keeping, when horses were primarily a recalcitrant but convenient source of winter meat, may have begun as early as 4800 BCE in the Pontic-Caspian steppes. This was when, at Khvalynsk and S’yezzhe in the middle Volga region, and Nikol’skoe on the Dnieper Rapids, horse heads and/or lower legs were first joined with the heads and/or lower legs of cattle and sheep in human funeral rituals; and when bone carvings of horses appeared with carvings of cattle in a few sites like S’yezzhe and Varfolomievka. Certainly horses were linked symbolically with humans and the cultured world of domesticated animals by 4800 BCE. Horse keeping would have added yet another element to the burst of economic, ritual, decorative, and political innovations that swept across the western steppes with the initial spread of stockbreeding about 5200–4800 BCE.





WHAT IS A DOMESTICATED HORSE?


We decided to investigate bit wear on horse teeth, because it is difficult to distinguish the bones of early domesticated horses from those of their wild cousins. The Russian zoologist V. Bibikova tried to define a domesticated skull type in 1967, but her small sample of horse skulls did not define a reliable type for most zoologists.

The bones of wild animals usually are distinguished from those of domesticated animals by two quantifiable measurements: measurements of variability in size, and counts of the ages and sexes of butchered animals. Other criteria include finding animals far outside their natural range and detecting domestication-related pathologies, of which bit wear is an example. Crib biting, a stall-chewing vice of bored horses, might cause another domestication-related pathology on the incisor teeth of horses kept in stalls, but it has not been studied systematically. Marsha Levine of the McDonald Institute at Cambridge University has examined riding-related pathologies in vertebrae, but vertebrae are difficult to study. They break and rot easily, their frequency is low in most archaeological samples, and only eight caudal thoracic vertebrae (T11–18) are known to exhibit pathologies from riding. Discussions of horse domestication still tend to focus on the first two methods.8





The Size-Variability Method


The size-variability method depends on two assumptions: (1) domesticated populations, because they are protected, should contain a wider variety of sizes and statures that survive to adulthood, or more variability; and (2) the average size of the domesticated population as a whole should decline, because penning, control of movement, and a restricted diet should reduce average stature. Measurements of leg bones (principally the width of the condyle and shaft) are used to look for these patterns. This method seems to work quite well with the leg bones of cattle and sheep: an increase in variability and reduction in average size does apparently identify domesticated cattle and sheep.

But the underlying assumptions are not known to apply to the earliest domesticated horses. American Indians controlled their horses not in a corral but with a “hobble” (a short rope tied between the two front legs, permitting a walk but not a run). The principal advantage of early horse keeping—its low cost in labor—could be realized only if horses were permitted to forage for themselves. Pens and corrals would defeat this purpose. Domesticated horses living and grazing in the same environment with their wild cousins probably would not show a reduction in size, and might not show an increase in variability. These changes could be expected if and when horses were restricted to shelters and fed fodder over the winter, like cattle and sheep were, or when they were separated into different herds that were managed and trained differently, for example, for riding, chariot teams, or meat and milk production.

During the earliest phase of horse domestication, when horses were free-ranging and kept for their meat, any size reductions caused by human control probably would have been obscured by natural variations in size between different regional wild populations. The scattered wild horses living in central and western Europe were smaller than the horses that lived in the steppes. In figure 10.3, the three bars on the left of the graph represent wild horses from Ice Age and Early Neolithic Germany. They were quite small. Bars 4 and 5 represent wild horses from forest-steppe and steppe-edge regions, which were significantly bigger. The horses from Dereivka, in the central steppes of Ukraine, were bigger still; 75% stood between 133 and 137 cm at the withers, or between 13 and 14 hands. The horses of Botai in northern Kazakhstan were even bigger, often over 14 hands. West-east movements of horse populations could cause changes in their average sizes, without any human interference. This leaves an increase in variability as the only indicator of domestication during the earliest phase. And variability is very sensitive to sample size—the larger the sample of bones, the better the chance of finding very small and very large individuals—so changes in variability alone are difficult to separate from sample-size effects.



Figure 10.3 The size-variability method for identifying the bones of domesticated horses. The box-and-whisker graphs show the thickness of the leg bones for thirteen archaeological horse populations, with the oldest sites (Paleolithic) on the left and the youngest (Late Bronze Age) on the right. The whiskers, showing the extreme measurements, are most affected by sample size and so are unreliable indicators of population variability. The white boxes, showing two standard deviations from the mean, are reliable indicators of variability, and it is these that are usually compared. The increase in this measurement of variability in bar 10 is taken as evidence for the beginning of horse domestication. After Benecke and von den Dreisch 2003, figures 6.7 and 6.8 combined.

The domestication of the horse is dated about 2500 BCE by the size-variability method. The earliest site that shows both a significant decrease in average size and an increase in variability is the Bell Beaker settlement of Csepel-Háros in Hungary, represented by bar 10 in figure 10.3, and dated about 2500 BCE. Subsequently many sites in Europe and the steppes show a similar pattern. The absence of these statistical indicators at Dereivka in Ukraine, dated about 4200–3700 BCE (see chapter 11), and at Botai-culture sites in northern Kazakhstan, dated about 3700–3000 BCE, are widely accepted as evidence that horses were not domesticated before about 2500 BCE. But marked regional size differences among early wild horses, the sensitivity of variability measurements to sample size effects, and the basic question of the applicability of these methods to the earliest domesticated horses are three reasons to look at other kinds of evidence. The appearance of significant new variability in horse herds after 2500 BCE could reflect the later development of specialized breeds and functions, not the earliest domestication.9





Age-at-Death Statistics


The second quantifiable method is the study of the ages and sexes of butchered animals. The animals selected for slaughter from a domesticated herd should be different ages and sexes from those obtained by hunting. Herders would probably cull young males as soon as they reached adult meat weight, at about two to three years of age. A site occupied by horse herders might contain very few obviously male horses, since the eruption of the canine teeth in males, the principal marker of gender in horse bones, happens at about age four or five, after the age when the males should have been slaughtered for food. Females should have been kept alive as breeders, up to ten years old or more. In contrast, hunters prey on the most predictable elements of a wild herd, so they would concentrate their efforts on the standard wild horse social group, the stallion-with-harem bands, which move along well-worn paths and trails within a defined territory. Regular hunting of stallion-with-harem bands would yield a small number of prime stallions (six to nine years old) and a large number of breeding-age females (three to ten years old) and their immature young.10

But many other hunting and culling patterns are possible, and might be superimposed on one another in a long-used settlement site. Also, only a few bones in a horse’s body indicate sex—a mature male (more than five years old) has canine teeth whereas females usually do not, and the pelvis of a mature female is distinctive. Horse jaws with the canines still embedded are not often preserved, so data on gender are spotty. Age is estimated based on molar teeth, which preserve well, so the sample for age estimation usually is bigger. But assigning a precise age to a loose horse molar, not found in the jaw, is difficult, and teeth are often found loose in archaeological sites. We had to invent a way to narrow down the very broad range of ages that could be assigned to each tooth. Further, teeth are part of the head, and heads may receive special treatment. If the goal of the analysis is to determine which horses were culled for food, heads are not necessarily the most direct indicators of the human diet. If the occupants of the site kept and used the heads of prime-age stallions for rituals, the teeth found in the site would reflect that, and not culling for food.11

Marsha Levine studied age and sex data at Dereivka in Ukraine (4200–3700 BCE) and Botai in northern Kazakhstan (3700–3000 BCE), two critical sites for the study of horse domestication in the steppes. She concluded that the horses at both sites were wild. At Dereivka the majority of the teeth were from animals whose ages clustered between five and seven years old, and fourteen of the sixteen mandibles were from mature males.12 This suggested that most of the horse heads at Dereivka came from prime-age stallions, not the butchering pattern expected for a managed population. But, in fact, it is an odd pattern for a hunted population as well. Why would hunters kill only prime stallions? Levine suggested that the Dereivka hunters had stalked wild horse bands, drawing the attention of the stallions, which were killed when they advanced to protect their harems. But stalking in the open steppe is probably the least productive way for a pedestrian hunter to attack a wild horse band, as stallions are more likely to alarm their band and run away than to approach a predator. Pedestrian hunters should have used ambush methods, shooting at short range on a habitually used horse trail. Moreover, the odd stallion-centered slaughter pattern of Dereivka closely matches the slaughter pattern at the Roman military cemetery at Kestren, the Netherlands (figure 10.4), where the horses certainly were domesticated. At Botai, in contrast, the age-and-sex profile matched what would be expected if whole wild herds were slaughtered en masse, with no selection for age or sex. The two profiles were dissimilar, yet Levine concluded that horses were wild at both places. Age and sex profiles are open to many different interpretations.

If it is difficult to distinguish wild from domesticated horses, it is doubly problematic to distinguish the bones of a mount from those of a horse merely eaten for dinner. Riding leaves few traces on horse bones. But a bit leaves marks on the teeth, and teeth usually survive very well. Bits are used only to guide horses from behind, to drive or to ride. They are not used if the horse is pulled from the front, as a packhorse is, as this would just pull the bit out of the mouth. Thus bit wear on the teeth indicates riding or driving. The absence of bit wear means nothing, since other forms of control (nosebands, hackamores) might leave no evidence. But its presence is an unmistakable sign of riding or driving. That is why we pursued it. Bit wear could be the smoking gun in the long argument over the origins of horseback riding and, by extension, in debates over the domestication of the horse.



Figure 10.4 The sge-at-death method for identifying the bones of domesticated horses. This graph compares the age-at-death statistics for Late Eneolithic horses from Dereivka, Ukraine, to domesticated horses from the Roman site of Kesteren, Netherlands. The two graphs are strikingly similar, but one is interpreted as a “wild” profile and the other is “domesticated.” After Levine 1999, figure 2.21.





BIT WEAR AND HORSEBACK RIDING


After Brown and I left the Smithsonian in 1985 we spent several years gathering a collection of horse lower second premolars (P2s), the teeth most affected by bit chewing. Eventually we collected 139 P2s from 72 modern horses. Forty were domesticated horses processed through veterinary autopsy labs at the University of Pennsylvania and Cornell University. All had been bitted with modern metal bits. We obtained information on their age, sex, and usage—hunting, leisure, driving, racing, or draft—and for some horses we even knew how often they had been bitted, and with what kind of bit. Thirteen additional horses came from the Horse Training and Behavior program at the State University of New York at Cobleskill. Some had never been bitted. We made casts of their teeth in their mouths, much as a dentist makes an impression to fit a crown—we think that we were the first people to do this to a living horse. A few feral horses, never bitted, were obtained from the Atlantic barrier island of Assateague, MD. Their bleached bones and teeth were found by Ron Keiper of Penn State, who regularly followed and studied the Assateague horses and generously gave us what he had found. Sixteen Nevada mustangs, killed in 1988 by ranchers, supplied most of our never-bitted P2s. I read about the event, made several telephone calls, and was able to get their mandibles from the Bureau of Land Management after the kill sites were documented. Many years later, in a separate study, Christian George at the University of Florida applied our methods to 113 more never-bitted P2s from a minimum of 58 fossil equids 1.5 million years old. These animals, of the species Equus “leidyi,” were excavated from a Pleistocene deposit near Leisey, Florida. George’s Leisey equids (the same size, diet, and dentition as modern horses) had never seen a human, much less a bit.13

We studied high-resolution casts or replicas of all the P2s under a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). The SEM revealed that the vice of bit chewing was amazingly widely practiced (figure 10.5). More than 90% of the bitted horses showed some wear on their P2s from chewing the bit, often just on one side. Their bits also showed wear from being chewed. Riding creates the same wear as driving, because it is not the rider or driver who creates bit wear—it is the horse grasping and releasing the bit between its teeth. A metal bit or even a bone bit creates distinctive microscopic abrasions on the occlusal enamel of the tooth, usually confined to the first or metaconid cusp, but extending back to the second cusp in many cases. These abrasions (type “a” wear, in our terminology) are easily identified under a microscope. All bits, whether hard (metal or bone) or soft (rope or leather) also create a second kind of wear: a wear facet or bevel on the front (mesial) corner of the tooth. The facet is caused both by direct pressure (particularly with a hard bit of bone or metal), which weakens and cracks the enamel when the bit is squeezed repeatedly between the teeth; and by the bit slipping back and forth over the front or mesial corner of the P2. Metal bits create both kinds of wear: abrasions on the occlusal enamel and wear facets on the mesial corner of the tooth. But rope bits probably were the earliest kind. Can a rope bit alone create visible wear on the enamel of horse teeth?

With a grant from the National Science Foundation and the cooperation of the State University of New York (SUNY) at Cobleskill we acquired four horses that had never been bitted. They were kept and ridden at SUNY Cobleskill, which has a Horse Training and Behavior Program and a shirty-five-horse stable. They ate only hay and pasture, no soft feeds, to mimic the natural dental wear of free-range horses. Each horse was ridden with a different organic bit—leather, horsehair rope, hemp rope, or bone—for 150 hours, or 600 hours of riding for all four horses. The horse with the horsehair rope bit was bitted by tying the rope around its lower jaw in the classic “war bridle” of the Plains Indians, yet it was still able to loosen the loop with its tongue and chew the rope. The other horses’ bits were kept in place by antler cheek-pieces made with flint tools. At four intervals each horse was anaesthetized by a bemused veterinarian, and we propped open its mouth, brushed its teeth, dried them, pulled its tongue to the side, and made molds of its P2s (figure 10.6). We tracked the progress of bit wear over time, and noted the differences between the wear made by the bone bit (hard) and the leather and rope bits (soft).14



Figure 10.5 Bit wear and no wear on the lower second premolars (P2s) of modern horses.

Left: a Scanning Electron Micrograph (SEM) taken at 13x of “a-wear” abrasions on the first cusp of a domesticated horse that was bitted with a metal bit. The profile shows a 3.5 mm bevel or facet on the same cusp.

Right: An SEM taken at 15x of the smooth surface of the first cusp of a feral horse from Nevada, never bitted. The profile shows a 90˚ angle with no bevel.



Figure 10.6 Brown and Anthony removing a high-resolution mold of the P2 of a horse bitted with an organic bit at State University of New York, Cobleskill, in 1992.

The riding experiment demonstrated that soft bits do create bit wear. The actual cause of wear might have been microscopic grit trapped in and under the bit, since all the soft bits were made of materials softer than enamel. After 150 hours of riding, bits made of leather and rope wore away about 1 mm of enamel on the first cusp of the P2 (figure 10.7). The mean bevel measurement for the three horses with rope or leather bits at the end of the experiment was more than 2 standard deviations greater than the pre-experiment mean.15 The rope and leather mouthpieces stood up well to chewing, although the horse with the hemp rope bit chewed through it several times. The horses bitted with soft bits showed the same wear facet on the same part of the P2 as horses bitted with metal and bone bits, but the surface of the facet was microscopically smooth and polished, not abraded. Hard bits, including our experimental bone bit, create distinctive “a” wear on the occlusal enamel of the facet, but soft bits do not. Soft bit wear is best identified by measuring the depth of the wear facet or bevel on the P2, not by looking for abrasions on its surface.



Figure 10.7 Graph showing the increase in bevel measurements in millimeters caused by organic bits over 150 hours of riding, with projections of measurements if riding had continued for 300 hours.



TABLE 10.1 Bevel Mea sure ments on the P2s of Bitted and Never- Bitted Mature (>3yr) Horses

Table 10.1 shows bevel mearurements for modern horses that never were bitted (left column); Pleistocene North American equids that never were bitted (center left column); domestic horses that were bitted, including some that were bitted infrequently (center right column); and a smaller sub-group of domestic horses that were bitted at least five times a week up to the day we made molds of their teeth (right column). Measurements of the depth of the wear facet easily distinguished the 73 teeth of bitted horses from the 105 teeth of never-bitted horses. The never-bitted/bitted means are different at better than the .001 level of significance. The never-bitted/daily-bitted means are more than 4 standard deviations apart. Bevel measurements segregate mature bitted from mature never-bitted horses, as populations.16

We set a bevel measurement of 3.0 mm as the minimum threshold for recognizing bit wear on archaeological horse teeth (figure 10.8). More than half of our occasionally bitted teeth did not exhibit a bevel measuring as much as 3 mm . But all horses in our sample with a bevel of 3 mm or more had been bitted. So the last question was, how adequate was our sample? Could a 3 mm wear facet occur naturally on a wild horse P2, caused by malocclusion? Criticisms of bit wear have centered on this problem.17



Figure 10.8 From our 1998 data: bevel measurements of never bitted, occasionally bitted, and frequently bitted horse teeth plotted against age. All domesticated horses had precisely known ages; all feral horses were aged by examining entire mandibles with intact incisor teeth. The line excludes feral horses and horses aged ≤3 yr. and includes only bitted horses. After Brown and Anthony 1998.

Very young horses with newly erupted permanent premolars do display natural dips and rises on their teeth. New permanent premolars are uneven because they have not yet been worn flat by occlusion with the opposing tooth. We had to exclude the teeth of horses two to three years old for that reason. But among the 105 measurable P2s from mature equids that had never been bitted, Pleistocene to modern, we found that a “natural” bevel measurement of more than 2.0 mm is unusual (less than 3% of teeth), and a bevel of 2.5 mm is exceedingly rare (less than 1%). Only one of the 105 never-bitted teeth had a bevel measurement greater than 2.5 mm—a single tooth from the Leisey equids with a mesial bevel of 2.9 mm (the next-nearest bevel was 2.34 mm). In contrast, bevels of 2.5 mm and more occurred in 58% of the teeth of mature horses that were bitted.18

A bevel of 3 mm or more on the P2 of a mature horse is evidence for either an exceedingly rare malocclusion or a very common effect of bitting. If even one mature horse from an archaeological site shows a bevel ≥3 mm bit wear is suggested, but is not a closed case. If multiple mature horses from a single site show mesial bevel measurements of 3 mm or more, they probably were bitted. I should stress that our method depends on the accurate measurement of a very small feature—a bevel or facet just a few millimeters deep. According to our measurements on 178 P2 teeth of mature equids the difference between a 2 mm and a 3 mm bevel is extremely important. In any discussion of bit wear, precise measurements are required and young animals must be eliminated. But until someone finds a population of mature wild horses that displays many P2 teeth with bevels ≥3 mm, bit wear as we have defined it indicates that a horse has been ridden or driven.19





INDO-EUROPEAN MIGRATIONS AND BIT WEAR AT DEREIVKA


Many archaeologists and historians in the first half of the twentieth century thought that horses were first domesticated by Indo-European–speaking peoples, often specifically characterized as Aryans, who also were credited with inventing the horse-drawn chariot. This fascination with the Aryans, or Ariomania, to use Peter Raulwing’s term, dominated the study of horseback riding and chariots before World War II.20

In 1964 Dimitri Telegin discovered the head-and-hoof bones of a seven- to eight-year-old stallion buried together with the remains of two dogs at Dereivka in Ukraine, apparently a cultic deposit of some kind (see figure 11.9). The Dereivka settlement contained three excavated structures of the Sredni Stog culture and the bones of a great many horses, 63% of the bones found. Ten radiocarbon dates placed the Sredni Stog settlement about 4200–3700 BCE, after the Dnieper-Donets II and Early Khvalynsk era. V. I. Bibikova, the chief paleozoologist at the Kiev Institute of Archaeology, declared the stallion a domesticated horse in 1967. The respected Hungarian zoologist and head of the Hungarian Institute of Archaeology, Sandor Bökönyi, agreed, noting the great variabity in the leg dimensions of the Dereivka horses. The German zoologist G. Nobis also agreed. During the late 1960s and 1970s horse domestication at Dereivka was widely accepted.21

For Marija Gimbutas of UCLA, the domesticated horses at Dereivka were part of the evidence which proved that horse-riding, Indo-European–speaking “Kurgan-culture” pastoralists had migrated in several waves out of the steppes between 4200 and 3200 BCE, destroying the world of egalitarian peace and beauty that she imagined for the Eneolithic cultures of Old Europe. But the idea of Indo-European migrations sweeping westward out of the steppes was not accepted by most Western archaeologists, who were increasingly suspicious of any migration-based explanation for culture change. During the 1980s Gimbutas’s scenario of massive “Kurgan-culture” invasions into eastern and central Europe was largely discredited, notably by the German archaeologist A. Häusler. Jim Mallory’s 1989 masterful review of Indo-European archaeology retained Gimbutas’s steppe homeland and her three waves as periods of increased movement in and around the steppes, but he was much less optimistic about linking specific archaeological cultures with specific migrations by specific Indo-European branches. Others, myself included, criticized both Gimbutas’s archaeology and Bibikova’s interpretation of the Dereivka horses. In 1990 Marsha Levine seemed to nail the coffin shut on the horse-riding, Kurgan-culture invasion hypothesis when she declared the horse age and sex ratios at Dereivka to be consistent with a wild, hunted population.22

Brown and I visited the Institute of Zoology in Kiev in 1989, the year after Levine, learning of her trip only after we arrived. With the cheerful help of Natalya Belan, a senior zoologist, we made molds of dozens of horse P2s from many archaeological sites in Ukraine. We examined one P2 from Early Eneolithic Varfolomievka in the Caspian Depression (no wear), one from the Tripolye A settlement of Luka Vrublevetskaya (no wear), several from Mesolithic and Paleolithic sites in Ukraine (no wear), many from Scythian and Roman-era graves (a lot of bit wear, some of it extreme), and those of the cult stallion and four other horse P2s from Dereivka. As soon as we saw the Dereivka cult stallion we knew it had bit wear. Its P2s had bevels of 3.5 mm and 4 mm, and the enamel on the first cusp was deeply abraded. Given its stratigraphic position at the base of a Late Eneolithic cultural level almost 1 m deep, dated by ten radiocarbon dates to 4200–3700 BCE, the cult stallion should have been about two thousand years older than the previously known oldest evidence for horseback riding. Only four other P2s still survived in the Dereivka collection: two deciduous teeth from horses less than 2.5 years old (not measurable), and two others from adult horses but with no bit wear. So our case rested on a single horse. But it was very clear wear—surprisingly similar to modern metal bit wear. In 1991 we published articles in Scientific American and in the British journal Antiquity announcing the discovery of bit wear at Dereivka. Levine’s conclusion that the Dereivka horses were wild had been published just the year before. Briefly we were too elated to worry about the argument that would follow.23

It began when A. Häusler challenged us at a conference in Berlin in 1992. He did not think the Dereivka stallion was Eneolithic or cultic; he deemed it a Medieval garbage deposit, denying there was evidence for a horse cult anywhere in the steppes during the Eneolithic. That the wear looked like metal bit wear was part of the problem, since a metal bit was improbable in the Eneolithic. Häusler’s target was bigger than bit wear or even horse domestication: he had dedicated much of his career to refuting Gimbutas’s “Kurgan-culture” migrations and the entire notion of a steppe Indo-European homeland.24 The horses at Dereivka were just a small piece in a larger controversy. But criticisms like his forced us to obtain a direct date on the skull itself.

Telegin first sent us a bone sample from the same excavation square and level as the stallion. It yielded a date between 90 BCE and 70 BCE (OxA 6577), our first indication of a problem. He obtained another anomalous radiocarbon date, ca. 3000 BCE, on a piece of bone that, like our first sample, seems not to have been from the stallion itself (Ki 5488). Finally, he sent us one of the bit-worn P2s from the cult stallion. The Oxford radiocarbon laboratory obtained a date of 410–200 BCE from this tooth (OxA 7185). Simultaneously the Kiev radiocarbon laboratory obtained a date of 790–520 BCE on a piece of bone from the skull (Ki 6962). Together these two samples suggest a date between 800 and 200 BCE.

The stallion-and-dog deposit at Dereivka was of the Scythian era. No wonder it had metal bit wear—so did many other Scythian horse teeth. It had been placed in a pit dug into the Eneolithic settlement between 800 and 200 BCE. The archaeologists who excavated this part of the site in 1964 did not see the intrusive pit. In 2000, nine years after our initial publication in Antiquity, we published another Antiquity article retracting the early date for bit wear at Dereivka. We were disappointed, but by then Dereivka was no longer the only prehistoric site in the steppes with bit wear.25



Figure 10.9 Horse-related sites of Eneolithic or older age in the western and central Eurasian steppes. The steppe ecological zone is enclosed in dashed lines.

(1) Moliukhor Bugor; (2) Dereivka; (3) Mariupol; (4) Matveev Kurgan; (5) Girzhevo; (6) Kair Shak; (7) Dzhangar; (8) Orlovka; (9) Varfolomievka; (10) Khvalynsk; (11) S’yezzhe; (12) Tersek; (13) Botai





BOTAI AND ENEOLITHIC HORSEBACK RIDING


The oldest horse P2s showing wear facets of 3 mm and more are from the Botai and Tersek cultures of northern Kazakhstan (figure 10.9). Excavated through the 1980s by Victor Zaibert, Botai was a settlement of specialized hunters who rode horses to hunt horses, a peculiar kind of economy that existed only between 3700 and 3000 BCE, and only in the steppes of northern Kazakhstan. Sites of the Botai type, east of the Ishim River, and of the related Tersek type, west of the Ishim, contain 65–99.9%/horse bones. Botai had more than 150 house-pits (figure 10.10) and 300,000 animal bones, 99.9% of them horse. A partial list of the other species represented at Botai (primarily by isolated teeth and phalanges) includes a very large bovid, probably bison but perhaps aurochs, as well as elk, red deer, roe deer, boar, bear, beaver, saiga antelope, and gazelle. Horses, not the easiest prey for people on foot, were overwhelmingly preferred over these animals.26



Figure 10.10 A concentration of horse bones in an excavated house pit at the Botai settlement in north-central Kazakhstan, dated about 3700–3000 BCE. Archaeozoologist Lubomir Peske takes meas urements during an international conference held in Kazakhstan in 1995 “Early Horsekeepers of the Eurasian Steppe 4500–1500 BC.” Photo by Asko Parpola.

We visited Zaibert’s lab in Petropavlovsk, Kazakhstan, in 1992, again unaware that Marsha Levine had arrived the year before. Among the forty-two P2s we examined from Botai, nineteen were acceptable for study (many had heavily damaged surfaces, and others were from horses younger than three years old). Five of these nineteen teeth, representing at least three different horses, had significant bevel measurements: two 3 mm, one 3.5 mm, one 4 mm, and one 6 mm . Wear facets on undamaged portions of the Botai P2s were polished smooth, the same kind of polish created by “soft” bits in our experiment. The five teeth were found in different places across the settlement—they did not come from a single intrusive pit. The proportion of P2s exhibiting bit wear at Botai was 12% of the entire sample of P2s provided, or 26% of the nineteen measurable P2s. Either number was just too high to explain by appealing to a rare natural malocclusion (figure 10.11). We also examined the horse P2s from a Tersek site, Kozhai 1, dated to the same period, 3700–3000 BCE. At Kozhai 1 horses accounted for 66.1% of seventy thousand identified animal bones (others were saiga antelope at 21.8%, onager at 9.4%, and bison, perhaps including some very large domesticated cattle, at 2.1%). We found a 3 mm wear facet on two P2s of the twelve we examined from Kozhai 1. Most of the P2s at Botai and Kozhai 1 did not exhibit bit wear, but a small percentage (12–26%) did, consistent with the interpretation that the Botai-Tersek people were mounted horse hunters.27



Figure 10.11 Three horse with bit wear from the Botai settlement. The photos show extensive postmortem damage to the occlusal surfaces. The undamaged middle tooth showed smooth enamel surfaces but had a significant wear facet, like a horse ridden with a “soft” bit of rope or leather.

Botai attracted the attention of everyone interested in early horse domestication. Two field excavations by Western archaeologists (Marsha Levine and Sandra Olsen) have occurred at Botai or Botai-culture sites. The original excavator, Victor Zaibert, the Kazakh zoologist L.A. Makarova, and the American archaeozoologist Sandra Olsen of the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh all concluded that at least some of the Botai horses were domesticated. In opposition, the archaeo-zoologists N. M. Ermolova, Marsha Levine, and the German team Norbert Benecke and Angela von den Dreisch concluded that all the Botai horses were wild.28 Levine found some pathologies in the Botai vertebrae but attributed them to age. Benecke and von den Dreisch showed that the Botai horses exhibited a narrow range of variability in size, like Paleolithic wild populations. The ages and sexes of the Botai horses were typical of a wild population, with a 1:1 ratio between the sexes, including all age groups, even colts and pregnant mares with gestating fetuses. Everyone agrees that whole herds of wild horses were killed by the Botai people, using herd-driving hunting techniques that had never been used before in the Kazakh steppes, certainly not on this scale. Were the hunters riding or on foot? Native American hunters on foot drove bison herds over cliffs before the introduction of horses to the Americas by Europeans, so herd driving was possible without riding.

Sandra Olsen of the Carnegie Museum concluded that at least some Botai horses were used for transport, because whole horse carcasses were butchered regularly over the course of several centuries in the settlement at Botai.29 How would pedestrian hunters drag eight-hundred-pound carcasses to the settlement, not just once or twice but as a regular practice that continued for centuries? Pedestrian hunters who used herd-driving hunting methods in the European Paleolithic at Solutré (where Olsen had worked earlier) and in the North American Plains butchered large animals where they died at the kill site. But the Botai settlement is located on the open, south-facing slope of a broad ridge top in a steppe environment—wild horses could not have been trapped in the settlement. Either some horses were tamed and could be led into the settlement or horses were used to drag whole carcasses of killed animals into the settlement, perhaps on sleds. Olsen’s interpretation was supported by soil analysis from a house pit at Botai (Olsen’s excavation 32) that revealed a distinct layer of soil filled with horse dung. This “must have been the result of redeposition of material from stabling layers,” according to the soil scientists who examined it.30 This dung-rich soil was removed from a horse stable or corral. The stabling of horses at Botai obviously suggests domestication.

One more argument for horseback riding is that the slaughter of wild populations with a 1:1 sex ratio could only be achieved by sweeping up both stallion-with-harem bands and bachelor bands, and these two kinds of social groups normally live far apart in the wild. If stallion-with-harem bands were driven into traps, the female:male ratio would be more than 2:1. The only way to capture both bachelor bands and harem bands in herd drives is to actively search and sweep up all the wild horses in a very large region. That would be impossible on foot.

Finally, the beginning of horseback riding provides a good explanation for the economic and cultural changes that appeared with the Botai-Tersek cultures. Before 3700 BCE foragers in the northern Kazkah steppes lived in small groups at temporary lakeside camps such as Vinogradovka XIV in Kokchetav district and Tel’manskie in Tselinograd district. Their remains are assigned to the Atbasar Neolithic.31 They hunted horses but also a variety of other game: short-horned bison, saiga antelope, gazelle, and red deer. The details of their foraging economy are unclear, as their camp sites were small and ephemeral and have yielded relatively few animal bones. Around 3700–3500 BCE they shifted to specialized horse hunting, started to use herd-driving hunting methods, and began to aggregate in large settlements—a new hunting strategy and a new settlement pattern. The number of animal bones deposited at each settlement rose to tens or even hundreds of thousands. Their stone tools changed from microlithic tool kits to large bifacial blades. They began to make large polished stone weights with central perforations, probably for manufacturing multi-stranded rawhide ropes (weights are hung from each strand as the strands are twisted together). Rawhide thong manufacture was one of the principal activities Olsen identified at Botai based on bone tool microwear. For the first time the foragers of the northern Kazakh steppes demonstrated the ability to drive and trap whole herds of horses and transport their carcasses into new, large communal settlements. No explanation other than the adoption of horseback riding has been offered for these changes.

The case for horse management and riding at Botai and Kozhai 1 is based on the presence of bit wear on seven Botai-Tersek horse P2s from two different sites, carcass transport and butchering practices, the discovery of horse-dung–filled stable soils, a 1:1 sex ratio, and changes in economy and settlement pattern consistent with the beginning of riding. The case against riding is based on the low variability in leg thickness and the absence of riding-related pathologies in a small sample of horse vertebrae, possibly from wild hunted horses, which probably made up 75–90% of the horse bones at Botai. We are reasonably certain that horses were bitted and ridden in northern Kazakhstan beginning about 3700–3500 BCE.





THE ORIGIN OF HORSEBACK RIDING


Horseback riding probably did not begin in northern Kazakhstan. The Botai-Tersek people were mounted foragers. A few domesticated cattle (?) bones might be found in some Tersek sites, but there were none in Botai sites, farther east; and neither had sheep.32 It is likely that Botai-Tersek people acquired the idea of domesticated animal management from their western neighbors, who had been managing domesticated cattle and sheep, and probably horses, for a thousand years before 3700–3500 BCE.

The evidence for riding at Botai is not isolated. Perhaps the most interesting parallel from beyond the steppes is a case of severe wear on a mesial horse P2 with a bevel much deeper than 3 mm, on a five-year-old stallion jaw excavated from Late Chalcolithic levels at Mokhrablur in Armenia, dated 4000–3500 BCE. This looks like another case of early bit wear perhaps even older than Botai, but we have not examined it for confirmation.33 Also, after about 3500 BCE horses began to appear in greater numbers or appeared regularly for the first time outside the Pontic-Caspian steppes. Between 3500 and 3000 BCE horses began to show up regularly in settlements of the Maikop and Early Transcaucasian Culture (ETC) in the Caucasus, and also for the first time in the lower and middle Danube valley in settlements of the Cernavoda III and Baden-Boleraz cultures as at Cernavoda and Kétegyháza. Around 3000 BCE horse bones rose to about 10–20% of the bones in Bernberg sites in central Germany and to more than 20% of the bones at the Cham site of Galgenberg in Bavaria. The Galgenburg horses included a native small type and a larger type probably imported from the steppes. This general increase in the importance of horses from Kazakhstan to the Caucasus, the Danube valley, and Germany after 3500 BCE suggests a significant change in the relationship between humans and horses. Botai and Tersek show what that change was: people had started to ride.34

Over the long term it would have been very difficult to manage horse herds without riding them. Anywhere that we see a sustained, long-term dependence on domesticated horses, riding is implied for herd management alone. Riding began in the Pontic-Caspian steppes before 3700 BCE, or before the Botai-Tersek culture appeared in the Kazakh steppes. It may well have started before 4200 BCE. It spread outside the Pontic-Caspian steppes between 3700 and 3000 BCE, as shown by increases in horse bones in southeastern Europe, central Europe, the Caucasus, and northern Kazakhstan.





THE ECONOMIC AND MILITARY EFFECTS

OF HORSEBACK RIDING


A person on foot can herd about two hundred sheep with a good herding dog. On horseback, with the same dog, that single person can herd about five hundred.35 Riding greatly increased the efficiency and therefore the scale and productivity of herding in the Eurasian grasslands. More cattle and sheep could be owned and controlled by riders than by pedestrian herders, which permitted a greater accumulation of animal wealth. Larger herds, of course, required larger pastures, and the desire for larger pastures would have caused a general renegotiation of tribal frontiers, a series of boundary conflicts. Victory in tribal warfare depended largely on forging alliances and mobilizing larger forces than your enemy, and so intensified warfare stimulated efforts to build alliances through feasts and the redistribution of wealth. Gifts were effective both in building alliances before conflicts and in sealing agreements after them. An increase in boundary conflicts would thus have encouraged more long-distance trade to acquire prestigious goods, as well as elaborate feasts and public ceremonies to forge alliances. This early phase of conflict, caused partly by herding on horseback, might be visible archaeologically in the horizon of polished stone mace-heads and body decorations (copper, gold, boars-tusk, and shell ornaments) that spread across the western steppes with the earliest herding economies about 5000–4200 BCE.36

Horses were valuable and easily stolen, and riding increased the efficiency of stealing cattle. When American Indians in the North American Plains first began to ride, chronic horse-stealing raids soured relationships even between tribes that had been friendly. Riding also was an excellent way to retreat quickly; often the most dangerous part of tribal raiding on foot was the running retreat after a raid. Eneolithic war parties might have left their horses under guard and attacked on foot, as many American Indians did in the early decades of horse warfare in the Plains. But even if horses were used for nothing more than transportation to and from the raid, the rapidity and reach of mounted raiders would have changed raiding tactics, status-seeking behaviors, alliance-building, displays of wealth, and settlement patterns. Thus riding cannot be cleanly separated from warfare.37

Many experts have suggested that horses were not ridden in warfare until after about 1500–1000 BCE, but they failed to differentiate between mounted raiding, which probably is very old, and cavalry, which was invented in the Iron Age after about 1000 BCE.38 Eneolithic tribal herders probably rode horses in inter-clan raids before 4000 BCE, but they were not like the Huns sweeping out of the steppes on armies of shaggy horses. What is intriguing about the Huns and their more ancient cousins, the Scythians, was that they formed armies. During the Iron Age the Scythians, essentially tribal in most other aspects of their political organization, became organized in their military operations like the formal armies of urban states. That required a change in ideology—how a warrior thought about himself, his role, and his responsibilities—as well as in the technology of mounted warfare—how weapons were used from horseback. Probably the change in weapons came first.

Mounted archery probably was not yet very effective before the Iron Age, for three reasons. The bows reconstructed from their traces in steppe Bronze Age graves were more than 1 m long and up to 1.5 m, or almost five feet, in length, which would clearly have made them clumsy to use from horseback; the arrowheads were chipped from flint or made from bone in widely varying sizes and weights, implying a nonstandardized, individualized array of arrow lengths and weights; and, finally, the bases of most arrowheads were made to fit into a hollow or split shaft, which weakened the arrow or required a separate hollow foreshaft for the attachment of the point. The more powerful the bow, and the higher the impact on striking a target, the more likely the arrow was to split, if the shaft had already been split to secure the point. Stemmed and triangular flint points, common before the Iron Age, were made to be inserted into a separate foreshaft with a hollow socket made of reed or wood (for stemmed points), or were set into a split shaft (for triangular points). The long bows, irregular arrow sizes, and less-than-optimal attachments between points and arrows together reduced the military effectiveness of early mounted archery. Before the Iron Age mounted raiders could harass tribal war bands, disrupt harvests in farming villages, or steal cattle, but that is not the same as defeating a disciplined army. Tribal raiding by small groups of riders in eastern Europe did not pose a threat to walled cities in Mesopotamia, and so was ignored by the kings and generals of the Near East and the eastern Mediterranean.39

The invention of the short, recurved, compound bow (the “cupid” bow) around 1000 BCE made it possible for riders to carry a powerful bow short enough to swing over the horse’s rear. For the first time arrows could be fired behind the rider with penetrating power. This maneuver, later known as the “Parthian shot,” was immortalized as the iconic image of the steppe archer. Cast bronze socketed arrowheads of standard weights and sizes also appeared in the Early Iron Age. A socketed arrowhead did not require a split-shaft mount, so arrows with socketed arrowheads did not split despite the power of the bow; they also did not need a separate foreshaft, and so arrows could be simpler and more streamlined. Reusable moulds were invented so that smiths could produce hundreds of socketed arrowheads of standard weight and size. Archers now had a much wider field of fire—to the rear, the front, and the left—and could carry dozens of standardized arrows. An army of mounted archers could now fill the sky with arrows that struck with killing power.40

But organizing an army of mounted archers was not a simple matter. The technical advances in bows, arrows, and casting were meaningless without a matching change in mentality, in the identity of the fighter, from a heroic single warrior to a nameless soldier. An ideological model of fighting appropriate for a state had to be grafted onto the mentality of tribal horseback riders. Pre-Iron-Age warfare in the Eurasian steppes, from what we can glean from sources like the Iliad and the Rig Veda, probably emphasized personal glory and heroism. Tribal warfare generally was conducted by forces that never drilled as a unit, often could choose to ignore their leaders, and valued personal bravery above following orders.41 In contrast, the tactics and ideology of state warfare depended on large disciplined units of anonymous soldiers who obeyed a general. These tactics, and the soldier mentality that went with them, were not applied to riders before 1000 BCE, partly because the short bows and standardized arrows that would make mounted archery truly threatening had not yet been invented. As mounted archers gained in firepower, someone on the edge of the civilized world began to organize them into armies. That seems to have occurred about 1000–900 BCE. Cavalry soon swept chariotry from the battlefield, and a new era in warfare began. But it would be grossly inappropriate to apply that later model of mounted warfare to the Eneolithic.

Riding began in the region identified as the Proto-Indo-European homeland. To understand how riding affected the spread of Indo-European languages we have to pick up the thread of the archaeological narrative that ended in chapter 9.





