PART ONE





Language and Archaeology





CHAPTER ONE





The Promise and Politics of the Mother Tongue



ANCESTORS


When you look in the mirror you see not just your face but a museum. Although your face, in one sense, is your own, it is composed of a collage of features you have inherited from your parents, grandparents, great-grandparents, and so on. The lips and eyes that either bother or please you are not yours alone but are also features of your ancestors, long dead perhaps as individuals but still very much alive as fragments in you. Even complex qualities such as your sense of balance, musical abilities, shyness in crowds, or susceptibility to sickness have been lived before. We carry the past around with us all the time, and not just in our bodies. It lives also in our customs, including the way we speak. The past is a set of invisible lenses we wear constantly, and through these we perceive the world and the world perceives us. We stand always on the shoulders of our ancestors, whether or not we look down to acknowledge them.

It is disconcerting to realize how few of our ancestors most of us can recognize or even name. You have four great-grandmothers, women sufficiently close to you genetically that you see elements of their faces, and skin, and hair each time you see your reflection. Each had a maiden name she heard spoken thousands of times, and yet you probably cannot recall any one of their maiden names. If we are lucky, we may find their birth names in genealogies or documents, although war, migration, and destroyed records have made that impossible for many Americans. Our four great-grandmothers had full lives, families, and bequeathed to us many of our most personal qualities, but we have lost these ancestors so completely that we cannot even name them. How many of us can imagine being so utterly forgotten just three generations from now by our own descendents that they remember nothing of us—not even our names?

In traditional societies, where life is still structured around family, extended kin, and the village, people often are more conscious of the debts they owe their ancestors, even of the power of their ghosts and spirits. Zafimaniry women in rural Madagascar weave complicated patterns on their hats, which they learned from their mothers and aunts. The patterns differ significantly between villages. The women in one village told the anthropologist Maurice Bloch that the designs were “pearls from the ancestors.” Even ordinary Zafimaniry houses are seen as temples to the spirits of the people who made them.1 This constant acknowledgment of the power of those who lived before is not part of the thinking of most modern, consumer cultures. We live in a world that depends for its economic survival on the constant adoption and consumption of new things. Archaeology, history, genealogy, and prayer are the overflowing drawers into which we throw our thoughts of earlier generations.

Archaeology is one way to acknowledge the humanity and importance of the people who lived before us and, obliquely, of ourselves. It is the only discipline that investigates the daily texture of past lives not described in writing, indeed the great majority of the lives humans have lived. Archaeologists have wrested surprisingly intimate details out of the silent remains of the preliterate past, but there are limits to what we can know about people who have left no written accounts of their opinions, their conversations, or their names.

Is there a way to overcome those limits and recover the values and beliefs that were central to how prehistoric people really lived their lives? Did they leave clues in some other medium? Many linguists believe they did, and that the medium is the very language we use every day. Our language contains a great many fossils that are the remnants of surprisingly ancient speakers. Our teachers tell us that these linguistic fossils are “irregular” forms, and we just learn them without thinking. We all know that a past tense is usually constructed by adding -t or -ed to the verb (kick-kicked, miss-missed) and that some verbs require a change in the vowel in the middle of the stem (run-ran, sing-sang). We are generally not told, however, that this vowel change was the older, original way of making a past tense. In fact, changing a vowel in the verb stem was the usual way to form a past tense probably about five thousand years ago. Still, this does not tell us much about what people were thinking then.

Are the words we use today actually fossils of people’s vocabulary of about five thousand years ago? A vocabulary list would shine a bright light on many obscure parts of the past. As the linguist Edward Sapir observed, “The complete vocabulary of a language may indeed be looked upon as a complex inventory of all the ideas, interests, and occupations that take up the attention of the community.”2 In fact, a substantial vocabulary list has been reconstructed for one of the languages spoken about five thousand years ago. That language is the ancestor of modern English as well as many other modern and ancient languages. All the languages that are descended from this same mother tongue belong to one family, that of the Indo-European languages. Today Indo-European languages are spoken by about three billion people—more than speak the languages of any other language family. The vocabulary of the mother tongue, called “Proto-Indo-European”, has been studied for about two hundred years, and in those two centuries fierce disagreements have continued about almost every aspect of Indo-European studies.

But disagreement produces light as well as heat. This book argues that it is now possible to solve the central puzzle surrounding Proto-Indo-European, namely, who spoke it, where was it spoken, and when. Generations of archaeologists and linguists have argued bitterly about the “homeland” question. Many doubt the wisdom of even pursuing it. In the past, nationalists and dictators have insisted that the homeland was in their country and belonged to their own superior “race.” But today Indo-European linguists are improving their methods and making new discoveries. They have reconstructed the basic forms and meanings of thousands of words from the Proto-Indo-European vocabulary—itself an astonishing feat. Those words can be analyzed to describe the thoughts, values, concerns, family relations, and religious beliefs of the people who spoke them. But first we have to figure out where and when they lived. If we can combine the Proto-Indo-European vocabulary with a specific set of archaeological remains, it might be possible to move beyond the usual limitations of archaeological knowledge and achieve a much richer knowledge of these particular ancestors.

I believe with many others that the Proto-Indo-European homeland was located in the steppes north of the Black and Caspian Seas in what is today southern Ukraine and Russia. The case for a steppe homeland is stronger today than in the past partly because of dramatic new archaeological discoveries in the steppes. To understand the significance of an Indo-European homeland in the steppes requires a leap into the complicated and fascinating world of steppe archaeology. Steppe means “wasteland” in the language of the Russian agricultural state. The steppes resembled the prairies of North America—a monotonous sea of grass framed under a huge, dramatic sky. A continuous belt of steppes extends from eastern Europe on the west (the belt ends between Odessa and Bucharest) to the Great Wall of China on the east, an arid corridor running seven thousand kilometers across the center of the Eurasian continent. This enormous grassland was an effective barrier to the transmission of ideas and technologies for thousands of years. Like the North American prairie, it was an unfriendly environment for people traveling on foot. And just as in North America, the key that opened the grasslands was the horse, combined in the Eurasian steppes with domesticated grazing animals—sheep and cattle—to process the grass and turn it into useful products for humans. Eventually people who rode horses and herded cattle and sheep acquired the wheel, and were then able to follow their herds almost anywhere, using heavy wagons to carry their tents and supplies. The isolated prehistoric societies of China and Europe became dimly aware of the possibility of one another’s existence only after the horse was domesticated and the covered wagon invented. Together, these two innovations in transportation made life predictable and productive for the people of the Eurasian steppes. The opening of the steppe—its transformation from a hostile ecological barrier to a corridor of transcontinental communication—forever changed the dynamics of Eurasian historical development, and, this author contends, played an important role in the first expansion of the Indo-European languages.





LINGUISTS AND CHAUVINISTS


The Indo-European problem was formulated in one famous sentence by Sir William Jones, a British judge in India, in 1786. Jones was already widely known before he made his discovery. Fifteen years earlier, in 1771, his Grammar of the Persian Language was the first English guide to the language of the Persian kings, and it earned him, at the age of twenty-five, the reputation as one of the most respected linguists in Europe. His translations of medieval Persian poems inspired Byron, Shelley, and the European Romantic movement. He rose from a respected barrister in Wales to a correspondent, tutor, and friend of some of the leading men of the kingdom. At age thirty-seven he was appointed one of the three justices of the first Supreme Court of Bengal. His arrival in Calcutta, a mythically alien place for an Englishman of his age, was the opening move in the imposition of royal government over a vital yet irresponsible merchant’s colony. Jones was to regulate both the excesses of the English merchants and the rights and duties of the Indians. But although the English merchants at least recognized his legal authority, the Indians obeyed an already functioning and ancient system of Hindu law, which was regularly cited in court by Hindu legal scholars, or pandits (the source of our term pundit). English judges could not determine if the laws the pandits cited really existed. Sanskrit was the ancient language of the Hindu legal texts, like Latin was for English law. If the two legal systems were to be integrated, one of the new Supreme Court justices had to learn Sanskrit. That was Jones.

He went to the ancient Hindu university at Nadiya, bought a vacation cottage, found a respected and willing pandit (Rāmalocana) on the faculty, and immersed himself in Hindu texts. Among these were the Vedas, the ancient religious compositions that lay at the root of Hindu religion. The Rig Veda, the oldest of the Vedic texts, had been composed long before the Buddha’s lifetime and was more than two thousand years old, but no one knew its age exactly. As Jones pored over Sanskrit texts his mind made comparisons not just with Persian and English but also with Latin and Greek, the mainstays of an eighteenth-century university education; with Gothic, the oldest literary form of German, which he had also learned; and with Welsh, a Celtic tongue and his boyhood language which he had not forgotten. In 1786, three years after his arrival in Calcutta, Jones came to a startling conclusion, announced in his third annual discourse to the Asiatic Society of Bengal, which he had founded when he first arrived. The key sentence is now quoted in every introductory textbook of historical linguistics (punctuation mine):

The Sanskrit language, whatever be its antiquity, is of a wonderful structure: more perfect than the Greek, more copious than the Latin, and more exquisitely refined than either; yet bearing to both of them a stronger affinity, both in the roots of verbs and in the forms of grammar, than could possibly have been produced by accident; so strong indeed, that no philologer could examine them all three, without believing them to have sprung from some common source, which, perhaps, no longer exists.



Jones had concluded that the Sanskrit language originated from the same source as Greek and Latin, the classical languages of European civilization. He added that Persian, Celtic, and German probably belonged to the same family. European scholars were astounded. The occupants of India, long regarded as the epitome of Asian exotics, turned out to be long-lost cousins. If Greek, Latin, and Sanskrit were relatives, descended from the same ancient parent language, what was that language? Where had it been it spoken? And by whom? By what historical circumstances did it generate daughter tongues that became the dominant languages spoken from Scotland to India?

These questions resonated particularly deeply in Germany, where popular interest in the history of the German language and the roots of German traditions were growing into the Romantic movement. The Romantics wanted to discard the cold, artificial logic of the Enlightenment to return to the roots of a simple and authentic life based in direct experience and community. Thomas Mann once said of a Romantic philosopher (Schlegel) that his thought was contaminated too much by reason, and that he was therefore a poor Romantic. It was ironic that William Jones helped to inspire this movement, because his own philosophy was quite different: “The race of man… cannot long be happy without virtue, nor actively virtuous without freedom, nor securely free without rational knowledge.”3 But Jones had energized the study of ancient languages, and ancient language played a central role in Romantic theories of authentic experience. In the 1780s J. G. Herder proposed a theory later developed by von Humboldt and elaborated in the twentieth century by Wittgenstein, that language creates the categories and distinctions through which humans give meaning to the world. Each particular language, therefore, generates and is enmeshed in a closed social community, or “folk,” that is at its core meaningless to an outsider. Language was seen by Herder and von Humboldt as a vessel that molded community and national identities. The brothers Grimm went out to collect “authentic” German folk tales while at the same time studying the German language, pursuing the Romantic conviction that language and folk culture were deeply related. In this setting the mysterious mother tongue, Proto-Indo-European, was regarded not just as a language but as a crucible in which Western civilization had its earliest beginnings.

After the 1859 publication of Charles Darwin’s The Origin of Species, the Romantic conviction that language was a defining factor in national identity was combined with new ideas about evolution and biology. Natural selection provided a scientific theory that was hijacked by nationalists and used to rationalize why some races or “folks” ruled others—some were more “fit” than others. Darwin himself never applied his theories of fitness and natural selection to such vague entities as races or languages, but this did not prevent unscientific opportunists from suggesting that the less “fit” races could be seen as a source of genetic weakness, a reservoir of barbarism that might contaminate and dilute the superior qualities of the races that were more “fit.” This toxic mixture of pseudo-science and Romanticism soon produced its own new ideologies. Language, culture, and a Darwinian interpretation of race were bundled together to explain the superior biological–spiritual–linguistic essence of the northern Europeans who conducted these self-congratulatory studies. Their writings and lectures encouraged people to think of themselves as members of long-established, biological–linguistic nations, and thus were promoted widely in the new national school systems and national newspapers of the emerging nation-states of Europe. The policies that forced the Welsh (including Sir William Jones) to speak English, and the Bretons to speak French, were rooted in politicians’ need for an ancient and “pure” national heritage for each new state. The ancient speakers of Proto-Indo-European soon were molded into the distant progenitors of such racial–linguistic–national stereotypes.4

Proto-Indo-European, the linguistic problem, became “the Proto-Indo-Europeans,” a biological population with its own mentality and personality: “a slim, tall, light-complexioned, blonde race, superior to all other peoples, calm and firm in character, constantly striving, intellectually brilliant, with an almost ideal attitude towards the world and life in general”.5 The name Aryan began to be applied to them, because the authors of the oldest religious texts in Sanskrit and Persian, the Rig Veda and Avesta, called themselves Aryans. These Aryans lived in Iran and eastward into Afghanistan–Pakistan–India. The term Aryan should be confined only to this Indo-Iranian branch of the Indo-European family. But the Vedas were a newly discovered source of mystical fascination in the nineteenth century, and in Victorian parlors the name Aryan soon spread beyond its proper linguistic and geographic confines. Madison Grant’s The Passing of the Great Race (1916), a best-seller in the U.S., was a virulent warning against the thinning of superior American “Aryan” blood (by which he meant the British–Scots–Irish–German settlers of the original thirteen colonies) through interbreeding with immigrant “inferior races,” which for him included Poles, Czechs, and Italians as well as Jews—all of whom spoke Indo-European languages (Yiddish is a Germanic language in its basic grammar and morphology).6

The gap through which the word Aryan escaped from Iran and the Indian subcontinent was provided by the Rig Veda itself: some scholars found passages in the Rig Veda that seemed to describe the Vedic Aryans as invaders who had conquered their way into the Punjab.7 But from where? A feverish search for the “Aryan homeland” began. Sir William Jones placed it in Iran. The Himalayan Mountains were a popular choice in the early nineteenth century, but other locations soon became the subject of animated debates. Amateurs and experts alike joined the search, many hoping to prove that their own nation had given birth to the Aryans. In the second decade of the twentieth century the German scholar Gustav Kossinna attempted to demonstrate on archaeological grounds that the Aryan homeland lay in northern Europe—in fact, in Germany. Kossinna illustrated the prehistoric migrations of the “Indo-Germanic” Aryans with neat black arrows that swept east, west, and south from his presumed Aryan homeland. Armies followed the pen of the prehistorian less than thirty years later.8

The problem of Indo-European origins was politicized almost from the beginning. It became enmeshed in nationalist and chauvinist causes, nurtured the murderous fantasy of Aryan racial superiority, and was actually pursued in archaeological excavations funded by the Nazi SS. Today the Indo-European past continues to be manipulated by causes and cults. In the books of the Goddess movement (Marija Gimbutas’s Civilization of the Goddess, Riane Eisler’s The Chalice and the Blade) the ancient “Indo-Europeans” are cast in archaeological dramas not as blonde heroes but as patriarchal, warlike invaders who destroyed a utopian prehistoric world of feminine peace and beauty. In Russia some modern nationalist political groups and neo-Pagan movements claim a direct linkage between themselves, as Slavs, and the ancient “Aryans.” In the United States white supremacist groups refer to themselves as Aryans. There actually were Aryans in history—the composers of the Rig Veda and the Avesta—but they were Bronze Age tribal people who lived in Iran, Afghanistan, and the northern Indian subcontinent. It is highly doubtful that they were blonde or blue-eyed, and they had no connection with the competing racial fantasies of modern bigots.9

The mistakes that led an obscure linguistic mystery to erupt into racial genocide were distressingly simple and therefore can be avoided by anyone who cares to avoid them. They were the equation of race with language, and the assignment of superiority to some language-and-race groups. Prominent linguists have always pleaded against both these ideas. While Martin Heidegger argued that some languages—German and Greek—were unique vessels for a superior kind of thought, the linguistic anthropologist Franz Boas protested that no language could be said to be superior to any other on the basis of objective criteria. As early as 1872 the great linguist Max Müller observed that the notion of an Aryan skull was not just unscientific but anti-scientific; languages are not white-skinned or long-headed. But then how can the Sanskrit language be connected with a skull type? And how did the Aryans themselves define “Aryan”? According to their own texts, they conceived of “Aryan-ness” as a religious–linguistic category. Some Sanskrit-speaking chiefs, and even poets in the Rig Veda, had names such as Balbūtha and Bbu that were foreign to the Sanskrit language. These people were of non-Aryan origin and yet were leaders among the Aryans. So even the Aryans of the Rig Veda were not genetically “pure”—whatever that means. The Rig Veda was a ritual canon, not a racial manifesto. If you sacrificed in the right way to the right gods, which required performing the great traditional prayers in the traditional language, you were an Aryan; otherwise you were not. The Rig Veda made the ritual and linguistic barrier clear, but it did not require or even contemplate racial purity.10

Any attempt to solve the Indo-European problem has to begin with the realization that the term Proto-Indo-European refers to a language community, and then work outward. Race really cannot be linked in any predictable way with language, so we cannot work from language to race or from race to language. Race is poorly defined; the boundaries between races are defined differently by different groups of people, and, since these definitions are cultural, scientists cannot describe a “true” boundary between any two races. Also, archaeologists have their own, quite different definitions of race, based on traits of the skull and teeth that often are invisible in a living person. However race is defined, languages are not normally sorted by race—all racial groups speak a variety of different languages. So skull shapes are almost irrelevant to linguistic problems. Languages and genes are correlated only in exceptional circumstances, usually at clear geographic barriers such as significant mountain ranges or seas—and often not even there.11 A migrating population did not have to be genetically homogeneous even if it did recruit almost exclusively from a single dialect group. Anyone who assumes a simple connection between language and genes, without citing geographic isolation or other special circumstances, is wrong at the outset.





THE LURE OF THE MOTHER TONGUE


The only aspect of the Indo-European problem that has been answered to most peoples’ satisfaction is how to define the language family, how to determine which languages belong to the Indo-European family and which do not. The discipline of linguistics was created in the nineteenth century by people trying to solve this problem. Their principal interests were comparative grammar, sound systems, and syntax, which provided the basis for classifying languages, grouping them into types, and otherwise defining the relationships between the tongues of humanity. No one had done this before. They divided the Indo-European language family into twelve major branches, distinguished by innovations in phonology or pronunciation and in morphology or word form that appeared at the root of each branch and were maintained in all the languages of that branch (figure 1.1). The twelve branches of Indo-European included most of the languages of Europe (but not Basque, Finnish, Estonian, or Magyar); the Persian language of Iran; Sanskrit and its many modern daughters (most important, Hindi and Urdu); and a number of extinct languages including Hittite in Anatolia (modern Turkey) and Tocharian in the deserts of Xinjiang (northwestern China) (figure 1.2). Modern English, like Yiddish and Swedish, is assigned to the Germanic branch. The analytic methods invented by nineteenth-century philologists are today used to describe, classify, and explain language variation worldwide.



Figure 1.1 The twelve branches of the Indo-European language family. Baltic and Slavic are sometimes combined into one branch, like Indo-Iranian, and Phrygian is sometimes set aside because we know so little about it, like Illyrian and Thracian. With those two changes the number of branches would be ten, an acceptable alternative. A tree diagram is meant to be a sketch of broad relationships; it does not represent a complete history.

Historical linguistics gave us not just static classifications but also the ability to reconstruct at least parts of extinct languages for which no written evidence survives. The methods that made this possible rely on regularities in the way sounds change inside the human mouth. If you collect Indo-European words for hundred from different branches of the language family and compare them, you can apply the myriad rules of sound change to see if all of them can be derived by regular changes from a single hypothetical ancestral word at the root of all the branches. The proof that Latin kentum (hundred) in the Italic branch and Lithuanian shimtas (hundred) in the Baltic branch are genetically related cognates is the construction of the ancestral root *k’tom-. The daughter forms are compared sound by sound, going through each sound in each word in each branch, to see if they can converge on one unique sequence of sounds that could have evolved into all of them by known rules. (I explain how this is done in the next chapter.) That root sequence of sounds, if it can be found, is the proof that the terms being compared are genetically related cognates. A reconstructed root is the residue of a successful comparison.



Figure 1.2 The approximate geographic locations of the major Indo-European branches at about 400 BCE.

Linguists have reconstructed the sounds of more than fifteen hundred Proto-Indo-European roots.12 The reconstructions vary in reliability, because they depend on the surviving linguistic evidence. On the other hand, archeological excavations have revealed inscriptions in Hittite, Mycenaean Greek, and archaic German that contained words, never seen before, displaying precisely the sounds previously reconstructed by comparative linguists. That linguists accurately predicted the sounds and letters later found in ancient inscriptions confirms that their reconstructions are not entirely theoretical. If we cannot regard reconstructed Proto-Indo-European as literally “real,” it is at least a close approximation of a prehistoric reality.

The recovery of even fragments of the Proto-Indo-European language is a remarkable accomplishment, considering that it was spoken by nonliterate people many thousands of years ago and never was written down. Although the grammar and morphology of Proto-Indo-European are most important in typological studies, it is the reconstructed vocabulary, or lexicon, that holds out the most promise for archaeologists. The reconstructed lexicon is a window onto the environment, social life, and beliefs of the speakers of Proto-Indo-European.

For example, reasonably solid lexical reconstructions indicate that Proto-Indo-European contained words for otter, beaver, wolf, lynx, elk, red deer, horse, mouse, hare, and hedgehog, among wild animals; goose, crane, duck, and eagle, among birds; bee and honey; and cattle (also cow, ox, and steer), sheep (also wool and weaving), pig (also boar, sow, and piglet), and dog among the domestic animals. The horse was certainly known to the speakers of Proto-Indo-European, but the lexical evidence alone is insufficient to determine if it was domesticated. All this lexical evidence might also be attested in, and compared against, archaeological remains to reconstruct the environment, economy, and ecology of the Proto-Indo-European world.

But the proto-lexicon contains much more, including clusters of words, suggesting that the speakers of PIE inherited their rights and duties through the father’s bloodline only (patrilineal descent); probably lived with the husband’s family after marriage (patrilocal residence); recognized the authority of chiefs who acted as patrons and givers of hospitality for their clients; likely had formally instituted warrior bands; practiced ritual sacrifices of cattle and horses; drove wagons; recognized a male sky deity; probably avoided speaking the name of the bear for ritual reasons; and recognized two senses of the sacred (“that which is imbued with holiness” and “that which is forbidden”). Many of these practices and beliefs are simply unrecoverable through archaeology. The proto-lexicon offers the hope of recovering some of the details of daily ritual and custom that archaeological evidence alone usually fails to deliver. That is what makes the solution of the Indo-European problem important for archaeologists, and for all of us who are interested in knowing our ancestors a little better.





A NEW SOLUTION FOR AN OLD PROBLEM


Linguists have been working on cultural-lexical reconstructions of Proto-Indo-European for almost two hundred years. Archaeologists have argued about the archaeological identity of the Proto-Indo-European language community for at least a century, probably with less progress than the linguists. The problem of Indo-European origins has been intertwined with European intellectual and political history for considerably more than a century. Why hasn’t a broadly acceptable union between archaeological and linguistic evidence been achieved?

Six major problems stand in the way. One is that the recent intellectual climate in Western academia has led many serious people to question the entire idea of proto-languages. The modern world has witnessed increasing cultural fusion in music (Black Ladysmith Mombasa and Paul Simon, Pavarotti and Sting), in art (Post-Modern eclecticism), in information services (News-Gossip), in the mixing of populations (international migration is at an all-time high), and in language (most of the people in the world are now bilingual or trilingual). As interest in the phenomenon of cultural convergence increased during the 1980s, thoughtful academics began to reconsider languages and cultures that had once been interpreted as individual, distinct entities. Even standard languages began to be seen as creoles, mixed tongues with multiple origins. In Indo-European studies this movement sowed doubt about the very concept of language families and the branching tree models that illustrated them, and some declared the search for any proto-language a delusion. Many ascribed the similarities between the Indo-European languages to convergence between neighboring languages that had distinct historical origins, implying that there never was a single proto-language.13

Much of this was creative but vague speculation. Linguists have now established that the similarities between the Indo-European languages are not the kinds of similarities produced by creolization and convergence. None of the Indo-European languages looks at all like a creole. The Indo-European languages must have replaced non–Indo-European languages rather than creolizing with them. Of course, there was inter-language borrowing, but it did not reach the extreme level of mixing and structural simplification seen in all creoles. The similarities that Sir William Jones noted among the Indo–European languages can only have been produced by descent from a common proto-language. On that point most linguists agree.

So we should be able to use the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European vocabulary as a source of clues about where it was spoken and when. But then the second problem arises: many archaeologists, apparently, do not believe that it is possible to reliably reconstruct any portion of the Proto-Indo-European lexicon. They do not accept the reconstructed vocabulary as real. This removes the principal reason for pursuing Indo-European origins and one of the most valuable tools in the search. In the next chapter I offer a defense of comparative linguistics, a brief explanation of how it works, and a guide to interpreting the reconstructed vocabulary.

The third problem is that archaeologists cannot agree about the antiquity of Proto-Indo-European. Some say it was spoken in 8000 BCE, others say as late as 2000 BCE, and still others regard it as an abstract idea that exists only in linguists’ heads and therefore cannot be assigned to any one time. This makes it impossible, of course, to focus on a specific era. But the principal reason for this state of chronic disagreement is that most archaeologists do not pay much attention to linguistics. Some have proposed solutions that are contradicted by large bodies of linguistic evidence. By solving the second problem, regarding the question of reliability and reality, we will advance significantly toward solving problem number 3—the question of when—which occupies chapter 3 and chapter 4.

The fourth problem is that archaeological methods are underdeveloped in precisely those areas that are most critical for Indo-European origin studies. Most archaeologists believe it is impossible to equate prehistoric language groups with archaeological artifacts, as language is not reflected in any consistent way in material culture. People who speak different languages might use similar houses or pots, and people who speak the same language can make pots or houses in different ways. But it seems to me that language and culture are predictably correlated under some circumstances. Where we see a very clear material-culture frontier—not just different pots but also different houses, graves, cemeteries, town patterns, icons, diets, and dress designs—that persists for centuries or millennia, it tends also to be a linguistic frontier. This does not happen everywhere. In fact, such ethno–linguistic frontiers seem to occur rarely. But where a robust material-culture frontier does persist for hundreds, even thousands of years, language tends to be correlated with it. This insight permits us to identify at least some linguistic frontiers on a map of purely archaeological cultures, which is a critical step in finding the Proto-Indo-European homeland.

Another weak aspect of contemporary archaeological theory is that archaeologists generally do not understand migration very well, and migration is an important vector of language change—certainly not the only cause but an important one. Migration was used by archaeologists before World War II as a simple explanation for any kind of change observed in prehistoric cultures: if pot type A in level one was replaced by pot type B in level two, then it was a migration of B-people that had caused the change. That simple assumption was proven to be grossly inadequate by a later generation of archaeologists who recognized the myriad internal catalysts of change. Shifts in artifact types were shown to be caused by changes in the size and complexity of social gatherings, shifts in economics, reorganization in the way crafts were managed, changes in the social function of crafts, innovations in technology, the introduction of new trade and exchange commodities, and so on. “Pots are not people” is a rule taught to every Western archaeology student since the 1960s. Migration disappeared entirely from the explanatory toolkit of Western archaeologists in the 1970s and 1980s. But migration is a hugely important human behavior, and you cannot understand the Indo-European problem if you ignore migration or pretend it was unimportant in the past. I have tried to use modern migration theory to understand prehistoric migrations and their probable role in language change, problems discussed in chapter 6.

Problem 5 relates to the specific homeland I defend in this book, located in the steppe grasslands of Russia and Ukraine. The recent prehistoric archaeology of the steppes has been published in obscure journals and books, in languages understood by relatively few Western archaeologists, and in a narrative form that often reminds Western archaeologists of the old “pots are people” archaeology of fifty years ago. I have tried to understand this literature for twenty-five years with limited success, but I can say that Soviet and post-Soviet archaeology is not a simple repetition of any phase of Western archaeology; it has its own unique history and guiding assumptions. In the second half of this book I present a selective and unavoidably imperfect synthesis of archaeology from the Neolithic, Copper, and Bronze Ages in the steppe zone of Russia, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan, bearing directly on the nature and identity of early speakers of Indo-European languages.

Horses gallop onstage to introduce the final, sixth problem. Scholars noticed more than a hundred years ago that the oldest well-documented Indo-European languages—Imperial Hittite, Mycenaean Greek, and the most ancient form of Sanskrit, or Old Indic—were spoken by militaristic societies that seemed to erupt into the ancient world driving chariots pulled by swift horses. Maybe Indo-European speakers invented the chariot. Maybe they were the first to domesticate horses. Could this explain the initial spread of the Indo-European languages? For about a thousand years, between 1700 and 700 BCE, chariots were the favored weapons of pharaohs and kings throughout the ancient world, from Greece to China. Large numbers of chariots, in the dozens or even hundreds, are mentioned in palace inventories of military equipment, in descriptions of battles, and in proud boasts of loot taken in warfare. After 800 BCE chariots were gradually abandoned as they became vulnerable to a new kind of warfare conducted by disciplined troops of mounted archers, the earliest cavalry. If Indo-European speakers were the first to have chariots, this could explain their early expansion; if they were the first to domesticate horses, then this could explain the central role horses played as symbols of strength and power in the rituals of the Old Indic Aryans, Greeks, Hittites, and other Indo-European speakers.

But until recently it has been difficult or impossible to determine when and where horses were domesticated. Early horse domestication left very few marks on the equine skeleton, and all we have left of ancient horses is their bones. For more than ten years I have worked on this problem with my research partner, and also my wife, Dorcas Brown, and we believe we now know where and when people began to keep herds of tamed horses. We also think that horseback riding began in the steppes long before chariots were invented, in spite of the fact that chariotry preceded cavalry in the warfare of the organized states and kingdoms of the ancient world.





LANGUAGE EXTINCTION AND THOUGHT


The people who spoke the Proto-Indo-European language lived at a critical time in a strategic place. They were positioned to benefit from innovations in transport, most important of these the beginning of horseback riding and the invention of wheeled vehicles. They were in no way superior to their neighbors; indeed, the surviving evidence suggests that their economy, domestic technology, and social organization were simpler than those of their western and southern neighbors. The expansion of their language was not a single event, nor did it have only one cause.

Nevertheless, that language did expand and diversify, and its daughters—including English—continue to expand today. Many other language families have become extinct as Indo-European languages spread. It is possible that the resultant loss of linguistic diversity has narrowed and channeled habits of perception in the modern world. For example, all Indo-European languages force the speaker to pay attention to tense and number when talking about an action: you must specify whether the action is past, present, or future; and you must specify whether the actor is singular or plural. It is impossible to use an Indo-European verb without deciding on these categories. Consequently speakers of Indo-European languages habitually frame all events in terms of when they occurred and whether they involved multiple actors. Many other language families do not require the speaker to address these categories when speaking of an action, so tense and number can remain unspecified.

On the other hand, other language families require that other aspects of reality be constantly used and recognized. For example, when describing an event or condition in Hopi you must use grammatical markers that specify whether you witnessed the event yourself, heard about it from someone else, or consider it to be an unchanging truth. Hopi speakers are forced by Hopi grammar to habitually frame all descriptions of reality in terms of the source and reliability of their information. The constant and automatic use of such categories generates habits in the perception and framing of the world that probably differ between people who use fundamentally different grammars.14 In that sense, the spread of Indo-European grammars has perhaps reduced the diversity of human perceptual habits. It might also have caused this author, as I write this book, to frame my observations in a way that repeats the perceptual habits and categories of a small group of people who lived in the western Eurasian steppes more than five thousand years ago.





CHAPTER TWO





How to Reconstruct a Dead Language


Proto-Indo-European has been dead as a spoken language for at least forty-five hundred years. The people who spoke it were nonliterate, so there are no inscriptions. Yet, in 1868, August Schleicher was able to tell a story in reconstructed Proto-Indo-European, called “The Sheep and the Horses,” or Avis akvasas ka. A rewrite in 1939 by Herman Hirt incorporated new interpretations of Proto-Indo-European phonology, and the title became Owis ek’woses-kwe. In 1979 Winfred Lehmann and Ladislav Zgusta suggested only minor new changes in their version, Owis ekwoskwe. While linguists debate increasingly minute details of pronunciation in exercises like these, most people are amazed that anything can be said about a language that died without written records. Amazement, of course, is a close cousin of suspicion. Might the linguists be arguing over a fantasy? In the absence of corroborative evidence from documents, how can linguists be sure about the accuracy of reconstructed Proto-Indo-European?1

Many archaeologists, accustomed to digging up real things, have a low opinion of those who merely reconstruct hypothetical phonemes—what is called “linguistic prehistory.” There are reasons for this skepticism. Both linguists and archaeologists have made communication across the disciplines almost impossible by speaking in dense jargons that are virtually impenetrable to anyone but themselves. Neither discipline is at all simple, and both are riddled with factions on many key questions of interpretation. Healthy disagreement can resemble confusion to an outsider, and most archaeologists, including this author, are outsiders in linguistics. Historical linguistics is not taught regularly in graduate archaeology programs, so most archaeologists know very little about the subject. Sometimes we make this quite clear to linguists. Nor is archaeology taught to graduate students in linguistics. Linguists’ occasional remarks about archaeology can sound simplistic and naïve to archaeologists, making some of us suspect that the entire field of historical linguistics may be riddled with simplistic and naïve assumptions.

The purpose of these first few chapters is to clear a path across the no-man’s land that separates archaeology and historical linguistics. I do this with considerable uncertainty—I have no more formal training in linguistics than most archaeologists. I am fortunate that a partial way has already been charted by Jim Mallory, perhaps the only doubly qualified linguist-archaeologist in Indo-European studies. The questions surrounding Indo-European origins are, at their core, about linguistic evidence. The most basic linguistic problem is to understand how language changes with time.2





LANGUAGE CHANGE AND TIME


Imagine that you had a time machine. If you are like me, there would be many times and places that you would like to visit. In most of them, however, no one spoke English. If you could not afford the Six-Month-Immersion Trip to, say, ancient Egypt, you would have to limit yourself to a time and place where you could speak the language. Consider, perhaps, a trip to England. How far back in time could you go and still be understood? Say we go to London in the year 1400 CE.

As you emerge from the time machine, a good first line to speak, something reassuring and recognizable, might be the opening line of the Lord’s Prayer. The first line in a conservative, old-fashioned version of Modern Standard English would be, “Our Father, who is in heaven, blessed be your name.” In the English of 1400, as spoken by Chaucer, you would say, “Oure fadir that art in heuenes, halwid be thy name.” Now turn the dial back another four hundred years to 1000 CE, and in Old English, or Anglo-Saxon, you would say, “Fœader ure thu the eart on heofonum, si thin nama gehalgod.” A chat with Alfred the Great would be out of the question.

Most normal spoken languages over the course of a thousand years undergo enough change that speakers at either end of the millennium, attempting a conversation, would have difficulty understanding each other. Languages like Church Latin or Old Indic (the oldest form of Sanskrit), frozen in ritual, would be your only hope for effective communication with people who lived more than a thousand years ago. Icelandic is a frequently cited example of a spoken language that has changed little in a thousand years, but it is spoken on an island isolated in the North Atlantic by people whose attitude to their old sagas and poetry has been one approaching religious reverence. Most languages undergo significantly more changes than Icelandic over far fewer than a thousand years for two reasons: first, no two people speak the same language exactly alike; and, second, most people meet a lot more people who speak differently than do the Icelanders. A language that borrows many words and phrases from another language changes more rapidly than one with a low borrowing rate. Icelandic has one of the lowest borrowing rates in the world.3 If we are exposed to a number of different ways of speaking, our own way of speaking is likely to change more rapidly. Fortunately, however, although the speed of language change is quite variable, the structure and sequence of language change is not.

Language change is not random; it flows in the direction of accents and phrases admired and emulated by large numbers of people. Once a target accent is selected, the structure of the sound changes that moves the speaker away from his own speech to the target is governed by rules. The same rules apparently exist in all our minds, mouths, and ears. Linguists just noticed them first. If rules define how a given innovation in pronunciation affects the old speech system—if sound shifts are predictable—then we should be able to play them backward, in effect, to hear earlier language states. That is more or less how Proto-Indo-European was reconstructed.

Most surprising about sound change is its regularity, its conformation to rules no one knows consciously. In early Medieval French there probably was a time when tsent’m ‘hundred’ was heard as just a dialectical pronunciation of the Latin word kentum ‘hundred’. The differences in sound between the two were allophones, or different sounds that did not create different meanings. But because of other changes in how Latin was spoken, [ts-] began to be heard as a different sound, a phoneme distinct from [k-] that could change the meaning of a word. At that point people had to decide whether kentum was pronounced with a [k-] or a [ts-]. When French speakers decided to use [ts-], they did so not just for the word kentum but in every word where Latin had the sound k- before a front vowel like -e-. And once this happened, ts- became confused with initial s-, and people had to decide again whether tsentum was pronounced with a [ts-] or [s-]. They chose [s-]. This sequence of shifts dropped below the level of consciousness and spread like a virus through all pre-French words with analogous sequences of sounds. Latin cera ‘wax’, pronounced [kera], became French cire, pronounced [seer]; and Latin civitas ‘community’, pronounced [kivitas], became French cité, pronounced [seetay]. Other sound changes happened, too, but they all followed the same unspoken and unconscious rules—the sound shifts were not idiosyncratic or confined to certain words; rather, they spread systematically to all similar sounds in the language. Peoples’ ears were very discriminating in identifying words that fit or did not fit the analogy. In words where the Latin k– was followed by a back vowel like - o it remained a k-, as in Latin costa > French côte.

Sound changes are rule-governed probably because all humans instinctively search for order in language. This must be a hard-wired part of all human brains. We do it without committee meetings, dictionaries, or even literacy, and we are not conscious of what we are doing (unless we are linguists). Human language is defined by its rules. Rules govern sentence construction (syntax), and the relationship between the sounds of words (phonology and morphology) and their meaning. Learning these rules changes our awareness from that of an infant to a functioning member of the human tribe. Because language is central to human evolution, culture, and social identity, each member of the tribe is biologically equipped to cooperate in converting novel changes into regular parts of the language system.4

Historical linguistics was created as a discipline in the nineteenth century, when scholars first exposed and analyzed the rules we follow when speaking and listening. I do not pretend to know these rules adequately, and if I did I would not try to explain them all. What I hope to do is indicate, in a general way, how some of them work so that we can use the “reconstructed vocabulary” of Proto-Indo-European with some awareness of its possibilities and limitations.

We begin with phonology. Any language can be separated into several interlocking systems, each with its own set of rules. The vocabulary, or lexicon, composes one system; syntax, or word order, and sentence construction compose another; morphology, or word form, including much of what is called “grammar” is the third; and phonology, or the rules about which sounds are acceptable and meaningful, is the fourth. Each system has its own peculiar tendencies, although a change in one (say, phonology) can bring about changes in another (say, morphology).5 We will look most closely at phonology and the lexicon, as these are the most important in understanding how the Proto-Indo-European vocabulary has been reconstructed.





PHONOLOGY: HOW TO RECONSTRUCT A DEAD SOUND


Phonology, or the study of linguistic sounds, is one of the principal tools of the historical linguist. Phonology is useful as a historical tool, because the sounds people utter tend to change over time in certain directions and not in others.

The direction of phonetic change is governed by two kinds of constraints: those that are generally applicable across most languages, and those specific to a single language or a related group of languages. General constraints are imposed by the mechanical limits of the human vocal anatomy, the need to issue sounds that can be distinguished and understood by listeners, and the tendency to simplify sound combinations that are difficult to pronounce. Constraints within languages are imposed by the limited range of sounds that are acceptable and meaningful for that language. Often these language-specific sounds are very recognizable. Comedians can make us laugh by speaking nonsense if they do it in the characteristic phonology of French or Italian, for example. Armed with a knowledge of both the general tendencies in the direction of phonetic change and the specific phonetic conventions within a given language group, a linguist can arrive at reliable conclusions about which phonetic variants are early pronunciations and which come later. This is the first step in reconstructing the phonological history of a language.

We know that French developed historically from the dialects of Latin spoken in the Roman province of Gaul (modern France) during the waning centuries of the Roman Empire around 300–400 CE. As late as the 1500s vernacular French suffered from low prestige among scholars, as it was considered nothing more than a corrupt form of Latin. Even if we knew nothing about that history, we could examine the Latin centum (pronounced [kentum]), and the French cent (pronounced [sohnt]), both meaning “hundred,” and we could say that the sound of the Latin word makes it the older form, that the Modern French form could have developed from it according to known rules of sound change, and that an intermediate pronunciation, [tsohnt], probably existed before the modern form appeared—and we would be right.





Some Basic Rules of Language Change: Phonology and Analogy


Two general phonetic rules help us make these decisions. One is that initial hard consonants like k and hard g tend to change toward soft sounds like s and sh if they change at all, whereas a change from s to k would generally be unusual. Another is that a consonant pronounced as a stop in the back of the mouth (k) is particularly likely to shift toward the front of the mouth (t or s) in a word where it is followed by a vowel that is pronounced in the front of the mouth (e). Pronounce [ke-] and [se-], and note the position of your tongue. The k is pronounced by using the back of the tongue and both e and s are formed with the middle or the tip of the tongue, which makes it easier to pronounce the segment se– than the segment ke-. Before a front vowel like -e we might expect the k– to shift forward to [ts-] and then to [s-] but not the other way around.

This is an example of a general phonetic tendency called assimilation: one sound tends to assimilate to a nearby sound in the same word, simplifying the needed movements. The specific type of assimilation seen here is called palatalization—a back consonant (k) followed by a front vowel (e) was assimilated in French toward the front of the palate, changing the [k] to [s]. Between the Latin [k] (pronounced with the back of the tongue at the back of the palate) and the Modern French [s] (tip of the tongue at the front of the palate) there should have been an intermediate pronunciation ts (middle of the tongue at the middle of the palate). Such sequences permit historical linguists to reconstruct undocumented intermediate stages in the evolution of a language. Palatalization has been systematic in the development of French from Latin. It is responsible for much of the distinctive phonology of the French language.

Assimilation usually changes the quality of a sound, or sometimes removes sounds from words by slurring two sounds together. The opposite process is the addition of new sounds to a word. A good example of an innovation of this kind is provided by the variable pronunciations of the word athlete in English. Many English speakers insert [-uh] in the middle of the word, saying [ath-uh-lete], but most are not aware they are doing so. The inserted syllable always is pronounced precisely the same way, as [-uh], because it assimilates to the tongue position required to pronounce the following -l. Linguists could have predicted that some speakers would insert a vowel in a difficult cluster of consonants like -thl (a phenomenon called epenthesis) and that the vowel inserted in athlete always would be pronounced [-uh] because of the rule of assimilation.

Another kind of change is analogical change, which tends to affect grammar quite directly. For example, the -s or -es ending for the plural of English nouns was originally limited to one class of Old English nouns: stãn for stone (nominative singular), stãnas for stones (nominative plural). But when a series of sound changes (see note 5) resulted in the loss of the phonemes that had once distinguished nouns of different classes, the -s ending began to be reinterpreted as a general plural indicator and was attached to all nouns. Plurals formed with - n (oxen), with a zero change (sheep), and with a vowel change in the stem (women) remain as relics of Old English, but the shift to -s is driving out such “irregular” forms and has been doing so for eight hundred years. Similar analogical changes have affected verbs: help/helped has replaced Old English help/holp as the -ed ending has been reinterpreted as a general ending for the past tense, reducing the once large number of strong verbs that formed their past with a vowel change. Analogical changes can also create new words or forms by analogy with old ones. Words formed with -able and -scape exist in such great numbers in English because these endings, which were originally bound to specific words (measurable, landscape), were reinterpreted as suffixes that could be removed and reattached to any stem (touchable, moonscape).

Phonological and analogical change are the internal mechanisms through which novel forms are incorporated into a language. By examining a sequence of documents within one language lineage from several different points in the past—inscriptions in, say, classical Latin, late vulgar Latin, early Medieval French, later Medieval French, and modern French—linguists have defined virtually all the sound changes and analogical shifts in the evolution of French from Latin. Regular, systematic rules, applicable also to other cases of language change in other languages, explain most of these shifts. But how do linguists replay these shifts “backward” to discover the origins of modern languages? How can we reconstruct the sounds of a language like Proto-Indo-European, for which there are no documents, a language spoken before writing was invented?





“Hundred”: An Example of Phonetic Reconstruction


Proto-Indo-European words were not reconstructed to create a dictionary of Proto-Indo-European vocabulary, although they are extraordinarily useful in this way. The real aim in reconstruction is to prove that a list of daughter terms are cognates, descended from the same mother term. The reconstruction of the mother term is a by-product of the comparison, the proof that every sound in every daughter word can be derived from a sound in the common parent. The first step is to gather up the suspected daughters: you must make a list of all the variants of the word you can find in the Indo-European languages (table 2.1). You have to know the rules of phonological change to do even this successfully, as some variants of the word might have changed radically in sound. Just recognizing the candidates and making up a good list can be a challenge. We will try this with the Proto-Indo-European word for “hundred.” The Indo-European roots for numbers, especially 1 to 10, 100, and 1,000, have been retained in almost all the Indo-European daughters.

Our list includes Latin centum, Avestan sat∂m, Lithuanian šimtas, and Old Gothic hunda– (a root much like hunda– evolved into the English word hundred). Similar-looking words meaning “hundred” in other Indo-European languages should be added, and I have already referred to the French word cent, but I will use only four for simplicity’s sake. The four words I have chosen come from four Indo-European branches: Italic, Indo-Iranian, Baltic, and Germanic.

TABLE 2.1

Indo-European Cognates for the Root “Hundred”



The question we must answer is this: Are these words phonetically transformed daughters of a single parent word? If the answer is yes, they are cognates. To prove they are cognates, we must be able to reconstruct an ancestral sequence of phonemes that could have developed into all the documented daughter sounds through known rules. We start with the first sound in the word.

The initial [k] phoneme in Latin centum could be explained if the parent term began with a [k] sound as well. The initial soft consonants ([s] [sh]) in Avestan sat∂m and Lithuanian šimtas could have developed from a Proto-Indo-European word that began with a hard consonant [k], like Latin centum, since hard sounds generally tend to shift toward soft sounds if they change at all. The reverse development ([s] or [sh] to [k]) would be very unlikely. Also, palatalization and sibilation (shifting to a ‘s’ or ‘sh’ sound) of initial hard consonants is expected in both the Indic branch, of which Vedic Sanskrit is a member; and the Baltic branch, of which Lithuanian is a member. The general direction of sound change and the specific conventions in each branch permit us to say that the Proto-Indo-European word from which all three of these developed could have begun with ‘k’.

What about hunda? It looks quite different but, in fact, the h is expected—it follows a rule that affected all initial [k] sounds in the Germanic branch. This shift involved not just k but also eight other consonants in Pre-Germanic.6 The consonant shift spread throughout the prehistoric Pre-Germanic language community, giving rise to a new Proto-Germanic phonology that would be retained in all the later Germanic languages, including, ultimately, English. This consonant shift was described by and named after Jakob Grimm (the same Grimm who collected fairy tales) and so is called Grimm’s Law. One of the changes described in Grimm’s Law was that the archaic Indo-European sound [k] shifted in most phonetic environments to Germanic [h]. The Indo-European k preserved in Latin centum shifted to h in Old Gothic hunda-; the initial k seen in Latin caput ‘head’ shifted to h in Old English hafud ‘head’; and so on throughout the vocabulary. (Caput>hafud shows that p also changed to f, as in pater >fater). So, although it looks very different, hunda– conforms: its first consonant can be derived from k by Grimm’s Law.

The first sound in the Proto-Indo-European word for “hundred” probably was k. (An initial [k] sound satisfies the other Indo-European cognates for “hundred” as well.)7 The second sound should have been a vowel, but which vowel?

The second sound was a vowel that does not exist in English. In Proto-Indo-European resonants could act as vowels, similar to the resonant n in the colloquial pronunciation of fish’n’ (as in Bob’s gone fish’n’). The second sound was a resonant, either * or *, both of which occur among the daughter terms being compared. (An asterisk is used before a reconstructed form for which there is no direct evidence.) M is attested in the Lithuanian cognate šimtas. An m in the Proto-Indo-European parent could account for the m in Lithuanian. It could have changed to n in Old Indic, Germanic, and other lineages by assimilating to the following t or d, as both n and t are articulated on the teeth. (Old Spanish semda ‘path’ changed to modern Spanish senda for the same reason.) A shift from an original m to an n before a t is explicable, but a shift from an original n to an m is much less likely. Therefore, the original second sound probably was . This consonant could have been lost entirely in Sanskrit satam by yet another assimilative tendency called total assimilation: after the m changed to n, giving *santam, the n was completely assimilated to the following t, giving satam. The same process was responsible for the loss of the [k] sound in the shift from Latin octo to modern Italian otto ‘eight’.

I will stop here, with an ancestral *k’ -, in my discussion of the Proto-Indo-European ancestor of centum. The analysis should continue through the phonemes that are attested in all the surviving cognates to reconstruct an acceptable ancestral root. By applying such rules to all the cognates, linguists have been able to reconstruct a Proto-Indo-European sequence of phonemes, *k’tom, that could have developed into all the attested phonemes in all the attested daughter forms. The Proto-Indo-European root *k’tom is the residue of a successful comparison—it is the proof that the daughter terms being compared are indeed cognates. It is also likely to be a pretty good approximation of the way this word was pronounced in at least some dialects of Proto-Indo-European.





The Limitations and Strengths of Reconstruction


The comparative method will produce the sound of the ancestral root and confirm a genetic relationship only with a group of cognates that has evolved regularly according to the rules of sound change. The result of a comparative analysis is either a demonstration of a genetic connection, if every phoneme in every cognate can be derived from a mutually acceptable parental phoneme; or no demonstrable connection. In many cases sounds may have been borrowed into a language from a neighboring language, and those sounds might replace the predicted shifts. The comparative method cannot force a regular reconstruction on an irregular set of sounds. Much of the Proto-Indo-European vocabulary, perhaps most of it, never will be reconstructed. Regular groups of cognates permit us to reconstruct a Proto-Indo-European root for the word door but not for wall; for rain but not for river; for foot but not for leg. Proto-Indo-European certainly had words for these things, but we cannot safely reconstruct how they sounded.

The comparative method cannot prove that two words are not related, but it can fail to produce proof that they are. For example, the Greek god Ouranos and the Indic deity Varuna had strikingly similar mythological attributes, and their names sound somewhat alike. Could Ouranos and Varuna be reflexes of the name of some earlier Proto-Indo-European god? Possibly—but the two names cannot be derived from a common parent by the rules of sound change known to have operated in Greek and Old Indic. Similarly Latin deus (god) and Greek théos (god) look like obvious cognates, but the comparative method reveals that Latin deus, in fact, shares a common origin with Greek Zéus.8 If Greek théos were to have a Latin cognate it should begin with an [f] sound (festus ‘festive’ has been suggested, but some of the other sounds in this comparison are problematic). It is still possible that deus and théos were historically related in some irregular way, but we cannot prove it.

In the end, how can we be sure that the comparative method accurately reconstructs undocumented stages in the phonological history of a language? Linguists themselves are divided on the question of the “reality” of reconstructed terms.9 A reconstruction based on cognates from eight Indo-European branches, like *k’tom-, is much more reliable and probably more “true” than one based on cognates in just two branches. Cognates in at least three branches, including an ancient branch (Anatolian, Greek, Avestan Iranian, Old Indic, Latin, some aspects of Celtic) should produce a reliable reconstruction. But how reliable? One test was conceived by Robert A. Hall, who reconstructed the shared parent of the Romance languages using just the rules of sound change, and then compared his reconstruction to Latin. Making allowances for the fact that the actual parents of the Romance languages were several provincial Vulgar Latin dialects, and the Latin used for the test was the classical Latin of Cicero and Caesar, the result was reassuring. Hall was even able to reconstruct a contrast between two sets of vowels although none of the modern daughters had retained it. He was unable to identify the feature that distinguished the two vowel sets as length—Latin had long vowels and short vowels, a distinction lost in all its Romance daughters—but he was able to rebuild a system with two contrasting sets of vowels and many of the other, more obvious aspects of Latin morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. Such clever exercises aside, the best proof of the realism of reconstruction lies in several cases where linguists have suggested a reconstruction and archaeologists have subsequently found inscriptions that proved it correct.10

For example, the oldest recorded Germanic cognates for the word guest (Gothic gasts, Old Norse gestr, Old High German gast) are thought to be derived from a reconstructed late Proto-Indo-European *ghos-ti- (which probably meant both “host” and “guest” and thus referred to a relationship of hospitality between strangers rather than to one of its roles) through a Proto-Germanic form reconstructed as *gastiz. None of the known forms of the word in the later Germanic languages contained the i before the final consonant, but rules of sound change predicted that the i should theoretically have been there in Proto-Germanic. Then an archaic Germanic inscription was found on a gold horn dug from a grave in Denmark. The inscription ek hlewagastiz holitijaz (or holtingaz) horna tawido is translated “I, Hlewagasti of Holt (or Holting) made the horn.” It contained the personal name Hlewagastiz, made up of two stems, Hlewa-‘fame’ and gastiz ‘guest’. Linguists were excited not because the horn was a beautiful golden artifact but because the stem contained the predicted i, verifying the accuracy of both the reconstructed Proto-Germanic form and its late Proto-Indo-European ancestor. Linguistic reconstruction had passed a real-world test.

Similarly linguists working on the development of the Greek language had proposed a Proto-Indo-European labiovelar *kw (pronounced [kw-]) as the ancestral phoneme that developed into Greek t (before a front vowel) or p (before a back vowel). The reconstruction of *kw was a reasonable but complex solution for the problem of how the Classical Greek consonants were related to their Proto-Indo-European ancestors. It remained entirely theoretical until the discovery and decipherment of the Mycenaean Linear B tablets, which revealed that the earliest form of Greek, Mycenaean, had the predicted kw where later Greek had t or p before front and back vowels.11 Examples like these confirm that the reconstructions of historical linguistics are more than just abstractions.

A reconstructed term is, of course, a phonetic idealization. Reconstructed Proto-Indo-European cannot capture the variety of dialectical pronunciations that must have existed more than perhaps one thousand years when the language was living in the mouths of people. Nevertheless, it is a remarkable victory that we can now pronounce, however stiffly, thousands of words in a language spoken by nonliterate people before 2500 BCE.





THE LEXICON: HOW TO RECONSTRUCT DEAD MEANINGS


Once we have reconstructed the sound of a word in Proto-Indo-European, how do we know what it meant? Some archaeologists have doubted the reliability of reconstructed Proto-Indo-European, as they felt that the original meanings of reconstructed terms could never be known confidently.12 But we can assign reliable meanings to many reconstructed Proto-Indo-European terms. And it is in the meanings of their words that we find the best evidence for the material culture, ecological environment, social relations, and spiritual beliefs of the speakers of Proto-Indo-European. Every meaning is worth the struggle.

Three general rules guide the assignment of meaning. First, look for the most ancient meanings that can be found. If the goal is to retrieve the meaning of the original Proto–Indo–European word, modern meanings should be checked against meanings that are recorded for ancient cognates.

Second, if one meaning is consistently attached to a cognate in all language branches, like hundred in the example I have used, that is clearly the least problematic meaning we can assign to the original Proto-Indo-European root. It is difficult to imagine how that meaning could have become attached to all the cognates unless it were the meaning attached to the ancestral root.

Third, if the word can be broken down into roots that point to the same meaning as the one proposed, then that meaning is doubly likely. For example, Proto-Indo-European *k’tom probably was a shortened version of *dek’tom, a word that included the Proto-Indo-European root *dek’ ‘ten’. The sequence of sounds in *dek’ was reconstructed independently using the cognates for the word ten, so the fact that the reconstructed roots for ten and hundred are linked in both meaning and sound tends to verify the reliability of both reconstructions. The root *k’tom turns out to be not just an arbitrary string of Proto-Indo-European phonemes but a meaningful compound: “(a unit) of tens.” This also tells us that the speakers of Proto-Indo-European had a decimal numbering system and counted to one hundred by tens, as we do.

In most cases the meaning of a Proto-Indo-European word changed and drifted as the various speech communities using it became separated, centuries passed, and daughter languages evolved. Because the association between word and meaning is arbitrary, there is less regular directionality to change in meaning than there is in sound change (although some semantic shifts are more probable than others). Nevertheless, general meanings can be retrieved. A good example is the word for “wheel.”





“Wheel”: An Example of Semantic Reconstruction


The word wheel is the modern English descendant of a PIE root that had a sound like *kwékwlos or *kwekwlós. But what, exactly, did *kwékwlos mean in Proto-Indo-European? The sequence of phonemes in the root *kwékwlos was pieced together by comparing cognates from eight old Indo-European languages, representing five branches. Reflexes of this word survived in Old Indic and Avestan (from the Indo-Iranian branch), Old Norse and Old English (from the Germanic branch), Greek, Phrygian, and Tocharian A and B. The meaning “wheel” is attested for the cognates in Sanskrit, Avestan, Old Norse, and Old English. The meaning of the Greek cognate had shifted to “circle” in the singular but in the plural still meant “wheels.” In Tocharian and Phrygian the cognates meant “wagon” or “vehicle.” What was the original meaning? (table 2.2).

Five of the eight *kwékwlos cognates have “wheel” or “wheels” as an attested meaning, and in those languages (Phrygian, Greek, Tocharian A & B) where the meaning drifted away from “wheel(s),” it had not drifted far (“circle,” “wagon,” or “vehicle”). Moreover, the cognates that preserve the meaning “wheel” are found in languages that are geographically isolated from one another (Old Indic and Avestan in Iran were neighbors, but neither had any known contact with Old Norse or Old English). The meaning “wheel” is unlikely to have been borrowed into Old Norse from Old Indic, or vice versa.

Some shifts in meaning are unlikely, and others are common. It is common to name a whole (“vehicle,” “wagon”) after one of its most characteristic parts (“wheels”), as seems to have happened in Phrygian and Tocharian. We do the same in modern English slang when we speak of someone’s car as their “wheels,” or clothing as their “threads.” A shift in meaning in the other direction, using a word that originally referred to the whole to refer to one of its parts (using wagon to refer to wheel), is much less probable.

The meaning of wheel is given additional support by the fact that it has an Indo-European etymology, like the root for *k’tom. It was a word created from another Indo-European root. That root was *kwel-, a verb that meant “to turn.” So *kwékwlos is not just a random string of phonemes reconstructed from the cognates for wheel; it meant “the thing that turns.” This not only tends to confirm the meaning “wheel” rather than “circle” or “vehicle” but it also indicates that the speakers of Proto-Indo-European made up their own words for wheels. If they learned about the invention of the wheel from others they did not adopt the foreign name for it, so the social setting in which the transfer took place probably was brief, between people who remained socially distant. The alternative, that wheels were invented within the Proto-Indo-European language community, seems unlikely for archaeological and historical reasons, though it remains possible (see chapter 4).

One more rule helps to confirm the reconstructed meaning. If it fits within a semantic field consisting of other roots with closely related reconstructed meanings, we can at least be relatively confident that such a word could have existed in Proto-Indo-European. “Wheel” is part of a semantic field consisting of words for the parts of a wagon or cart (table 2.2). Happily, at least four other such words can be reconstructed for Proto-Indo-European. These are:

1. *rot-eh2-, a second term for “wheel,” with cognates in Old Indic and Avestan that meant “chariot,” and cognates that meant “wheel” in Latin, Old Irish, Welsh, Old High German, and Lithuanian.

2. *aks- (or perhaps *h2eks-) ‘axle’ attested by cognates that had not varied in meaning over thousands of years, and still meant “axle” in Old Indic, Greek, Latin, Old Norse, Old English, Old High German, Lithuanian, and Old Church Slavonic.

3. *h2ih3s- ‘thill’ (the harness pole) attested by cognates that meant “thill” in Hittite and Old Indic.

4. *wégheti, a verb meaning “to convey or go in a vehicle,” attested by cognates carrying this meaning in Old Indic, Avestan, Latin, Old English, and Old Church Slavonic and by cognate-derived nouns ending in *- no- meaning “wagon” in Old Irish, Old English, Old High German, and Old Norse.



TABLE 2.2

Proto-Indo-European Roots for Words Referring to Parts of a Wagon



These four additional terms constitute a well-documented semantic field (wheel, axle, thill, and wagon or convey in a vehicle) that increases our confidence in reconstructing the meaning “wheel” for *kwékwlos. Of the five terms assigned to this semantic field, all but thill have clear Indo-European etymologies in independently reconstructed roots. The speakers of Proto-Indo-European were familiar with wheels and wagons, and used words of their own creation to talk about them.

Fine distinctions, shades of meaning, and the word associations that enriched Proto-Indo-European poetry may be forever lost, but gross meanings are recoverable for at least fifteen hundred Proto-Indo-European roots such as *dekm- ‘ten’, and for additional thousands of other words derived from them, such as *ktom- ‘hundred’. Those meanings provide a window into the lives and thoughts of the speakers of Proto-Indo-European.





SYNTAX AND MORPHOLOGY: THE SHAPE OF A DEAD LANGUAGE


I will not try to describe in any detail the grammatical connections between the Indo-European languages. The reconstructed vocabulary is most important for our purposes. But grammar, the bedrock of language classification, provides the primary evidence for classifying languages and determining relationships between them. Grammar has two aspects: syntax, or the rules governing the order of words in sentences; and morphology, or the rules governing the forms words must take when used in particular ways.

Proto-Indo-European grammar has left its mark on all the Indo-European languages to one degree or another. In all the Indo-European language branches, nouns are declined; that is, the noun changes form depending on how it is used in a sentence. English lost most of these declinations during its evolution from Anglo-Saxon, but all the other languages in the Germanic branch retain them, and we have kept some use-dependent pronouns (masculine: he, his, him/feminine: she, hers, her). Moreover, most Indo-European nouns are declined in similar ways, with endings that are genetically cognate, and with the same formal system of cases (nominative, genitive, accusative, etc.) that intersect in the same way with the same three gender classes (masculine, feminine, neuter); and with similar formal classes, or declensions, of nouns that are declined in distinctive ways. Indo-European verbs also share similar conjugation classes (first person, second person or familiar, third person or formal, singular, plural, past tense, present tense, etc.), similar stem alterations (run-ran, give-gave), and similar endings. This particular constellation of formal categories, structures, transformations, and endings is not at all necessary or universal in human language. It is unique, as a system, and is found only in the Indo-European languages. The languages that share this grammatical system certainly are daughters of a single language from which that system was inherited.

One example shows how unlikely it would be for the Indo-European languages to share these grammatical structures by random chance. The verb to be has one form in the first-person singular ([I] am) and another in the third-person singular ([he/she/it] is). Our English verbs are descended from the archaic Germanic forms im and ist. The Germanic forms have exact, proven cognates in Old Indic ásmi and ásti; in Greek eimí and estí; and in Old Church Slavonic jesmi and jestû. All these words are derived from a reconstructable Proto-Indo-European pair, *h1e’smi and *h1e’sti. That all these languages share the same system of verb classes (first person, second person or familiar, and third person), and that they use the same basic roots and endings to identify those classes, confirms that they are genetically related languages.





CONCLUSION: RAISING A LANGUAGE FROM THE DEAD


It will always be difficult to work with Proto-Indo-European. The version we have is uncertain in many morphological details, phonetically idealized, and fragmentary, and can be difficult to decipher. The meanings of some terms will never be fully understood, and for others only an approximate definition is possible. Yet reconstructed Proto-Indo-European captures key parts of a language that actually existed.

Some dismiss reconstructed Proto-Indo-European as nothing more than a hypothesis. But the limitations of Proto-Indo-European apply equally to the written languages of ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, which are universally counted among the great treasures of antiquity. No curator of Assyrian records would suggest that we should discard the palace archives of Nineveh because they are incomplete, or because we cannot know the exact sound and meaning of many terms, or because we are uncertain about how the written court language related to the ‘real’ language spoken by the people in the street. Yet these same problems have convinced many archaeologists that the study of Proto-Indo-European is too speculative to yield any real historical value.

Reconstructed Proto-Indo-European is a long, fragmentary list of words used in daily speech by people who created no other texts. That is why it is important. The list becomes useful, however, only if we can determine where it came from. To do that we must locate the Proto-Indo-European homeland. But we cannot locate the Proto-Indo-European homeland until we first locate Proto-Indo-European in time. We have to know when it was spoken. Then it becomes possible to say where.





CHAPTER THREE





Language and Time 1

The Last Speakers of Proto-Indo-European


Time changes everything. Reading to my young children, I found that in mid-sentence I began to edit and replace words that suddenly looked archaic to me, in stories I had loved when I was young. The language of Robert Louis Stevenson and Jules Verne now seems surprisingly stiff and distant, and as for Shakespeare’s English—we all need the glossary. What is true for modern languages was true for prehistoric languages. Over time, they changed. So what do we mean by Proto-Indo-European? If it changed over time, is it not a moving target? However we define it, for how long was Proto-Indo-European spoken? Most important, when was it spoken? How do we assign a date to a language that left no inscriptions, that died without ever being written down? It helps to divide any problem into parts, and this one can easily be divided into two: the birth date and the death date.

This chapter concentrates on the death date, the date after which Proto-Indo-European must have ceased to exist. But it helps to begin by considering how long a period probably preceded that. Given that the time between the birth and death dates of Proto-Indo-European could not have been infinite, precisely how long a time was it? Do languages, which are living, changing things, have life expectancies?





THE SIZE OF THE CHRONOLOGICAL WINDOW: HOW LONG DO LANGUAGES LAST?


If we were magically able to converse with an English speaker living a thousand years ago, as proposed in the last chapter, we would not understand each other. Very few natural languages, those that are learned and spoken at home, remain sufficiently unchanged after a thousand years to be considered the “same language.” How can the rate of change be measured? Languages normally have dialects—regional accents—and, within any region, they have innovating social sectors (entertainers, soldiers, traders) and conservative sectors (the very rich, the very poor). Depending on who you are, your language might be changing very rapidly or very slowly. Unstable conditions—invasions, famines, the fall of old prestige groups and the rise of new ones—increase the rate of change. Some parts of language change earlier and faster, whereas other parts are resistant. That last observation led the linguist Morris Swadesh to develop a standard word list chosen from the most resistant vocabulary, a group of words that tend to be retained, not replaced, in most languages around the world, even after invasions and conquests. Over the long term, he hoped, the average rate of replacement in this resistant vocabulary might yield a reliable standardized measurement of the speed of language change, what Swadesh called glottochronology.1

Between 1950 and 1952 Swadesh published a hundred-word and a two-hundred-word basic core vocabulary, a standardized list of resistant terms. All languages, he suggested, tend to retain their own words for certain kinds of meanings, including body parts (blood, foot); lower numerals (one, two, three); some kinship terms (mother, father); basic needs (eat, sleep); basic natural features (sun, moon, rain, river); some flora and fauna (tree, domesticated animals); some pronouns (this, that, he, she); and conjunctions (and, or, if). The content of the list can be and has been modified to suit vocabularies in different languages—in fact, the preferred two-hundred-meaning list in English contains 215 words. The English core vocabulary has proven extremely resistant to change. Although English has borrowed more than 50% of its general vocabulary from the Romance languages, mainly from French (reflecting the conquest of Anglo-Saxon England by the French-speaking Normans) and Latin (from centuries of technical and professional vocabulary training in courts, churches, and schools), only 4% of the English core vocabulary is borrowed from Romance. In its core vocabulary English remains a Germanic language, true to its origins among the Anglo-Saxons who migrated from northern Europe to Britain after the fall of the Roman Empire.

Comparing core vocabularies between old and new phases in languages with long historical records (Old English/Modern English, Middle Egyptian/Coptic, Ancient Chinese/Modern Mandarin, Late Latin/Modern French, and nine other pairs), Swadesh calculated an average replacement rate of 14% per thousand years for the hundred-word list, and 19% per thousand years for the two-hundred-word list. He suggested that 19% was an acceptable average for all languages (usually rounded to 20%). To illustrate what that number means, Italian and French have distinct, unrelated words for 23% of the terms in the two-hundred-word list, and Spanish and Portuguese show a difference of 15%. As a general rule, if more than 10% of the core vocabulary is different between two dialects, they are either mutually unintelligible or approaching that state, that is, they are distinct languages or emerging languages. On average, then, with a replacement rate of 14–19% per thousand years in the core vocabulary, we should expect that most languages—including this one—would be incomprehensible to our own descendants a thousand years from now.

Swadesh hoped to use the replacement rate in the core vocabulary as a standardized clock to establish the date of splits and branches in unwritten languages. His own research involved the splits between American Indian language families in prehistoric North America, which were undatable by any other means. But the reliability of his standard replacement rate wilted under criticism. Extreme cases like Icelandic (very slow change, with a replacement rate of only 3–4% per thousand years) and English (very rapid, with a 26% replacement rate per thousand years) challenged the utility of the “average” rate.2 The mathematics was affected if a language had multiple words for one meaning on the list. The dates given by glottochronology for many language splits contradicted known historical dates, generally by giving a date much later than it should have been. This direction in the errors suggested that real language change often was slower than Swadesh’s model suggested—less than 19% per thousand years. A devastating critique of Swadesh’s mathematics by Chretien, in 1962, seemed to drive a stake through the heart of glottochronology.

But in 1972 Chretien’s critique was itself shown to be incorrect, and, since the 1980s, Sankoff and Embleton have introduced equations that include as critical values borrowing rates, the number of geographic borders with other languages, and a similarity index between the compared languages (because similar languages borrow in the core more easily then dissimilar languages). Multiple synonyms can each be given a fractional score. Studies incorporating these improved methods succeeded better in producing dates for splits between known languages that matched historical facts. More important, comparisons between most Indo-European languages still yielded replacement rates in the core vocabulary of about 10–20% per thousand years. Comparing the core vocabularies in ninety-five Indo-European languages, Kruskal and Black found that the most frequent date for the first splitting of Proto–Indo–European was about 3000 BCE. Although this estimate cannot be relied on absolutely, it is probably “in the ballpark” and should not be ignored.3

One simple point can be extracted from these debates: if the Proto-Indo-European core vocabulary changed at a rate ≥10% per millennium, or at the lower end of the expected range, Proto-Indo-European did not exist as a single language with a single grammar and vocabulary for as long as a thousand years. Proto-Indo-European grammar and vocabulary should have changed quite substantially over a thousand years. Yet the grammar of Proto-Indo-European, as reconstructed by linguists, is remarkably homogeneous both in morphology and phonology. Proto-Indo-European nouns and pronouns shared a set of cases, genders, and declensions that intersect with dozens of cognate phonological endings. Verbs had a shared system of tenses and aspects, again tagged by a shared set of phonological vowel changes (run-ran) and endings. This shared system of grammatical structures and phonological ways of labeling them looks like a single language. It suggests that reconstructed Proto-Indo-European probably refers to less than a thousand years of language change. It took less than a thousand years for late Vulgar Latin to evolve into seven Romance languages, and Proto-Indo-European does not contain nearly enough internal grammatical diversity to represent seven distinct grammars.

But considering that Proto-Indo-European is a fragmentary reconstruction, not an actual language, we should allow it more time to account for the gaps in our knowledge (more on this in chapter 5). Let us assign a nominal lifetime of two thousand years to the phase of language history represented by reconstructed Proto-Indo-European. In the history of English two thousand years would take us all the way back to the origins of the sound shifts that defined Proto-Germanic, and would include all the variation in all the Germanic languages ever spoken, from Hlewagasti of Holt to Puff Daddy of hip-hop fame. Proto-Indo-European does not seem to contain that much variation, so two thousand years probably is too long. But for archaeological purposes it is quite helpful to be able to say that the time period we are trying to identify is no longer than two thousand years.

What is the end date for that two-thousand-year window of time?





THE TERMINAL DATE FOR PROTO-INDO-EUROPEAN: THE MOTHER BECOMES HER DAUGHTERS


The terminal date for reconstructed Proto-Indo-European—the date after which it becomes an anachronism—should be close to the date when its oldest daughters were born. Proto-Indo-European was reconstructed on the basis of systematic comparisons between all the Indo-European daughter languages. The mother tongue cannot be placed later than the daughters. Of course, it would have survived after the detachment and isolation of the oldest daughter, but as time passed, if that daughter dialect remained isolated from the Proto-Indo-European speech community, each would have developed its own peculiar innovations. The image of the mother that is retained through each of the daughters is the form the mother had before the detachment of that daughter branch. Each daughter, therefore, preserves a somewhat different image of the mother.

Linguists have exploited this fact and other aspects of internal variation to identify chronological phases within Proto-Indo-European. The number of phases defined by different linguists varies from three (early, middle, late) to six.4 But if we define Proto-Indo-European as the language that was ancestral to all the Indo-European daughters, then it is the oldest reconstructable form, the earliest phase of Proto-Indo-European, that we are talking about. The later daughters did not evolve directly from this early kind of Proto-Indo-European but from some intermediate, evolved set of late Indo-European languages that preserved aspects of the mother tongue and passed them along.

So when did the oldest daughter separate? The answer to that question depends very much on the accidental survival of written inscriptions. And the oldest daughter preserved in written inscriptions is so peculiar that it is probably safer to rely on the image of the mother preserved within the second set of daughters. What’s wrong with the oldest daughter?





THE OLDEST AND STRANGEST DAUGHTER (OR COUSIN?): ANATOLIAN


The oldest written Indo-European languages belonged to the Anatolian branch. The Anatolian branch had three early stems: Hittite, Luwian, and Palaic.5 All three languages are extinct but once were spoken over large parts of ancient Anatolia, modern Turkey (figure 3.1). Hittite is by far the best known of the three, as it was the palace and administrative language of the Hittite Empire.

Inscriptions place Hittite speakers in Anatolia as early as 1900 BCE, but the empire was created only about 1650–1600 BCE, when Hittite warlords conquered and united several independent native Hattic kingdoms in central Anatolia around modern Kayseri. The name Hittite was given to them by Egyptian and Syrian scribes who failed to distinguish the Hittite kings from the Hattic kings they had conquered. The Hittites called themselves Neshites after the Anatolian city, Kanesh, where they rose to power. But Kanesh had earlier been a Hattic city; its name was Hattic. Hattic-speakers also named the city that became the capital of the Hittite Empire, Hattušas. Hattic was a non–Indo-European language, probably linked distantly to the Caucasian languages. The Hittites borrowed Hattic words for throne, lord, king, queen, queen mother, heir apparent, priest, and a long list of palace officials and cult leaders—probably in a historical setting where the Hattic languages were the languages of royalty. Palaic, the second Anatolian language, also borrowed vocabulary from Hattic. Palaic was spoken in a city called Pala probably located in north-central Anatolia north of Ankara. Given the geography of Hattic place-names and Hattic_? Palaic/Hittite loans, Hattic seems to have been spoken across all of central Anatolia before Hittite or Palaic was spoken there. The early speakers of Hittite and Palaic were intruders in a non–Indo-European central Anatolian landscape dominated by Hattic speakers who had already founded cities, acquired literate bureaucracies, and established kingdoms and palace cults.6

Figure 3.1 The ancient languages of Anatolia at about 1500 BCE.



After Hittite speakers usurped the Hattic kingdom they enjoyed a period of prosperity enriched by Assyrian trade, and then endured defeats that later were dimly but bitterly recalled. They remained confined to the center of the Anatolian plateau until about 1650 BCE, when Hittite armies became mighty enough to challenge the great powers of the Near East and the imperial era began. The Hittites looted Babylon, took other cities from the Assyrians, and fought the Egyptian pharaoh Ramses II to a standstill at the greatest chariot battle of ancient times, at Kadesh, on the banks of the Orontes River in Syria, in 1286 BCE. A Hittite monarch married an Egyptian princess. The Hittite kings also knew and negotiated with the princes who ruled Troy, probably the place referred to in the Hittite archives as steep Wilusa (Ilios).7 The Hittite capital city, Hattušas, was burned in a general calamity that brought down the Hittite kings, their army, and their cities about 1180 BCE. The Hittite language then quickly disappeared; apparently only the ruling élite ever spoke it.

The third early Anatolian language, Luwian, was spoken by more people over a larger area, and it continued to be spoken after the end of the empire. During the later Hittite empire Luwian was the dominant spoken language even in the Hittite royal court. Luwian did not borrow from Hattic and so might have been spoken originally in western Anatolia, outside the Hattic core region—perhaps even in Troy, where a Luwian inscription was found on a seal in Troy level VI—the Troy of the Trojan War. On the other hand, Luwian did borrow from other, unknown non–Indo-European language(s). Hittite and Luwian texts are abundant from the empire period, 1650–1180 BCE. These are the earliest complete texts in any Indo-European language. But individual Hittite and Luwian words survive from an earlier era, before the empire began.8

The oldest Hittite and Luwian names and words appeared in the business records of Assyrian merchants who lived in a commercial district, or karum, outside the walls of Kanesh, the city celebrated by the later Hittites as the place where they first became kings. Archaeological excavations here, on the banks of the Halys River in central Anatolia, have shown that the Assyrian karum, a foreigners’ enclave that covered more than eighty acres outside the Kanesh city walls, operated from about 1920 to 1850 BCE (level II), was burned, rebuilt, and operated again (level Ib) until about 1750 BCE, when it was burned again. After that the Assyrians abandoned the karum system in Anatolia, so the Kanesh karum is a closed archaeological deposit dated between 1920 and 1750 BCE. The Kanesh karum was the central office for a network of literate Assyrian merchants who oversaw trade between the Assyrian state and the warring kingdoms of Late Bronze Age Anatolia. The Assyrian decision to make Kanesh their distribution center greatly increased the power of its Hittite and Luwian occupants.

Most of the local names recorded by the merchants in the Kanesh karum accounts were Hittite or Luwian, beginning with the earliest records of about 1900 BCE. Many still were Hattic. But Hittite speakers seem to have controlled business with the Assyrian karum. The Assyrian merchants were so accustomed to doing business with Hittite speakers that they adopted Hittite words for contract and lodging even in their private correspondence. Palaic, the third language of the Anatolian branch, is not known from the Kanesh records. Palaic died out as a spoken language probably before 1500 BCE. It presumably was spoken in Anatolia during the karum period but not at Kanesh.

Hittite, Luwian, and Palaic had evolved already by 1900 BCE. This is a critical piece of information in any attempt to date Proto-Indo-European. All three were descended from the same root language, Proto-Anatolian. The linguist Craig Melchert described Luwian and Hittite of the empire period, ca. 1400 BCE, as sisters about as different as twentieth-century Welsh and Irish.9 Welsh and Irish probably share a common origin of about two thousand years ago. If Luwian and Hittite separated from Proto-Anatolian two thousand years before 1400 BCE, then Proto-Anatolian should be placed at about 3400 BCE. What about its ancestor? When did the root of the Anatolian branch separate from the rest of Proto-Indo-European?





Dating Proto-Anatolian: The Definition of Proto- and Pre-Languages


Linguists do not use the term proto- in a consistent way, so I should be clear about what I mean by Proto-Anatolian. Proto-Anatolian is the language that was immediately ancestral to the three known daughter languages in the Anatolian branch. Proto-Anatolian can be described fairly accurately on the basis of the shared traits of Hittite, Luwian, and Palaic. But Proto-Anatolian occupies just the later portion of an undocumented period of linguistic change that must have occurred between it and Proto-Indo-European. The hypothetical language stage in between can be called Pre-Anatolian. Proto-Anatolian is a fairly concrete linguistic entity closely related to its known daughters. But Pre-Anatolian represents an evolutionary period. Pre-Anatolian is a phase defined by Proto-Anatolian at one end and Proto-Indo-European at the other. How can we determine when Pre-Anatolian separated from Proto-Indo-European?

The ultimate age of the Anatolian branch is based partly on objective external evidence (dated documents at Kanesh), partly on presumed rates of language change over time, and partly on internal evidence within the Anatolian languages. The Anatolian languages are quite different phonologically and grammatically from all the other known Indo-European daughter languages. They are so peculiar that many specialists think they do not really belong with the other daughters.

Many of the peculiar features of Anatolian look like archaisms, characteristics thought to have existed in an extremely early stage of Proto-Indo-European. For example, Hittite had a kind of consonant that has become famous in Indo-European linguistics (yes, consonants can be famous): h2, a guttural sound or laryngeal. In 1879 a Swiss linguist, Ferdinand de Saussure, realized that several seemingly random differences in vowel pronunciation between the Indo-European languages could be brought under one explanatory rule if he assumed that the pronunciation of these vowels had been affected by a “lost” consonant that no longer existed in any Indo-European language. He proposed that such a lost sound had existed in Proto-Indo-European. It was the first time a linguist had been so bold as to reconstruct a feature for Proto-Indo-European that no longer existed in any Indo-European language. The discovery and decipherment of Hittite forty years later proved Saussure right. In a stunning confirmation of the predictive power of comparative linguistics, the Hittite laryngeal h2 (and traces of a slightly different laryngeal, h3) appeared in Hittite inscriptions in just those positions Saussure had predicted for his “lost” consonant. Most Indo-Europeanists now accept that archaic Proto-Indo-European contained laryngeal sounds (probably three different ones, usually transcribed as *h1, *h2, *h3,) that were preserved clearly only in the Anatolian branch.10 The best explanation for why Anatolian has laryngeals is that Pre-Anatolian speakers became separated from the Proto-Indo-European language community at a very early date, when a laryngeal-rich phonology was still characteristic of archaic Proto-Indo-European. But then what does archaic mean? What, exactly, did Pre-Anatolian separate from?





The Indo-Hittite Hypothesis


The Anatolian branch either lost or never possessed other features that were present in all other Indo-European branches. In verbs, for example, the Anatolian languages had only two tenses, a present and a past, whereas the other ancient Indo-European languages had as many as six tenses. In nouns, Anatolian had just animate and neuter; it had no feminine case. The other ancient Indo-European languages had feminine, masculine, and neuter cases. The Anatolian languages also lacked the dual, a form that was used in other early Indo-European languages for objects that were doubled like eyes or ears. (Example: Sanskrit dēvas ‘one god’, but dēvau ‘double gods’.) Alexander Lehrman identified ten such traits that probably were innovations in Proto-Indo-European after Pre-Anatolian split away.11

For some Indo-Europeanists these traits suggest that the Anatolian branch did not develop from Proto-Indo-European at all but rather evolved from an older Pre-Proto-Indo-European ancestor. This ancestral language was called Indo-Hittite by William Sturtevant. According to the Indo–Hittite hypothesis, Anatolian is an Indo-European language only in the broadest sense, as it did not develop from Proto-Indo-European. But it did preserve, uniquely, features of an earlier language community from which they both evolved. I cannot solve the debate over the categorization of Anatolian here, although it is obviously true that Proto-Indo-European must have evolved from an earlier language community, and we can use Indo-Hittite to refer to that hypothetical earlier stage. The Proto-Indo-European language community was a chain of dialects with both geographic and chronological differences. The Anatolian branch seems to have separated from an archaic chronological stage in the evolution of Proto-Indo-European, and it probably separated from a different geographic dialect as well, but I will call it archaic Proto-Indo-European rather than Indo-Hittite.12

A substantial period of time is needed for the Pre-Anatolian phase. Craig Melchert and Alexander Lehrman agreed that a separation date of about 4000 BCE between Pre-Anatolian and the archaic Proto-Indo-European language community seems reasonable. The millennium or so around 4000 BCE, say 4500 to 3500 BCE, constitutes the latest window within which Pre-Anatolian is likely to have separated.

Unfortunately the oldest daughter of Proto-Indo-European looks so peculiar that we cannot be certain she is a daughter rather than a cousin. Pre-Anatolian could have emerged from Indo-Hittite, not from Proto-Indo-European. So we cannot confidently assign a terminal date to Proto-Indo-European based on the birth of Anatolian.





THE NEXT OLDEST INSCRIPTIONS: GREEK AND OLD INDIC


Luckily we have well-dated inscriptions in two other Indo-European languages from the same era as the Hittite empire. The first was Greek, the language of the palace-centered Bronze Age warrior kings who ruled at Mycenae, Pylos, and other strongholds in Greece beginning about 1650 BCE. The Mycenaean civilization appeared rather suddenly with the construction of the spectacular royal Shaft Graves at Mycenae, dated about 1650 BCE, about the same time as the rise of the Hittite empire in Anatolia. The Shaft Graves, with their golden death masks, swords, spears, and images of men in chariots, signified the elevation of a new Greek-speaking dynasty of unprecedented wealth whose economic power depended on long-distance sea trade. The Mycenaean kingdoms were destroyed during the same period of unrest and pillage that brought down the Hittite Empire about 1150 BCE. Mycenaean Greek, the language of palace administration as recorded in the Linear B tablets, was clearly Greek, not Proto-Greek, by 1450 BCE, the date of the oldest preserved inscriptions. The people who spoke it were the models for Nestor and Agamemnon, whose deeds, dimly remembered and elevated to epic, were celebrated centuries later by Homer in the Iliad and the Odyssey. We do not know when Greek speakers appeared in Greece, but it happened no later than 1650 BCE. As with Anatolian, there are numerous indications that Mycenaean Greek was an intrusive language in a land where non-Greek languages had been spoken before the Mycenaean age.13 The Mycenaeans almost certainly were unaware that another Indo-European language was being used in palaces not far away.

Old Indic, the language of the Rig Veda, was recorded in inscriptions not long after 1500 BCE but in a puzzling place. Most Vedic specialists agree that the 1,028 hymns of the Rig Veda were compiled into what became the sacred form in the Punjab, in northwestern India and Pakistan, probably between about 1500 and 1300 BCE. But the deities, moral concepts, and Old Indic language of the Rig Veda first appeared in written documents not in India but in northern Syria.14

The Mitanni dynasty ruled over what is today northern Syria between 1500 and 1350 BCE. The Mitanni kings regularly spoke a non–Indo-European language, Hurrian, then the dominant local language in much of northern Syria and eastern Turkey. Like Hattic, Hurrian was a native language of the Anatolian uplands, related to the Caucasian languages. But all the Mitanni kings, first to last, took Old Indic throne names, even if they had Hurrian names before being crowned. Tus’ratta I was Old Indic Tvesa-ratha ‘having an attacking chariot’, Artatama I was Rta-dhaaman ‘having the abode of r’ta’, Artas’s’umara was Rta-smara ‘remembering r’ta’, and S’attuara I was Satvar ‘warrior’.15 The name of the Mitanni capital city, Waššukanni, was Old Indic vasu-khani, literally “wealth-mine.” The Mitanni were famous as charioteers, and, in the oldest surviving horse-training manual in the world, a Mitanni horse trainer named Kikkuli (a Hurrian name) used many Old Indic terms for technical details, including horse colors and numbers of laps. The Mitanni military aristocracy was composed of chariot warriors called maryanna, probably from an Indic term márya meaning “young man,” employed in the Rig Veda to refer to the heavenly war-band assembled around Indra. Several royal Mitanni names contained the Old Indic term r’ta, which meant “cosmic order and truth,” the central moral concept of the Rig Veda. The Mitanni king Kurtiwaza explicitly named four Old Indic gods (Indra, Varuna, Mithra, and the Nāsatyas), among many native Hurrian deities, to witness his treaty with the Hittite monarch around 1380 BCE. And these were not just any Old Indic gods. Three of them—Indra, Varuna, and the Nāsatyas or Divine Twins—were the three most important deities in the Rig Veda. So the Mitanni texts prove not only that the Old Indic language existed by 1500 BCE but also that the central religious pantheon and moral beliefs enshrined in the Rig Veda existed equally early.

Why did Hurrian-speaking kings in Syria use Old Indic names, words, and religious terms in these ways? A good guess is that the Mitanni kingdom was founded by Old Indic-speaking mercenaries, perhaps charioteers, who regularly recited the kinds of hymns and prayers that were collected at about the same time far to the east by the compilers of the Rig Veda. Hired by a Hurrian king about 1500 BCE, they usurped his throne and founded a dynasty, a very common pattern in Near Eastern and Iranian dynastic histories. The dynasty quickly became Hurrian in almost every sense but clung to a tradition of using Old Indic royal names, some Vedic deity names, and Old Indic technical terms related to chariotry long after its founders faded into history. This is, of course, a guess, but something like it seems almost necessary to explain the distribution and usage of Old Indic by the Mitanni.

The Mitanni inscriptions establish that Old Indic was being spoken before 1500 BCE in the Near East. By 1500 BCE Proto-Indo-European had differentiated into at least Old Indic, Mycenaean Greek, and the three known daughters of Proto-Anatolian. What does this suggest about the terminal date for Proto-Indo-European?





COUNTING THE RELATIVES: HOW MANY IN 1500 BCE?


To answer this question we first have to understand where Greek and Old Indic are placed among the known branches of the Indo-European family. Mycenaean Greek is the oldest recorded language in the Greek branch. It is an isolated language; it has no recorded close relatives or sister languages. It probably had unrecorded sisters, but none survived in written records. The appearance of the Shaft-Grave princes about 1650 BCE represents the latest possible arrival of Greek speakers in Greece. The Shaft-Grave princes probably already spoke an early form of Greek, not Proto-Greek, since their descendants’ oldest preserved inscriptions at about 1450 BCE were in Greek. Proto-Greek might be dated at the latest between about 2000 and 1650 BCE. Pre-Greek, the phase that preceded Proto-Greek, probably originated as a dialect of late Proto-Indo-European at least five hundred to seven hundred years before the appearance of Mycenaean Greek, and very probably earlier—minimally about 2400–2200 BCE. The terminal date for Proto-Indo-European can be set at about 2400–2200 BCE—it could not have been later than this—from the perspective of the Greek branch. What about Old Indic?

Unlike Mycenaean Greek, Old Indic does have a known sister language, Avestan Iranian, which we must take into account. Avestan is the oldest of the Iranian languages that would later be spoken by Persian emperors and Scythian nomads alike, and today are spoken in Iran and Tajikistan. Avestan Iranian was the language of the Avesta, the holiest text of Zorastrianism. The oldest parts of the Avesta, the Gathas, probably were composed by Zoroaster (the Greek form of the name) or by Zarathustra (the original Iranian form) himself. Zarathustra was a religious reformer who lived in eastern Iran, judging from the places he named, probably between 1200 and 1000 BCE.16 His theology was partly a reaction against the glorification of war and blood sacrifice by the poets of the Rig Veda. One of the oldest Gathas was “the lament of the cow,” a protest against cattle stealing from the cow’s point of view. But the Avesta and the Rig Veda were closely related in both language and thought. They used the same deity names (although Old Indic gods were demonized in the Avesta), employed the same poetic conventions, and shared specific rituals. For example, they used a cognate term for the ritual of spreading straw for the seat of the attending god before a sacrifice (Vedic barhis, Avestan bares–man); and both traditions termed a pious man “one who spread the straw.” In many small details they revealed their kinship in a shared Indo-Iranian past. The two languages, Avestan Iranian and Old Indic, developed from a shared parent language, Indo-Iranian, which is not documented.

The Mitanni inscriptions establish that Old Indic had appeared as a distinct language by 1500 BCE. Common Indo-Iranian must be earlier. It probably dates back at least to 1700 BCE. Proto-Indo-Iranian—a dialect that had some of the innovations of Indo-Iranian but not yet all of them—has to be placed earlier still, at or before 2000 BCE. Pre-Indo-Iranian was an eastern dialect of Proto-Indo-European, and must then have existed at the latest around 2500–2300 BCE. As with Greek, the period from 2500 to 2300 BCE, give or take a few centuries, is the minimal age for the separation of Pre-Indo-Iranian from Proto-Indo-European.

So the terminal date for Proto-Indo-European—the date after which our reconstructed form of the language becomes an anachronism—can be set around 2500 BCE, more or less, from the perspective of Greek and Old Indic. It might be extended a century or two later, but, as far as these two languages are concerned, a terminal date much later than 2500 BCE—say, as late as 2000 BCE—is impossible. And, of course, Anatolian must have separated long before 2500 BCE. By about 2500 BCE Proto-Indo-European had changed and fragmented into a variety of late dialects and daughter languages—including at least the Anatolian group, Pre-Greek and Pre-Indo-Iranian. Can other daughters be dated to the same period? How many other daughters existed by 2500 BCE?





More Help from the Other Daughters: Who’s the Oldest of Them All?


In fact, some other daughters not only can be placed this early—they must be. Again, to understand why, we have to understand where Greek and Old Indic stand within the known branches of the Indo-European language family. Neither Greek nor Indo-Iranian can be placed among the very oldest Indo-European daughter branches. They are the oldest daughters to survive in inscriptions (along with Anatolian), but that is an accident of history (table 3.1). From the perspective of historical linguistics, Old Indic and Greek must be classified as late Indo-European daughters. Why?

Linguists distinguish older daughter branches from younger ones on the basis of shared innovations and archaisms. Older branches seem to have separated earlier because they lack innovations characteristic of the later branches, and they retain archaic features. Anatolian is a good example; it retains some phonetic traits that definitely are archaic (laryngeals) and lacks other features that probably represent innovations. Indo-Iranian, on the other hand, exhibits three innovations that identify it as a later branch.

Indo-Iranian shared one innovation with a group of languages that linguists labeled the sat∂m group: Indo-Iranian, Slavic, Baltic, Albanian, Armenian, and perhaps Phrygian. Among the sat∂m languages, Proto-Indo-European *k– before a front vowel (like *k’mtom ‘hundred’) was regularly shifted to š– or s– (like Avestan Iranian sat∂m). This same group of languages exhibited a second shared innovation: Proto-Indo-European *kw- (called a labiovelar, pronounced like the first sound in queen) changed to k-. The third innovation was shared between just a subgroup within the sat∂m languages: Indo-Iranian, Baltic, and Slavic. It is called the ruki-rule: the original sound [*-s] in Proto-Indo-European was shifted to [*-sh] after the consonants r, u, k, and i. Language branches that do not share these innovations are assumed to have split away and lost regular contact with the sat∂m and ruki groups before they occurred.

TABLE 3.1

The First Appearance in Written Records of the Twelve Branches of Indo-European





The Celtic and Italic branches do not display the sat∂m innovations or the ruki rule; both exhibit a number of archaic features and also share a few innovations. Celtic languages, today limited to the British Isles and nearby coastal France, were spoken over much of central and western Europe, from Austria to Spain, around 600–300 BCE, when the earliest records of Celtic appeared. Italic languages were spoken in the Italian peninsula at about 600–500 BCE, but today, of course, Latin has many daughters—the Romance languages. In most comparative studies of the Indo-European languages, Italic and Celtic would be placed among the earliest branches to separate from the main trunk. The people who spoke Pre-Celtic and Pre-Italic lost contact with the eastern and northern groups of Indo-European speakers before the sat∂m and ruki innovations occurred. We cannot yet discuss where the boundaries of these linguistic regions were, but we can say that Pre-Italic and Pre-Celtic departed to form a western regional–chronological block, whereas the ancestors of Indo-Iranian, Baltic, Slavic, and Armenian stayed behind and shared a set of later innovations. Tocharian, the easternmost Indo-European language, spoken in the Silk Road caravan cities of the Tarim Basin in northwestern China, also lacked the sat∂m and ruki innovations, so it seems to have departed equally early to form an eastern branch.

Greek shared a series of linguistic features uniquely with the Indo-Iranian languages, but it did not adopt the sat∂m innovation or the ruki rule.17 Pre-Greek and Pre-Indo-Iranian must have developed in neighboring regions, but the speakers of Pre-Greek departed before the sat∂m or the ruki innovations appeared. The shared features included morphological innovations, conventions in heroic poetry, and vocabulary. In morphology, Greek and Indo-Iranian shared two important innovations: the augment, a prefix e– before past tenses (although, because it is not well attested in the earliest forms of Greek and Indo-Iranian, the augment might have developed independently in each branch much later); and a mediopassive verb form with a suffixed –i. In weapon vocabulary they shared common terms for bow (*taksos), arrow (*eis-), bowstring (*jya-), and club (*uágros), or cudgel, the weapon specifically associated with Indra and his Greek counterpart Herakles. In ritual they shared a unique term for a specific ritual, the hecatomb, or sacrifice of a hundred cows; and they referred to the gods with the same shared epithet, those who give riches. They retained shared cognate names for at least three deities: (1) Erinys/Sara yū, a horse-goddess in both traditions, born of a primeval creator-god and the mother of a winged horse in Greek or of the Divine Twins in Indo-Iranian, who are often represented as horses; (2) Kérberos/Śárvara, the multiheaded dog that guarded the entrance to the Otherworld; and (3) Pan/Pūán, a pastoral god that guarded the flocks, symbolically associated in both traditions with the goat. In both traditions, goat entrails were the specific funeral offering made to the hell-hound Kérberos/Śárvara during a funeral ceremony. In poetry, ancient Greek, like Indo-Iranian, had two kinds of verse: one with a twelve-syllable line (the Sapphic/Alcaic line) and another with an eight-syllable line. No other Indo-European poetic tradition shared both these forms. They also shared a specific poetic formula, meaning “fame everlasting,” applied to heroes, found in this exact form only in the Rig Veda and Homer. Both Greek and Indo-Iranian used a specific verb tense, the imperfect, in poetic narratives about past events.18

It is unlikely that such a large bundle of common innovations, vocabulary, and poetic forms arose independently in two branches. Therefore, Pre-Greek and Pre-Indo-Iranian almost certainly were neighboring late Indo-European dialects, spoken near enough to each other so that words related to warfare and ritual, names of gods and goddesses, and poetic forms were shared. Greek did not adopt the ruki rule or the sat∂m shift, so we can define two strata here: the older links Pre-Greek and Pre-Indo-Iranian, and the later separates Proto-Greek from Proto-Indo-Iranian.





The Birth Order of the Daughters and the Death of the Mother


The ruki rule, the centum/sat∂m split, and sixty-three possible variations on seventeen other morphological and phonological traits were analyzed mathematically to generate thousands of possible branching diagrams by Don Ringe, Wendy Tarnow, and colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania.19 The cladistic method they used was borrowed from evolutionary biology but was adapted to compare linguistic innovations rather than genetic ones. A program selected the trees that emerged most often from among all possible evolutionary trees. The evolutionary trees identified by this method agreed well with branching diagrams proposed on more traditional grounds. The oldest branch to split away was, without any doubt, Pre-Anatolian (figure 3.2). Pre-Tocharian probably separated next, although it also showed some later traits. The next branching event separated Pre-Celtic and Pre-Italic from the still evolving core. Germanic has some archaic traits that suggest an initial separation at about the same time as Pre-Celtic and Pre-Italic, but then later it was strongly affected by borrowing from Celtic, Baltic, and Slavic, so the precise time it split away is uncertain. Pre-Greek separated after Italic and Celtic, followed by Indo-Iranian. The innovations of Indo-Iranian were shared (perhaps later) with several language groups in southeastern Europe (Pre-Armenian, Pre-Albanian, partly in Pre-Phrygian) and in the forests of northeastern Europe (Pre-Baltic and Pre-Slavic). Common Indo-Iranian, we must remember, is dated at the latest to about 1700 BCE. The Ringe-Tarnow branching diagram puts the separations of Anatolian, Tocharian, Italic, Celtic, German, and Greek before this. Anatolian probably had split away before 3500 BCE, Italic and Celtic before 2500 BCE, Greek after 2500 BCE, and Proto-Indo-Iranian by 2000 BCE. Those are not meant to be exact dates, but they are in the right sequence, are linked to dated inscriptions in three places (Greek, Anatolian, and Old Indic), and make sense.



Figure 3.2 The best branching diagram according to the Ringe–Warnow–Taylor (2002) cladistic method, with the minimal separation dates suggested in this chapter. Germanic shows a mixture of archaic and derived traits that make its place uncertain; it could have branched off at about the same time as the root of Italic and Celtic, although here it is shown branching later because it also shared many traits with Pre-Baltic and Pre-Slavic.

By 2500 BCE the language that has been reconstructed as Proto-Indo-European had evolved into something else or, more accurately, into a variety of things,—late dialects such as Pre-Greek and Pre-Indo-Iranian that continued to diverge in different ways in different places. The Indo-European languages that evolved after 2500 BCE did not develop from Proto-Indo-European but from a set of intermediate Indo-European languages that preserved and passed along aspects of the mother tongue. By 2500 BCE Proto-Indo-European was a dead language.





CHAPTER FOUR





Language and Time 2

Wool, Wheels, and Proto-Indo-European


If Proto-Indo-European was dead as a spoken language by 2500 BCE, when was it born? Is there a date after which Proto-Indo-European must have been spoken? This question can be answered with surprising precision. Two sets of vocabulary terms identify the date after which Proto-Indo-European must have been spoken: words related to woven wool textiles, and to wheels and wagons. Neither woven wool textiles nor wheeled vehicles existed before about 4000 BCE. It is possible that neither existed before about 3500 BCE. Yet Proto-Indo-European speakers spoke regularly about wheeled vehicles and some sort of wool textile. This vocabulary suggests that Proto-Indo-European was spoken after 4000–3500 BCE. As the Proto-Indo-European vocabulary for wheeled vehicles has already been described in chapter 2, let us begin here with the Proto-Indo-European terms for wool.





THE WOOL VOCABULARY


Woven woolen textiles are made from long wool fibers of a type that did not grow on wild sheep. Sheep with long wooly coats are genetic mutants bred just for that trait. If Proto-Indo-European contained words referring unequivocally to woven woolen textiles, then those words had to have entered Proto-Indo-European after the date when wool sheep were developed. But if we are to use the wool vocabulary as a dating tool, we need to know both the exact meaning of the reconstructed roots and the date when wool sheep first appeared. Both issues are problematic.

Proto-Indo-European contained roots that meant “sheep,” “ewe,” “ram,” and “lamb”—a developed vocabulary that undoubtedly indicates familiarity with domesticated sheep. It also had a term that in most daughter cognates meant “wool”. The root *HwlHn- is based on cognates in almost all branches from Welsh to Indic and including Hittite, so it goes back to the archaic Proto-Indo-European era before the Anatolian branch split away. The stem is unusually long, however, suggesting to Bill Darden of the University of Chicago that it was either borrowed or derived by the addition of the -n- suffix from a shorter, older root. He suggested that the shorter root, and the earliest form, was *Hwel- or *Hwol– (transcribed as *Hw(e/o)l). Its cognates in Baltic, Slavic, Greek, Germanic, and Armenian meant “felt,” “roll,” “beat,” and “press.” “Felt” seems to be the meaning that unites them, since the verbs describe operations in the manufacture of felt. Felt is made by beating or pressing wool fibers until they are pounded into a loose mat. The mat is then rolled up and pressed tightly, unrolled and wetted, then rolled and pressed again, all this repeated until the mat is tight. Wool fibers are curly, and they interlock during this pressing process. The resulting felt textile is quite warm. The winter tents of Eurasian nomads and the winter boots of Russian farmers (made to fit over regular shoes) were traditionally made from felt. If Darden is right, the most ancient Pre-Proto-Indo-European wool root, *Hw(e/o)l-), was connected with felt. The derivative stem *HwlHn-, the root retained in both Anatolian and classic Proto-Indo-European, meant “wool” or something made of wool, but we cannot be certain that it referred to a woven wool textile. It could have referred to the short, natural wool that grew on wild sheep or to some kind of felt textile made of short wool.1

Sheep (Ovis orientalis) were domesticated in the period from about 8000 to 7500 BCE in eastern Anatolia and western Iran as a captive source of meat, which is all they were used for during the first four thousand years of sheepherding. They were covered not with wool but with long, coarse hair called kemp. Wool grew on these sheep as an insulating undercoat of very short curly fibers that, in the words of textile specialist Elizabeth Barber, were “structurally unspinnable.” This “wild” short wool was molted at the end of the winter. In fact, the annual shedding of short wild wool might have created the first crude (and smelly) felts, when sheep slept on their own damp sheddings. The next step would have been to intentionally pluck the wool when it loosened, just before it was shed. But woven wool textiles required wool thread.

Wool thread could only be made from unnaturally long wool fibers, as the fibers had to be long enough to cling to each other when pulled apart. A spinner of wool would pull a clump of fibers from a mass of long-fiber wool and twist them into a thread by handfeeding the strand onto a twirling weighted stick, or hand spindle (the spinning wheel was a much later invention). The spindle was suspended in the air and kept twirling with a motion of the wrist. The spindle weights are called spindle whorls, and they are just about the only evidence that survives of ancient thread making, although it is difficult to distinguish spindle whorls used for making woolen thread from those used for making flaxen thread, apparently the oldest kind of thread made by humans. Linen made from flax was the oldest woven textile. Woolen thread was invented only after spinners of flax and other plant fibers began to obtain the longer animal fibers that grew on mutant wool sheep. When did this genetic alteration happen? The conventional wisdom is that wool sheep appeared about 4000–3500 BCE.2

In southern Mesopotamia and western Iran, where the first city-based civilizations appeared, woven wool textiles were an important part of the earliest urban economies. Wool absorbed dye much better than linen did, so woolen textiles were much more colorful, and the color could be woven in with differently colored threads rather than stamped on the textile surface (apparently the oldest kind of textile decoration). But almost all the evidence for wool production appears in the Late Uruk period or later, after about 3350 BCE.3 Because wool itself is rarely preserved, the evidence comes from animal bones. When sheep are raised for their wool, the butchering pattern should show three features: (1) sheep or goats (which differ only in a few bones) or both should make up the majority of the herded animals; (2) sheep, the wool producers, should greatly outnumber goats, the best milk producers; and (3) the sheep should have been butchered at an advanced age, after years of wool production. Susan Pollock’s review of the faunal data from eight Uruk-period sites in southern Mesopotamia, northern Mesopotamia, and western Iran showed that the shift to a wool-sheep butchering pattern occurred in this heartland of cities no earlier than the Late Uruk period, after 3350 BCE (figure 4.1). Early and Middle Uruk sheep (4000–3350 BCE) did not show a wool-butchering pattern. This Mesopotamian/western Iranian date for wool sheep was confirmed at Arslantepe on the upper Euphrates in eastern Anatolia. Here, herds were dominated by cattle and goats before 3350 BCE (phase VII), but in the next phase (VIa) Late Uruk pottery appeared, and sheep suddenly rose to first place, with more than half of them living to maturity.4

The animal-bone evidence from the Near East suggests that wool sheep appeared after about 3400 BCE. Because sheep were not native to Europe, domesticated Near Eastern sheep were imported to Europe by the first farmers who migrated to Europe from Anatolia about 6500 BCE. But the mutation for longer wool might have appeared as an adaptation to cold winters after domesticated sheep were introduced to northern climates, so it would not be surprising if the earliest long-wool sheep were bred in Europe. At Khvalynsk, a cemetery dated about 4600–4200 BCE on the middle Volga in Russia, sheep were the principal animal sacrificed in the graves, and most of them were mature, as if being kept alive for wool or milk. But animals chosen for sacrifice might have been kept alive for a ritual reason. At Svobodnoe, a farming settlement in the North Caucasus piedmont in what is now southern Russia, dated between about 4300 and 3700 BCE, sheep were the dominant domesticated animal, and sheep outnumbered goats by 5 to 1. This is a classic wool-sheep harvesting pattern. But at other settlements of the same age in the North Caucasus this pattern is not repeated. A new large breed of sheep appeared in eastern Hungary at Kétegyháza in the Cernavoda III–Boleraz period, dated 3600–3200 BCE, which Sandor Bökönyi suggested was introduced from Anatolia and Mesopotamia; at Bronocice in southern Poland, in levels dated to the same period, sheep greatly outnumbered goats by 20 to 1. But beyond these tantalizing cases there was no broad or widespread shift to sheep keeping or to a wool-butchering pattern in Europe until after about 3300–3100 BCE, about the same time it occurred in the Near East.5



Figure 4.1 Locations of early sites with some evidence for wool sheep. The drawing is from a microscopic image of the oldest known woven wool textile published by N. Shishlina:(1) Uruk; (2) Hacinebi; (3) Arslantepe; (4) Novosvobodnaya; (5) Bronocice; (6) Kétegyháza; (7) Khvalynsk. After Shishlina 1999.

No actual woven woolen textiles are firmly dated before about 3000 BCE, but they were very widespread by 2800 BCE. A woven woolen textile fragment that might predate 3000 BCE was found in a grave in the North Caucasus Mountains, probably a grave of the Novosvobodnaya culture (although there is some uncertainty about the provenience). The wool fibers were dyed dark brown and beige, and then a red dye was painted on the finished fabric. The Novosvobodnaya culture is dated between 3400 and 3100 BCE, but this fabric has not been directly dated. At Shar-i Sokhta, a Bronze Age semi-urban trading center in east-central Iran, woven woolens were the only kinds of textiles recovered in levels dated 2800–2500 BCE. A woven wool fragment was found at Clairvaux-les-lacs Station III in France, dated 2900 BCE, so wool sheep and woven wool textiles were known from France to central Iran by 2900–2500 BCE.6

The preponderance of the evidence suggests that woven wool textiles appeared in Europe, as in the Near East, after about 3300 BCE, although wool sheep may have appeared earlier than this, about 4000 BCE, in the North Caucasus Mountains and perhaps even in the steppes. But if the root *HwlHn- referred to the short undercoat wool of “natural” sheep, it could have existed before 4000 BCE. This uncertainty in meaning weakens the reliability of the wool vocabulary for dating Proto-Indo-European. The wheeled vehicle vocabulary is different. It refers to very definite objects (wheels, axles), and the earliest wheeled vehicles are very well dated. Unlike wool textiles, wagons required an elaborate set of metal tools (chisels, axes) that preserve well, the images of wagons are easier to categorize, and the wagons themselves preserve more easily than textiles.





THE WHEEL VOCABULARY


Proto-Indo-European contained a set of words referring to wheeled vehicles—wagons or carts or both. We can say with great confidence that wheeled vehicles were not invented until after 4000 BCE; the surviving evidence suggests a date closer to 3500 BCE. Before 4000 BCE there were no wheels or wagons to talk about.

Proto-Indo-European contained at least five terms related to wheels and wagons, as noted in chapter 2: two words for wheel (perhaps for different kinds of wheels), one for axle, one for thill (the pole to which the animals were yoked), and a verb meaning “to go or convey in a vehicle.” Cognates for these terms occur in all the major branches of Indo-European, from Celtic in the west to Vedic Sanskrit and Tocharian in the east, and from Baltic in the north to Greek in the south (figure 4.2). Most of the terms have a kind of vowel structure called an o-stem that identifies a late stage in the development of Proto-Indo-European; axle was an older n-stem derived from a word that meant “shoulder.” The o-stems are important, since they appeared only during the later end of the Proto-Indo-European period. Almost all the terms are derived from Proto-Indo-European roots, so the vocabulary for wagons and wheels was not imported from the outside but was created within the Proto-Indo-European speech community.7



Figure 4.2 The geographic distribution of the Indo-European wheel-wagon vocabulary.

The only branch that might not contain a convincing wheeled-vehicle vocabulary is Anatolian, as Bill Darden observed. Two possible Proto-Indo-European wheeled-vehicle roots are preserved in Anatolian. One (hurki- ‘wheel’) is thought to be descended from a Proto-Indo-European root, because the same root might have yielded Tocharian A wärkänt and Tocharian B yerkwanto, both meaning “wheel.” Tocharian is an extinct Indo-European branch consisting of two (perhaps three) known languages, called A and B (and perhaps C), recorded in documents written in about 500–700 CE by Buddhist monks in the desert caravan cities of the Tarim Basin in northwestern China. But Tocharian specialist Don Ringe sees serious difficulties in deriving either Tocharian term from the same root that yielded Anatolian hurki-, suggesting that the Tocharian and Anatolian terms were unrelated and therefore do not require a Proto-Indo-European root.8 The other Anatolian vehicle term (hišša- ‘thill’ or ‘harness-pole’) has a good Indo-European source, *ei-/ *oi- or perhaps *h2ih3s-, but its original meaning might have referred to plow shafts rather than wagon shafts. So we cannot be certain that archaic Proto-Indo-European, as partially preserved in Anatolian, had a wheeled-vehicle vocabulary. But the rest of Proto-Indo-European did.





WHEN WAS THE WHEEL INVENTED?


How do we know that wheeled vehicles did not exist before 4000 BCE? First, a wheeled vehicle required not just wheels but also an axle to hold the vehicle. The wheel, axle, and vehicle together made a complicated combination of load-bearing moving parts. The earliest wagons were planed and chiseled entirely from wood, and the moving parts had to fit precisely. In a wagon with a fixed axle and revolving wheels (apparently the earliest type), the axle arms (the ends of the axle that passed through the center of the wheel) had to fit snugly, but not too snugly, in the hole through the nave, or hub. If the fit was too loose, the wheels would wobble as they turned. If it was too tight, there would be excessive drag on the revolving wheel.

Then there was the problem of the draft—the total weight, with drag, pulled by the animal team. Whereas a sledge could be pulled using traces, or flexible straps and ropes, a wagon or cart had to have a rigid draft pole, or thill, and a rigid yoke. The weight of these elements increased the overall draft. One way to reduce the draft was to reduce the diameter of the axle arms to fit a smaller hole in the wheel. A large-diameter axle was strong but created more friction between the axle arms and the revolving wheel. A smaller-diameter axle arm would cause less drag but would break easily unless the wagon was very narrow. The first wagon-wrights had to calculate the relationship between drag, axle diameter/strength, axle length/rigidity, and the width of the wagon bed. In a work vehicle meant to carry heavy loads, a short axle with small-diameter axle arms and a narrow wagon bed made good engineering sense, and, in fact, this is what the earliest wagons looked like, with a bed only about 1 m wide. Another way to reduce the draft was to reduce the number of wheels from four to two—to make a wagon into a cart. The draft of a modern two-wheeled cart is 40% less than a four-wheeled wagon of the same weight, and we can assume that an advantage of approximately the same magnitude applied to ancient carts. Carts were lighter and easier to pull, and on rough ground were less likely to get stuck. Large loads probably still needed wagons, but carts would have been useful for smaller loads.9

Archaeological and inscriptional evidence for wheeled vehicles is widespread after about 3400 BCE. One uncertain piece of evidence, a track preserved under a barrow grave at Flintbek in northern Germany, might have been made by wheels, and might be as old as 3600 BCE. But the real explosion of evidence begins about 3400 BCE. Wheeled vehicles appeared in four different media dated between about 3400 and 3000 BCE—a written sign for wagons, two-dimensional images of wagons and carts, three-dimensional models of wagons, and preserved wooden wheels and wagon parts themselves. These four independent kinds of evidence appeared across the ancient world between 3400 and 3000 BCE, about the same time as wool sheep, and clearly indicate when wheeled vehicles became widespread. The next four sections discuss the four kinds of evidence.10





Mesopotamian Wagons: The Oldest Written Evidence


Clay tablets with “wagon” signs impressed on them were found in the Eanna temple precinct in Uruk, one of the first cities created by humans. About thirty-nine hundred tablets were recovered from level IVa, the end of Late Uruk. In these texts, among the oldest documents in the world, a pictograph (figure 4.3.f) shows a four-wheeled wagon with some kind of canopy or superstructure. The “wagon” sign occurred just three times in thirty-nine hundred texts, whereas the sign for “sledge”—a similar kind of transport, but dragged on runners not rolled on wheels—occurred thirty-eight times. Wagons were not yet common.

The Eanna precinct tablets were inside Temple C when it burned down. Charcoal from the Temple C roof timbers yielded four radiocarbon dates averaging about 3500–3370 BCE. A radiocarbon date tells us when the dated material, in this case wood, died, not when it was burned. The wood in the center of any tree is actually dead (something few people realize); only the outer ring of bark and the sappy wood just beneath it are alive. If the timbers in Temple C were made from the center of a large tree, the wood might have died a century or two before the building was burned down, so the actual age of the Temple C tablets is later than the radiocarbon date, perhaps 3300–3100 BCE. Sledges still were far more common than wagons in the city of Uruk at that date. Ox-drawn canopied sledges might have preceded canopied wagons as a form of transport (in parades or processions? harvest rituals?) used by city officials.

A circular clay object that might be a model wheel, perhaps from a small ceramic model of a wagon, was found at the site of Arslantepe in eastern Turkey, in the ruins of a temple-palace from level VIa at the site, also dated 3400–3100 BCE (figure 4.3.c). Arslantepe was one of a string of native strongholds along the upper Euphrates River in eastern Anatolia that entered into close relations with faraway Uruk during the Late Uruk period. Although the kind of activities that lay behind this “Uruk expansion” northward up the Euphrates valley is not known (see chapter 12), the possible clay wheel model at Arslantepe could indicate that wagons were being used in eastern Anatolia during the period of Late Uruk influence.





Wagons and Carts from the Rhine to the Volga: The Oldest Pictorial Evidence


A two-dimensional image that seems to portray a four-wheeled wagon, harness pole, and yoke was incised on the surface of a decorated clay mug of the Trichterbecker (TRB) culture found at the settlement of Bronocice in southern Poland, dated about 3500–3350 BCE (figure 4.3.b). The TRB culture is recognized by its distinctive pottery shapes and tombs, which are found over a broad region in modern Poland, eastern Germany, and southern Denmark. Most TRB people were simple farmers who lived in small agricultural villages, but the Bronocice settlement was unusually large, a TRB town covering fifty-two hectares. The cup or mug with the wagon image incised on its surface was found in a rubbish pit containing animal bones, the broken sherds of five clay vessels, and flint tools. Only this cup had a wagon image. The design is unusual for TRB pottery, not an accidental combination of normal decorative motifs. The cup’s date is the subject of some disagreement. A cattle bone found in the same pit yielded an average age of about 3500 BCE, whereas six of the seven other radiocarbon dates for the settlement around the pit average 150 years later, about 3350 BCE. The excavators accept an age range spanning these results, about 3500–3350 BCE. The Bronocice wagon image is the oldest well-dated image of a wheeled vehicle in the world.

Two other images could be about the same age, although they probably are somewhat later. An image of two large-horned cattle pulling what seems to be a two-wheeled cart was scratched on the wall of a Wartberg culture stone tomb at Lohne-Züschen I, Hesse, central Germany (figure 4.3.e). The grave was reused over a long period of time between about 3400 and 2800 BCE, so the image could have been carved any time in that span. Far away to the east, a metal cauldron from the Evdik kurgan near the mouth of the Volga River bears a repoussé image that might show a yoke, a wheel, a cart, and a draft animal; it was found in a grave with objects of the Novosvobodnaya culture, dated between 3500 and 3100 BCE (figure 4.3.a). These images of carts and wagons are distributed from central Germany through southern Poland to the Russian steppes.



Figure 4.3 The oldest images and models of wagons and wheels: (a) bronze kettle from Evdik kurgan, lower Volga, Russia, with a design that could represent, from the left, a yoke, cart, wheel, X-braced floor, and animal head; (b) image of a four-wheeled wagon on a ceramic vessel from Bronocice, southern Poland; (c) ceramic wheel (from a clay model?) at Arslantepe, eastern Anatolia; (d) ceramic wagon model from Baden grave 177 at Budakalász, Hungary; (e) cart image with two cattle incised on stone, from a tomb at Lohne-Züschen I, Hesse, central Germany; (f) earliest written symbols for a wagon, on clay tablets from Uruk IVa, southern Iraq. After (a) Shilov and Bagautdinov 1997; (b, d, e) Milisauskas 2002; (c,f) Bakker et al. 1999.





Hungarian Wagons: The Oldest Clay Models


The Baden culture is recognized by its pottery and to a certain extent by its distinctive copper tools, weapons, and ornaments. It appeared in Hungary about 3500 BCE, and the styles that define it then spread into northern Serbia, western Romania, Slovakia, Moravia, and southern Poland. Baden-style polished and channeled ceramic mugs and small pots were used across southeastern Europe about 3500–3000 BCE. Similarities between Baden ceramics and those of northwestern Anatolia in the centuries before Troy I suggest one route by which wheeled vehicles could have spread between Mesopotamia and Europe. Three-dimensional ceramic models of four-wheeled wagons (figure 4.3.d) were included in sacrificial deposits associated with two graves of the Late Baden (Pécel) culture at Budakalász (Grave 177) and Szigetszentmárton in eastern Hungary, dated about 3300–3100 BCE. Paired oxen, almost certainly a team, were found sacrificed in Grave 3 at Budakalász and in other Late Baden graves in Hungary. Paired oxen also were placed in graves of the partly contemporary Globular Amphorae culture (3200–2700 BCE) in central and southern Poland. The Baden wagon models are the oldest well-dated three-dimensional models of wheeled vehicles.





Steppe and Bog Vehicles: The Oldest Actual Wagons


Remains of about 250 wagons and carts have been discovered under earthen burial mounds, or kurgans, in the steppe grasslands of Russia and Ukraine, dated about 3000–2000 BCE (figure 4.4 and figure 4.5). The wheels were 50–80 cm in diameter. Some were made of a single plank cut vertically from the trunk of a tree, with the grain (not like a salami). Most steppe wheels, however, were made of two or three planks cut into circular segments and then doweled together with mortice-and-tenon joints. In the center were long tapered naves (hubs), about 20–30 cm wide at the base and projecting outward about 10–20 cm on either side of the wheel. The naves were secured to the axle arms by a lynchpin that pinned the nave to the axle, and between them they kept the wheel from wobbling. The axles had rounded axle arms for the wheel mounts and were about 2 m long. The wagons themselves were about 1 m wide and about 2 m long. The earliest radiocarbon dates on wood from steppe wagons average around 3300–2800 BCE. A wagon or cart grave at Bal’ki kurgan (grave 57) on the lower Dnieper was dated 4370 ± 120 BP, or 3330–2880 BCE; and wood from a wagon buried in Ostanni kurgan 1 (grave 160) on the Kuban River was dated 4440 ± 40 BP, or 3320–2930 BCE. The probability distributions for both dates lie predominantly before 3000 BCE, so both vehicles probably date before 3000 BCE. But these funeral vehicles can hardly have been the very first wagons used in the steppes.



Figure 4.4 Preserved wagon parts and wheels: (a) two solid wooden wheels at the corners of grave 57, Bal’ki kurgan, Ukraine, radiocarbon dated 3330–2900 BCE; (b) Catacomb-culture tripartite wheel with dowels, probably 2600–2200 BCE; (c) preserved axle and reconstructed wagon from various preserved wheel and wagon fragments in bog deposits in northwestern Germany and Denmark dated about 3000–2800 BCE. After (a) Lyashko and Otroshchenko 1988; (b) Korpusova and Lyashko 1990; (c) Hayen 1989.



Figure 4.5 The best-preserved wagon graves in the steppes are in the Kuban River region in southern Russia. This wagon was buried under Ostannii kurgan 1. Radiocarbon dated about 3300–2900 BCE, the upper part of the wagon is on the left and the lower part, on the right. After Gei 2000, figure 53.

Other wooden wheels and axles have been discovered preserved in bogs or lakes in central and northern Europe. In the mountains of Switzerland and southwestern Germany wagon-wrights made the axle arms square and mortised them into a square hole in the wheel. The middle of the axle was circular and revolved under the wagon. This revolving-axle design created more drag and was less efficient than the revolving-wheel design, but it did not require carving large wooden naves and so the Alpine wheels were much easier to make. One found near Zurich in a waterlogged settlement of the Horgen culture (the Pressehaus site) was dated about 3200 BCE by associated tree-ring dates. The Pressehaus wheel tells us that separate regional European design traditions for wheel making already existed before 3200 BCE. Wooden wheels and axles also have been found in bogs in the Netherlands and Denmark, providing important evidence on the construction details of early wagons, but dated after 3000 BCE. They had fixed axles and revolving wheels, like those of the steppes and central Europe.





THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WHEEL


It would be difficult to exaggerate the social and economic importance of the first wheeled transport. Before wheeled vehicles were invented, really heavy things could be moved efficiently only on water, using barges or rafts, or by organizing a large hauling group on land. Some of the heavier items that prehistoric, temperate European farmers had to haul across land all the time included harvested grain crops, hay crops, manure for fertilizer, firewood, building lumber, clay for pottery making, hides and leather, and people. In northern and western Europe, some Neolithic communities celebrated their hauling capacities by moving gigantic stones to make megalithic community tombs and stone henges; other communities hauled earth, making massive earthworks. These constructions demonstrated in a visible, permanent way the solidity and strength of the communities that made them, which depended in many ways on human hauling capacities. The importance and significance of the village community as a group transport device changed profoundly with the introduction of wagons, which passed on the burden of hauling to animals and machines, where it has remained ever since.

Although the earliest wagons were slow and clumsy, and probably required teams of specially trained oxen, they permitted single families to carry manure out to the fields and to bring firewood, supplies, crops, and people back home. This reduced the need for cooperative communal labor and made single-family farms viable. Perhaps wagons contributed to the disappearance of large nucleated villages and the dispersal of many farming populations across the European landscape after about 3500 BCE. Wagons were useful in a different way in the open grasslands of the steppes, where the economy depended more on herding than on agriculture. Here wagons made portable things that had never been portable in bulk—shelter, water, and food. Herders who had always lived in the forested river valleys and grazed their herds timidly on the edges of the steppes now could take their tents, water, and food supplies to distant pastures far from the river valleys. The wagon was a mobile home that permitted herders to follow their animals deep into the grasslands and live in the open. Again, this permitted the dispersal of communities, in this case across interior steppes that earlier had been almost useless economically. Significant wealth and power could be extracted from larger herds spread over larger pastures.

Andrew Sherratt bundled the invention of the wheel together with the invention of the plow, wool sheep, dairying, and the beginning of horse transport to explain a sweeping set of changes that occurred among European societies about 3500–3000 BCE. The Secondary Products Revolution (now often shortened to SPR), as Sherratt described it in 1981, was an economic explanation for widespread changes in settlement patterns, economy, rituals, and crafts, many of which had been ascribed by an older generation of archaeologists to Indo-European migrations. (“Secondary products” are items like wool, milk, and muscular power that can be harvested continuously from an animal without killing it, in contrast to “primary products” such as meat, blood, bone, and hides.) Much of the subject matter discussed in arguments over the SPR—the diffusion of wagons, horseback riding, and wool sheep—was also central in discussions of Indo-European expansions, but, in Sherratt’s view, all of them were derived by diffusion from the civilizations of the Near East rather than from Indo-Europeans. Indo-European languages were no longer central or even necessary to the argument, to the great relief of many archaeologists. But Sherrat’s proposal that all these innovations came from the Near East and entered Europe at about the same time quickly fell apart. Scratch-plows and dairying appeared in Europe long before 3500 BCE, and horse domestication was a local event in the steppes. An important fragment of the SPR survives in the conjoined diffusion of wool sheep and wagons across much of the ancient Near East and Europe between 3500 and 3000 BCE, but we do not know where either of these innovations started.11

The clearest proof of the wheel’s impact was the speed with which wagon technology spread (figure 4.6), so rapidly, in fact, that we cannot even say where the wheel-and-axle principle was invented. Most specialists assume that the earliest wagons were produced in Mesopotamia, which was urban and therefore more sophisticated than the tribal societies of Europe; indeed, Mesopotamia had sledges that served as prototypes. But we really don’t know. Another prototype existed in Europe in the form of Mesolithic and Neolithic bent-wood sleds, doweled together with fine mortice-and-tenon joints; in much of eastern Europe, in fact, right up to the twentieth century, it made sense to park your wagon or carriage in the barn for the winter and resort to sleds, far more effective than wheels in snow and ice. Bent-wood sleds were at least as useful in prehistoric Europe as in Mesopotamia, and they began to appear in northern Europe as early as the Mesolithic; thus the skills needed to make wheels and axles existed in both Europe and the Near East.12



Figure 4.6 Sites with early evidence for wheels or wagons: (1) Uruk; (2) Budakalasz; (3) Arslantepe; (4) Bronicice; (5) Flintbek; (6) Lohne-Zuschen I; (7) Bal’ki kurgan; (8) Ostannii kurgan; (9) Evdik kurgan. Dashed line indicates the distribution of about 250 wagon graves in the Pontic-Caspian steppes.

Regardless of where the wheel-and-axle principle was invented, the technology spread rapidly over much of Europe and the Near East between 3400 and 3000 BCE. Proto-Indo-European speakers talked about wagons and wheels using their own words, created from Indo-European roots. Most of these words were o-stems, a relatively late development in Proto-Indo-European phonology. The wagon vocabulary shows that late Proto-Indo-European was spoken certainly after 4000 BCE, and probably after 3500 BCE. Anatolian is the only major early Indo-European branch that has a doubtful wheeled-vehicle vocabulary. As Bill Darden suggested, perhaps Pre-Anatolian split away from the archaic Proto-Indo-European dialects before wagons appeared in the Proto-Indo-European homeland. Pre-Anatolian could have been spoken before 4000 BCE. Late Proto-Indo-European, including the full wagon vocabulary, probably was spoken after 3500 BCE.





WAGONS AND THE ANATOLIAN HOMELAND HYPOTHESIS


The wagon vocabulary is a key to resolving the debate about the place and time of the Proto-Indo-European homeland. The principal alternative to a homeland in the steppes dated 4000–3500 BCE is a homeland in Anatolia and the Aegean dated 7000–6500 BCE. Colin Renfrew proposed that Indo-Hittite (Pre-Proto-Indo-European) was spoken by the first farmers in southern and western Anatolia at sites such as Çatal Höyük dated about 7000 BCE. In his scenario, a dialect of Indo-Hittite was carried to Greece with the first farming economy by pioneer farmers from Anatolia about 6700–6500 BCE. In Greece, the language of the pioneer farmers developed into Proto-Indo-European and spread through Europe and the Mediterranean Basin with the expansion of the earliest agricultural economy. By linking the dispersal of the Indo-European languages with the diffusion of the first farming economy, Renfrew achieved an appealingly elegant solution to the problem of Indo-European origins. Since 1987 he and others have shown convincingly that the migrations of pioneer farmers were one of the principal vectors for the spread of many ancient languages around the world. The “first-farming/language-dispersal” hypothesis, therefore, was embraced by many archaeologists. But it required that the first split between parental Indo-Hittite and Proto-Indo-European began about 6700–6500 BCE, when Anatolian farmers first migrated to Greece. By 3500 BCE, the earliest date for wagons in Europe, the Indo-European language family should have been bushy, multi-branched, and three thousand years old, well past the period of sharing a common vocabulary for anything.13

The Anatolian—origin hypothesis raises other problems as well. The first Neolithic farmers of Anatolia are thought to have migrated there from northern Syria, which, according to Renfrew’s first-farming/ language-dispersal hypothesis, should have resulted in the spread of a north Syrian Neolithic language to Anatolia (figure 4.7). The indigenous languages of northern Syria probably belonged to the Afro-Asiatic language phylum, like Semitic and most languages of the lowland Near East. If the first Anatolian farmers spoke an Afro-Asiatic language, it was that language, not Proto-Indo-European, that should have been carried to Greece.14 The earliest Indo-European languages documented in Anatolia—Hittite, Palaic, and Luwian—showed little diversity, and only Luwian had a significant number of speakers by 1500 BCE. All three borrowed extensively from non–Indo-European languages (Hattic, Hurrian, and perhaps others) that seem to have been older, more prestigious, and more widely spoken. The Indo-European languages of Anatolia did not have the established population base of speakers, and also lacked the kind of diversity that would be expected had they been evolving there since the Neolithic.



Figure 4.7 The spread of the first farming economy into Anatolia, probably by migration from the Core Area in northern Syria, about 7500 BCE. The first pioneer farmers probably spoke an Afro-Asiatic language. After Bar-Yosef 2002.





Phylogenetic Approaches to Dating Proto-Indo-European


Still, the Anatolian-origin hypothesis has support from new methods in phylogenetic linguistics. Cladistic methods borrowed from biology have been used for two purposes: to arrange the Indo-European languages in a chronological order of branching events (discussed in the previous chapter); and to estimate dates for the separation between any two branches, or for the root of all branches which is a much riskier proposition. Attaching time estimates to language branches using evolutionary models based on biological change is, at best, an uncertain procedure. People intentionally reshape their speech all the time but cannot intentionally reshape their genes. The way a linguistic innovation is reproduced in a speech community is quite different from the way a mutation is reproduced in a breeding population. The topography of language splits and rejoinings is much more complex and the speed of language branching far more variable. Whereas genes spread as whole units, the spread of language is always a modular process, and some modules (grammar and phonology) are more resistant to borrowing and spread than others (words).

Russell Gray and Quentin Atkinson attempted to work around these problems by processing a cocktail of cladistic and linguistic methods through computer programs. They suggested that pre-Anatolian detached from the rest of the Indo-European community about 6700 BCE (plus or minus twelve hundred years). Pre-Tocharian separated next (about 5900 BCE), then pre-Greek/Armenian (about 5300 BCE), and then pre–Indo-Iranian/Albanian (about 4900 BCE). Finally, a super-clade that included the ancestors of pre–Balto-Slavic and pre–Italo-Celto-Germanic separated about 4500 BCE. Archaeology shows that 6700–6500 BCE was about when the first pioneer farmers left Anatolia to colonize Greece. One could hardly ask for a closer match between archaeological and phylogentic dates.15 But how can the presence of the wagon vocabulary in Proto-Indo-European be synchronized with a first-dispersal date of 6500 BCE?





The Slow Evolution Hypothesis


The wagon vocabulary cannot have been created after Proto-Indo-European was dead and the daughter languages differentiated. The wagon/wheel terms do not contain the sounds that would be expected had they been created in a later daughter language and then borrowed into the others, whereas they do contain the sounds predicted if they were inherited into the daughter branches from Proto-Indo-European. The Proto-Indo-European origin of the wagon vocabulary cannot be rejected, as it consists of at least five classic reconstructions. If they are in fact false, then the core methods of comparative linguistics—those that determine “genetic” relatedness—would be so unreliable as to be useless, and the question of Indo-European origins would be moot.

But could the wagon/wheel vocabularies have been created independently by the speakers of each branch from the same Proto-Indo-European roots? In the example of *kwekwlos ‘wheel’, Gray suggested (in a comment on his homepage) that the semantic development from the verb *kwel–’turn’ to the noun wheel ’the turner’ was so natural that it could have been repeated independently in each branch. One difficulty here is that at least four different verbs meaning “turn” or “roll” or “revolve” are reconstructed for Proto-Indo-European, which makes the repeated independent choice of *kwel– problematic.16 More critical, the Proto-Indo-European pronunciations of *kwel- and the other wagon terms would not have survived unchanged through time. They could not have been available frozen in their Proto-Indo-European phonetic forms to speakers of nine or ten branches that originated at different times across thousands of years. We cannot assume stasis in phonetic development for the wheel vocabulary when all the rest of the vocabulary changed normally with time. But what if all the other vocabulary also changed very slowly?

This is the solution Renfrew offered (figure 4.8). For the wagon/wheel vocabulary to be brought into synchronization with the first-farming/language-dispersal hypothesis, Proto-Indo-European must have been spoken for thirty-five hundred years, requiring a very long period when Proto-Indo-European changed very little. Pre-Proto-Indo-European or Indo-Hittite was spoken in Anatolia before 6500 BCE. Archaic Proto-Indo-European evolved as the language of the pioneer farmers in Greece about 6500–6000 BCE. As their descendants migrated northward and westward, and established widely scattered Neolithic communities from Bulgaria to Hungary and Ukraine, the language they carried remained a single language, Archaic Proto-Indo-European. Their descendants paused for several centuries, and then a second wave of pioneer migration pushed across the Carpathians into the North European plain between about 5500 and 5000 BCE with the Linear Pottery farmers. These farming migrations created Renfrew’s Stage 1 of Proto-Indo-European, which was spoken across most of Europe between 6500 and 5000 BCE, from the Rhine to the Dnieper and from Germany to Greece. During Renfrew’s Proto-Indo-European Stage 2, between 5000 and 3000 BCE, archaic Proto-Indo-European spread into the steppes and was carried to the Volga with the adoption of herding economies. Late Proto-Indo-European dialectical features developed, including the appearance of “thematic” inflections such as o-stems, which occur in all the wagon/wheel terms. These late features were shared across the Proto-Indo–European–speaking region, which comprised two-thirds of prehistoric Europe. The wagon vocabulary appeared late in Stage 2 and was adopted from the Rhine to the Volga.17



Figure 4.8 If Proto-Indo-European spread across Europe with the first farmers about 6500–5500 BCE, it must have remained almost unchanged until about 3500 BCE, when the wheeled vehicle vocabulary appeared. This diagram illustrates a division into just three dialects in three thousand years. After Renfrew 2001.

It seems to me that this conception of Proto-Indo-European contains three fatal flaws. First, for Proto-Indo-European to have remained a unified dialect chain for more than thirty-five hundred years, from 6500 to 3000 BCE, would require that all its dialects changed at about the same rate and that the rate was extraordinarily slow. A homogeneous rate of change across most of Neolithic Europe is very unlikely, as the rate of language change is affected by a host of local factors, as Sheila Embleton showed, and these would have varied from one region to the next. And for Proto-Indo-European only to have evolved from its earlier form to its later form in thirty-five hundred years would require a pan-European condition of near stasis in the speed of language change during the Neolithic/Eneolithic, a truly unrealistic demand. In addition, Neolithic Europe evinces an almost incredible diversity in material culture. “This bewildering diversity,” as V. Gordon Childe observed, “though embarrassing to the student and confusing on a map, is yet a significant feature in the pattern of European prehistory.”18 Long-established, undisturbed tribal languages tend to be more varied than tribal material cultures (see chapter 6). One would therefore expect that the linguistic diversity of Neolithic/Eneolithic Europe should have been even more bewildering than its material-culture diversity, not less so, and certainly not markedly less.

Finally, this enormous area was just too big for the survival of a single language under the conditions of tribal economics and politics, with foot travel the only means of land transport. Mallory and I discussed the likely scale of tribal language territories in Neolithic/Eneolithic Europe, and Nettles described tribal language geographies in West Africa.19 Most tribal cultivators in West Africa spoke languages distributed over less than 10,000 km2. Foragers around the world generally had much larger language territories than farmers had, and shifting farmers in poor environments had larger language territories than intensive farmers had in rich environments. Among most tribal farmers the documented size of language families—not languages but language families like Indo-European or Uralic—has usually been significantly less than 200,000 km2. Mallory used an average of 250,000–500,000 km2 for Neolithic European language families just to make room on the large end for the many uncertainties involved. Still, that resulted in twenty to forty language families for Neolithic Europe.

The actual number of language families in Europe at 3500 BCE probably was less than this, as the farming economy had been introduced into Neolithic Europe through a series of migrations that began about 6500 BCE. The dynamics of long-distance migration, particularly among pioneer farmers, can lead to the rapid spread of an unusually homogeneous language over an unusually large area for a few centuries (see chapter 6), but then local differentiation should have set in. In Neolithic Europe several distinct migrations flowed from different demographic recruiting pools and went to different places, where they interacted with different Mesolithic forager language groups. This should have produced incipient language differentiation among the immigrant farmers within five hundred to a thousand years, by 6000–5500 BCE. In comparison, the migrations of Bantu-speaking cattle herders across central and southern Africa occurred about two thousand years ago, and Proto-Bantu has diversified since then into more than five hundred modern Bantu languages assigned to nineteen branches, still interspersed today with enclaves belonging to non-Bantu language families. Europe in 3500 BCE, two thousand to three thousand years after the initial farming migrations, probably had at least the linguistic diversity of modern central and southern Africa—hundreds of languages that were descended from the original Neolithic farmers’ speech, interspersed with pre-Neolithic language families of different types. The language of the original migrants to Greece cannot have remained a single language for three thousand years after its speakers were dispersed over many millions of square kilometers and several climate zones. Ethnographic or historic examples of such a large, stable language territory among tribal farmers simply do not exist.

That the speakers of Proto-Indo-European had wagons and a wagon vocabulary cannot be brought into agreement with a dispersal date as early as 6500 BCE. The wagon vocabulary is incompatible with the first-farming/language-dispersal hypothesis. Proto-Indo-European cannot have been spoken in Neolithic Greece and still have existed three thousand years later when wagons were invented. Proto-Indo-European therefore did not spread with the farming economy. Its first dispersal occurred much later, after 4000 BCE, in a European landscape that was already densely occupied by people who probably spoke hundreds of languages.





THE BIRTH AND DEATH OF PROTO-INDO-EUROPEAN


The historically known early Indo-European languages set one chronological limit on Proto-Indo-European, a terminus ante quem, and the reconstructed vocabulary related to wool and wheels sets another limit, a terminus post quem. The latest possible date for Proto-Indo-European can be set at about 2500 BCE (chapter 3). The evidence of the wool and wagon/wheel vocabularies establishes that late Proto-Indo-European was spoken after about 4000–3500 BCE, probably after 3500 BCE. If we include in our definition of Proto-Indo-European the end of the archaic Anatolian-like stage, without a securely documented wheeled-vehicle vocabulary, and the dialects spoken at the beginning of the final dispersal about 2500 BCE, the maximum window extends from about 4500 to about 2500 BCE. This two thousand-year target guides us to a well-defined archaeological era.

Within this time frame the archaeology of the Indo-European homeland is probably consistent with the following sequence, which makes sense also in terms of both traditional branching studies and cladistics. Archaic Proto-Indo-European (partly preserved only in Anatolian) probably was spoken before 4000 BCE; early Proto-Indo-European (partly preserved in Tocharian) was spoken between 4000 and 3500 BCE; and late Proto-Indo-European (the source of Italic and Celtic with the wagon/wheel vocabulary) was spoken about 3500–3000 BCE. Pre-Germanic split away from the western edge of late Proto-Indo-European dialects about 3300 BCE, and Pre-Greek split away about 2500 BCE, probably from a different set of dialects. Pre-Baltic split away from Pre-Slavic and other northwestern dialects about 2500 BCE. Pre-Indo-Iranian developed from a northeastern set of dialects between 2500 and 2200 BCE.

Now that the target is fixed in time, we can solve the old and bitter debate about where Proto-Indo-European was spoken.





