                                 A History
                                    of
                               Archaeological
                                 Thought
                                Second Edition

In its original edition, Bruce Trigger’s book was the first ever to examine the
history of archaeological thought from medieval times to the present in world-
wide perspective. Now, in this new edition, he both updates the original work
and introduces new archaeological perspectives and concerns. At once stimu-
lating and even-handed, it places the development of archaeological thought
and theory within a broad social and intellectual framework. The successive
but interacting trends apparent in archaeological thought are defined and the
author seeks to determine the extent to which these trends were a reflection
of the personal and collective interests of archaeologists as these relate – in the
West at least – to the fluctuating fortunes of the middle classes. Although sub-
jective influences have been powerful, Professor Trigger argues that the grad-
ual accumulation of archaeological data has exercised a growing constraint on
interpretation. In turn, this use of data has increased the objectivity of archae-
ological research and enhanced its value for understanding the entire span of
human history and the human condition in general.

Bruce G. Trigger is James McGill Professor in the Department of Anthro-
pology at McGill University. He received his PhD from Yale University and
has carried out archaeological research in Egypt and the Sudan. His interests
include the comparative study of early civilizations, the history of archaeol-
ogy, and archaeological and anthropological theory. He has received various
scholarly awards, including the prestigious Prix Léon-Gérin from the Quebec
government, for his sustained contributions to the social sciences. He is an
honorary fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland and an honorary
member of the Prehistoric Society (UK). His numerous books include the
first edition of A History of Archaeological Thought (Cambridge 1989); The
Cambridge History of the Native Peoples of the Americas, Volume I (Cambridge
1996), coedited with Wilcomb E. Washburn; and Understanding Early Civi-
lizations (Cambridge 2003).
BRUCE G. TRIGGER




  A History
       of
Archaeological
   Thought
 Second Edition
                     CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo, Delhi

                           Cambridge University Press
           32 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10013-2473, USA

                                www.cambridge.org
          Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521840767

                        © Cambridge University Press 1996

          This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
         and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
          no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
                    permission of Cambridge University Press.

                               First published 1996
                           Reprinted 2007 (twice), 2008

     A catalog record for this publication is available from the British Library

                Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication data

                                Trigger, Bruce G.
        A history of archaeological thought / Bruce G. Trigger. – 2nd ed.
                                      p. cm.
                 Includes bibliographical references and index.
                    ISBN-13: 978-0-521-84076-7 (hardback)
                      ISBN-10: 0-521-84076-7 (hardback)
                      ISBN-13: 978-0-521-60049-1 (pbk.)
                         ISBN-10: 0-521-60049-9 (pbk.)
        1. Archaeology – History. 2. Archaeology – Philosophy – History.
                                     I. Title.
                               CC100.T75 2006
                           930.1 – dc22 2006007559

                        ISBN 978-0-521-84076-7 hardback
                       ISBN 978-0-521-60049-1 paperback

                        Transferred to digital printing 2009

       Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or
    accuracy of URLs for external or third-party Internet websites referred to in
   this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is,
    or will remain, accurate or appropriate. Information regarding prices, travel
      timetables and other factual information given in this work are correct at
    the time of first printing but Cambridge University Press does not guarantee
                      the accuracy of such information thereafter.
To B a r b a r a
                         CONTENTS

list of illustrations                                      page xi

preface to the second edition                                  xv

1 Studying the History of Archaeology                           1
  Approaches to the History of Archaeology                      5
  Social Context                                               17
  Archaeological Interpretation                                26
  Challenge                                                    38

2 Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies                 40
  Interests in the Past                                        40
  The Medieval View of History                                 48
  Renaissance Antiquarianism                                   52
  The Development of Classical Archaeology                     61
  Egyptology and Assyriology                                   67
  Other First Archaeologies                                    74
  Conclusions                                                  77

3 Antiquarianism without Texts                                 80
  Antiquarianism in Northern Europe                            81
  Recognition of Stone Tools                                   92
  The Enlightenment                                            97
  Scientific Antiquarianism                                   106
  Antiquarianism and Romanticism                              110
  The New World                                               114
  The Impasse of Antiquarianism                               118

4 The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology                   121
  Relative Dating                                             121
  The Development and Spread of Scandinavian Archaeology      129

                                 vii
                             Contents

  The Antiquity of Humanity                             138
  Palaeolithic Archaeology                              147
  Reaction against Evolution                            156
  Archaeology in North America                          158
  Conclusions                                           164

5 Evolutionary Archaeology                              166
  The Rise of Racism                                    167
  Lubbock’s Synthesis                                   171
  Colonial Archaeology in the United States             177
  Australian Prehistory                                 189
  Archaeology in New Zealand                            193
  Racist Archaeology in Africa                          195
  The Legacy of Evolutionary Archaeology                207

6 Culture-Historical Archaeology                        211
  Early Interests in Ethnicity                          211
  Diffusionism                                          217
  The Montelian Synthesis of European Prehistory        223
  The Concept of Culture                                232
  The Birth of Culture-Historical Archaeology           235
  Childe and The Dawn of European Civilization          241
  European Archaeology and Nationalism                  248
  Other National Archaeologies                          261
  Culture-Historical Archaeology in the United States   278
  Technical Developments                                290
  Theory                                                303
  Conclusions                                           311

7 Early Functional-Processual Archaeology               314
  Environmental Functional-Processualism                315
  Social Anthropology                                   319
  Economic Approaches                                   322
  Soviet Archaeology                                    326
  Childe as a Marxist Archaeologist                     344
  Grahame Clark                                         353
  Early Functionalism in the United States              361
  The Conjunctive Approach                              367



                                 viii
                             Contents

   Ecological and Settlement Archaeology           372
   World Archaeology                               382
   Conclusions                                     384

8 Processualism and Postprocessualism              386
   Neoevolutionism                                 386
   Early New Archaeology                           392
   The Diversification of Processual Archaeology   418
   Postprocessual Archaeology                      444
   Continental European Alternatives               478
   Discussion                                      480

9 Pragmatic Synthesis                              484
   Competing Approaches                            485
   Theoretical Convergence                         497
   Middle-Ranging Theory                           508
   High-Level Theory                               519

10 The Relevance of Archaeology                    529
   The Challenge of Relativism                     529
   The Development of Archaeology                  532
   Relations with Other Social Sciences            538
   Coping with Subjectivity                        540

bibliographical essay                              549

references                                         583

index                                              681




                                 ix
                       ILLUSTRATIONS


1.1 Relations between levels of generalization                        page 31
2.1 Digging at Herculaneum, 1782                                           59
2.2 Layard’s reconstruction of an Assyrian palace, from Monu-
    ments of Nineveh, 1853                                                71
2.3 Shang cast bronze ritual vessel, illustrated with rubbing of
    inscriptions and their transcription into conventional charac-
    ters, from twelfth-century ad catalogue Bogutu                        75
3.1 Merlin erecting Stonehenge, from a fourteenth-century British
    manuscript                                                            83
3.2 Engraving of tumuli and rune stones at Jelling, Denmark,
    1591                                                                  87
3.3 Early speculations about relations between stone, bronze, and
    iron implements in Europe and the Middle East                         96
3.4 Aubrey’s plan of Avebury, from his Monumenta Britannica,
    ca. 1675                                                             107
3.5 Stukeley’s view of Avebury                                           109
4.1 Successive styles of ornamentation, from Thomsen’s
    Guidebook                                                            126
4.2 Thomsen showing visitors around the Museum of Northern
    Antiquities                                                          128
4.3 Worsaae boring into one of the large tumuli at Jelling; he
    explains the procedure to King Frederik VII of Denmark               131
4.4 Acheulean handaxe found by Frere at Hoxne, published in
    Archaeologia, 1800                                                   140
4.5 Profile showing location of Palaeolithic material, from
    Boucher de Perthes’s Antiquités celtiques et antédiluviennes,
    1847                                                                 143
4.6 Mortillet’s epochs of prehistory, from Formation de la nation
    française, 1897                                                     151
4.7 Plan of prehistoric earthworks at Portsmouth, Ohio, from
    Atwater’s “Description of the antiquities discovered in the
    State of Ohio”                                                       162
4.8 Grave Creek Mound, West Virginia                                     163
5.1 John Lubbock (Lord Avebury) (1834–1913)                              172



                                     xi
                                Illustrations

 5.2 “Cultural characterization areas” of North America, based on
     archaeological criteria, by Holmes                                182
 5.3 Drawing of the Great Serpent Mound of Ohio, from a pop-
     ular article by Putnam                                            188
 5.4 “Native police dispersing the blacks,” Western Queensland,
     ca. 1882                                                          190
 5.5 “Approach to the acropolis,” from J. T. Bent’s The Ruined
     Cities of Mashonaland, 1892                                       198
 6.1 Oscar Montelius (1843–1921)                                       224
 6.2 Bronze Age artifacts arranged according to Montelius’s
     system, 1881                                                      226
 6.3 Childe with a party of workmen at Skara Brae, Orkney, 1928–
     1930                                                              243
 6.4 Childe’s first chart correlating the archaeological cultures of
     central Europe                                                    245
 6.5 Excavations at Novgorod after World War II                        252
 6.6 Kidder’s profile of refuse stratigraphy and construction levels
     at Pecos Ruin, New Mexico                                         281
 6.7 Chronological chart from Ford and Willey’s synthesis of east-
     ern North American prehistory                                     287
 6.8 Petrie’s profile of Tell el-Hesy, 1890                            292
 6.9 Grave from Hallstatt cemetery, Austria, recorded by the
     painter Isidor Engel in the mid-nineteenth century                293
6.10 Pottery of successive periods in Petrie’s predynastic sequence,
     from Diospolis Parva, 1901                                        296
6.11 Illustration of horizontal excavation and reconstruction of
     a prehistoric German site, from pamphlet issued by Halle
     Museum                                                            302
 7.1 V. I. Ravdonikas (1894–1976)                                      329
 7.2 Plan of Palaeolithic hut found at Buryet                          335
 7.3 Grahame Clark’s original systems diagram from Archaeology
     and Society, 1939                                                 355
 7.4 Clark’s refined ecosystems diagram with habitat and biome
     added, first used in his Reckitt Lecture, 1953                    356
 7.5 Plan and section of Cutting II, Star Carr                         359
 7.6 Structures on mound platform, from Hiwasee Island, by
     T. Lewis and M. Kneberg, 1946                                     364
 7.7 MacNeish’s interpretation of subsistence-settlement pattern
     of Ajuereado Phase (11,000–7,000 bc) in Tehuacan Valley,
     Mexico                                                            374
 7.8 Willey’s interpretation of community patterns in the Virú
     Valley, Peru, in the Huancaco Period (ad 800–1000)                378
 7.9 The settlement pattern of the Basin of Mexico for the Late
     Horizon                                                           381
 8.1 Sampling at Broken K Pueblo, J. N. Hill, 1968                     404


                                      xii
                               Illustrations

8.2 Binford’s plan of a modern Nunamiut butchery area at Anavik
    Springs, Alaska, showing where caribou were dismembered
    and waste products were disposed                                406
8.3 Model of drop and toss zones, as developed by L. R. Binford
    from his ethnoarchaeological study of the Nunamiut of Alaska    418
8.4 System flow chart for Shoshonean Indian subsistence cycle, by
    D. H. Thomas                                                    421
8.5 Flow diagram of presumed food/monument allocation in the
    Classic Maya civilization                                       423
8.6 Modular housing unit at Glastonbury Iron Age site, as identi-
    fied by D. L. Clarke                                            434
8.7 Hodder’s recording of ethnographic distribution of shield
    types and calabash motifs among different ethnic groups in
    the Baringo area of Kenya                                       454
8.8 Eighteenth-century William Paca Garden, Annapolis,
    Maryland                                                        461




                                    xiii
    PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

Since the first edition of A History of Archaeological Thought was
published in 1989, there has been a significant upsurge of interest
in the history of archaeology and a vast increase in the publication
of books and papers relating to this topic. As recently as the 1970s,
one or two significant books and a handful of papers dealing with
the history of archaeology were published each year. At the height
of their influence in the 1970s, processual archaeologists proclaimed
that the history of archaeology was irrelevant for understanding the
development of the discipline, which they argued was shaped by the
deployment of ever more rigorous forms of scientific method. This
view reduced the history of archaeology to being little more than
a form of entertainment or propaganda. Today, a growing number
of archaeologists, who accept that what archaeologists believe influ-
ences not only the questions they ask but also the answers they find
acceptable, maintain that all archaeological interpretations must be
evaluated in relation to their historical context. This growing interest
has transformed the history of archaeology into being an established
subdiscipline of archaeology with its own international bulletin, sym-
posia, encyclopedias, textbooks, and publication series. An increasing
number of studies, often based on painstaking archival research and
oral histories, are examining the archaeology practiced at specific
times and in specific places from a variety of analytical perspectives.
These works have made a new edition of A History of Archaeological
Thought essential.
   Archaeological theory and practice have also changed radically
since the 1980s. The last fifteen years have witnessed the grow-
ing diversification of postprocessual archaeology and the spread of
some of its key ideas throughout archaeology, as archaeologists have
striven to understand better how human beliefs and behavior relate
to material culture. At the same time, Darwinian and behavioral


                                  xv
                    Preface to the Second Edition

archaeology have been challenging processual archaeology’s long-
standing monopoly of materialist explanations of archaeological find-
ings and there is growing interest in the possible constraints that
psychological and biological factors exert on human behavior and
beliefs. The collapse of the communist regimes of Eastern Europe
and of the Soviet Union and the growing impact that an increas-
ingly transnational economy has been having on regional, national,
and supranational loyalties in various parts of the world have encour-
aged a renewed interest in culture-historical archaeology and its key
concept, ethnicity. Under these conditions, the inadequacies of the
processual/postprocessual dichotomy that arose in the 1980s and
early 1990s are becoming ever more evident. Theoretical diversity is
increasingly being appreciated as a source of enhanced understanding
rather than regarded as a threat to archaeology. As a result, efforts
are being made to produce broader theoretical frameworks within
which diverse approaches can be synthesized and assigned mutually
supportive roles.
   Archaeologists also are becoming more aware of what is known
about the nature of scientific enquiry. In the 1960s, the naive empiri-
cism of many American archaeologists was challenged by a dogmatic
positivism that stressed the need to create knowledge by formulat-
ing and testing deductive propositions about human behavior. More
recently, a growing appreciation of relativism and a reviving interest
in the role played by beliefs in influencing human behavior have pro-
moted a growing appreciation of realist and idealist epistemologies.
As a result, a growing number of archaeologists have come to view the
positivism and ecological determinism of the 1960s as outmoded and
erroneous. A second edition of A History of Archaeological Thought
is needed not only to survey the theoretical developments of the last
fifteen years but to take account of the important insights gained as
a result of these developments as they relate to viewing the entire
history of archaeological thought.
   In this second edition, I also seek to rectify the shortcomings of
my original work. In addition to correcting factual errors, I have
tried to provide a more balanced coverage by paying more attention
to classical and other forms of historical archaeology, as well as to
prehistoric archaeology in continental Europe and other non-English
speaking parts of the world. I also pay more attention to gender issues
and discuss in some detail the work of R. G. Collingwood, André

                                  xvi
                    Preface to the Second Edition

Leroi-Gourhan, and other archaeological theorists who received little
or no attention in the first edition.
   To keep this edition about the same length as the first one, I have
had to condense or omit sections of the original work that seem less
important in the early 2000s than they did in the late 1980s. The
material that appeared in the chapter on “Soviet Archaeology” has
been broken up and now appears, often in abbreviated form, in the
chapters dealing with culture-historical, early functional-processual,
and recent archaeology. The amount of coverage devoted to Gordon
Childe also has been reduced, and hindsight has permitted the
treatment of processual and postprocessual archaeology to be simul-
taneously condensed and clarified.
   The need for concision also has compelled me to recognize more
clearly than I did in the first edition that I am writing an intellec-
tual history of archaeology. The primary focus of this edition is on
the development of the main ideas that have guided archaeologi-
cal thought, not on great discoveries, the development of analytical
techniques, or the accumulation of factual knowledge about the past,
although I acknowledge that these are important and worthwhile
topics. This book also does not attempt to provide a balanced cov-
erage of archaeological research done in all countries or regions of
the world, or to describe the networks of archaeological researchers
that have played a key role in shaping archaeological thought. Like-
wise, although I recognize that social, political, economic, and insti-
tutional factors have played important roles in the development of
archaeological thought, tracing these influences is not my primary
goal. While these topics are discussed, insofar as they are neces-
sary for understanding the development of archaeological theory,
I have taken care that this book does not become primarily a social
or institutional history. Finally, because I view archaeology from a
world perspective, my primary emphasis is on comparison rather than
providing detailed accounts of specific events, which are now being
examined in a growing number of books and monographs.
   After 1989, I spent twelve years researching and writing Under-
standing Early Civilizations (2003a), the goal of which was to develop
a better understanding of archaeological and anthropological the-
ory. My findings have been applied in the present work. As a result,
my critiques of various theoretical positions are more specific and
detailed than they were in the first edition. I am also prepared to

                                 xvii
                    Preface to the Second Edition

project certain trends into the future, subject to the understanding
that these are extrapolations, not predictions, which I do not believe
are possible in the social sciences.
   The original edition of A History of Archaeological Thought was
based to a considerable extent on my previous writings, as detailed
in my Preface to that work. In many respects, that edition betrays its
piecemeal origins. Although the second edition is based on the first,
it is also grounded on considerable original research and has been
rewritten and reshaped from beginning to end. Scarcely a sentence
has not been altered and much new material has been substituted for
the original text. I hope that careful planning and thorough revision
have resulted in a more unified as well as an updated work.
   In the first edition, I thanked for their help Rosemarie Bernard,
Chen Chun, Margaret Deith, Brian Fagan, Norman Hammond,
Fumiko Ikawa-Smith, Jane Kelley, Philip Kohl, Isabel McBryde,
Mary Mason, Valerie Pinsky, Neil Silberman, Peter Timmins, Robert
Vogel, Alexander von Gernet, Michael Woloch, and Alison Wylie,
as well as other colleagues who sent me reprints of their papers.
For help with the second edition, I wish to thank especially Wakoh
Anazawa for generously sharing with me his perspectives on the his-
tory of Japanese archaeology; Mario Bunge and Oscar Moro Abadı́a
for their close reading of the first edition and their numerous helpful
comments on it; Stephen Chrisomalis for his research on the concept
of ethnicity and his summaries and evaluations of the many papers
on the history of archaeology published between 1989 and 2002;
Michael O’Brien and his coauthors for providing me in advance of
publication with a copy of their trendsetting book Archaeology as a
Process; and Peter Rowley-Conwy for sharing with me on an ongoing
basis the findings of his important research on the development of
prehistoric archaeology in Scandinavia from 1835 to 1843. I am most
grateful to Randall McGuire for reading and commenting in detail
on a preliminary draft of the entire book. I also thank for their help
Brian Alters, Linda Beringhaus, André Costopoulos, Nicole Cou-
ture, Marguerita Dı́az-Andreu, John Galaty, Heinrich Härke, Alice
Kehoe, Kristian Kristiansen, Harry Lerner, Michael Lever, Tim Mur-
ray, Nadezhda Platinova, Jonathan Reyman, Ulrike Sommer, George
Stocking, Thomas Patterson, and numerous undergraduates who
since the 1970s have taken my courses, “The History of Archaeologi-
cal Theory” and “Current Issues in Archaeology,” as well as graduate

                                 xviii
                     Preface to the Second Edition

students who have participated in various seminars. A detailed review
of the original edition of my book by L. B. Vishnyatsky et al. (1992)
was very helpful for revising my treatment of Soviet archaeology. It
was translated for me from Russian by Natasha Pakhomova.
   I further thank Petra Kalshoven for her skillful editorial work. She
provided my manuscript with American spelling and grammar, as well
as assiduously challenging how I expressed my ideas and not infre-
quently the ideas themselves. Her knowledge of both classical archae-
ology and sociocultural anthropology made her a most helpful and
welcome critic and the result is a more accurate and reader-friendly
book. I am also most grateful to Diane Mann for expertly turning my
numerous index cards into a bibliography and for word-processing
the final versions of the manuscript, Rose Marie Stano for keep-
ing my accounts, and Cynthia Romanyk for her help with mailing
and communications. Jenna Friedman and Rosalyn Trigger helped
to verify the references and Rosalyn Trigger prepared the new illus-
trative material for submission to the publisher. I also thank Cathy
Felgar (Cambridge University Press) and Mary Paden (TechBooks)
for overseeing production of this book, Lindsey Smith for securing
permission to use illustrations, Susan Stevenson for expert proof-
reading, and Catherine Fox for preparing the index. Last, but not
least, I thank Frank Smith for his good advice at every stage in the
production of this book.
   As in the first edition, sources for specific facts and ideas are pro-
vided between brackets in the text, whereas the Bibliographical Essay
at the end of the book supplies a more general guide to the sources
that are relevant for each chapter.
   Research for the first edition was greatly assisted by a sabbatical
leave from McGill University and a Canada Council Leave Fellowship
in 1976–1977 and a second sabbatical leave and a Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada Leave Fellowship in 1983.
The second edition was largely drafted during a sabbatical leave in
2004 and work on it has been supported since 2002 by the stipend
attached to my James McGill Professorship.
   This book is written from the perspective of ontological mate-
rialism and epistemological realism. These are positions that I am
convinced any social scientist who believes in the evolutionary origin
of the human species must adopt. I also appreciate the value of rela-
tivist critiques of knowledge for promoting sound scientific practice.

                                  xix
                     Preface to the Second Edition

I developed my understanding of relativism from traditional (mate-
rialist) Marxist philosophy. Although I accept the importance of the-
ories of culture for understanding human behavior, I reject cultural
determinism, just as I reject ecological determinism and unilinear
evolutionism. Inspired by the work of Gordon Childe, I have long
sought to reconcile a materialist approach with efforts to account for
the cultural and historical diversity that characterizes both human
behavior and the archaeological record.
   This book goes to press at a time that should see archaeology
consolidate its position as a mature social science devoted to the study
of past human behavior, culture, and history by means of material
culture. Much of this development will come about as the result
of fractious theoretical confrontations being balanced by a growing
emphasis on theoretical accommodation and synthesis. Archaeology
also will establish its credentials as the only social science with a broad
enough temporal perspective that the historical significance of all the
other social sciences has to be established in relation to it.
   Last but not least, I rededicate this second edition to my wife
Barbara, with love and gratitude for all the happiness and purpose
she brings to my life. I also thank her for providing Fisherman’s
Retreat, a haven where over three summers I was able to focus on
this book. She also has read the entire manuscript and made valuable
contributions to improving its clarity.




                                    xx
                                    chapter 1
         Studying the History of Archaeology

     Though there exists one major academic industry . . . telling the
     social scientists . . . how they can turn themselves into genuine
     scientists, there exists another, with at least as flourishing an
     output, putatively establishing that the study of man and society
     cannot be scientific.
          e r n e s t g e l l n e r , Relativism and the Social Sciences (1985), p. 120



Since the 1950s archaeology, especially in North America and western
Europe, has shifted from a seemingly complacent culture-historical
orthodoxy to ambitious theoretical innovations. These innovations
have led to growing disagreements about the goals of the discipline
and how these goals can be achieved. Increasing numbers of archae-
ologists, following in the wake of historians and sociologists, have
abandoned positivist certainty and begun to entertain doubts about
the objectivity of their research. They see social factors as determining
not only the questions they ask but also the answers they judge to be
convincing. Extreme versions of this view deny that archaeologists
can offer interpretations of their data that are other than a reflec-
tion of the transient values of the societies in which they live. Yet, if
archaeology cannot produce some kind of cumulative understanding
of the past and a commentary that is at least partially independent of
specific historical contexts, what scientific – as opposed to political,
psychological, or aesthetic – justification can be offered for doing
archaeological research?
   These concerns have encouraged studying the history of archaeo-
logical thought as a means by which problems of subjectivity, objec-
tivity, and the gradual accumulation of knowledge can be assessed.
A growing number of archaeologists have come to agree with the
philosopher and archaeologist R. G. Collingwood (1939: 132) that
“no historical problem should be studied without studying . . . the
history of historical thought about it.” The clear implication of

                                               1
                A History of Archaeological Thought

Collingwood’s position is that archaeological interpretation and the
history of archaeology are closely aligned. In recent decades, histori-
cal investigations of archaeological interpretation have multiplied and
more advanced methodologies for carrying out such studies have
been adopted from the history of science (Corbey and Roebroek
2001). Christopher Gosden (1999: 34) has argued that to be effec-
tive, disciplinary histories must not be purely intellectual or social
but both.
   This historical approach is not, however, without its critics.
Michael Schiffer (1976: 193) once asserted that graduate courses
should cease to be “histories of thought” and instead should system-
atically expound and articulate current theories, as, in a general sort
of way, K. R. Dark has since done in his book Theoretical Archaeology
(1995). Schiffer’s position embodied the view that the truth or false-
ness of theoretical formulations is independent of social influences
and hence of history but can be determined by applying scientifically
valid procedures of evaluation to adequate bodies of data. Taken
to an extreme, this view implies that the history and philosophy of
archaeology are totally unrelated to each other.
   The primary goal of this book is to survey the intellectual his-
tory of archaeology in an attempt to evaluate the claims of three
alternative epistemologies that are currently being applied to archae-
ology. Positivist epistemologists maintain that society and culture
exert no significant influence on the development of archaeology,
which is shaped by explanations based on explicit theories being
tested in the light of adequate evidence and according to proper
scientific methods. Extreme relativists argue that the interpretation
of archaeological data is so influenced by the intellectual persua-
sions, class interests, ethnic loyalties, gender prejudices, and per-
sonal self-interest of archaeologists that objectivity is impossible.
There is no such thing as objective knowledge, and, therefore, no
one truth but many possibly antithetical truths. Moderate relativists
concede that archaeological interpretations are influenced by society,
culture, and self-interest but maintain that archaeological evidence
constrains speculation. The term relativism, as used here, embraces
both relativism, in the strict sense of phenomena being perceived,
valued, and understood differently as a result of cultural variation,
and subjectivism, which refers to how phenomena are perceived, val-
ued, and understood differently as a result of variations in individual

                                  2
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

comprehension. To address these questions, it is necessary to con-
sider what archaeologists have learned about the past, how the meth-
ods they use to study the past have changed, what ideas have guided
the development of archaeology at different periods, how these ideas
relate to broader social, cultural, and intellectual trends, whether
different societies produce different kinds of archaeology and, if so,
what are the differences, and finally whether there is long-term con-
vergence or divergence in the development of archaeology. It also
cannot be assumed that the same factors necessarily influence archae-
ology to the same extent at every stage in its development.
   Archaeology is not a universal or self-evident activity. In some
countries, people debate whether foreign archaeologists are treasure
hunters or spies. They cannot imagine that anyone would be inter-
ested in going to so much trouble and expense to study the past for
its own sake. In Western civilization, despite the popularity of the
Indiana Jones stereotype, it is generally accepted that archaeology is
an esoteric discipline that has no relevance for the needs or concerns
of the present. Ernest Hooton (1938: 218) once described archae-
ologists as “the senile playboys of science rooting in the rubbish
heaps of antiquity.” Yet for almost 200 years a widespread concern
for the broader implications of archaeological discoveries has con-
tradicted this image of archaeology. No one would deny the roman-
tic fascination aroused by spectacular archaeological finds, such as
those by Austen Layard at Nimrud or Heinrich Schliemann at Troy
in the nineteenth century, and the more recent discoveries of the
tomb of Tutankhamen, the Palace of Minos at Knossos, the life-size
ceramic army of the Chinese Emperor Qin Shihuangdi, and numer-
ous several-million-years-old remains of hominids in East Africa. This
does not, however, explain the intense public interest in the contro-
versies that have surrounded the interpretation of many more routine
archaeological finds, the attention that diverse political, social, and
religious movements throughout the world have paid to archaeolog-
ical research, and rigorous efforts by various totalitarian regimes to
control the interpretation of archaeological data. During the second
half of the nineteenth century, archaeology was looked to for sup-
port by both sides in the debate about whether evolutionism or the
book of Genesis provided a more reliable account of human origins.
Later, W. M. F. Petrie, Leonard Woolley, and John Garstang claimed
to have made finds in Egypt, Iraq, and Palestine that supported

                                  3
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

historical accounts in the Hebrew Bible. Elsewhere German and
Polish archaeologists engaged in polemics about whether the
Lusatian culture had been created by prehistoric Germans or Slavs. As
recently as the 1970s, Peter Garlake, a government-employed archae-
ologist in Southern Rhodesia, found his position no longer tenable
because he refused to cast doubt on conclusive archaeological evi-
dence that stone ruins in that part of central Africa had been built
by ancestors of the Bantu peoples who live in that region. Today,
the findings of ecological archaeologists are being coopted both by
conservationists and by those who are anxious to minimize legal
restraints on environmental pollution and degradation.
   My adoption of a historical perspective does not mean that I
claim any privileged status with respect to objectivity for such an
approach. Historical interpretations are notoriously conjectural and
open-ended, to the extent that some historians have characterized
them as merely expressions of personal opinion. It is also recognized
that, because of the abundance of historical data, evidence can be
selectively marshaled to “prove” almost anything. There may, how-
ever, be some truth in William McNeill’s (1986: 164) argument that,
even if historical interpretation is a form of myth-making, such myths
help to guide public action and can be regarded as a human substitute
for instinct. If this is so, it follows that they are subject to the opera-
tion of the social equivalent of natural selection and hence may more
closely approximate reality over long periods of time. This, however,
is a tenuous basis on which to base hopes for the objectivity of his-
torical interpretations.
   I therefore do not claim that the historical study presented here
is any more objective than are the interpretations of archaeologi-
cal or ethnological data that it examines. I believe, however, as do
many others who study the history of archaeology, that a histori-
cal approach offers a special vantage point from which to examine
the changing relations between archaeological interpretation and its
social and cultural milieu. The time perspective provides a different
basis for studying the ties between archaeology and society than do
philosophical or sociological approaches. In particular, it permits the
researcher to identify the influence of subjective factors by observing
how and under what circumstances interpretations of the archaeo-
logical record have changed. Although this does not eliminate the
bias of the observer, or the possibility that this bias will influence

                                    4
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

the interpretation of archaeological data, it increases the chances of
gaining more rounded insights into what happened in the past.


            Approaches to the History of Archaeology
The need for a more systematic study of the history of archaeological
interpretation is indicated by serious disagreements about the nature
and significance of that history. Much of the controversy centers on
the role played by explanation in the study of archaeological data
over the last two centuries.
   Some historians of archaeology believe that the discipline has
evolved in a predetermined manner through a series of stages
(Schwartz 1967; Fitting 1973). In A History of American Archaeology,
G. R. Willey and J. A. Sabloff (1974, 1980) posited an initial Spec-
ulative period (1492–1840) followed by Classificatory-Descriptive
(1840–1914), Classificatory-Historical (1914–1960), and Explanatory
(1960–) ones. This scheme was based in part on Douglas Schwartz’s
(1967) previous division of the history of American archaeology into
three stages: Speculative, Empirical, and Explanatory. Only in the
1993 edition of A History of American Archaeology was the final
period, which began in 1960, renamed the Modern one. Although
this series of stages was applied only to New World archaeology,
Willey and Sabloff (1974: 209–10) observed that their scheme was
likely to apply everywhere. They proposed that over the course
of 150 years archaeology had developed according to an inductive
Baconian model of doing science, which involves first collecting data,
then describing and classifying it, and finally trying to explain it. Yet
this approach does not account for why archaeological findings were
already highly controversial during the nineteenth century. Such
debates were only possible because various conclusions about the
past were already being drawn on the basis of available evidence and
some of these conclusions were offending people. Also, if archaeolo-
gists could not draw any conclusions, what motivated them to con-
tinue to study the past or to collect artifacts? As the British historian
E. H. Carr (1967: 3–35) has reminded us, the mere characterization
of data as being relevant or irrelevant, that occurs even in the most
descriptive historical studies, implies the existence of some kind of
theoretical framework. It can further be argued in opposition to the
idea of a neutral observational language that not even the simplest

                                   5
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

archaeological fact can be established independently of a theoreti-
cal context (Wylie 1982: 42). In the past, most of these frameworks
were not formulated explicitly or even consciously by archaeologists.
Today, especially in the context of American and British archaeology,
many theoretical propositions are systematically elaborated. Explana-
tion was an inherent aspect of archaeology from the beginning, even
if much of the theory that was employed was left implicit rather than
clearly spelled out.
   David Clarke (1973) proposed a convergent model of archaeolog-
ical development. He argued that until the 1960s archaeology had
consisted of isolated regional traditions of research, each following its
own idiosyncratic and largely uncritical practices and characterized
by its own preferred forms of description, interpretation, and expla-
nation. Because these sorts of archaeology were scientifically undis-
ciplined, their modes of analysis tended to be highly subjective and
produced the results that local archaeologists expected. According to
Clarke, in the 1960s these prescientific approaches were replaced by
a new, sophisticated, self-critical, universal, and objective scientific
archaeology. This is a false, or at best partial, view of the history of
archaeology. International contacts characterized archaeology from
the earliest stages of its development. Therefore, if local forms of
research have been radically different from one another, an explana-
tion other than mutual isolation is required.
   Many archaeologists have utilized the philosopher Thomas Kuhn’s
(1962, 1970) more relativistic concept of scientific revolutions to try
to understand the development of archaeology. Kuhn formulated
his ideas to explain the development of the physical sciences and, in
the first edition of The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962), he
spoke of a preparadigmatic period to which his concept of scientific
revolutions did not apply. He also appears to have believed that all
social sciences remained in that category. However, in the second
edition, he accepted that immature disciplines might be described
as having multiple research paradigms (Kuhn 1970). Kuhn described
a research paradigm as having an accepted canon of scientific prac-
tice, including laws, theory, applications, and instrumentation, that
provides a model for a “particular coherent tradition of scientific
research.” Such a tradition is sustained by a “scientific community,”
defined as a group of scholars working together in the same discipline.
Kuhn argued that every scientific community develops a paradigm

                                   6
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

that influences the types of questions thought to be worth asking,
the theories that are used to explain data, and the procedures that
are employed to collect and analyze evidence. Scientists promote
such paradigms through their control of teaching, journals, research
grants, professional accreditation, hiring, tenure, and promotion. In
normal times, scientists conduct their research within the context of
the dominant paradigm, which they seek to elaborate. Paradigms are
thus not merely scientific theories but also belief systems that con-
stitute the culture of scientific communities. In adopting this view,
Kuhn was building on the work of Ludwik Fleck ([1935], English
translation 1979), who maintained that science was a collective cre-
ation within a social milieu.
   According to Kuhn, paradigm shifts occur when an old paradigm is
seen as not supported by accumulating data or when scientists work-
ing within it grow interested in problems that the existing paradigm
is not equipped to answer. Kuhn maintained that this leads to the
old paradigm’s being replaced by a new one. He also argued that
successive paradigms are incommensurate. This means that a scien-
tist working in terms of one paradigm can never understand how
matters are perceived by someone working in terms of an alternative
one. Kuhn originally argued in extreme relativistic terms that a new
paradigm was not necessarily more comprehensive or accurate than
its predecessor. Eventually, he accepted that, at least in the physical
sciences, later paradigms are more comprehensive and account for
more than do antecedent ones (Kuhn 1970; Bird 2000). This repre-
sented a shift from an extreme to a more moderate relativist posi-
tion. He also argued late in his career that without debates among
scientists who hold different views, incorrect assumptions would
go unchecked and improved scientific insights would be impossible
(Kuhn 1977).
   Some archaeologists, especially processual ones seeking to enhance
the innovativeness of their movement, combined Kuhn’s idea of
scientific revolutions with a unilinear evolutionary view of the
development of their discipline. They maintained that successive
phases in the development of archaeological theory display enough
internal consistency to qualify as paradigms and that the replace-
ment of one paradigm by another constituted a scientific revolu-
tion (Sterud 1973). According to this view, successive innovators,
such as Christian Thomsen, Oscar Montelius, Gordon Childe, and

                                  7
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

Lewis Binford, recognized major anomalies and inadequacies in con-
ventional interpretations of archaeological data and created new
paradigms that significantly changed the direction of archaeologi-
cal research. These paradigms not only altered the significance that
was accorded to archaeological data but also determined what kinds
of problems were and were not regarded as important. Clarke, how-
ever, regarded archaeology before 1960 as being in a preparadigmatic
state.
   Such unilinear views of the history of archaeology fail to account
for why archaeologists or other social scientists, in part because of the
emergent complexity of their subject matter, never agree about high-
level theory. This disagreement has meant that several rival paradigms
coexist at any one time. Currently, processual archaeology treats ideas
as epiphenomenal, whereas postprocessual archaeology regards them
as the principal determinants of behavior. Simultaneously, evolution-
ary archaeology is seeking to create a new paradigm by combining ele-
ments of culture-historical archaeology with a selectionist Darwinian
explanation of changes in material culture. Although archaeologists
often display considerable bias in their support for different schools,
there is no evidence that they are trapped in noncommunicating
discourses or that it is impossible for them to understand their oppo-
nents. On the contrary, their arguments often display considerable
knowledge of such positions. Robert Chapman (2003: 14) argues that
in archaeology rival positions are not only not hermetically sealed
but also internally highly variable. Thus, they are not incommensu-
rate with one another in the Kuhnian sense. Both Michael Schiffer
(1996: 659) and Todd and Christine VanPool (2003) maintain that
regarding theoretical orientations as paradigms radicalizes positions
and encourages exclusion and polemic rather than the systematic
comparison, testing, and synthesis of ideas.
   The relevance of Kuhn’s concept of revolutionary change also
has been questioned. Most alterations in the theory and practice of
archaeology appear to occur gradually and there are growing doubts
that even what appear to be rapid shifts accord with his concept of
revolutions. Kuhn also failed to account for the longevity of vari-
ous positions and for why rival positions fluctuate in relative impor-
tance, often repeatedly, rather than one position definitively replac-
ing another, or for why few positions are ever totally abandoned.
Thus, the new cultural anthropology and postprocessual archaeology

                                   8
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

address many of the same issues that Boasian culture-historical
anthropology and archaeology once did, and early neoevolutionary
archaeology strongly resembled nineteenth-century unilinear archae-
ology. To accommodate the concept of paradigm to these real-
ities, Margaret Masterman (1970) differentiated three main types
of paradigm: metaphysical, relating to the worldview of a group of
scientists; sociological, that define what is accepted; and construct,
that supply the tools and methods for solving problems. No one
of these types alone constitutes “the” paradigm of a particular era.
Despite such efforts to modify Kuhn’s ideas, there is a growing sense
that the concept of paradigm may not be appropriate to describe
changing trends in interpretation in archaeology or any of the social
sciences, and perhaps not even in science in general (Gándara 1980,
1981). Finally, Jean Molino (1992: 19) argues that nothing is more
dangerous than the belief that a scientific revolution allows a sci-
ence to start again. Old questions, methods, and answers frequently
remain valid. Once the principle of stratigraphy was established as
a reliable technique for inferring chronology, it continued to be
used by archaeologists regardless of what other views they might
espouse (Dunnell 2001: 1298). The same is true of Ian Hodder’s
(1982b) demonstration that material culture can be used to dis-
tort or invert as well as to reflect social reality. The development
of such broad agreements is another factor reducing the incommen-
surability of different bodies of theory. For all these reasons, I will
avoid the term “paradigm” and speak simply of schools or theoretical
positions.
   Shaun Hides (1996) and, in a more nuanced and careful manner,
Ian Morris (1994b) have attempted to understand the development
of archaeology in relation to Michel Foucault’s (1970, 1972) concept
of four successive but radically different and in his view discontinu-
ous epistemes or modes of knowledge: Renaissance (ca. 1400–1650),
Classical (ca. 1650–1800), Modern (ca. 1800–1950), and Postmodern
(ca. 1950–). Foucault understands these epistemes as general modes
of thought, each of which in turn influenced all fields of knowledge
and dominated an era of modern Western civilization. Each episteme
is radically different from any other. No one could escape the epis-
teme of the time in which they lived, which imposed a particular set
of norms and postulates on all thinking. Thus, epistemes, as dom-
inant cultural patterns, are very different from Kuhn’s paradigms,

                                  9
                A History of Archaeological Thought

although both have been used to characterize general stages in the
development of scientific interpretation.
   Although Foucault’s views about epistemes have potentially valu-
able contributions to make to understanding the development of
archaeological thought, they have been criticized because of his reluc-
tance to study causation and how epistemes may have been influ-
enced by changing social realities (Morris 1994b: 10; Gutting 1989).
Foucault also appears to underestimate the extent to which epistemes
have overlapped and mutually influenced people’s thinking. Epis-
temes can contribute little to understanding the theoretical diversity
that characterizes archaeology at any given point in time.
   An alternative unilinear evolutionary view to those based on
the ideas of Kuhn and Foucault, and that accords with Stephen
Toulmin’s (1970) thesis that sciences do not experience revolutions
but, rather, gradual changes or progressions, holds that the history of
archaeology has been characterized by a cumulative growth of knowl-
edge about the past from early times to the present (Casson 1939;
Heizer 1962a; Meltzer 1979). It is maintained that, although various
phases in this development may be delineated arbitrarily, in reality
archaeology changes in a gradual fashion, with no radical breaks or
sudden transformations. Some archaeologists view the development
of their discipline as following a course that is inevitable. Jaroslav
Malina and Zdenek Vašı́ček (1990) document how an expanding
database, with evidence increasingly being derived from settlement
data and ecofacts as well as from artifacts and monuments, together
with new theories from the other social sciences and biology has
shaped the development of archaeology. Like other unilinear views,
theirs does not take account of the variability of archaeological the-
ories at any one time. Nor does it explain the frequent failure of
archaeologists to develop their ideas in a systematic fashion. For
example, although nineteenth-century naturalists with archaeolog-
ical interests, such as Japetus Steenstrup (Morlot 1861: 300) and
William Buckland (Dawkins 1874: 281–4), carried out experiments
to determine how faunal remains were introduced into sites, research
of this sort did not become routine in archaeology until the 1970s
(Binford 1977, 1981).
   Other historians of archaeology have rejected unilinear interpreta-
tions in favor of cyclical ones. This view began with Stuart Piggott
(1935, 1950, 1968, 1976, 1985) and Glyn Daniel (1950). They argued

                                  10
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

that archaeological interpretations were influenced by the varying
popularity of the opposing rationalist and romantic views of human
behavior that had been constructed in France during the eighteenth
century. The romantic view was seen as encouraging an interest
in culture-history, ethnicity, and idealism in archaeology, whereas
rationalism encouraged the adoption of evolutionary and material-
ist approaches. Piggott and Daniel assumed that human behavior
was too complex and unpredictable ever to be fully understood.
They believed that archaeological interpretations therefore tended to
reflect the dominant intellectual fashions of the time, which them-
selves changed in an unpredictable manner. It was therefore con-
cluded that little progress could be made in understanding the past
apart from that facilitated by a growing database. Archaeologists
often returned to studying the same problems after long gaps during
which what had been learned previously had been forgotten. Another
application of a cyclical view to studying the history of archaeology
is Kristian Kristiansen’s (2002) characterization of Danish archae-
ology as consisting of alternating phases of interest in ecological
and culture-historical problems. Although these shifts can be con-
strued as alternations of rationalist and romantic approaches, they
do not appear to have been produced by alterations in general intel-
lectual fashions but by processes internal to Danish archaeology and
society.
    Some archaeologists doubt that the basic interests and concepts
of their discipline change significantly from one period to another.
Bryony Orme (1973: 490) has maintained that the archaeological
interpretations offered in the past were more like those of the present
than is commonly believed and that archaeological preoccupations
have changed little. Jean-Claude Gardin (1980: 165–80) argues that
it is wrong to believe that there is a great gap between the present and
earlier times in the “small world” of archaeological interpretation. He
suggests that there has been little change in what archaeologists do
over time, that the same formulae have been used for site reports over
a long period, and that there is no gulf between processual and post-
processual approaches. Long-term continuities in interpretation have
been shown to occur in studies of human evolution (Landau 1991;
Stoczkowski 2002). A remarkable antiquity also can be demonstrated
for some ideas that are commonly believed to be modern. Archaeol-
ogists argued that growing population densities led to the adoption

                                  11
                A History of Archaeological Thought

of more labor-intensive forms of food production long before they
rediscovered this idea in the work of the economist Ester Boserup
(Smith and Young 1972). As early as 1673, the British statesman
William Temple had adumbrated this theory with his observation that
high population densities force people to work hard (Slotkin 1965:
110–11). In 1843, the Swedish archaeologist Sven Nilsson (1868:
lxvii) argued that increasing population had brought about a shift
from pastoralism to agriculture in prehistoric Scandinavia. This con-
cept also was implicit in the “oasis” theory of the origin of food
production, as expounded by Raphael Pumpelly (1908: 65–6) and
adopted by Harold Peake and H. J. Fleure (1927) and then by
Gordon Childe (1928). They proposed that postglacial desiccation
in the Middle East had compelled people to cluster around surviving
sources of water, where they had to innovate in order to feed higher
population densities. Yet, although ideas persist and recur in the his-
tory of archaeology, this does not mean that there is nothing new in
the interpretation of archaeological data. Such ideas must be exam-
ined in relation to the different conceptual frameworks of which they
were a part at each period. It is from these frameworks that these con-
cepts derive their significance to the discipline and, as the frameworks
change, their significance does as well. According undue importance
to particular ideas and not paying enough attention to their chang-
ing context will lead archaeologists to underestimate the amount
of change that has characterized the development of archaeological
interpretation. It also has been argued that a major goal of the his-
tory of archaeology must be to study critically how archaeological
concepts and understandings have altered over time, so that they
are not accepted as natural and given in their current state (Trigger
1978b). Recent work along these lines has been inspired by Pierre
Bourdieu’s (1980) concept of the social history of the social sciences
(Moro Abadı́a and González Morales 2003).
   Many archaeologists note that one of the principal characteristics
of archaeological interpretation has been its enduring regional diver-
sity. Leo Klejn (1977, 1990) and Trigger and Glover (1981–1982)
have examined the history of archaeology as one of regional schools.
In her review of Japanese and North American studies of the Jomon
culture, Junko Habu (2004: 5) has demonstrated how assumptions,
goals, methods, and theoretical developments cannot be considered
apart from one another in a single tradition of archaeological practice

                                  12
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

and hence the distinctive and often complementary findings of differ-
ent research traditions cannot be sucessfully synthesized without an
understanding of the specific circumstances in which these findings
were produced. Nadia Abu El-Haj (2001) argues that specific expres-
sions of archaeological practice must be examined independently in
order to understand how each of them articulated with, and both
transformed and was shaped by, local social and political conditions.
She implies that little is to be gained by comparing such situations
and trying to generalize about them. Yet, although Abu El-Haj is
correct that every practice of archaeology has unique features, this
does not mean that detailed comparisons may not help to understand
better archaeological practice and the history of archaeology.
   Robert Dunnell (2001: 1290–1) argues that the overall history of
archaeology displays both a lack of linear development and much
parochial diversity. This is because archaeology is not a science in the
sense that it systematically uses theory to explain evidence. Dunnell
regards archaeology as remaining in a preparadigmatic state. Only
occasionally has something resembling a paradigm arisen and these
have proved to be short-lived.
   It is clear that there have been, and still are, regional traditions
in archaeological interpretation and that each of them has its own
unique features (Daniel 1981b; Evans et al. 1981: 11–70). What has
not yet been studied adequately is the significance of their diver-
gences. To what degree do they represent irreconcilable differences
in the understanding of human behavior, differences in the questions
being asked, or the same basic ideas being studied under the guise
of different terminologies?
   Over the past few decades, archaeologists have identified vari-
ous types of approaches to doing archaeology, each of which is
represented by various examples in different parts of the world.
Although these began with geographical groupings, as the list has
expanded it has come to include other types of social differences.
Each type is distinguished by the cause whose interest it serves:
national archaeology (Fleury-Ilett 1996: 200–1), nationalist archaeol-
ogy, colonialist archaeology, imperialist archaeology (Trigger 1984a),
third-world archaeology (Chakrabarti 2001: 1191–3), continentalist
archaeology (Morris 1994b: 11), regional or proto-national archae-
ology (Dı́az-Andreu 1996b: 86), community archaeology (Moser
1995a; Marshall 2002), indigenous archaeology (Watkins 2000),

                                  13
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

internalist archaeology (Yellowhorn 2002), working-class archaeol-
ogy (McGuire and Reckner 2003), touristic archaeology, and the
archaeologies of protest (Silberman 1995: 261), of the disenfran-
chised, and of cultural identity (Scham 2001). The list might tech-
nically include gender archaeology although this approach is differ-
ent because, instead of simply representing an alternative focus of
research, it has established itself as a necessary and integral part of all
other archaeologies. Although no two examples of any one of these
varied approaches to archaeology are identical, they share sufficient
features to identify each approach as a distinctive type, the develop-
ment and function of which are worthy of study.
   Yet ideas diffuse and convergent as well as independent develop-
ment characterize archaeology. Studies of archaeology, with a few
notable exceptions (I. Bernal 1980; Chakrabarti 1982), have failed
to take account of the vast intellectual exchange that characterized
the development of archaeology in all parts of the world during the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. This is dramatically illustrated
by the early study of shell mounds. Reports of the pioneering studies
by Danish scholars, who began their work in the 1840s, stimulated
a large number of investigations of shell heaps along the Atlantic
and later the Pacific coasts of North America in the latter half of
the nineteenth century (Trigger 1986a). When the American zool-
ogist Edward Morse went to teach in Japan, after analyzing mate-
rial from shell mounds along the coast of Maine for the Harvard
University archaeologist Jeffries Wyman, he discovered and exca-
vated in 1877 a large Mesolithic shell deposit at Omori, near Tokyo.
Some of his students dug another shell mound by themselves and it
was not long before Japanese archaeologists who had been educated
in Europe established the study of the Mesolithic Jomon culture
on a professional basis (Ikawa-Smith 1982). The Scandinavian stud-
ies also stimulated the early investigation of shell mounds in Brazil
(Ihering 1895) and Southeast Asia (Earl 1863). Even the ideologi-
cally opposed archaeological traditions of Western Europe and the
Soviet Union significantly influenced each other, despite decades
when scientific contact of any sort was very difficult and politically
dangerous for scholars on both sides of the Iron Curtain. For all
these reasons it seems unwise to overestimate the historical inde-
pendence or theoretical distinctiveness of these regional archaeolo-
gies. One of the important tasks for historians of archaeology is to

                                    14
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

determine to what extent developments in one region did or did not
influence developments elsewhere. For early times, this is hard to do
because archaeologists often failed to indicate the sources of their
ideas.
   Less attention has been paid to the effects of disciplinary special-
ization within archaeology on the ways in which archaeological data
are interpreted (Rouse 1972: 1–25). Yet differing orientations along
these lines may account for as many differences as do social and polit-
ical orientations. Classical archaeology, Egyptology, and Assyriology
have been strongly committed to studying epigraphy and art history
within a historical framework (Bietak 1979). Medieval archaeology
developed as an investigation of material remains that complements
research based on written records (M. Thompson 1967; D. M. Wilson
1976; Barley 1977; Andrén 1998). Palaeolithic archaeology developed
alongside historical geology and palaeontology and has maintained
close ties with these disciplines, whereas the study of later prehis-
toric periods frequently combines information from numerous other
disciplines, including linguistics, folklore, biological anthropology,
and comparative ethnology, with archaeological findings (D. McCall
1964; Trigger 1968a; Jennings 1979).
   Yet, although many of these types of archaeology have developed
in considerable intellectual isolation from each other over long peri-
ods and have been further estranged as a result of the balkanization of
their respective jargons, historical connections, sporadic interaction,
and common methodological interests have been sufficient for all of
them to share numerous interpretive concepts. Tim Murray (2001a:
xix–xx) points out that, despite archaeology’s great diversity, the
common questions and fundamental activities, such as classification,
that lie at the core of archaeology enable archaeologists to commu-
nicate with each other and exchange knowledge. Yet, although they
share a general commitment to making the human past intelligible
and to developing the intellectual tools required for this task, archae-
ologists have gone about doing their work in many different ways and
have sought to use archaeology to serve many different political and
cultural ends.
   More narrowly focused studies of the history of archaeology exam-
ine the role played by institutions, such as archaeological societies
and archaeological departments in museums or universities, in pro-
moting the development of archaeology. Michael O’Brien, R. Lee

                                  15
                A History of Archaeological Thought

Lyman, and Michael Schiffer (2005) have traced the development of
New Archaeology in terms of the contributions of individual archae-
ologists and of clusters of cooperating or competing archaeologists.
Michael Balter (2005) has studied, again from the perspective of the
individual participants, the interactive team that has been excavating
at the early Neolithic site of Çatalhöyük, in Turkey, under the inno-
vative leadership of Ian Hodder. This fine-grained type of approach
reveals much about the social dynamics and academic strategies that
have shaped broader trends in the development of archaeology.
   Biography and autobiography have long been part of the history
of archaeology, but they have generally been viewed as a means
of celebrating or justifying the careers of individual archaeologists.
Today, there is growing interest in using a biographical approach
to investigate how archaeologists have interpreted the past. John
Chapman (1998) explains the role that the real-life experiences of the
Lithuanian-born archaeologist Marija Gimbutas played in shaping
her interpretations of European prehistory, especially the distinction
that she drew between what she believed had been a matriarchal and
peaceful Early Europe and the patriarchal and warlike Indo-European
societies that replaced it. Jean-Paul Sartre (1971–1972) explored in
detail the problems of this sort of approach in his innovative “total
biography” of the French novelist Gustave Flaubert. He showed how
Flaubert was shaped by the culture in which he lived and the social
class to which he belonged. He also demonstrated, however, that
many aspects of Flaubert’s life and writings could only be understood
by means of a detailed psychological analysis of his childhood and
family relations. Clearly, if we are to understand all aspects of what
archaeologists do, we have to study them as individuals. Sartre’s work
makes it clear that because of psychological factors even archaeolo-
gists who share similar ethnic and class backgrounds and the same
historical experiences are unlikely to interpret archaeological data in
precisely the same manner. By contrast, analogous social and cul-
tural contexts produce general similarities in the interpretation of
archaeological data that are deserving of consideration.
   Although biographical and sociopolitical perspectives on the his-
tory of archaeology are complementary, some of the specific ap-
proaches outlined above are contradictory and hence not all of them
can be valid. Because this study attempts to trace the development
of archaeological thought from a broad perspective, it is impossible

                                  16
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

for it to examine the contributions of all archaeologists or even to
investigate systematically the developments that have taken place
in each country and each branch of archaeology (Schuyler 1971).
Instead, I will investigate a number of major interpretive trends in
roughly the chronological order in which they came into prominence.
These trends frequently overlapped and interacted with one another,
both temporally and geographically, and the work of individual
archaeologists often reflects several of these trends, either at differ-
ent stages of their careers or in some combination at a single point in
time. My thematic approach allows a historical study to take account
of changing styles of archaeological interpretation that cannot be
fitted into clearly defined chronological or geographical pigeon-
holes but that reflect waves of innovation that have transformed
archaeology.


                           Social Context
No one denies that archaeological research is influenced by many dif-
ferent kinds of factors. The most controversial of these is the social
context in which archaeologists live and work. Very few archae-
ologists, including those who favor a positivistic view of scientific
research, would reject the proposal that the questions archaeologists
ask are influenced at least to some degree by this milieu. Yet posi-
tivists maintain that, so long as adequate data are available and these
data are analyzed using proper scientific methods, the validity of the
resulting conclusions is independent of the prejudices or beliefs of
the investigator. Other archaeologists believe that, because their dis-
cipline’s findings concerning the past consciously or unconsciously
are perceived to have implications for the present or about human
nature generally, and because people easily accept what they want to
believe but demand overwhelming evidence before they accept ideas
that they find abhorrent, changing social conditions influence not
only the questions archaeologists ask but also the answers that they
are predisposed to find acceptable. Even statistical tests, because they
employ arbitrary levels of confidence, are open to subjective interpre-
tation. Strong positivists, who believe that a single exception invali-
dates a law, would theoretically have to examine all possible cases to
prove that they are dealing with a universal generalization. Because
such proof is normally impossible, faith is also involved there.

                                  17
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

   David Clarke (1979: 85) had these subjective factors in mind when
he described archaeology as an adaptive system “related internally to
its changing content and externally to the spirit of the times.” Else-
where he wrote: “Through exposure to life in general, to educational
processes and to the changing contemporary systems of belief we
acquire a general philosophy and an archaeological philosophy in
particular – a partly conscious and partly subconscious system of
beliefs, concepts, values and principles, both realistic and metaphys-
ical” (Ibid.: 25). Still earlier, Collingwood (1939: 114) had observed
that every archaeological problem “ultimately arises out of ‘real’
life . . . we study history in order to see more clearly into the situ-
ation in which we are called upon to act.”
   In recent decades archaeology has been powerfully influenced by
the attacks that relativists have launched against the concept of sci-
ence as a rational and objective enterprise. These attacks have their
roots in the antipositivism of the para-Marxist Frankfurt School,
as represented in the writings of Walter Benjamin (1969), Jürgen
Habermas (1971), and Herbert Marcuse (1964). These philosophers
stressed that social conditions influence both what data are regarded
as important and how they are interpreted (Kolakowski 1978c: 341–
95). Their views have been strengthened by Kuhn’s paradigmatic
concept, by the arguments of the sociologist Barry Barnes (1974,
1977) that scientific knowledge is not different in kind from any other
forms of cultural belief, and by the anarchistic claims of the American
philosopher of science Paul Feyerabend (1975) that, because objec-
tive criteria for evaluating theories do not exist, science should not be
fettered by rigid rules and personal preferences and aesthetic tastes
may be relied on when evaluating rival theories. Ideas of this sort have
attracted a considerable following among self-styled critical archae-
ologists, especially in Britain and the United States.
   Although some relativists argue that, in the long run, greater
awareness of social biases will promote more objectivity (Leone
1982), others maintain that even basic archaeological data are men-
tal constructs and, hence, are not independent of the social milieu
in which they are created and utilized (Gallay 1986: 55–61). The
more extreme relativists ignore the qualifications of Habermas and
Barnes that “knowledge arises out of our encounters with reality
and is continually subject to feedback-correction from these encoun-
ters” (B. Barnes 1977: 10). Instead, they conclude that archaeological

                                   18
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

interpretations are determined entirely by their social context rather
than by any objective evidence. Thus statements about the past can-
not be evaluated by any criteria other than the internal coherence of
a particular study “which can only be criticised in terms of internal
conceptual relations and not in terms of externally imposed standards
or criteria for ‘measuring’ or ‘determining’ truth or falsety” (Miller
and Tilley 1984b: 151). A broad spectrum of alternatives separates
those hyperpositivistic archaeologists who believe that only the qual-
ity of archaeological data and of analytical techniques determines the
value of archaeological interpretations and the hyperrelativists who
are inclined to accord archaeological data no role, but instead explain
archaeological interpretations entirely in terms of the social and cul-
tural loyalties of researchers. Despite its extremes and inconsistencies,
the relativist critique of science has played an important and on the
whole a beneficial role in making social scientists more aware of the
subjective biases that influence their findings.
   Although the influences that societies exert on archaeological
interpretations are potentially very diverse, the development of
archaeology has corresponded temporally with the rise to power
of the middle classes in Western society. Many of the early patrons
of classical archaeology belonged to the aristocracy, but ever since
the Italian trader Ciriaco de’ Pizzicolli in the fifteenth century,
those who have actively studied archaeological remains have come
predominantly from the middle classes. They have been civil
servants, clergymen, wealthy merchants, country squires, and, with
increasing professionalization, university teachers and museolo-
gists. In addition, much of the public interest in archaeological
findings has been associated with the educated members of the
bourgeoisie.
   All branches of scientific investigations that have developed since
the seventeenth century have done so under the aegis of the middle
classes. Because archaeology and history are readily intelligible disci-
plines, their findings have important implications for shaping views
of human nature and how and why modern societies have come
to be as they are (Levine 1986). This transparent relevance for cur-
rent political, economic, and social issues has made relations between
archaeology and society especially complex and important. It there-
fore seems reasonable to examine archaeology as an expression of the
ideology of the middle classes and to try to discover to what extent

                                   19
                A History of Archaeological Thought

changes in archaeological interpretation reflect the altering fortunes
of that group. Yet, although it is reasonable to assume that archae-
ologists are always influenced by the circumstances in which they
live, it does not necessarily follow that, as archaeological data accu-
mulate and archaeology develops as a discipline, all archaeological
interpretations will be influenced to the same extent by contempo-
rary social biases.
   Moreover, the middle classes have not been a homogeneous phe-
nomenon, either over time or in any one society. Their interests
and degree of development have varied greatly from one country to
another and within each country they have been divided into various
strata, with individuals who prefer either more radical or more con-
servative political options being present in each stratum. The bour-
geoisie of the Ancien Régime in France, composed largely of clerics,
professionals, and royal administrators, has to be distinguished from
the entrepreneurial bourgeoisie and factory owners of the industrial
era (Darnton 1984: 113; E. Wood 2000). It is also evident that archae-
ology has not been of equal interest to the whole middle class, but
mainly to that part of it, largely composed of professionals, which
is inclined to be interested in scholarship (Kristiansen 1981; Levine
1986). Karl Marx noted rather condescendingly that in many ways
intellectuals were very different in outlook and interest from other
members of the middle class. He argued that what made them “rep-
resentatives of the lower-middle class is the fact that in their minds
they do not get beyond the limits which the lower-middle class do
not get beyond in life, and that they are consequently driven, theo-
retically, to the same problems and social positions to which material
interest and social position drive the latter in practice” (Marx [1852]
in Marx and Engels 1962, I: 275).
   Relations between interests and ideas are contextually mediated by
a large number of heterogeneous factors. Archaeologists therefore
cannot expect to establish a one-to-one correspondence between
specific archaeological interpretations and particular class interests.
Instead, they must analyze the ideas influencing archaeological inter-
pretations as tools with which social groups seek to achieve their
goals in particular situations. Among these goals are to enhance a
group’s self-confidence by making its success appear natural, pre-
destined, and inevitable; to inspire and justify collective action; and
to disguise collective interests as altruism (B. Barnes 1974: 16); in

                                  20
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

short, to provide groups and whole societies with mythical charters
(McNeill 1986). Without denying the significance of individual psy-
chological traits and cultural traditions, such considerations provide
an important focus for examining the relations between archaeology
and society.
   Most professional archaeologists also believe archaeological inter-
pretation to be significantly influenced by a large number of other
factors. All but the most radical relativists agree that one of these is
the archaeological database. Archaeological data have been accumu-
lating continuously over several centuries and new data are held to
constitute a test of earlier interpretations. Yet what data are collected
and by what methods are influenced by every archaeologist’s sense of
what is significant, which in turn reflects his or her theoretical presup-
positions. This creates a reciprocal relation between data collection
and interpretation that leaves both open to social influences. More-
over, the data recovered in the past are often neither adequate nor
appropriate to solve the problems that are considered important at a
later time. This is not simply because archaeologists were unfamiliar
with techniques that became important later and therefore failed to
preserve charcoal for radiocarbon dating or soil samples for phytolith
analysis, although such gaps in documentation can be extremely lim-
iting. New perspectives frequently open up whole new lines of inves-
tigation. For example, Grahame Clark’s (1954) interest in the sub-
sistence economy of the Mesolithic period led him to ask questions
that could not be answered using data collected when the main inter-
est of Mesolithic studies was typological (Clark 1932). Likewise, the
development of an interest in settlement archaeology revolutionized
archaeological site surveys (Willey 1953) and provided a stronger
impetus for the recording and analysis of intrasite distributions of
features and artifacts (Millon et al. 1973). Hence, although archaeo-
logical data are collected continuously, the results are not necessarily
as cumulative as many archaeologists believe. Indeed, archaeologists
often seem to build more readily on what their predecessors con-
cluded about the past than on the actual evidence on which those
conclusions were based.
   What archaeologists can study is also influenced by the resources
that are made available for archaeological research, the institu-
tional and public contexts in which research is carried out, and the
kinds of investigations societies or governments are prepared to let

                                   21
                A History of Archaeological Thought

archaeologists undertake. To obtain support archaeologists must
please their sponsors, whether these be wealthy patrons (Hinsley
1985), colleagues and politicians managing the allocation of pub-
lic funds (Patterson 1986a, 1999), or the general public. There also
may be social restrictions on excavating certain kinds of sites, such
as cemeteries or religious localities. To protect cultural resources,
governments frequently enact stringent controls over when and how
archaeologists excavate and how they record their findings. They
sometimes prevent archaeologists from sending even mundane finds,
such as soil samples, abroad for analysis. There is also a growing ten-
dency to assign responsibility for managing archaeological research
to local or ethnic groups on the grounds that such resources are part
of their heritage. Although many archaeologists accept these controls
as appropriate, they may impose major constraints on the research
archaeologists do and how they interpret their finds. Such constraints
have given rise to considerable tensions between archaeologists and
aboriginal resource managers (Moser 1995b; Nicholas and Andrews
1997; Swidler et al. 1997; D. Thomas 2000).
   Until the twentieth century, few archaeologists were educated in
the discipline. Instead they brought to archaeology a variety of skills
and viewpoints acquired in many different fields and avocations. All
of them had studied a general school curriculum in which classical
and biblical material was emphasized. Basic principles derived from
a widespread interest in numismatics played an important role in
the development of typology and seriation by Christian Thomsen,
John Evans, and other early archaeologists (McKay 1976). In the
nineteenth century, a growing number who took up the study of
archaeology had been further educated in the physical and biological
sciences. Even now, it is claimed that significant differences can be
noted between the work done by professional archaeologists whose
undergraduate studies were in the humanities and in the natural sci-
ences (R. Chapman 1979: 121). More recently, a large number of pre-
historic archaeologists have been educated in anthropology or history
departments, depending on local preferences. In general, archaeol-
ogists trained within the context of history remain interested in the
pasts of specific countries or peoples, whereas archaeologists trained
in anthropology are more likely to be interested in studying the past
from a comparative perspective.


                                  22
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

   The roles played by particularly successful or charismatic archae-
ologists as exemplars in shaping the practice of archaeology on a
national and an international scale also are significant, even if they
probably developed their ideas in contexts that were fertile to those
ideas. Younger archaeologists may strike off in new directions and
pioneer novel techniques of analysis or interpretation in order to try
to establish professional reputations for themselves.
   Archaeological interpretation also has been influenced by tech-
nical developments in the physical and biological sciences. Until
recent decades, when collaborative research involving archaeologists
and natural scientists became routine, with rare exceptions the flow
of information between these disciplines was unidirectional, with
archaeologists being the recipients. Hence, research in the natural
sciences was only fortuitously related to the needs of archaeolo-
gists, although from time to time discoveries were made that were of
tremendous importance for archaeology. The development of radio-
carbon and other geochronometric dating techniques after World
War II provided archaeologists for the first time with a universally
applicable chronology that allowed the approximate year as well
as the relative order of archaeological manifestations to be deter-
mined. These dating techniques also constituted an independent
test of chronologies that had been inferred by means of seriation
alone or were based on limited textual data. Pollen analysis provided
valuable new insights into prehistoric climatic and environmental
changes and trace-element analyses added an important dimension
to the study of the prehistoric movement of certain kinds of goods.
While there is considerable variation in how quickly and insightfully
archaeologists apply innovations derived from the physical and bio-
logical sciences to their work, once they have been incorporated into
archaeological research such innovations tend to spread throughout
the world rapidly and with little resistance. The main obstacle to
their spread is lack of funds and trained scientific personnel, factors
that probably create more disparity between the archaeology of rich
and poor nations than any other. Yet even now, when more physi-
cal and biological research is being undertaken specifically to solve
archaeological problems, discoveries in these fields remain among
the least predictable factors influencing archaeological interpretation
(Nash 2000a).


                                  23
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   The proliferation of electronic forms of data processing has revolu-
tionized archaeological analysis no less than did radiocarbon dating.
It is now possible to correlate in a routine fashion vast amounts of
data, which in the past only an exceptional archaeologist, such as
W. M. F. Petrie, would have attempted to analyze (Kendall 1969,
1971). This allows archaeologists to use the abundant data at their
disposal to search for more detailed patterning in the archaeological
record (Hodson et al. 1971; Doran and Hodson 1975; Hodder 1978b;
Orton 1980; Sabloff 1981) and to explore the test implications of ever
more complex hypotheses about human behavior so that these find-
ings can be compared with the archaeological record (Wobst 1974;
Mithen 1993; Costopoulos 2002). New theoretical orientations have
been encouraged by specific developments of a mathematical nature.
General systems theory (Flannery 1968; Steiger 1971; Laszlo 1972a;
Berlinski 1976) and catastrophe theory (Thom 1975; Renfrew 1978a;
Renfrew and Cooke 1979; Saunders 1980) are both mathematical
approaches to the study of change, even if their strictly mathematical
aspects have been emphasized less than the underlying concepts in
applying them to archaeological problems.
   The interpretation of archaeological data also has been significantly
affected by the changing theories of human behavior and cognition
espoused by the social sciences. It has been especially influenced by
concepts derived from ethnology and history, the two related dis-
ciplines with which archaeologists have maintained the closest ties.
Theoretical concepts derived from geography, sociology, economics,
and political science also have influenced archaeology, either directly
or through anthropology and history. Yet, because all these disci-
plines have been shaped by many of the same social movements that
have influenced archaeology, it is often difficult to distinguish social
science influences on archaeology from those of society at large.
   The interpretation of archaeological data is also influenced by
established beliefs about what has been learned from the archaeo-
logical record. Often specific interpretations of the past are uncriti-
cally accommodated to changing general views, rather than carefully
scrutinized and assessed, even when these interpretations were for-
mulated in accordance with a general view that has been rejected.
Because of this, specific views about the past can persist and influ-
ence archaeological interpretation long after the reasoning that led
to their formulation has been discredited and abandoned. In their

                                  24
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

detailed study of research at the Neolithic site of Avebury in England,
Peter Ucko et al. (1991) demonstrated how the uncritical accep-
tance of older findings has constrained more recent research. Vari-
ous studies have traced how interpretive motifs derived from clas-
sical and medieval Europe have influenced the understanding of
early human behavior and how Marcelin Boule’s and Arthur Keith’s
contrasting portrayals of Neanderthals have continued to play a
central role in constructing knowledge about them (Moser 1992;
Trinkaus and Shipman 1993; Stringer and Gamble 1993). By con-
trast, David Wengrow (2003: 134) has argued that studying the his-
tory of archaeology can contribute to the better understanding of
the past and present through reengagement in a new context with
ideas long forgotten as a result of what Laura Nader (2001) calls the
“collective amnesia” associated with changing research programs. It
thus becomes obvious that, although archaeologists’ understandings
of the past are influenced by the social milieu in which they exist,
they also are influenced by many factors that relate to the ongoing
development of archaeology as a discipline or set of disciplines. A his-
tory of archaeological thought requires knowledge not only of the
social setting in which archaeological research is carried out but also
of the ongoing development of archaeology as a practice.
   Like other studies of the history of science, the history of archae-
ology is characterized by two broad approaches: internalist and
externalist or contextual (Kuhn 1977: 109–10; Bauer 1992: 110–14).
Internalist studies trace the discoveries and intellectual debates that
have shaped archaeological interpretation. An excellent example of
such an endeavor is Donald Grayson’s The Establishment of Human
Antiquity (1983). Internalist approaches continue to be preferred by
epistemological positivists and political conservatives. They also are
generally accepted as a valid way to study the history of archaeol-
ogy. Externalist approaches seek to relate changes in archaeologi-
cal understanding to changes in the social, economic, and political
milieus in which archaeology is practiced. Although there is growing
interest in such studies in both Western and ex-colonial countries
(Klindt-Jensen 1975; I. Bernal 1980; Robertshaw 1990; Patterson
1995; Marchand 1996), conservative archaeologists and historians of
science often criticize such interpretations on the grounds that they
are speculative and ideologically driven (Daniel and Renfrew 1988:
199). In recent years, however, this sort of approach has acquired

                                  25
                A History of Archaeological Thought

new levels of respectability as a result of Adrian Desmond’s (1982,
1989; Desmond and Moore 1992) studies of the social and political
implications of biological evolutionism in Victorian England. More-
over, there is a large body of evidence that interpretations are influ-
enced by social milieus. Although it would seem ideal for studies to
combine both approaches, in practice few historians of archaeology
attempt to do this. I will, however, apply both approaches in this
book.
   Histories of science also are expected to avoid presentism, which
involves judging past developments in terms of the current prac-
tices and beliefs of the discipline. This sort of approach evaluates
what happened in the past in terms of present concerns and treats
the history of archaeology as a chronicle of its progress toward its
present state. Presentism is generally regarded by historians of sci-
ence as a common shortcoming of amateur historians, especially
scientists writing about their own disciplines. More sophisticated
studies are expected to try to understand past events on their own
terms and in relation to past social and political, as well as disci-
plinary, contexts. Yet Tim Murray (1999b) embraces an “avowedly
presentist” approach and Robert Dunnell (2001: 1291) objects that
by avoiding presentism historians of archaeology fail to distinguish
between scientific discoveries of lasting value and those that are of
no importance for the development of the discipline. To be relevant,
Dunnell argues, studies of the history of archaeology must be theo-
retically informed. Thus, his position appears to be an endorsement of
presentism.


                  Archaeological Interpretation
Archaeologists debate whether their discipline, or any social science,
can or should be scientific. In part, these debates arise from dis-
agreements about what constitutes science and scientific behavior.
Most historians and philosophers of science trace the origin of mod-
ern science back to the philosopher Francis Bacon and regard it as a
method of knowing rather than a body of knowledge. Bacon sought
to persuade scholars to cease relying on revealed or authoritative
knowledge to understand the world and instead to employ observa-
tion, classification, comparison, and where possible experimentation
to achieve this goal. In this way, scientific knowledge was made the

                                  26
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

ever-developing product of communities of researchers (Zimmerman
2001: 117).
   It is a fundamental tenet of science that nothing is significant by
itself but only in relation to hypotheses; hence only theories can
explain phenomena (Dunnell 1982b; Bird 2000: 18). Scientists must
search for order, most often in the form of systemic properties,
that facilitates the construction of explanations, without subjecting
themselves to any a priori limiting presuppositions about the general
extent or nature of that order. Their goal is to discover mechanisms
that account for how things work and have come to be as they find
them (Bunge 1997).
   A scientific viewpoint treats the idea of absolute, unchanging truth
as a dangerous and absurd illusion. Although scientists seek the most
comprehensible and enduring understanding that their data permit,
they acknowledge that they are unable to transcend the limitations
of their data and what they are capable of perceiving at any particular
point in time. Hence, they expect that in due course every scientific
theory will be altered and probably become outmoded. Scientists are
professionally obligated to test every theory against new evidence and
to ensure that no theory logically contradicts any other accepted ones
(Klejn 2001a: 86). Contrary to Karl Popper’s (1959) argument that
theories can only be disproved rather than proved, the philosopher
of science Mario Bunge (1996: 180–3) argues that, because even the
refutation of a theory is not necessarily definitive, scientists are jus-
tified in supporting a likely theory until convincing evidence to the
contrary emerges. It is also now widely accepted that the processes
of recovering and analyzing data are generally no less biased than is
their explanation.
   There is no fundamental disagreement between this position and
relativist claims that science is an ensemble of social practices that seek
to make the world and human behavior meaningful and intelligible;
that science is embedded in society; and that its claims are at best par-
tial, negotiated, and contested positions about what is to be taken
for granted (Shanks 1996: 103), provided that it is also recognized
that archaeological data were created independently of archaeologists
and therefore have the capacity to resist their interpretations (Wylie
1982, 1989b, 2002; Trigger 1989b, 1998b). Kristiansen (2002) argues
that archaeologists must regard such observations not as invitations
to cultivate subjectivity but as a challenge to try hard to be objective.

                                    27
                A History of Archaeological Thought

Science presupposes a commitment to use more than rhetoric, per-
suasion, and political power or academic authority to recruit support
for a position.
   Jean-Claude Gardin (1980: 4) identifies the goal of archaeology
as being to create intellectual constructions relating to the study of
objects of all sorts that originated in the past. Leo Klejn (2001a: 88)
defines archaeology as a discipline constructed by theories related to
the study of material culture and antiquity. Lynn Meskell (2002: 293)
observes that what sets archaeology apart from history and anthropol-
ogy is its materiality. Yet David Wengrow (2003: 134) identifies it with
an improved understanding of human behavior and history, whereas
others have suggested that its goal should be to generalize about pro-
cesses of cultural change (Binford 1962, 1983b). These perspectives
are not antithetical. Archaeology is based on recovering and study-
ing material culture but that does not prevent archaeologists from
trying to study past human behavior, any more than palaeontologists
are precluded from trying to understand the behavior of prehistoric
animals. Today, there is a growing tendency to view archaeologi-
cal theory as a subset of anthropological (or social science) theory
dealing with how human behavior and beliefs are related to material
culture and how material culture influences human behavior.
   Scientific theory is a form of generalization that addresses how
things work and change. Theories generally promote an understand-
ing of one realm or dimension of reality by ignoring others. They
do not seek to analyze the world as it is observed but through what
are judged to be appropriate categories (Hegmon 2003: 213). To
account for a specific situation, it is necessary to combine various
explanations of this sort to form an explanatory argument (Roberts
1996). As a result of increasing relativism, there is growing interest
in how knowledge is constructed, including how archaeologists eval-
uate knowledge claims and reach conclusions. This has produced a
growing concern with archaeological theory even if many archaeol-
ogists, including archaeological theorists, believe that the close rela-
tions between theories and practice cast doubt on the desirability of
establishing a separate subdiscipline of theoretical archaeology.
   Archaeology is a social science in the sense that it tries to explain
what has happened to specific groups of human beings in the past.
Yet, unlike ethnologists, geographers, sociologists, political scien-
tists, and economists, archaeologists cannot observe the behavior of

                                  28
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

the people they are studying and, unlike historians, most of them do
not have direct access to the thoughts of these people as recorded in
written texts. Instead, archaeologists must conjecture human behav-
ior and ideas from the material remains of what human beings have
made and used and the lasting physical impact of their activities on
the environment. The interpretation of archaeological data depends
on an understanding of how human beings behave at the present time
and particularly of how this behavior is reflected in material culture.
Archaeologists also must invoke uniformitarian principles in order to
use an understanding of geological and biological processes going
on at the present time to infer how natural processes have helped to
shape the archaeological record. Yet they are far from agreed how
such understanding can be applied legitimately and comprehensively
to derive an understanding of past human behavior from their data
(Binford 1967a, 1981; Gibbon 1984; Gallay 1986).
   For a long time, most archaeologists were naive empiricists, offer-
ing what appeared to be plausible explanations for the evidence
they were recovering. Then, in the 1960s, processual archaeolo-
gists embraced a positivist epistemology that emphasized establish-
ing general regularities between observable phenomena and explain-
ing these regularities. They also treated explanation and prediction
as equivalent. This approach favored studying behavior, as it priv-
ileged what can be witnessed instead of dealing with more elusive
thoughts and motives. It also privileged methodological individual-
ism and because it doubted the epistemological validity of emergent
properties was reductionist. It therefore promoted a belief in a “uni-
fied science,” which sought to apply methodologies derived from
the physical sciences to study everything (Hempel and Oppenheim
1948; Hempel 1965). Postprocessualists, and still earlier archaeolo-
gists such as R. G. Collingwood, embraced an opposing idealist epis-
temology that maintains that perceptions only acquire meaning as a
result of discriminations that occur in the observer’s mind. Idealists
therefore believe that concepts play an important role in determin-
ing perception: humans do not adjust to the world as it really is but
to the world as they imagine it to be. Idealism thus emphasizes the
value of a cultural rather than a behavioral approach to understand-
ing human activities (Collingwood 1946; Barnes 1974; Laudan 1990).
Postprocessualists object that positivists ignore the cognitively medi-
ated nature of human behavior and hence downplay the importance

                                  29
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

of culture. Positivists maintain that, because of its wholly subjec-
tive nature, the hermeneutic method does not provide a scientific
approach for the study of beliefs. Each of these approaches is the
formalization of a way of gaining a type of knowledge that is vital for
everyday human living. Positivism relates to the sort of knowledge
that is necessary to adapt to the natural world and idealism to what
is required to interact with other human beings.
   The inadequacies of both positivism and idealism as epistemologies
for the social sciences have promoted the popularity of a third option:
realism (Bhaskar 1978; Harré 1970, 1972; Harré and Madden 1975;
Bunge 2003). Mario Bunge (1996: 355–8) maintains that realism is
the epistemology that all reasonable and productive scientists actu-
ally follow, whatever epistemology they advocate. Realists identify
the object of scientific study as being not only what can be perceived
with the senses or conceptualized in the brain but all that exists and
happens. Thus, realists pay equal attention to all things, whether
they can observe them or only their effects. Ideas are viewed as pro-
cesses that occur in the human brain and hence can be studied from
a materialist perspective. Realists maintain that some imperceptible
entities are appropriate objects of study. Thus, they do not confine
themselves to appearances, as positivists do, but they also do not
make common cause with idealists in belittling the significance of
appearances. Often they begin with appearances and try to explain
them by postulating unobservable entities, as Gregor Mendel did
when he proposed that what are now called genes were necessary to
explain the results of his interbreeding of different varieties of garden
peas. Because it accepts the validity of studying structures as well as
entities, realism is antireductionist. As a result of acknowledging the
complexity of the real world, it also rejects the positivist equating of
explanation and prediction.
   Generalizations, which can concern both patterns and the mecha-
nisms that account for patterns, play a role in all scientific operations
relating to the collection, description, classification, and interpreta-
tion of data. Archaeologists follow the example of philosophers of
science (Nagel 1961) and other social science disciplines in classify-
ing their generalizations into high, middle, and low categories (Klejn
1977; Raab and Goodyear 1984) (Figure 1.1). Only middle- and high-
level generalizations count as hypotheses or theories, according to the
extent of their confirmation, because they alone propose mechanisms

                                   30
                        Studying the History of Archaeology

Levels of
Theory
                Darwinian      cultural         cultural        Marxism
  High                                                                     idealism
                 theory        ecology         materialism




  Middle




  Low




                                          Archaeological Data



            logical     factual
            coherence   correspondence
         (length of arrow indicates relative importance of relationship)

                 Figure 1.1 Relations between levels of generalization


    that account for why things are as they are and change as they do in
    multiple instances.
       Low-level generalizations seek to discover patterns in archaeolog-
    ical data (Klejn 1977: 2). These patterns appear to be the same as
    Ernest Nagel’s (1961: 79–105) experimental laws, of which he offers
    as an example the proposition that all female whales suckle their
    young. Such generalizations are normally based on regularities that
    are repeatedly observed and can be refuted by the observation of
    contrary cases. The vast majority of generalizations on which higher-
    level archaeological interpretations are based are empirical ones of
    this sort. They include most typological classifications of artifacts;
    the delineation of specific archaeological cultures; the demonstration
    by means of stratification, seriation, or radiocarbon dating that one
    archaeological manifestation dates earlier, or later, than another; and
    the observation that in an individual culture all humans are buried in

                                             31
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

a particular position accompanied by specific types of artifacts. These
generalizations are based on observations that specific attributes or
artifact types occur repeatedly in a particular association with each
other, correlate with a specific geographical locality, or date to a cer-
tain period. The dimensions of such generalizations are the classical
ones of space, time, and form (Spaulding 1960; Gardin 1980: 62–
97). Archaeologists also may assume that specific types of projectile
points served particular functions and that each archaeological cul-
ture was associated with a specific people. These inferences, which
refer to human behavior, differ substantially from generalizations that
are based on empirical observations of correlations between two or
more categories of archaeologically tangible data and do not con-
stitute examples of low-level generalizations. In many instances, the
behavioral assumptions turn out to be incorrect, unproved, or mis-
leading (Hodder and Hutson 2003: 173–5).
   Because of the nature of archaeological data, low-level gen-
eralizations never refer to human behavior. They only reveal
correlations between one sort of archaeological observation and
another, thus providing evidence of hitherto unnoticed patterning or
ordering in archaeological data. These empirical observations never
provide explanations but constitute patterns that require explanation.
Discovering generalizations of this sort is the most time-consuming
and arguably the most productive activity in which archaeologists
engage. Yet, from a theoretical perspective, it is the least studied of
archaeological activities. Most historical work of this sort has been
done by archaeologists interested in classification and seriation and
by logicists (Gardin 1980: 10; Malina and Vašı́ček 1990: 149–209).
   Middle-level theories have been defined as generalizations that
attempt to explain the regularities that occur between two or more
variables in multiple instances (Raab and Goodyear 1984). Such gen-
eralizations can be produced either by refining high-level theories
so that they are applicable to specific data sets (such as archaeolog-
ical data) or by seeking to provide an explanation for why certain
low-level generalizations occur in multiple instances. All social sci-
ence generalizations should have cross-cultural validity and also make
some reference to human behavior. In addition, they must be suffi-
ciently specific that they can be tested by applying them to particular
sets of data. An example of a middle-level anthropological general-
ization is Ester Boserup’s (1965) proposition that among agricultural

                                   32
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

economies increasing population pressure leads to situations that
require more labor for each unit of food produced in order to derive
more food from each available unit of arable land. This theory would
be archaeologically testable if archaeologists could establish reliable
measures of absolute or relative changes in population, the labor-
intensiveness and productivity of specific agricultural regimes, and a
sufficiently precise chronology to specify the temporal relationship
between changes in population and food production. Doing this
would require elaborating what Lewis Binford (1981) calls middle-
range theory, which attempts to use ethnographic data to establish
reliable correlations between archaeologically observable phenom-
ena and archaeologically unobservable human behavior. Although
“middle-level” and “middle-range” theories are not identical, in that
middle-level theory can refer exclusively to human behavior, whereas
middle-range theory must by definition refer to both human behavior
and archaeologically observable traits, all Binford’s middle-range the-
ory can be regarded as a special type of middle-level theory. Middle-
range theory is vital for testing all middle-level theory relating to
archaeological data.
   High-level, or general theories, which Marvin Harris (1979: 26–
7) has called “research strategies” and David Clarke (1979: 25–30)
labeled “controlling models,” have been defined as abstract rules
that explain relations among the theoretical propositions that are
relevant for understanding a major field of knowledge. Darwinian
evolutionism and more recently the synthetic theory of biological
evolution, which combines Darwinian principles with genetics, are
examples of general theories relating to the biological sciences. In
the human domain, general theories exclusively relate propositions
about human behavior to one another; hence, there are no theoret-
ical formulations at this level that pertain specifically to archaeology
rather than to the social sciences in general. This is true even of theo-
ries that relate human behavior to material culture. Examples of rival
high-level theories that currently influence archaeological research
are selectionism, cultural ecology, cultural materialism, and histori-
cal materialism (Marxism). These are all materialist approaches and
overlap to varying degrees. In recent years, there has been a resur-
gence of interest in high-level theories that attempt to explain human
behavior in terms of cultural beliefs or underlying cultural structures.
Such theories share an idealist approach. Still other theories, such as

                                   33
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

neo-Marxism, bridge the gap between materialist and idealist high-
level positions creating a broad spectrum of high-level social science
theories.
   Because high-level theories attempt to interrelate concepts about
human behavior rather than to account for specific observations, they
cannot be confirmed or falsified directly (M. Harris 1979: 76). In that
respect, they resemble religious dogmas. Their credibility can, how-
ever, be influenced by the repeated success or failure of middle-level
theories that are logically dependent on them. Yet such testing is
anything but straightforward. Although many middle-range theo-
ries may have significance for distinguishing between materialist and
idealist modes of explanation, the complexity of all human behav-
ior and its symbolically mediated nature create much opportunity
for obfuscation. Social scientists exhibit great ingenuity in dismiss-
ing results that do not agree with their presuppositions as excep-
tions or even reinterpreting them as likely confirmation of what they
believe. As the result of a growing appreciation of the role played
by ideas in influencing human behavior, many Marxists have shifted
from a purely materialist to a more idealist view of human behavior.
Sometimes this new position is distinguished as neo-Marxism,
sometimes it is not (McGuire 1993; Trigger 1993). Likewise, in recent
years, many cultural ecologists have shifted from a more deterministic
to a less deterministic position. The overlapping nature of high-level
theories of human behavior provides considerable opportunities for
such intellectual gymnastics. It is still more difficult for archaeolo-
gists to assess the relative utility of the various materialist positions
listed above. Tests of Boserup’s middle-level theory have implica-
tions for both cultural materialism and cultural ecology and hence
would be of little use for assessing the relative utility of one or the
other. The failure of middle-level theories to confirm preferred high-
level ones also can be dismissed as the result of inadequate or inap-
propriate data rather than accepted as casting doubt on high-level
propositions.
   Because of the indirectness of tests, the rise and fall in the popu-
larity of specific high-level theories seems to be influenced more by
social processes than by the scientific examination of logically related
middle-level theories. Between 1850 and 1945, a strong empha-
sis was placed on biological, and more specifically racial, explana-
tions of variation in human behavior. Scientific demonstrations that

                                   34
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

explanations of this sort did not hold in specific instances were inad-
equate to undermine the faith that many scholars had in the general
validity of a racist approach (M. Harris 1968a: 80–107). Yet racial
and, for a time, almost all biologically based theories were aban-
doned as scientific explanations of human behavior following the
military defeat of Nazi Germany in 1945 and the consequent rev-
elation of the full extent of its racist-inspired atrocities. It often
has been observed that materialist theories tend to flourish in the
social sciences when middle-class intellectuals feel secure, whereas
idealist ones are espoused during periods when economic and social
upheaval create uncertainty (Engels [1868] in Marx and Engels 1964:
263–8).
   Archaeologists generally accept, mostly implicitly, that scientific
explanations are subject to two types of verification (Lowther 1962;
Kosso 2001). The first test is that of correspondence truth. This test
seeks to determine if an explanation corresponds to the facts. It is use-
less to suggest that a drought accounts for the collapse of centralized
political control in an early civilization if no evidence of a drought can
be produced. The second test is that of coherence truth: whether or
not an argument is logically consistent. Over two and a half millen-
nia, rationalist philosophers have developed logic as a powerful tool
for detecting flaws in explanations. Few archaeologists have studied
formal logic, but they enjoy discovering logical flaws in one another’s
arguments as a way of discrediting both unwelcome theories and aca-
demic rivals. Complex arguments are needed to cope with phenom-
ena relating to human behavior. Political collapse might result from
a severe famine but only if a society lacks stored surpluses or access
to alternative sources of food. Hence, monocausal explanations are
rarely, if ever, adequate in the social sciences. Moreover, the same
effect may result from a number of different causes: a breakdown in
normal patterns of succession to high leadership also might result in
political collapse. This is a situation known as equifinality.
   Ideally, it should be possible to establish a logically coherent rela-
tionship among high, middle, and low levels of theory and a factual
correspondence between middle- and low-level generalizations and
observable evidence. Because low-level generalizations are empirical
in nature, coherence tests do not apply to the relations between them
and evidence, whereas, as we have already noted, factual correspon-
dence rarely serves as a direct test of high-level theories. American

                                   35
                A History of Archaeological Thought

archaeologists have fiercely debated whether middle-level theory
ought to be derived deductively as a coherent set of interrelated con-
cepts from high-level theories or whether it also can be constructed
inductively from evidence and low-level generalizations. Those who
support the deductive approach argue that explanations of human
behavior, as opposed to empirical generalizations about it, should be
based on covering laws stated as hypotheses and tested against inde-
pendent sets of data (Watson et al. 1971: 3–19; Binford 1972: 111).
They seek to establish explicit, logical connections between high- and
middle-level theory. Generally, however, they underestimate the ten-
uous, complex, and intractable nature of the relations between these
two levels. By contrast, because high-level theory is hard to verify,
highly susceptible to subjective influence, and not absolutely required
to create middle-level theories, many inductivists regard the creation
of high-level theories as an ultimate goal that archaeologists should
address only after they have established a large corpus of reliable
generalizations at the middle level (M. Salmon 1982: 33–4; Gibbon
1984: 35–70; Gallay 1986: 117–21). In keeping with what they regard
as the Baconian tradition of science, inductivists also maintain that,
although deductive research cannot go beyond confirming or dis-
proving existing theories, an inductive approach has the potential for
making genuinely new discoveries about aspects of human behavior.
They also believe that an inductive approach is superior because it
is grounded on evidence collected without presuppositions. Yet it
is evident that theories are not derived from evidence but imposed
on it.
   The debate whether explanations are better produced by induc-
tion or deduction poses a false dichotomy. Observations that Charles
Darwin made in the course of a five-year voyage around the world
led him to doubt whether creationism could best account for the
geographical distributions of various species of plants and animals.
For over two decades he collected vast amounts of information on
variations within and between different species. Yet, according to his
own account, the concept of natural selection occurred to him not
as a direct result of his research but as a consequence of his reading
the economist Thomas Malthus’s (1798) theory that the main cause
of human suffering is the natural tendency for human population
increase to outrun the available food supply. Once the theory of nat-
ural selection had occurred to Darwin, he was able to use the data

                                  36
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

he had collected to present convincing arguments in support of his
idea. Both induction and deduction played significant roles in the
development of the theory of natural selection and continue to do
so in the creation of all scientific theories. The credibility of all sci-
entific theories depends on their maintaining logical coherence with
other relevant theories and satisfactory correspondence with relevant
evidence. Because numerous implicit assumptions about the nature
of human behavior color what is believed to be any sound explana-
tion of archaeological data, high-level concepts can be ignored only
at the risk that implicit ones will unwittingly distort archaeological
interpretations. Successful theory-building involves the combining
of both approaches.
   Archaeologists also disagree about the formal nature of the gen-
eralizations that they seek to elaborate. Processual archaeologists
assumed that all laws must be universal in nature. They also believed
these laws to be primarily ecological, although today archaeolo-
gists are deriving a growing number of such generalizations from
evolutionary psychology, neuroscience, and biology. Such laws
relate to variables that are assumed to hold true regardless of the
temporal period, region of the world, or specific cultures that are
being studied. These generalizations vary in scale from major assump-
tions about historical processes to regularities dealing with relatively
trivial aspects of human behavior (M. Salmon 1982: 8–30). A good
example of this sort of approach is formalist economics, which main-
tains that the rules used to explain the economic behavior of Western
societies explain the behavior of all human beings. Such an approach
accounts for significant variations in human behavior in different
societies by viewing them as the results of novel combinations and
permutations of a fixed set of interacting variables (Burling 1962;
Cancian 1966; Cook 1966). Universal generalizations are frequently
interpreted as reflecting an invariant human nature.
   Other archaeologists maintain that universal laws concerning
human nature are relatively few in number and that most cross-
cultural generalizations apply only to societies that share the same or
closely related modes of production. This position is similar in gen-
eral orientation to that of the economic substantivists. In contrast to
formalists, substantivists maintain that the rules, as well as the forms,
of economic behavior are fundamentally transformed by evolution-
ary processes (Polanyi 1944, 1966; Polanyi et al. 1957; Dalton 1961).

                                   37
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

The substantivist approach implies that novel properties can and do
emerge as a result of sociocultural change (Childe 1947a). This dis-
tinction between universal generalizations and more restricted ones
may not be as far-reaching or absolute as its proponents maintain.
Generalizations that apply only to specific types of societies can be
rewritten in the form of universal generalizations, whereas univer-
sal ones may be reformulated, usually in greater detail, so that they
apply specifically to a particular class of society. Yet those who stress
the importance of restricted generalizations argue that all or most of
them cannot be transformed into universal generalizations without
a severe loss in content and significance (Trigger 1982a).
   The third type of generalization is specific to an individual culture
or to a single group of historically related cultures. Examples would
be the definitions of the canons that governed ancient Egyptian or
classical Greek art (Childe 1947: 43–9; Montané 1980: 130–6). Such
generalizations are potentially very important inasmuch as most cul-
tural patterning is probably of this sort. Yet, where no culturally
specific meanings can be applied to such patterns, they remain at the
level of empirical generalizations.


                              Challenge
A final question is whether a historical study can measure progress in
the interpretation of archaeological data. Are steady advances being
made toward a more objective and comprehensive understanding
of archaeological findings, as many archaeologists assume? Or is the
interpretation of such data largely a matter of fashion and the accom-
plishments of a later period not necessarily more comprehensive or
objective than those of an earlier one? Answering this question is
vital for considering whether the development of archaeology does
or does not promote greater objectivity in its findings.
   In examining the patterns that have characterized the interpre-
tation of archaeological data, I shall attempt to ascertain to what
extent archaeological techniques as well as a general understanding
of human history and behavior have been irreversibly altered as a
result of archaeological activity. There is evidence of some linearity
in the development of archaeology as, for example, with the continu-
ing relevance of the principle of stratigraphy, of frequency seriation,
and of Ian Hodder’s (1982b) demonstration that material culture

                                   38
                 Studying the History of Archaeology

can play an active as well as an epiphenomenal role in social pro-
cesses. Yet there is no evidence that archaeologists at any one period
are less influenced by subjective beliefs and social circumstances than
they are at any other. In addition, contingent factors, personalities,
academic policies, sheer ignorance, professional biases, and funding
all influence the acceptance and application of new ideas and tech-
niques (Nash 2000b: 208). It is possible, however, that archaeolog-
ical interpretation, although initially highly subjective, becomes less
influenced by social biases and less susceptible to political manipu-
lation as the archaeological database becomes more abundant, and,
therefore, that an understanding of the past grows more objective as
more archaeological research is carried out. That trend would accord
with the claims of moderate relativists that archaeological evidence
has the capacity to limit speculation about the past. If archaeological
interpretations are wholly, or even largely, subjective, we should not
be able to discover many significant long-term patterns but only ran-
dom variations brought about by changes in the economic, social,
and intellectual milieu. If evidence plays a role in limiting speculation,
the development of archaeology should be increasingly constrained
by knowledge that belongs to the discipline, even if subjective factors
continue to influence significantly the answers to what are regarded
at any given time as interesting questions. If archaeological evidence
plays a significant role in shaping an understanding of the past, the
study of ontology, in particular of the factors that constrain human
behavior, will become as – if not more – important than learning
about epistemology, or the nature of understanding, for the future
development of our discipline. That would reverse a trend that has
prevailed since the 1960s or even the 1930s. By learning more about
how archaeological questions are answered over time, we may hope
to gain additional insights into the objectivity or subjectivity of
archaeological interpretations; to what extent archaeology can be
more than the past relived in the present, in the sense Collingwood
defined that process; and the degree to which any sort of understand-
ing can be communicated from one age or culture to another.




                                   39
                                  chapter 2
  Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

     Everyone should be Greek in his own way! But he should be Greek!
            j o h a n n w o l f g a n g v o n g o e t h e , “Antik und Modern”
                              trans. P. Marchand (1996), p. 16



Historians of archaeology used to assume that archaeology was a
self-evident branch of human knowledge and that its development
was inevitable. The growing popularity of relativism among archae-
ologists has heightened their awareness that archaeology is a field of
investigation, or discourse, that has evolved only recently and been
anticipated only a few times in human history. It is therefore worth
enquiring what kinds of conditions give rise to archaeology and what
sorts of archaeology may be the first to evolve.
   Some histories of archaeology have traced its origins to any interest
in what modern archaeologists identify as the material remains of
the human past (Schnapp 1997). Others have restricted their focus
to the deliberate use of material culture to learn more about the
past (Trigger 1989a). These two approaches are obviously historically
related and it is possible that the former interest was a prerequisite for
the development of the latter. Yet an interest in material remains of
the past does not inevitably lead to the development of archaeology,
which to a significant degree seems to grow out of interests in the
past that are not primarily associated with material culture. I will
therefore limit the current study to tracing the use of material culture
to study the past, either for its own sake or for some assumed practical
purpose.


                             Interests in the Past
All human groups appear to be interested in their own past. Many
social scientists believe that knowledge of sociocultural origins is fun-
damental for the development of individual and social identity. This

                                           40
            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

assessment assumes that there is a past and, hence, that time, whether
it is viewed as an attribute of the natural world or a form of percep-
tion embedded in the human brain, is invariably conceptualized as
a linear, irreversible flow. This conclusion may be psychologically
correct in the sense that, because of awareness of causality, every-
one perceives time as they are experiencing it to be unidirectional.
Yet it is known anthropologically that the imaging of time is cultur-
ally variable (Moro Abadı́a 2002; T. Murray 2004b). The Australian
aborigine concept of dream-time posits that the supernatural time
of creation continues to exist alongside the present world (J. Isaacs
1980). In many cultures, rituals are believed to renew the cosmos
periodically by repeating the act of creation. Hunter-gatherers regard
time differently from the way farmers do, not least because the two
groups schedule their subsistence activities differently. The ancient
Maya viewed time as cyclical and events as repeating themselves over
intervals of varying lengths. Ancient Mesopotamians seem to have
conceptualized time as something they viewed facing the past with
their backs to the future (Schnapp 1997: 30–1). Chinese, Koreans,
and Japanese talk of ascending to the past, which they associate with
the sky realm, that is inhabited by the creator deities and the souls of
their human ancestors (G. Barnes 1990a). Even different groups of
archaeologists perceive time differently. British archaeologists usu-
ally place the oldest period at the top of their time charts, perhaps in
keeping with the idea that time is a river and hence flows downward,
whereas American archaeologists habitually put the oldest period at
the bottom of their charts, either in imitation of stratigraphy or to
symbolize their faith in evolutionary progress. Although the percep-
tion of time is psychologically shaped by a common experience of it
as an irreversible sequence of cause and effect, there is no basis for
assuming that all cultures have conceptualized time or the past in the
same way.
   For much of human history, interest in what we call the past was
satisfied by myths and legends concerning the creation of the world
and chronicling the origins and adventures of specific ethnic groups.
Hence, high-level theories, in this case in the form of the basic reli-
gious beliefs underlying such stories about the past, long antedate the
middle- and low-level generalizations of archaeologists. Ideas about
the past were often contested by different political or ethnic groups as
part of their efforts to legitimate rival political and economic claims

                                  41
                A History of Archaeological Thought

(Carassco 1982). The relations between material culture and such
interests in the past are highly complex.
   Projectile points, stone pipes, and native copper tools made mil-
lennia earlier are found in Iroquoian sites dating from the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries ad in eastern North America. Ethnographic
evidence indicates that they were regarded as having been made by
spirits who had lost them in the forest. Such objects were collected
because they were credited with magical powers that would bring
their human possessors various forms of good fortune (Thwaites
1896–1901, vol. 33: 211). In medieval Europe, peasants collected
stone celts and projectile points that they discovered in the course of
their agricultural work. They believed such finds to be produced by
lightning or by supernatural creatures such as elves. Stone celts were
kept as protection against lightning bolts or sold to goldsmiths who
used them for burnishing metal (Heizer 1962a: 63). The Japanese
believed stone arrowheads that appeared in fields after rainstorms to
be the weapons of supernatural armies that had fallen to earth. Their
discovery required the performance of special rituals (Ikawa-Smith
2001: 735). Upper-class Maya prized jade ornaments that had been
passed from generation to generation as heirlooms or been recovered
from old tombs (Joyce 2003) and the Aztecs included ancient Olmec
figurines in the ritual deposits that they incorporated into their major
temples (Matos Moctezuma 1984).
   All peoples also seek to explain their landscapes, including the
ancient monuments that are part of them. In early societies, such
explanations took the form of historically transmitted knowledge,
altered to varying degrees over time, or pure inventions, which were
believed to varying degrees. In medieval Europe, burial mounds were
associated with supernatural beings, prehistoric giants, or early his-
torical peoples such as the Huns. In prehistoric Mexico, ancient
cities were viewed as places of historical and supernatural signifi-
cance (Hamann 2002). In the sixteenth century, the Aztecs regularly
performed rituals amidst the ruins of Teotihuacán, which had been
inhabited in the first millennium ad and was believed to be where the
gods had reestablished the cosmic order at the beginning of the most
recent cycle of existence. The Inkas regarded large rocks as deities or
ancestors who had transformed themselves into stones. The ancient
Egyptian priests at Heliopolis claimed that the remains of a fossilized
forest nearby were the charred bones of a giant serpent that the

                                  42
            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

sun god had slain in the course of creating the universe (Meeks and
Favard Meeks 1996: 21). These explanations assigned both human
and supernatural origins to features of the landscape that we under-
stand to be human or natural creations. Because attributions of this
sort are highly idiosyncratic, archaeologists require culturally specific
data coded in verbal form to be able to assign original meanings
to such data. These meanings are not inherent in material forms,
nor can they be assumed to be universal. Richard Bradley (2003:
225) has proposed that the materiality of ancient remains would have
posed problems to ancient communities that were similar in nature
to those they posed to early antiquaries and that in each instance
learning about these monuments might have taken a similar course.
Yet there is little evidence of a desire in most human societies to use
material remains to learn about the past. Instead, these remains were
explained in terms of commonly held beliefs that in their specificity
are usually unknown to us. Hence, to identify such interpretations
as “indigenous archaeology,” or even as precursors to archaeology,
is to transgress the limits of inference.
   In the earliest literate civilizations, written records provided a
chronological framework (sometimes incorrectly interpreted) as well
as sources of information about what had happened in the past that
were independent of human memory and hence inhibited the revi-
sion of recollections of the past. Even so, the compiling of annals did
not give rise to the writing of detailed histories or analytical narra-
tives of current events either in the Middle East or in China until after
700 bc (Van Seters 1983; Redford 1986). Donald E. Brown (1988)
has demonstrated that there is great variation in the extent to which
civilizations that have been literate for equally long periods are inter-
ested in the study of history. There also is abundant evidence that
the development of history as a literary genre does not ensure the
concomitant growth of a disciplined interest in the material remains
of earlier times.
   In ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, artifacts and ancient buildings
came to be valued not only as relics of former rulers and periods of
political greatness but as sources of information about the past. In
Egypt, from the beginning of the Twelfth Dynasty (1991–1786 bc),
royal craftsmen began to copy styles of art and architecture from the
late Old Kingdom. In the course of the Twelfth Dynasty, features
copied from still older and abandoned royal monuments, or perhaps

                                   43
                A History of Archaeological Thought

from their surviving plans, were incorporated into royal tombs
(I. Edwards 1985: 210–17; Dodson 1988). During the Eighteenth
Dynasty (1552–1305 bc), scribes left graffiti recording their visits to
ancient and abandoned monuments, studies were made of records
of ancient royal festivals in an effort to enhance the authenticity and
ritual power of their reenactments, and a predynastic palette was
inscribed with the name of Queen Tiye (1405–1367 bc), who was pre-
sumably its owner. In the Nineteenth Dynasty, a son of Ramesses II,
Khaemwese, whose fame as a sage and magician was to endure into
Greco-Roman times, cleared and studied the texts associated with
abandoned religious buildings near the capital city of Memphis in
order to repair those structures and revive their cults (Gomaa 1973;
J. P. Allen 1999). In Iraq, King Nabonidus (r. 556–539 bc) and other
Late Babylonian rulers excavated and studied the ruins of ancient
mudbrick temples so that they could rebuild them on their original
foundations and restore their cults. Collections also were made of
statues and ancient texts to help purify rituals. One of these collec-
tions, amassed by Bel-Shalti-Nannar, a daughter of Nabonidus, has
been described as the world’s oldest known museum of antiquities
(Woolley 1950: 152–4). Great effort also went into cultivating the
skills needed to read the ancient texts associated with these finds
(Jonker 1995).
   Both the Egyptians’ and the Mesopotamians’ interest in the mate-
rial remains of the past had a strong religious component. It was
believed that the gods had established civilization in a perfect form
at the beginning of time. Although individual kings might strive to
outdo their predecessors, later generations had in general failed to
sustain the original divine perfection. The monuments, as well as the
written records of the past, therefore constituted tangible links to
eras that were closer to the time of creation and, hence, provided
the models by which the sacred prototypes of civilization could be
more nearly approximated. Because of their greater proximity to the
cosmic drama of creation, these artifacts also were probably believed
to be endowed with unusual divine power. Yet, although the pur-
pose of much of this ancient Egyptian and Mesopotamian research
was to manipulate supernatural powers more effectively, it can be
regarded as constituting an early form of antiquarianism, as it used
material remains to enhance an understanding of the past. It was,
however, based on the idea that the past differed from the present

                                  44
            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

only to the extent that it had possessed superior knowledge that
could enhance the supernatural power of those who possessed it.
Although, in Egypt, ancient art continued to be carefully studied
and copied, after 700 bc a growing awareness of differences between
the present and the past seems to have stifled rather than encouraged
the development of antiquarianism (Loprieno 2003).
   The ancient Greeks used the terms history and archaeology to
distinguish two historical genres, although at first neither term was
employed in its modern sense. Historia was originally used to des-
ignate a form of enquiry that involved first posing a question, then
looking for relevant information, and finally drawing a conclusion
from the data. In the fifth century bc, Herodotus and others began
to use it to signify the study of the recent past based on recollec-
tions of people who had participated in the events they described.
This sort of chronicling began in the aftermath of the Persian Wars.
Later, scholars began to synthesize chronicles of this sort to pro-
duce document-based histories in the modern sense. Henceforth, as
it does now, history designated the study of the past based on written
records. Until recently, the main focus of such histories was the study
of political and military events.
   The term archaiologia (Latin antiquitates) was first used in the
fourth century bc to refer to the study of the more remote past (lit-
erally, “beginnings” arche) using myths, legends, oral traditions, and
material remains. The main emphasis was on genealogies, the found-
ing of cities, and the origins of peoples, institutions, and customs.
The survival of traditions about the past was facilitated by hero cults
that had persisted through the Early Iron Age (Antonaccio 1995).
These traditions, for example, transmitted accurate memories of an
age when bronze had been used but not iron (Momigliano 1966;
Schnapp 1997: 60–5). Knowledge of this sort was incorporated into
the broad range of speculative chronologies that largely replaced reli-
gious accounts of the origins of the universe and of human beings
in classical Greece. These included cyclical and steady-state views of
the universe as well as degenerationist accounts that posited succes-
sive ages of gold, silver, bronze, iron, and, in the future, lead, each
characterized by harder work and greater human misery than the one
before, and the evolutionary theories of Epicureans who posited that
technological progress moved from the use of bare hands and then
stones to the manufacture first of bronze and then of iron tools. Both

                                  45
                A History of Archaeological Thought

the degenerationist and evolutionary theories incorporated memo-
ries that an age of bronze had preceded that of iron.
   The ancient Greeks preserved as votive offerings in their temples
artifacts that were said to have belonged to great men of the past
and sometimes opened graves to recover what they believed were
the relics of ancient heroes. The historian Thucydides noted that
many of the graves dug up on the island of Delos, when that island
was religiously purified in the fifth century bc, revealed weapons and
a method of burial resembling those of the Carian people of his
own day. He concluded that this confirmed a tradition that Carians
had once lived on the island (Casson 1939: 71). Increasingly, ancient
bronzes and pottery vessels that were accidentally unearthed or plun-
dered by dealers were sold to wealthy art collectors (Wace 1949). One
example of mass plunder occurred in the cemeteries of old Corinth,
when that abandoned city was refounded by Julius Caesar in 44 bc.
Wealthy Romans admired the works of talented Greek artists and
sought to purchase the originals or good copies of them. This inter-
est inspired the Roman author Pliny the Elder’s (ad 23–79) historical
account of Greek art and artists. Yet, despite a growing interest in
ancient works of art, scholars made no effort to recover or collect
such artifacts systematically, nor, with the notable exception of a few
works, such as that of Pliny on art, did artifacts become a specialized
focus of analysis. In his guide to Greece written in the second cen-
tury ad, the physician Pausanias systematically described the public
buildings, art works, rites, and customs of the different regions of
southern Greece. He regarded it as significant that the blade of a
spear attributed to Achilles, a hero of the Trojan War, which was
kept in the temple of Athena at Phaselis, was made of bronze (Levi
1979, vol. 2: 17) and he briefly described the celebrated Bronze Age
ruins at Tiryns and Mycenae. Yet for him and other writers of guide
books ruined buildings were “hardly worth mentioning” (Levi 1979,
vol. 1: 3). Inferences based on accurate historical and ethnographic
knowledge, such as that of Thucydides, were likewise notable for
their rarity. Educated Greeks and Romans were aware that the cul-
ture of the remote past was different from that of the present and
valued the fine art works from earlier times as collectibles. Yet, they
did not develop a sense that these objects could be used as a basis for
learning more about the past, as written records and oral traditions
were being used.

                                  46
            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

   So far there has been no detailed study of why archaeology in
the modern sense failed to develop in ancient Greece and Rome and
why the investigation of the remote past remained a subject for philo-
sophical speculation. Schnapp (1997: 70) attributes it to a general gap
between theory and practice in Greek science, whereas Moses Finley
(1975: 22) sees it as part of a more general lack of interest in material
culture among Greek and Roman intellectuals. It also might relate
to a strong dislike among intellectuals for studying mundane objects.
The well-developed infrastructure of libraries, archives, and facilities
for reproducing manuscripts also must have favored the study of the
written word. Historia, by distinguishing itself for its methodological
rigor, must have further reinforced its disciplinary credentials at the
expense of a more discursive archaiologia and the study of material
culture.
   During the Eastern Zhou Dynasty (771–221 bc), the philosopher
Han Feizu ascribed what we recognize as Neolithic painted and
incised pottery to an early period in the development of Chinese
civilization. In the third century bc, there was speculation about suc-
cessive ages of stone, jade, bronze, and iron. Sima Qian (ca. 145–
85 bc), the great Chinese historian, visited ancient ruins and exam-
ined relics from the past when he was collecting information for the
Shi Ji, his influential history of ancient China. Confucian scholars
valued the systematic study of the past as a guide to moral behav-
ior and, by stressing a common heritage extending back at least to
the Xia Dynasty (2205–1766 bc), they made historical studies per-
form a powerful role in unifying Chinese cultural and political life
(G. Wang 1985). Sima Qian and other early Chinese historians seem
to have been interested in inscribed ancient objects as direct sources
of information about the past that might be used to supplement and
correct errors in the available corpus of historical literature. Bronze
vessels, jade carvings, and other ancient works of art were collected
and treasured as prestige objects as statues and fancy vases were in
the classical civilizations of the Mediterranean region.
   Although some scholars in later antiquity occasionally used arti-
facts as other than a source of texts to supplement what could be
learned about the past and scholars as a whole became aware that the
material culture of the past had been markedly different from that of
the present, they did not develop a specific corpus of techniques for
recovering and studying such artifacts and utterly failed to establish

                                   47
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

any tradition of antiquarian research. Nothing resembling an endur-
ing discipline of archaeology developed in any of these civilizations.
Although in Greece and China, beginning in the first millennium bc,
philosophers replaced fixed religious beliefs with various, contending
explanations of the origins of human beings and civilizations, their
proposals remained speculative.


                   The Medieval View of History
Recent research has demonstrated greater awareness of the mate-
rial remains of Roman culture in medieval western Europe than was
previously believed (Greenhalgh 1989). More buildings and sculp-
ture surviving from the classical period were visible in medieval times
than at any subsequent period before the nineteenth century, and
such material is often mentioned briefly in written records. In a few
Italian and French cities, some of the most impressive Roman monu-
ments were officially protected as objects of civic pride. The medieval
period also was a time of massive destruction of such remains, as
Roman cemeteries and ruined buildings were plundered of mate-
rial to erect churches, houses, and city walls. Marble was so easily
obtained from classical sites that this stone ceased to be quarried.
Such acts of destruction led to the discovery of ancient inscriptions
and works of art, but few of these finds have survived. Roman sar-
cophagi continued to be emptied and reused for burials as late as
the sixteenth century. Ancient gems, coins, and ivories that were
recovered in the course of plundering Roman ruins were recycled
or incorporated into new works of art. A limited and disorganized
interest in what was being found was combined with the belief that
these objects might possess supernatural powers. Because of this,
classical statues were sometimes destroyed or mutilated (Sklenář
1983: 15).
   As a result of these finds, medieval artists living within the borders
of what had been the Roman Empire sometimes had opportuni-
ties to study classical art. Roman art was not continuously known,
admired, or copied but encounters of this sort provided the basis
for short bursts of interest in Roman iconography and style: a series
of mini-renascences that preceded the Renaissance (Panofsky 1960).
The Lombard kings of northern Italy (ad 568–774) imitated Roman
epigraphy and coinage, whereas the Merovingian rulers of France

                                   48
            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

(476–750) plundered Roman burials for their own grave goods.
Charlemagne (r. 768–814), in his efforts to substantiate his claim
to be a successor to the Roman emperors, revived many aspects of
Roman art including the making of bronze statues and laying mosaics
in the Roman style. The great population expansion and the accom-
panying destruction of old buildings that took place in Europe from
the twelfth to the thirteenth centuries once again intensified this
process, especially in Italy. Some stone carvers adopted numerous
classical motifs and depicted Roman soldiers dressed as legionaries.
The Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II (r. 1220–1250) both dug
for and purchased antiquities. He also imitated Roman coinage and
built a Roman-style triumphal arch in Capua. At the same time, an
awareness of classical culture had all but disappeared in France, where
both prehistoric and Roman ruins were attributed to recent Saracen
(Arab) invaders (Weiss 1969: 3–15; Geary 1986; Greenhalgh 1989;
Schnapp 1997: 80–103).
   Yet at no time during the medieval period was archaeological exca-
vation seen as providing a source of history. Digging was reserved for
recovering holy relics, which were associated with saints and required
to consecrate churches. Discoveries of classical artifacts were some-
times noted and comments made about them but no effort was
made to study such finds in a methodical fashion. Even if classi-
cal art was reused and copied, the dominant styles of art and archi-
tecture throughout Europe, Romanesque (ad 1075–1125) followed
by Gothic (1125–1500), were new creations that over time exhib-
ited ever fewer Roman features. Yet, despite these and many other
striking changes, it did not occur to medieval scholars to regard clas-
sical antiquity as constituting a different civilization from their own,
except in matters relating to religion. There was no significant aware-
ness of a cultural break between the classical age and their own time
(Weiss 1969: 3).
   In the medieval period, the Roman Catholic Church monopolized
and regulated learning, a situation very different from the contend-
ing philosophical schools of classical civilization. The only certain
knowledge of ancient times was thought to be what was recorded in
the Bible and the surviving histories of Greece and Rome. Moreover,
it was believed that the Bible provided a complete history not only
of humanity but also of the cosmos since the time of its creation. On
this basis, a Christian view of the past was constructed that in various

                                  49
                A History of Archaeological Thought

ways has continued to influence the interpretation of archaeological
data to the present. This view can be summarized in terms of six
propositions:

1. The world was thought to be of recent, supernatural origin and
   unlikely to last more than a few thousand years. Rabbinical author-
   ities estimated that it had been created about 3700 bc, whereas
   Pope Clement VIII dated the creation to 5199 bc and as late
   as the seventeenth century Archbishop James Ussher was to set
   it at 4004 bc. These dates, which were computed using biblical
   genealogies, agreed that the world was only a few thousand years
   old. It also was believed that this world would cease to exist fol-
   lowing the return of Christ. Although the precise timing of this
   event was unknown, the earth was generally thought to be in its
   last days (Slotkin 1965: 36–7; D. Wilcox 1987).
2. The physical world was believed to be in an advanced state of
   degeneration and most natural changes to represent the decay of
   God’s original creation. Because the earth was intended to endure
   for only a few thousand years, there was little need for divine pro-
   vision to counteract depletions resulting from natural processes
   and human exploitation of its resources. The biblical documenta-
   tion of greater human longevity in ancient times provided a war-
   rant for believing that human beings as well as the environment
   had been deteriorating physically and intellectually since their cre-
   ation. The decay and impoverishment of the physical world also
   bore witness to humanity of the transience of all material things,
   confirming the Christian Church’s emphasis on spiritual matters
   (Slotkin 1965: 37; Toulmin and Goodfield 1966: 75–6).
3. Humanity was affirmed to have been created by God in the
   Garden of Eden, which was located in the Middle East, and to
   have spread from that region to other parts of the world, first
   after the expulsion of the original humans from the Garden of
   Eden and again following Noah’s flood, which was believed to
   have taken place about 2500 bc. The second dispersal was has-
   tened by the differentiation of languages, which was imposed on
   humanity as divine retribution for their presumption in building
   the Tower of Babel. The center of world history long remained in
   the Middle East, where the Bible chronicled the development of
   Judaism and from where Christianity had been carried to Europe.

                                  50
            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

   Scholars sought to link northern and western Europe to the
   recorded history of the Middle East and the classical world by con-
   structing fanciful pedigrees that identified biblical personages or
   individuals known from other historical accounts as the founders
   of European nations or early kings in that region (Kendrick
   1950: 3).
4. It was believed to be natural for standards of human conduct
   to decline over time, an idea that was reinforced by knowledge
   of classical theories of degeneration. The Bible affirmed that
   Adam, the earliest man, and his first descendants had been farm-
   ers and herdsmen and that iron working had been practiced in
   the Middle East only a few generations later. The earliest humans
   had shared in God’s revelation of himself to Adam. Knowledge
   of God and his wishes was subsequently maintained and elab-
   orated through successive divine revelations made to Hebrew
   patriarchs and prophets. These, together with the revelations
   contained in the New Testament, became the property of the
   Christian Church, which henceforth was responsible for uphold-
   ing standards of human conduct. By contrast, it was believed
   that those groups who had moved away from the Middle East
   and failed to have their faith renewed by divine revelation or
   Christian teaching tended to degenerate into polytheism, idol-
   atry, and immorality. The ultimate products of this process were
   the monsters that were believed to inhabit the most remote
   regions of the world. The theory of degeneration was also used
   to account for the primitive technologies of hunter-gatherers and
   tribal agriculturalists when they were encountered by Europeans.
   Yet, when applied to technology and material culture, the
   concept of degeneration conflicted with the alternative – but
   to Christians an equally attractive – view, promoted by ancient
   Roman historians such as Cornelius Tacitus (ca. ad 56–120),
   that material prosperity encouraged moral depravity. Another
   competing idea anchored in classical philosophy held that any
   non-Judaeo-Christian religious beliefs that vaguely resembled
   Christian ones had arisen from the study of the natural world,
   which Christian theologians maintained reflected God’s own
   nature (MacCormack 1991: 214). Medieval scholars were primarily
   concerned with explaining moral and spiritual rather than tech-
   nological progress and decay.

                                 51
                A History of Archaeological Thought

5. The history of the world was interpreted as a succession of unique
   events. Christianity encouraged a historical view of human affairs
   in the sense that world history was seen as a series of happenings
   that had cosmic significance. These events were interpreted as
   the results of God’s predetermined interventions, the final one
   of which would terminate the ongoing struggle between good
   and evil. There was, therefore, no sense that change or progress
   was intrinsic in human history or that human beings, unaided by
   God, were capable of achieving anything of historical significance
   (Kendrick 1950: 3; Toulmin and Goodfield 1966: 56). Between
   God’s interventions, human affairs proceeded in a static or cyclical
   fashion.
6. Finally, medieval scholars and artisans were even less aware of
   changes in material culture than ancient Greek and Roman ones
   had been. It was not widely realized that in biblical times human
   beings had worn clothes or lived in houses that were significantly
   different from those of the medieval period.

   During the Middle Ages, interest in the material remains of the past
was even more limited and transient than it had been in classical times,
apart from the collection and preservation of holy relics. This did
not encourage the development of a systematic study of the material
remains of the past. Yet the understanding of the past that was created
at this time from selected written records formed the conceptual basis
out of which the study of archaeology was to develop in Europe as
social conditions changed. Moreover, despite the strenuous efforts
that many generations of prehistoric archaeologists have made to
refute it, in most of its essentials the medieval view remains very
much alive. A Gallup poll conducted in the United States in 2001
indicated that 45 percent of respondents believed that human beings
had been created in more or less their present form and at one point
in time within the last 10,000 years (Alters and Nelson 2002: 1892).


                  Renaissance Antiquarianism
As a consequence of increasing trade and other economic changes,
during the fourteenth century a feudal organization in northern
Italy gave way to mercantile cities. People also became aware for
the first time of irreversible changes taking place in the course of

                                  52
            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

their lifetimes. Scholars came to regard cities such as Verona, Padua,
and Florence as revivals of the city-states of antiquity and began to
search surviving classical writings to provide these cities with individ-
ual pedigrees that would enhance their reputations and with prece-
dents that would sanction the political changes that were occurring
in them, both of which would help them to resist the efforts of
German and French kings to control them. The views of these schol-
ars reflected the interests of the new urban nobility and upper-middle
class on whose patronage they depended. This interest in origins also
attracted attention among the free cities of the Holy Roman Empire.
In the early fifteenth century, Sigismund Meisterlin’s studies of the
origin of such communities marked the beginning of a longstand-
ing interest in Italian humanist studies in Germany (Schnapp 1997:
110–11).
   This use of historical precedents to justify innovations had its roots
in medieval thinking, which, at least with respect to secular matters,
viewed the remote past as superior to the present and therefore as
a source of information that could improve life. Yet in the Renais-
sance an expanding search for historical texts that would justify polit-
ical innovations gradually led to the realization that contemporary
social and cultural life did not significantly resemble that of classi-
cal antiquity. The Italian poet Petrarch (1304–1374) clearly realized
that ancient Rome had long ago disappeared from the world and
had been succeeded by an unworthy era of cultural deprivation, later
to be called the Middle Ages or medieval period, from which he
hoped his own age was finally emerging. Rejecting the more recent
past, Petrarch believed that only the history of ancient Rome was
worth studying (Rowe 1965; D. Wilcox 1987). The aim of Renais-
sance scholars was to emulate as best they could the glorious achieve-
ments of antiquity. At first, there was little hope that in their current
degenerate condition human beings could ever hope to excel the
greatest achievements of ancient Rome. Only in its possession of a
religion based on divine revelation could the modern age be viewed
as unambiguously superior to pagan antiquity.
   The early Renaissance scholarship of the fourteenth century was
focused on the recovery from monastic libraries and renewed study of
surviving Latin texts, especially those dealing with historical, legal,
and literary themes. In the fifteenth century, more attention was
paid to Greek texts, which were then becoming available in Italy

                                   53
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

from abroad in larger numbers. Many of these texts, however, dealt
with philosophy, theology, magic, and science and, hence, were of
less specific interest to Italian scholars and their patrons. Attempts to
work out the topography of ancient Rome were based on the gen-
eral comparison of ancient descriptions of the city with the locations
of its surviving monuments. Even the original appearance of major
buildings was at first ascertained from how they were portrayed on
Roman coins rather than by studying the buildings themselves (Jacks
1993).
   A more disciplined interest in classical antiquity gradually spread
from texts to architecture and art. The topographer Leon Battista
Alberti (1404–1472) argued that it was necessary to study ancient
architecture as well as to read about it (Andrén 1998: 108). Ancient
art and architecture were of particular interest to the urban nobil-
ity and wealthy merchants who sought to manifest their newly
achieved social status by becoming patrons of the arts. Interest
also was being spurred by the unprecedented destruction of ancient
buildings, which were being quarried for ready building materials
for churches and the palaces of the rich as the city of Rome once
again began to expand. The decrees of successive popes did little
to safeguard Roman ruins, although they may have been more suc-
cessful in preventing the unauthorized export of artworks from the
papal domains (Weiss 1969: 99–100). The artist Raphael (1483–1520),
who oversaw the supplying of stone for building the new St. Peter’s
Cathedral, recorded ancient buildings that were being destroyed,
but only sought to preserve inscriptions and sculpture (Parslow
1995: 160).
   There was a growing interest in creating new forms of art and
architecture to replace the Gothic style that was now associated with
the declining feudal upper class. Models were provided by works of
art and architecture that had survived from classical times and which
in the case of architecture often were studied as they were being
demolished. By sponsoring the recovery of knowledge about classi-
cal art and architecture and the production of new work modeled
on classical examples, the leaders of the new social order that was
emerging in northern Italy stylistically identified themselves with the
glories of ancient times and further distinguished themselves from
the feudal society they were seeking to replace.


                                   54
             Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

   An early interest in both written texts and material objects surviv-
ing from the past is expressed in the work of Cyriacus of Ancona
(Ciriaco de’ Pizzicolli, ad 1391–1454). He was an Italian merchant
who traveled extensively in Greece and the eastern Mediterranean
over a period of twenty-five years, often specifically in order to collect
information about ancient monuments. In the course of his travels,
he copied hundreds of inscriptions, made drawings of monuments,
and collected books, coins, and works of art. His chief interest, how-
ever, remained public inscriptions. Although his six volumes of com-
mentaries on these texts were destroyed in a fire in 1514, some of his
other works survive (Casson 1939: 93–9; Weiss 1969: 137–42).
   By the late fifteenth century, popes such as Paul II and Alexander
VI, cardinals, and other members of the Italian nobility were collect-
ing and displaying ancient works of art. They also began to sponsor
searching beneath the ground for such objects. For a long time, there
were no systematic excavations but merely digging in likely places for
objects that had historical, aesthetic, and commercial value. Nowhere
were such objects recovered in greater abundance than in Rome.
These works inspired contemporary sculptors and painters, such as
Michelangelo and Baccio Bandinelli, who both eventually claimed
that they could carve better statues than the ancient Romans had (L.
Barkan 1999: 10). An interest in classical antiquities gradually spread
throughout the rest of Europe. Classical inscriptions, monuments,
and works of art found in England, France, parts of Germany, and
other lands that had been part of the Roman Empire were studied by
local antiquaries, such as William Camden, as early as the sixteenth
century. In due course, members of the nobility became avid col-
lectors of Roman and Greek art, which their agents purchased for
them in Italy and Greece. Early in the seventeenth century, King
Charles I, the Duke of Buckingham, and the Earl of Arundel were
friendly rivals in importing such works into England (Parry 1995: 125;
Scott 2003).
   In the fourteenth century, the term antiquitates referred only to
compilations of written texts. By 1600, the philological approach to
studying the past seemed exhausted and those who studied classical
antiquity had redefined their principal task as being to collect material
evidence relating to the past (Jacks 1993: 9). The term antiquary or
antiquarian was used as early as the fifteenth century, and by the


                                   55
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

next century sometimes designated an official appointment as well as
amateurs studying ancient objects (Piggott 1989: 13–17).
    Jacob Spon (1647–1685), an antiquary from Lyon who specialized
in epigraphy (the study of ancient inscriptions), was the first per-
son to use the term archaeology in its modern sense to designate
the investigation of the material remains of former human societies.
Both he and his contemporary, the numismatist Ezechiel Spanheim
(1629–1710), regarded ancient inscriptions as more direct and reliable
sources of information than surviving texts, which had been recopied
many times. Near the end of the seventeenth century, Francesco
Bianchini (1662–1729), who pioneered the study of classical iconog-
raphy, began to specify the ways in which the study of images pro-
vided information that was different from, and complementary to,
that provided by texts. In addition to establishing the significance
of artifacts as objects of antiquarian study, Bianchini theorized what
antiquaries had already been doing for some time when they com-
pared ancient monuments with the principles of classical architecture
as expounded in the writings of the ancient Roman architect Marcus
Vitruvius Pollio (first century bc) or what numismatists did when
they combined the study of images and texts.
    The importance of artifacts was realized even more strongly by
the French Benedictine monk Bernard de Montfaucon (1655–1741)
and by the French aristocrat Anne Claude Philippe de Turbières,
comte de Caylus (1692–1765). Their works provide early exam-
ples of the predilection of French academics for creating extensive
compilations. Montfaucon’s fifteen-volume L’antiquité expliquée et
représentée en figures (1719–1724) consists of illustrations of artifacts
topically arranged and accompanied by explanatory texts. Caylus’s
heavily illustrated seven-volume Recueil d’antiquités égyptiennes,
étrusques, grecques, romaines, et gauloises (1752–1767) broke new
ground by stressing the need to compare artifacts with one another
as well as with texts. Caylus drew attention not only to how cultural
differences were expressed in material culture but also to what could
be learned from careful descriptions and classifications of artifacts
and by studying how they had been manufactured. Yet, although
Montfaucon and Caylus both realized that style changed over time
as well as differing from one group to another, they failed to dis-
cover how to utilize stylistic criteria to date archaeological material
(Laming-Emperaire 1964: 80–5).

                                    56
            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

   Throughout the eighteenth century, antiquaries spent much time
studying works of art from classical times. The British ambassador
in Naples, Sir William Hamilton (1730–1803), lived there for almost
forty years collecting and popularizing painted Greek ceramics as
major works of art and models for modern artists. Stone and metal
statues and painted pottery were described and aesthetically appreci-
ated, and efforts were made to ascertain the meaning of their deco-
ration. Unfortunately, such works could be dated only by historical
texts and few bore inscriptions, had been found in a context that
dated them, or could be identified as a specific work described in
ancient historical records. This problem was resolved by the German
antiquary Johann Winckelmann (1717–1768). Winckelmann believed
that because of their great love of liberty the ancient Greeks had
produced the greatest art the world has ever seen, most evident in
their anthropomorphic images. He devoted his career to studying
the Greek and Roman sculpture that was on display in Italy; much of
the best Greek art being available only in the form of Roman copies.
Inspired by the philologist Julius Caesar Scaliger’s (1484–1558) divi-
sion of Greek literature into four successive periods, Winckelmann
sought to date as many sculptures as possible from the inscriptions
they bore or by identifying them with dated works described in clas-
sical literature. Then, by carefully noting the stylistic traits of these
dated works, he determined the styles that were characteristic of dif-
ferent periods. In this manner, he divided classical sculpture into four
successive types: an old or primitive style; a high style associated with
the work of Phidias; a refined style inspired by the sculptor Praxiteles;
and a period of “imitation” and “decay” characteristic of the Roman
age. Using these styles, it was possible to assign statues about which
no written information was available to one of these four periods of
classical antiquity.
   Although this sequence depended on written texts for its cre-
ation, once the stylistic trends were recognized, it was possible for
art historians to date ancient sculpture without reference to textual
data. Winckelmann’s Geschichte der Kunst des Altertums (History
of Ancient Art), published in 1764, provided not only meticulous
descriptions of individual works but also the first comprehensive
periodization of Greek and Roman sculpture and a discussion of
factors influencing the development of classical sculpture, including
social conditions, climate, and craftsmanship. Winckelmann believed

                                   57
                A History of Archaeological Thought

that his successive styles constituted a cycle of cultural develop-
ment and decline such as the Italian philosopher Giambattista Vico
(1668–1744) had argued characterized all human affairs not associ-
ated with the Judaeo-Christian religion. Yet, on the basis of Greek
art, Winckelmann also attempted to define ideal, and in his opinion
eternally valid, standards of artistic beauty and continued to study
material that was of great interest to his aristocratic patrons. Despite
his professed love of the ancient Greeks, he exhibited no inter-
est in investigating their everyday lives. Winckelmann nevertheless
extended a historical knowledge of classical civilization into domains
inadequately dealt with in ancient texts. Not even the most detailed
ancient account of classical art could reveal as much about that art
or its development as did Winckelmann’s comparative study of sur-
viving works. His research marked the culmination of an interest in
the material remains of the past begun by Bianchini.
   Winckelmann is frequently identified as the founder of classical
archaeology. His demonstration that it was possible to establish a
chronology of styles that could be applied to undated artifacts was
an important step forward in establishing archaeology as a separate
historical discipline. Yet Winckelmann, like most other antiquaries of
the eighteenth century, generally was interested in studying objects
that had been removed from their archaeological context. His pri-
mary interest was with genre, not provenience. Hence, in many ways,
the claim that he was the founder of art history may be even more
appropriate than the claim that he was the father of classical archae-
ology. Winckelmann clearly was responsible for establishing a close
and lasting relation between classical studies and what was to become
the separate discipline of art history.
   The eighteenth century also witnessed the development of sys-
tematic archaeological excavations, especially at the Roman sites of
Herculaneum and Pompeii, which had been destroyed by an erup-
tion of Mount Vesuvius in ad 79 (Figure 2.1). The earliest digging
was aimed primarily at recovering statues and other works of art for
the king of Naples, often by tunneling. Despite objections by Italian
antiquaries attached to the royal court, who wished art objects to be
recovered as quickly as possible for them to study, the Swiss army
engineer Karl Weber (1712–1764), who supervised later excavations,
his successor Francesco La Vega, and French antiquaries working
for the king of Naples developed a preference for studying public

                                  58
Figure 2.1 Digging at Herculaneum, 1782 (J.-C. Saint-Non, Voyage pittoresque et description du royaume de Naples et de
                                             Sicile, Paris 1781–1786)

                                                             59
                A History of Archaeological Thought

buildings and large private residences at these sites. In France, since
the late seventeenth century there had been a growing interest
in examining, recording, and trying to preserve Roman buildings
(Schnapp 1997: 247–53). This interest had been stimulated by the
great programs of constructing roads and fortifications undertaken
during the reign of Louis XIV, which had revealed numerous buried
Roman structures. Accurate plans and elevations were recorded,
often under very difficult circumstances, of major buildings found
at Herculaneum and Pompeii, and axonometric projections of these
structures were sometimes prepared. Locations where outstanding
artifacts were found were noted on these plans.
   Before this time, architects had studied ancient buildings, but they
had rarely cleared them in any systematic fashion. In their plans, these
architects had restored missing parts and added details in a fanciful
manner and generally employed ancient treatises on architecture to
interpret ruins. The excavations at Naples were among the first to
use carefully excavated ruins to try to understand better such texts.
Although few stratigraphic observations were made, these develop-
ments were no less important than the work of Winckelmann for
helping to transform antiquarian studies into classical archaeology.
The systematic excavation and conservation of the ruins of ancient
temples and other public buildings carried out by the French between
1809 and 1814, during Napoleon Bonaparte’s occupation of Rome,
even though the primary goal of these excavations was to uncover
works of fine art, suggests that new standards of excavation had been
established at Herculaneum and Pompeii during the eighteenth cen-
tury (Ridley 1992). Antiquaries had been interested in the urban
geography of Rome since the early Renaissance, but it was only in
the eighteenth century that they began to study systematically the
architecture of specific sites as well as collections of fine art.
   Although Cyriacus of Ancona had recorded classical antiquities in
the eastern Mediterranean in the early Renaissance and classical art
from that region was reaching England by the seventeenth century
(Parry 1995: 125), the main focus of classical studies long remained
in Italy. In 1734, a group of English gentlemen who had toured Italy
established the Society of Dilettanti, which funded detailed surveys
of ancient monuments in Greece beginning in 1751. Similar work
was carried out by the French investigator David Le Roy starting in
1758. Publications of this research provided models for Greek revival

                                  60
            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

architecture and more generally stimulated a growing interest in the
art and architecture of ancient Greece as well as that of Italy. Serious
archaeological work did not begin in Greece, however, until after
that country’s independence from Turkey in the early nineteenth
century.


           The Development of Classical Archaeology
In the late eighteenth century, classical archaeology had begun to
develop in an academic context. Following its military defeat by
Napoleon in 1806, the north German kingdom of Prussia set out to
reform its educational system. The goal of this reform was to educate
civil servants so that they could manage the affairs of state more effec-
tively without exposing them to the revolutionary ideas of the French
Enlightenment, which were regarded as highly subversive by the con-
servative, estate-owning Prussian upper class. German humanists had
been inspired by Winckelmann’s publications to regard the genius,
creativity, love of freedom, and sense of beauty of the ancient Greeks
as the highest expression of the human spirit. They also believed that
the essence of Greek achievements could be recreated in forms suit-
able for the modern world (Marchand 1996: 16). One of the other
leading concepts of German humanism at this period was the belief
that every culture was unique and deserved to be understood on its
own terms (Zammito 2002). This encouraged an antipathy toward
the comparative study of cultures that has continued to character-
ize classical studies to the present. This antipathy encouraged many
philhellenic humanists to forget the ancient Greeks’ own accounts
of their cultural relations with Egypt and the Middle East and to
view classical Greece as a self-contained culture that expressed the
noble spirit of its creators, who in turn were identified as quintessen-
tial Europeans or Indo-Europeans (M. Bernal 1987). In the course
of the nineteenth century, the connection between ancient Greeks
and modern Germans was increasingly racialized. Already during the
Napoleonic period, many educated Germans viewed modern France
as the counterpart of imperial Rome, and modern Germany, which
was culturally highly developed but politically disunited and threat-
ened by France, as equivalent to ancient Greece.
   Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767–1835), who was in charge of edu-
cational reform in Prussia, decided that a high school curriculum

                                   61
                A History of Archaeological Thought

based on the study of classical languages, literatures, history, philos-
ophy, and art was the best way to educate future bureaucrats with-
out exposing them to revolutionary ideas. He assumed that Greek
philosophy was sufficiently developed to provide German students
with all the ideas they required to function in the modern world.
Although Winckelmann had attributed the great cultural achieve-
ments of the ancient Greeks to their love of freedom, von Humboldt
decreed that the study of their culture should remain apolitical. When
many educated Germans actively supported the Greek revolt against
Turkey in the 1820s, Prussia, Austria, and other conservative German
states prohibited the formation of associations for this purpose and
in some cases suppressed any public expression of support for the
Greeks (Marchand 1996: 32–5).
   The implementation of von Humboldt’s curriculum reform
encouraged an expansion of classical studies or Altertumskunde (the
science of ancient times) at Prussian and other German universities.
Classical studies, as it had been instituted by C. G. Heyne (1729–
1812) at the University of Göttingen and formulated more clearly by
his student Friedrich Wolf (1759–1824) at the University of Halle,
privileged philology as the key to understanding ancient Greek and
Roman culture, although it also embraced the study of classical art
and architecture, which had been objects of antiquarian research
since the Renaissance. Even after Barthold Niebuhr (1776–1831)
demonstrated the unreliability of many written “historical” sources,
classical scholars chose to rely on the literary source criticism that
he advocated rather than on archaeology to check the veracity of
ancient texts. Archaeology was regarded mainly as a way to recover
data for epigraphers and art historians to study. Whether classical art
and architecture were studied in departments of classics or art his-
tory, classical archaeology trailed in the wake of the larger discipline
into which it was incorporated. Yet, because classical studies enjoyed
the support of most educated Germans, including most members
of the civil service, unprecedented funding for classical archaeolog-
ical research gradually became available. In this way, archaeologists
benefited from their connections with classics and art history.
   In the second half of the nineteenth century, classical archaeolo-
gists began to search for ways to recover information that would
corroborate and expand what was known from written records.
Tracing architectural changes over relatively short periods in urban

                                  62
            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

centers required detailed stratigraphic studies. One of the pioneers of
this sort of analysis was Giuseppe Fiorelli (1823–1896) who, with the
support of the government of the newly unified Italy, took charge
of the excavations at Pompeii in 1860. He proclaimed the recovery
of works of art and monumental architecture, which had hitherto
dominated work at the site, to be secondary to the detailed excava-
tion of all kinds of buildings in order to learn how they had been
constructed and for what purposes different parts of them had been
used. This required careful excavation to recover information about
the ruined upper stories of houses. He also emphasized classifying
artifacts according to function. Fiorelli established a school at Pom-
peii where students could learn his techniques.
   Major advances in excavation techniques were achieved by
Alexander Conze (1831–1914) from the University of Vienna on the
island of Samothrace in 1873 and 1875 and the German archaeolo-
gist Ernst Curtius (1814–1896) at the Greek cult center of Olympia
between 1875 and 1881. In their efforts to work out the history of
major structures at these sites, both archaeologists endeavored to
record the plans and stratigraphy of their excavations of major pub-
lic buildings, including ones that had been rebuilt several times, in
sufficient detail that their reports could serve as substitutes for the
evidence that their excavations had destroyed. The report on Samoth-
race was the first to contain plans prepared by professional architects,
as well as photographic documentation of the progress of the work.
These excavations constituted prototypes for major excavations at
other classical sites.
   During the nineteenth century, classical studies, strongly influ-
enced by the German model, became the quintessential expression
of humanism and the preferred basis of a liberal arts education across
Europe and America (Morris 1994b: 31). At least in countries where
Protestantism prevailed, everyone who could read was supposed to
be familiar with the stories contained in the Bible. Better-educated
people were expected also to be familiar with ancient Greek and
Roman history, legends, and mythology. Allusions to these stories
were woven into everyday conversation, as well as literature and
art. Thus, knowledge of classical times became a token of superior
taste, education, and social status and supporting the cultivation of
such knowledge constituted evidence of social solidarity (Lowenthal
1985). The upper-middle classes thus financed efforts to produce and

                                  63
                A History of Archaeological Thought

disseminate such knowledge. Public funds and private philanthropy
supported the creation of museums in major European and North
American cities and of national schools to promote classical research
in Italy, Greece, and neighboring regions.
   Although the Italian government prevented foreign archaeologists
from excavating in Italy, foreign archaeologists based in Greece car-
ried out important excavations at classical sites around the north-
eastern Mediterranean. The Germans dug at Pergamon in modern
Turkey from 1878 until 1915 and the Americans at Corinth from 1896
to 1916 and at the Athenian agora beginning in 1931, whereas the
French carried out long-term research at Delos and Delphi and the
British worked at Sparta and in Crete. Russian classical archaeology
was pursued within the borders of the Russian empire, where valu-
able Greek jewelry was found in Scythian burials and Greek colonies
had been established along the north shore of the Black Sea. Classical
excavations began in the Crimea early in the nineteenth century, and
by 1826 so many finds had been assembled in the city of Krech that
an archaeological museum was established there. The study of classi-
cal antiquities was vigorously pursued by the Imperial Odessa Soci-
ety of History and Antiquity, founded in 1839 (M. Miller 1956: 22,
27; Sklenář 1983: 94). Russian classical archaeology continued along
traditional lines with a preference for the analysis of ancient art, as
Russian medieval archaeology also did.
   In general, classical excavators sought to recover information relat-
ing to epigraphy, fine arts, architecture, and urban design. The
organization of research at major sites was characterized by increas-
ing specialization of tasks and the development of more elaborate
hierarchical structures. Directors, who controlled research funds,
determined the goals of such research and evaluated the performance
of students and junior colleagues. Much of the professional train-
ing of classical archaeologists occurred at these digs and within the
national schools that often were associated with them. Professional
standards and a desire to do work that was precise and could with-
stand international peer evaluation gradually replaced the romanti-
cism of earlier times. Only major countries possessed the resources
required to finance large-scale excavations and they found in archae-
ology yet another way to compete for international prestige. Accom-
panying this growing professionalism was an increasingly insistent
denial that knowledge of ancient Greece was relevant for the present.

                                  64
             Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

The professed goal of professional archaeologists came to be to know
what had really existed in the past, at least in terms of what was of
interest to classical studies.
   As a result of being employed in university or museum depart-
ments of classical studies or art history, most classical archae-
ologists remained isolated from prehistoric archaeologists and
anthropologists; a rare exception being Roman provincial archae-
ology in countries such as Britain. Although many foreign archae-
ologists working in Greece were aware of the work being done by
prehistoric archaeologists studying the Bronze Age cultures of the
Aegean area, they long denied that these cultures were of much sig-
nificance for understanding the classical period and hence did not
pay as much attention to this work as they might have done. One
result of this was a remarkable continuity in the practice of classi-
cal archaeology. Michael Shanks (1996: 97–9) has proposed that for
almost 200 years, into the 1960s, classical archaeologists continued
to ask essentially the same questions and to collect the same sorts of
data. They searched for ancient texts and works of fine art in the con-
texts of sanctuaries, other public buildings, and elaborate houses, and
sought to recover urban plans with a primary focus on civic centers,
but they generally ignored evidence relating to subsistence, overall
settlement patterns, rural life, technological processes, or trade. In
a remarkable display of conservatism, classical archaeology remained
true to its original Renaissance preoccupations.
   Within this pattern, changes did occur. During the nineteenth
century, as part of the professionalization of classical archaeology, a
preoccupation with the analysis of style replaced an earlier interest
in beauty. In the 1850s, Eduard Gerhard (1795–1867) argued that
archaeology had to be based on the systematic description and com-
parison of artifacts. Like palaeographers, numismatists, and art his-
torians, classical archaeologists used stylistic analysis to order various
kinds of artifacts chronologically, determine where they were made,
and even try to ascertain who had made them. Adolf Furtwängler
(1853–1907) perfected techniques for stylistically categorizing finds
that were widely imitated. His catalogues of Greek vases culminated
in John Beazley’s (1885–1970) celebrated efforts to assign the man-
ufacture of unsigned as well as what were believed to be signed
Attic painted ceramic vessels to individual painters or their schools
(Marchand 1996: 104–15; Shanks 1996: 60–3). Yet, Mary Beard

                                   65
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

(2001) has observed that no more can be said about Beazley’s artists
than can be said about the pots he assigned to them.
   Classical archaeologists showed little interest in ascertaining the
uses made of ancient objects, with the conspicuous exception of the
American archaeologist Harriet Ann Boyd Hawes (1871–1945), who
employed functional considerations as a basis for classifying many of
her Cretan finds. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth cen-
turies, the British classicists Charles Newton, Jane Harrison, and
William Ridgeway became interested in studying ancient Greek reli-
gious beliefs, everyday life, and other anthropological concerns, but
their ideas had no lasting impact on classical archaeology (Morris
1994b: 28–9). For classicists, the main question was not what func-
tions an artifact had served in the civilization that had created it, but
the far more subjective issue of what such an artifact might be able to
communicate about the general mindset of its creators. Explanations
of change were treated as the responsibility of classical epigraphers
and historians rather than of archaeologists. Archaeological publica-
tions increasingly took the form of site reports and catalogues. Thus,
the main objectives of classical archaeologists retreated to the for-
mal study of a limited range of material culture in isolation from its
original social or cultural context. Whether working within classical
studies or art history, classical archaeologists appeared increasingly
unlikely to produce any broad vision of the past.
   Stephen Dyson (1989, 1998) and Ian Morris (1994b: 14) suggest
that the main reason for the conservatism of classical archaeology was
the need for graduate students to go abroad to carry out research,
usually within the hierarchical structures created for large, long-
term excavation projects. There they found themselves dependent on
the goodwill of senior academics who dictated what topics students
might study and how they would do their research. By the time even
an innovative researcher was in a position to chart his own course,
he had become thoroughly enculturated into established ways of
doing things. The great importance accorded to teamwork also may
have promoted conformity. Yet perhaps an equally important factor
maintaining the status quo was the role assigned to archaeologists
as providers of data to be studied by epigraphers, historians, and
art historians. The best escape for intellectually ambitious archaeol-
ogists was to seek to establish themselves in these more prestigious
roles.

                                   66
            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

   Since the 1960s, classical studies have been in decline (Morris
1994b: 12). Ancient Greece and Rome do not enjoy the prestige
they once did in modern multiethnic societies where classical human-
ism has been replaced by ethnographic humanism (Marchand 1996:
372–3), or in a world in which human history now extends back four
million years. New electronic technologies make classical societies
seem more irrelevant to understanding modern life than ever before,
and many find Western society’s justification in its own success, even
if they are not convinced that this success will be long-lived. Dimin-
ishing funding for classical studies and increasing questioning of the
relevance of the discipline have caused many classical archaeologists
to explore new adaptations. These developments will be examined
in Chapter 9.


                    Egyptology and Assyriology
Classical studies provided a model for the development of both Egyp-
tology and Assyriology. In the late eighteenth century, almost noth-
ing was known about the ancient civilizations of Egypt and the Mid-
dle East except what had been recorded about them by the ancient
Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans. Their scripts could not be read and
their writings and works of art were unstudied and largely remained
buried in the ground.
   Ancient Egypt had long been a subject of speculation and fantasy
and, despite the development of Egyptology, remains so in amateur
circles. To the Greeks and Romans of antiquity, Egypt was already an
ancient civilization and a repository of primeval wisdom, arcane cults,
and bizarre customs. It must have impressed visitors from the north-
ern shores of the Mediterranean in much the same way that India did
European visitors in the eighteenth century ad. In the Bible, Egypt
was portrayed as a land of exotic splendor and a place of refuge
but also as a land of oppression, idolatry, and dangerous women.
The rediscovery in the fifteenth century of classical writings about
Egypt led Renaissance scholars to speculate that, long before Moses,
Egyptians had received a pristine revelation of divine wisdom that
may have been more complete and less corrupted than was that
recorded in the Hebrew scriptures. In 1600, the mystic Giordano
Bruno was burned at the stake in Rome for claiming, among other
things, that ancient Egyptian religious beliefs were older and more

                                  67
                A History of Archaeological Thought

authentic than Christian ones (Yates 1964). By contrast, in the fol-
lowing century the Jesuit priest Athanasius Kircher (1602–1680) sup-
ported the idea of ancient Egyptian wisdom as a means of combat-
ting mechanistic philosophy and modern science, both of which he
regarded as a serious threat to Christianity. Ideas of this sort even-
tually became a perennial part of the European intellectual under-
ground through Rosicrucianism and Freemasonry (Stevenson 1988).
   Beginning in the medieval period, European visitors to Egypt
produced accounts of their travels that included brief descriptions
of ancient monuments. The systematic study of ancient Egypt
began with observations by the French academics who accompa-
nied Napoleon Bonaparte’s invasion of Egypt in 1798–1799 and pro-
duced the multivolume Description de l’Egypte beginning in 1809.
Another result of this military campaign was the accidental discovery
of the Rosetta Stone, a bilingual inscription that played a major role
in Jean-François Champollion’s (1790–1832) decipherment of the
ancient Egyptian scripts, which began to produce substantial results
by 1822. Most Egyptian texts turned out not to be repositories of eso-
teric knowledge but to deal with historical, administrative, and secu-
lar matters as well as routine aspects of religious cults. Champollion
and Ippolito Rosellini (1800–1843), in 1828–1829, and the German
Egyptologist Karl Lepsius (1810–1884), between 1849 and 1859, led
expeditions to Egypt that recorded temples, tombs, and, most impor-
tant, the monumental inscriptions that were associated with them;
the American Egyptologist James Breasted (1865–1935) extended
this work throughout Nubia between 1905 and 1907. Using these
texts, it was possible to produce a chronology and skeletal his-
tory of ancient Egypt, in relation to which Egyptologists could
begin to study the development of Egyptian art and architecture.
Champollion was, however, forced to restrict his chronology so that
it did not conflict with that of the Bible, in order not to offend
the religious sentiments of the conservative officials who controlled
France after the defeat of Napoleon (M. Bernal 1987: 252–3). At
the same time, adventurers, including the Italian circus performer
and strong man Giovanni Belzoni (1778–1823) and agents of the
French Consul-General Bernardino Drovetti, were locked in fierce
competition to acquire major collections of Egyptian art works for
public display in Britain and France (Fagan 1975). Their plundering


                                 68
            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

of ancient Egyptian tombs and temples was halted only after
the French Egyptologist Auguste Mariette (1821–1881), who was
appointed Conservator of Egyptian Monuments in 1858, took steps
to stop all unauthorized work. Even his clearances of ancient temples
and tombs were intended to forestall robbers and to acquire material
for a national collection rather than to record the circumstances in
which finds were made.
   W. M. F. Petrie (1853–1942), who began working in Egypt in
1880, set new standards by recording the plans of his excavations
and noting where major finds had been made, but only rarely did he
record stratigraphic sections. He regarded sections as being of minor
importance, as most of the sites he dug had been occupied for rel-
atively short periods (Drower 1985). George Reisner (1867–1942),
an American archaeologist who excavated in Egypt and the Sudan
beginning in 1899, introduced the routine recording of sections as
well as profiles as early as his work at Deir el-Ballas in 1900 (Lacovara
1981: 120). He excavated by natural levels and also recorded in
minute detail the precise locations of many precious but often badly
decayed objects that he found buried together in the tomb of Queen
Hetepheres at Giza. His work brought Egyptian archaeology close
to its modern technical standard (J. Wilson 1964: 144–50).
   Egyptologists tended to excavate mainly temples and tombs in
their search for texts, art treasures, and architectural data. Only a few
residential sites were excavated, primarily with the intention of find-
ing papyri and other inscriptions. Unlike in classical studies, archae-
ology was the sole source of written material produced by the people
being studied. John Gardiner Wilkinson (1837) and Adolf Erman
([1886], English translation 1894) used tomb paintings to produce
studies of daily life in ancient Egypt (J. Thompson 1992). Later,
W. M. F. Petrie sought to trace changes from one period to another
in items of the material culture used in everyday life (Drower 1985).
Nevertheless, daily life did not become a major focus of scholarly
study in Egyptology. Instead, Egyptologists, modeling their work on
classical studies, concentrated overwhelmingly on philology, literary
studies, political history, and the study of elite art and architecture.
One distinctive and enduring feature of Egyptian archaeology was
a substantial interest in ancient Egyptian technology (Lucas 1926).
Because it was a less populous field than classical studies, Egyptology


                                   69
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

also was less specialized, the principal division being between archae-
ologists and epigraphers. The two most distinguished interpretive
works produced by Egyptological archaeologists before the 1960s
were Breasted’s Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient
Egypt (1912) and Henri Frankfort’s Kingship and the Gods (1948),
a contrastive study of how rulership was conceptualized in ancient
Egypt and Mesopotamia.
   Beginning in the twelfth century, when Rabbi Benjamin of Tudela
in northern Spain encountered the ruins of Nineveh, European trav-
elers to the Middle East noted the remains of ancient cities in Iraq and
Persia and occasionally brought back to Europe unreadable inscrip-
tions and other artifacts. In 1616 Pietro della Valle identified and
investigated the ruins of Babylon and also visited the site of Ur. In
1786, abbé Joseph de Beauchamp (1752–1801) carried out the first
known excavations at Babylon. All three of these cities had been
mentioned in the Hebrew Bible. In 1754, Jean-Jacques Barthélemy
(1716–95) used his knowledge of Hebrew to decipher the closely-
related Phoenician alphabet, thereby initiating the epigraphic study
of “lost” Middle Eastern civilizations. The first successful attempt to
translate copies of Old Persian cuneiform texts from Persepolis was
made by Georg Grotefend (1775–1833) in 1802. Early in the nine-
teenth century, Claudius Rich, the East India Company agent in
Baghdad, inspected the ruins of ancient Mesopotamian sites, includ-
ing those of Nineveh and Babylon, and collected artifacts that were
purchased by the British Museum in 1825. Sporadic digging gave
way in the 1840s to Paul-Emile Botta’s (1802–1870) more extensive
excavations at Nineveh and Khorsabad and Austen Layard’s (1817–
1891) at Nimrud and Kuyunjik in northern Iraq. The elaborate neo-
Assyrian palaces at these sites yielded vast amounts of ancient sculp-
ture and textual material (Figure 2.2). By 1857, beginning with a
trilingual historical text that the Persian king Darius I (r. 522–486 bc)
had ordered carved on a cliff face at Bisitun in Iran, Henry Rawlinson
(1810–1895) and others had succeeded in translating cuneiform texts
composed in the ancient Babylonian language, a breakthrough that
made it possible to begin reconstructing the history of ancient Assyria
and Babylon. This work of decipherment aroused great public inter-
est, as some of these texts confirmed historical events mentioned in
the Hebrew Bible.


                                   70
71




     Figure 2.2 Layard’s reconstruction of an Assyrian palace, from Monuments of Nineveh, 1853
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

   Major excavations began in southern Iraq only after a hiatus caused
by Britain’s and France’s participation in the Crimean War (1853–
1856). Ernest de Sarzec’s (1832–1901) work at Tello (ancient Girsu)
between 1877 and 1901 provided the first substantial evidence of
the Sumerian culture which had flourished in southern Iraq in the
third millennium bc. American archaeologists began excavating at
Nippur in 1887 (B. Kuklick 1996) and a German team at Uruk in
1912. These and other sites yielded enormous numbers of cuneiform
texts. Between 1899 and 1913, the German archaeologist Robert
Koldewey (1855–1925) excavated large areas of ancient Babylon,
revealing a vast amount of information about the layout of this
city during the late Babylonian period. His horizontal clearances did
not, however, recover significant information about the earlier peri-
ods of this city’s history. In contrast, between 1897 and 1908, the
French archaeologist Jacques de Morgan dug a deep trench into
the citadel mound at Susa, in western Iran. It produced a stratified
sequence extending from late historic back into prehistoric times;
however, de Morgan’s poor stratigraphic controls lessened the value
of his work. Between 1922 and 1934, Leonard Woolley (1880–1960)
(1950) revealed much about the city of Ur at various phases of its
history.
   Reconstructing the history of Mesopotamia using written texts
made it possible for Assyriologists to study changes in art and archi-
tecture over long periods of time. The only sporadic occurrence of
first-rate art meant, however, that the study of art history remained
less developed in Assyriology than in Egyptology or classical studies.
Conversely, because of the extraordinary preservation of written texts
epigraphers have devoted unparalleled attention to using them to
study the political history, literary genres, religious beliefs, and social
and political organization of ancient Mesopotamia. As a result, both
epigraphers and archaeologists have exhibited much more concern
for understanding changing patterns of everyday life in Mesopotamia
than was common until recent decades in Egyptology or classical
studies. Yet the diversity of the corpuses of epigraphic data, both lin-
guistically and topically, has caused Mesopotamian epigraphers to be
divided into a large number of temporal and topical specializations.
This diversity and a more general division between text-based and
archaeologically oriented Assyriologists have been major barriers to
synthetic interpretations of Mesopotamian data.

                                    72
             Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

   The development of Egyptology and Assyriology added 3,000
years of written history to two areas of the world that had hith-
erto been known only at second hand through the accounts of the
ancient Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans. Both disciplines modeled
themselves on classical studies. They relied on written sources to
supply chronologies, historical records, and information about the
beliefs and values of these two civilizations, but they also were con-
cerned with the development of art and monumental architecture
as documented by archaeological finds. Both disciplines depended
more heavily on archaeology than classical studies did, as almost all
the texts they studied had to be dug out of the earth. Although
the development of both disciplines was initially supported largely
because they were believed to be relevant for biblical studies, as
they grew more professionalized, Assyriologists and Egyptologists
sought to break free of the limitations that this interest imposed.
As knowledge of Egyptian and Middle Eastern history increased,
it became increasingly attractive to dismiss Hebrew culture as a
late and parochial expression of that of the Middle East (Marchand
1996: 220–7). Although this position was sometimes linked to anti-
Jewish sentiments, it was more often associated with increasing
secularism.
   Another pervasive bias built into Egyptology and Assyriology was
the refusal of these disciplines to study the Islamic period in Egypt
and Iraq. It was generally assumed that the cultures of these ancient
civilizations were superior to Islamic ones. Even most hellenophiles
recognized in ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia some of the early
roots of classical civilization, whereas Islamic civilization was believed
to be different from, and inferior to, what had preceded it. Few provi-
sions were made for modern Egyptians and Iraqis to become profes-
sional Egyptologists and Assyriologists (D. Reid 2002). Archaeology
thus both mirrored and supported European projects of coloniza-
tion in North Africa and the Middle East that grew more explicit
and interventionist through the nineteenth century. Therefore, as
they escaped from the confines of biblical authority, these new dis-
ciplines became mired in colonialism, orientalism, and increasingly
racism (Said 1978). It is a mistake, however, to conceptualize any
of these categories in a unitary fashion. Each discipline and differ-
ent archaeologists utilized them in different ways and for their own
specific purposes.

                                   73
                 A History of Archaeological Thought


                     Other First Archaeologies
In China, a long-standing interest in studying ancient elite artifacts
intensified during the Song Dynasty (ad 960–1279) as part of a revival
of Confucianism among the literati (G. Barnes 1993: 28). This inter-
est also was stimulated by the accidental unearthing of bronze vessels
of the Shang Dynasty, following a displacement in the course of the
Yellow River. These vessels formed the nucleus of an Imperial col-
lection of antiquities still preserved in Beijing (Elisseeff 1986: 37–9).
Song scholars began to publish detailed descriptions and studies
of ancient bronze and jade objects, especially ones bearing inscrip-
tions. The earliest surviving work of this sort, Kaogutu by Lu Dalin,
describes in words and line drawings 210 bronze and thirteen jade
artifacts dating from the Shang to the Han Dynasties, which were
kept in the Imperial collection and in thirty private ones. The inscrip-
tions on these objects were studied as sources of information about
ancient epigraphy and historical matters and the artifacts themselves
were minutely scrutinized in an effort to acquire information about
early forms of rituals and other aspects of culture that was not sup-
plied by surviving ancient texts (Figure 2.3). Inscriptions, decorative
motifs, and the general shapes of objects also were used as criteria
for dating them and assuring their authenticity and in due course
scholars were able to assign dates to vessels on the basis of formal
criteria only. The inscriptions on these vessels also were employed to
evaluate the reliability of surviving texts. In the preface to his book
on antiquities, the Song scholar Zhao Mingcheng noted that, when
matters such as dates, geography, official titles, and genealogy in
surviving classical writings were checked against texts recovered on
ancient vessels, the two were in conflict 30 to 40 percent of the time,
and on this basis he concluded that in these instances the preserved
classical writings were in error (Rudolph 1962–1963: 169–70).
   Although antiquarian studies experienced a severe decline after the
Song Dynasty, they revived early in the Qing Dynasty (ad 1644–
1911). Scholars such as Gu Yenwu (1613–1682) and Yen Rozhü
(1636–1704) paid much attention to textual criticism. One of their
major concerns was to establish the authenticity of ancient writings.
Ancient inscriptions on bronze and stone were used to verify and
correct the meanings of characters that were given in early dictio-
naries. Scholars who belonged to this school also made the earliest

                                   74
            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies




   Figure 2.3 Shang cast bronze ritual vessel, illustrated with rubbing of
   inscriptions and their transcription into conventional characters, from
     twelfth-century ad catalogue Bogutu (Percival David Foundation
                           of Chinese Art, London)

studies of inscriptions on Shang oracle bones that were unearthed
at Anyang beginning in 1898 (Li Chi 1977: 3–13; Chang 1981). Yet,
although these scholars have been interpreted as providing an indige-
nous basis for the development of archaeology in modern China, they
made no effort to recover data. Their studies also remained a branch
of general historiography rather than developing, because of their

                                     75
                A History of Archaeological Thought

additional concern with material culture, into a discipline in its own
right, as classical studies, Egyptology, and Assyriology did in the
West. Li Chi (1977: 32–3) maintains that Chinese scholars viewed
their office desks as their proper work domains and physical labor as
being unworthy of their learning. Although Chinese scholars eagerly
studied antiquities, they also had a deeply rooted antipathy against
carrying out excavations. The knowing violation of graves was pun-
ishable by death in China into the twentieth century, and all forms
of excavation were believed to be potentially capable of disturbing
benevolent supernatural influences flowing through the soil (Creel
1937: 27–9).
   In Japan, during the prosperous Tokugawa period (ad 1603–1868),
gentlemen-scholars of the samurai (warrior) and merchant classes
collected and described ancient artifacts. Neo-Confucians adopted
a rationalistic approach to antiquities. For example, Hakuseki Arai
(1656–1725) maintained that stone arrowheads were not of supernat-
ural origin but had been manufactured by human beings in ancient
times. Followers of the Kokugaku, or national learning, movement,
sought to eliminate foreign influences from Japanese culture and to
restore the primacy of Shinto religion and the power of the emperor.
They promoted the study of texts such as the Kojiki (Register of
Ancient Things) and Nihon Shoki (Chronicles of Japan), both com-
posed in the eighth century ad. On the basis of vague evidence,
or mere guesses, they claimed that many large artificial mounds
(kofun) were the burial places of specific early emperors and sought
to conserve and repair them. In this way, they turned the land-
scape into a statement supporting the priority of Shinto temples over
Buddhist ones and of centralized government over Tokugawa feudal-
ism. Michael Hoffman (1974) has suggested that these antiquarian
activities were the result of European influence but, even though
Hakuseki is known to have conversed with Italian missionaries, this
is by no means certain. Antiquarianism seems to belong to the same
tradition as does the study of Japanese history and folklore. It is
therefore likely that in Japan, as in China and Italy, an interest in
the material remains of the past developed under propitious circum-
stances as an extension of historical studies beyond the use of writ-
ten sources (Hoffman 1974; Ikawa-Smith 1982, 2001; Bleed 1986;
Barnes, G. 1990b).


                                 76
            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

   By contrast, systematic antiquarianism did not develop in India
before the colonial period. Despite impressive intellectual achieve-
ments in other fields, Indian scholarship did not devote much atten-
tion to political history (Chakrabarti 1982), perhaps because the
Hindu religion and the division of socioregulatory powers between
high-caste priests and warriors directed efforts to understanding
the meaning of life and of historical events more toward cosmol-
ogy (Pande 1985; J. Hall 1986: 58–83). Antiquarianism also failed
to develop in the Middle East, even where Islamic peoples lived
amid impressive monuments of antiquity. Moreover, Islamic culture
encouraged a strong interest in history and efforts were made to
explain what had happened in the past in naturalistic terms, espe-
cially by the historian and statesman Abu Zayd Abd ar-Rahman ibn
Khaldun (ad 1332–1406), that modern historians judge to have been
far in advance of historical research being done anywhere else in the
world (Masry 1981). The failure of antiquarianism to develop in the
Arab world may be attributed to Islam’s view of pagan pre-Islamic
civilizations and their works as an Age of Ignorance, to a tendency
to view many features of Islamic history as cyclical, and to a reli-
giously based disdain for and fear of works of art that involved the
portrayal of human forms. Too great an interest in pre-Islamic times
also could easily have been mistaken for dabbling in satanic arts. In
the medieval period, some Arab writers celebrated ancient Egypt’s
monuments as wonders worthy of respect but mainly because of
their association with revered Moslems. By contrast, popular prac-
tices that attributed supernatural powers to ancient Egyptian struc-
tures were seen by scholars as something that had to be suppressed
(Wood 1998). India and the Arab world indicate the highly partic-
ularistic factors that must be taken into account in explaining the
origins of archaeological research, or its failure to develop, in any
specific culture.


                           Conclusions
The first archaeologies to be developed in a systematic fashion were
historical ones. Although an interest in material culture surviving
from the past is ubiquitous, disciplines devoted to studying the past
by means of such material have developed in only a few societies.


                                 77
                A History of Archaeological Thought

Practices generally anticipating those of modern archaeology
developed for religious reasons in Egypt and Mesopotamia, but they
were not coherently organized and did not survive into later times.
In ancient Greece and Rome and in medieval Europe, the study of
the material remains of the past was at best vestigial and disorga-
nized. Comparisons between Renaissance Europe, Song China, and,
to a lesser degree, Japan suggest that in some cases where traditions
of historiography are well established, studies of written documents
may come to be supplemented by systematic research on palaeogra-
phy and ancient elite culture. In China and Europe, such studies first
used texts to date ancient finds and then employed stylistic traits to
track changes in art and architecture over time.
   The more extensive and systematic development of such research
in Europe may be attributed to the vast social and political transfor-
mation that occurred there beginning in the late medieval period.
The study of classical antiquity began in the context of the rejection
of feudalism that started in northern Italy and was closely related to
the desire of rising elites to abandon their ties to the immediate past
and associate themselves with what they gradually came to recognize
as an older and superior cultural tradition. Antiquarianism evolved as
a practice that was capable of providing the information that wealthy
patrons valued (Parry 1995: 95). Classical archaeology later came to
play a major role in defining European culture from the viewpoint of
the upper classes. This situation, which contrasted with the greater
continuity in Chinese and Japanese society before the twentieth cen-
tury, may have stimulated the development of archaeology as a major
source of information about the literate civilizations of ancient times.
The rediscovery of classical antiquity provided detailed information
about the glorious pasts of Italy and Greece, which had received
little coverage in biblical accounts, whereas the study of Egypt and
Mesopotamia was initially motivated by curiosity concerning civi-
lizations that had featured prominently in the Hebrew scriptures.
A growing sense of the discontinuity and diversity of the sources
of European civilization encouraged research that relied ever more
heavily on archaeology as a source of textual data as well as artifacts.
   Once classical studies, Egyptology, and Assyriology were formed,
these disciplines proved remarkably resistant to fundamental change
into the 1960s. Each continued to focus on the high culture of one
or more ancient civilizations, supplementing the study of ancient

                                  78
             Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies

texts with the investigation of fine art and monumental architecture.
The primary role of archaeology in these disciplines was to recover
material to be interpreted by experts in other subfields. This cast
archaeology in an inferior role compared to the study of epigraphy,
ancient literature, history, or art history. Yet classical archaeologists,
such as D. G. Hogarth (1899: vi), the Director of the British School
at Athens, had no doubts that archaeology illuminated by written
texts was greatly superior to archaeology that was not. Thus, it seems
unlikely that most archaeologists regarded their subordinate position
within these larger disciplines as anything but natural.




                                   79
                                chapter 3
              Antiquarianism without Texts

                   Knowing the past is as astonishing a
                   performance as knowing the stars.
                g e o r g e k u b l e r , The Shape of Time (1962), p. 19


The first archaeologists were only interested in historical times. They
sought to use major works of art and architecture from the past
to extend their knowledge of ancient civilizations that were already
familiar to them from written records. Although they progressively
enhanced their ability to elicit information about human behav-
ior from material remains, they did not at first seek to study peo-
ples about whom there was no written documentation. In the Ger-
man academic tradition, the term archaeology (Archäologie) remains
generally restricted to this sort of archaeology, whereas prehis-
toric archaeology is called Urgeschichte (history of beginnings) or
Frühgeschichte (early history). Elsewhere the term archaeology was
extended to the study of prehistory as the latter activity became more
professionalized (Gran-Aymerich 1998: 128–30). Both classical and
prehistoric archaeology grew out of a less professional and at first
largely undifferentiated antiquarianism.
   As a result of the work of prehistoric archaeologists, today we
know that historical archaeologists ignored at least 95 percent of
human history extending from the earliest known hominids who
existed some four million years ago to the nonliterate peoples who
lived in many parts of the world until recent times. In this chap-
ter, we will examine how archaeology began to develop in northern
and central Europe, where historical records usually do not ante-
date the Roman period and in some areas began only after ad 1000.
We also will trace how archaeology spread to other parts of the
world where there were no written records before the arrival of the
Europeans.


                                          80
                    Antiquarianism without Texts


              Antiquarianism in Northern Europe
In medieval Europe, what we now recognize as prehistoric tumuli
and megalithic monuments were objects of local interest and priests
occasionally recorded in their chronicles the folk tales that were asso-
ciated with them. Few of these monuments escaped violation by
lords or peasants who believed them to contain treasure (Klindt-
Jensen 1975: 9). Abandoned buildings of later times were likewise
plundered for construction materials and in search of holy relics and
treasure (Kendrick 1950: 18; Sklenář 1983: 16–18). As long as people
believed that the world had been created between 4000 and 5000 bc
and that the Bible provided a reliable account of events in the Middle
East covering the whole of human history, relatively little appeared to
lie beyond the purview of written records. There was no agreement
whether human beings had reached Europe before Noah’s flood,
which was calculated to have occurred about 2500 bc, but, if any
had, they were believed to have certainly been destroyed by that
cataclysm. It would have taken a long time for the few people that
the Bible recorded as having survived in the Middle East to have
increased in numbers and once again spread north and west. Thus,
only a few hundred to a few thousand years of human history in
Europe appeared to be unaccounted for. This meant that in much
of central and northern Europe and in most other parts of the world
little time was available for prehistory as we now understand it.
   During the Middle Ages, chroniclers, who were usually priests,
constructed colorful histories that traced royal and noble families
back to prestigious individuals who were mentioned either in the
Bible or in classical writings. These accounts were justified with ref-
erences to historical records, oral traditions, legends, myths, folk-
etymologies, and outright inventions. They had the Goths descended
from Gog, one of Noah’s grandsons (Klindt-Jensen 1975: 10), and
Brutus, a Trojan prince, becoming the first king of Britain after he
had defeated a race of giants who had previously lived there. Pagan
deities were often reinterpreted as deified mortals whose pedigrees
could be traced back to minor biblical figures (Kendrick 1950: 82).
In an age that was uncritical of historical scholarship, written records
frequently were forged to support these tales (Sklenář 1983: 14).
English scholars proudly claimed that King Arthur, and before him
Brutus, had conquered much of the world (Kendrick 1950: 36–7).

                                  81
                A History of Archaeological Thought

Individual chroniclers supported particular ruling groups. Geoffrey
of Monmouth, who wrote in the twelfth century, stressed England’s
earlier British, rather than its more recent Anglo-Saxon past, in order
not to displease his Norman masters by lauding the achievements of
the ruling group they had conquered (Ibid.: 4). As a result of conflict-
ing loyalties, contradictory claims were made in different chronicles.
   Other historical studies attempted to establish religious ties with
the Middle East. In the late twelfth century, the monks of Glas-
tonbury Abbey, in southwestern England, claimed that Joseph of
Arimathea, a minor biblical figure, had in ad 63 brought to England
the chalice that Jesus had used at his last supper (Kendrick 1950:
15). Prehistoric monuments were sometimes mentioned in these
accounts. Geoffrey of Monmouth associated Stonehenge with the
magician Merlin and hence with Arthurian legend (Figure 3.1),
whereas German writers often ascribed megalithic graves and tumuli
to the Huns, who had invaded Europe in the fifth century ad
(Sklenář 1983: 16). The ancient Greeks would have labeled such
history archaiologia.
   The stirrings of patriotism in northern Europe that led to the
Protestant Reformation stimulated a new and more secular interest
in the histories of the countries of that region that was already evi-
dent by the sixteenth century. This patriotism was especially strong
among the middle class, whose growing prosperity was linked to the
decline of feudalism and the development of nation states, each ruled
by an increasingly powerful monarch served by civil servants, lawyers,
rural gentry, and clergy. In Protestant countries, the clergy was usu-
ally wholly dependent on the government and strongly supported it.
Yet the entire middle class, such as it was then constituted, benefited
from, and supported, increasingly powerful kings.
   In England, the newly installed and still insecure Tudor dynasty
(ad 1480–1603) was glorified by renewed historical treatments of
Arthurian legends, which reflected the family’s Welsh, as opposed
to English, origins. Later, there was a marked increase of interest
in the history of England before the Norman Conquest as scholars
combed early records in an attempt to prove that Protestantism,
rather than engaging in heretical innovation, was restoring elements
of true Christianity that had been destroyed or distorted by Roman
Catholicism (Kendrick 1950: 115).


                                  82
                    Antiquarianism without Texts




Figure 3.1 Merlin erecting Stonehenge, from a fourteenth-century British
          manuscript (British Library MS Egerton 3028, f.30r.)

                                  83
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   T. D. Kendrick (1950) has interpreted the growth of historical
scholarship in England during the sixteenth century as a slow triumph
of Renaissance over medieval thought. Across northern Europe,
newly powerful rulers adopted Renaissance art, architecture, and
learning as symbols of their overcoming of feudalism. The Italian
historian Polydore Vergil (ca. 1470–1555), who was invited by Henry
VII to write a history of England, rejected the uncritical approach of
medieval chroniclers and sought to base his work on reliable doc-
umentary sources. This led him to reject the historicity of many
treasured national legends, such as those concerning King Arthur’s
conquests on the European continent, because he found no con-
firmation of them in the historical records of any other country
(Ibid.: 38). Critical studies of this sort demolished medieval chron-
icles and created a significant void in the early history of northern
Europe.
   In general, until the late 1600s, British antiquaries sought to fill
this gap with information derived from written archival sources dat-
ing from the medieval and still earlier Anglo-Saxon periods. They
began researching the origins of laws, religious practices, and the
royal prerogative, as well as genealogy and heraldry. In 1572, a group
of antiquaries established the London Society of Antiquaries to pro-
mote the preservation of such records and the study of the history of
institutions. This society disbanded early in the seventeenth century
because King James I feared that the work of its members might
undermine his royal powers (Piggott 1989: 22; Parry 1995: 43–4).
   From the beginning, however, some antiquaries exhibited an inter-
est in the physical remains of the past. In England, as early as the
fifteenth century, John Rous (1411–1491) and William of Worcester
(1415–1482) were aware that the past had been materially different
from the present. William was working on an account of Britain that
involved measuring and describing old buildings (Kendrick 1950: 18–
33). This concern with the material remains of the past was strength-
ened as a result of the destruction of the monasteries in the reign
of Henry VIII (1509–1547). The dismantling of these familiar land-
marks and the dispersal of their libraries spurred scholars to record
what was being destroyed as well as monuments of the more remote
past. In this way, the study of physical remains began to supplement
that of written records and oral traditions. These leisured, although
usually not rich, antiquaries were drawn from the professional and

                                  84
                     Antiquarianism without Texts

administrative middle class, which was expanding and prospering
under the more centralized rule of the Tudors (Casson 1939: 143).
For these patriotic Englishmen, local antiquities were an acceptable
substitute for the classical art from Italy and Greece that would soon
be imported by the king and members of the nobility. They visited
monuments dating from the medieval, Roman, and prehistoric peri-
ods and described them in the context of county topographies and
histories. They also recorded the local legends and traditions relat-
ing to these sites. In addition, some antiquaries made collections of
local (as well as exotic) curiosities. John Twyne, who died in 1581,
collected Romano-British coins, pottery, and glass, as well as study-
ing earthworks and megaliths (Kendrick 1950: 105). A more varied
and extensive, but less archaeological, collection of curiosities by the
royal gardener John Tradescant was to become the nucleus of the
Ashmolean Museum, established at Oxford in 1675. Hitherto, col-
lections containing antiquities had consisted either of church relics
or the family heirlooms of the nobility.
   At first, no clear distinction was drawn between curiosities that
were of natural and those that were of human origin. Scholars,
as well as uneducated people, believed prehistoric stone tools to
be thunderstones (a view endorsed by the Roman naturalist Pliny
[Slotkin 1965: x]) or elf-bolts and in Poland and central Europe it was
widely thought that pottery vessels grew spontaneously in the earth
(Abramowicz 1981; Sklenář 1983: 16; Coye 1997; Schnapp 1997: 145–
8). In a world unaware of biological evolution, it was not self-evident
that a prehistoric celt was man-made whereas a fossil ammonite was
a natural formation. Most of these curios were found accidentally
by farmers and manual laborers and there was as yet no tradition of
excavating for prehistoric remains.
   John Leland (1503–1552) was appointed King’s Antiquary in 1533;
evidence of growing royal interest in promoting the secular study
of the past. He played an important role in rescuing books follow-
ing the dispersal of monastic libraries. He also toured England and
Wales recording place-names and genealogies as well as objects of
antiquarian interest, including the visible remains of prehistoric sites.
Only vaguely aware even of major changes in architectural styles in
medieval times, his great innovation within the English context was
his desire to travel to see things rather than simply to read about
them (Kendrick 1950: 45–64).

                                   85
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

   William Camden’s (1551–1623) Britannia, first published in 1586,
was originally intended as a survey of what was known about England
in Roman times based on literary sources and topographic surveys.
In adopting this approach, Camden was following the example of
Italian topographical antiquaries to whose work he had been intro-
duced by the cartographer Abraham Ortelius in 1577 (Piggott 1989:
18). Camden’s studies also extended to pre-Roman Britain and later
Saxon England. It is indicative of the limited understanding of prehis-
tory at this time that in his survey of the county of Wiltshire, nothing,
not even Stonehenge or Silbury Hill, was recognized as being pre-
Roman. Britannia was revised and updated in many editions both
during Camden’s lifetime and posthumously.
   Camden’s style of research was continued by a succession of histo-
rians and topographers, most of whom worked at the county level.
They did little digging and had no sense of chronology apart from
what could be ascertained from written records. Like classical anti-
quaries, they sought to explain ancient monuments by associating
them with people mentioned in historical accounts. Their lack of an
established method for doing this meant that what are now recog-
nized as prehistoric remains were generally ascribed quite arbitrarily
either to the ancient Britons, whom the Romans had encountered
when they first invaded England, or to the Saxons and Danes, who
invaded Britain after the fall of the Roman Empire.
   Systematic antiquarian research developed somewhat later in Scan-
dinavia than in England, as part of the keen political and military
rivalry that followed the political separation of Sweden and Denmark
in 1523. Renaissance historians soon became as fascinated with their
respective national heritages as were those in England. They were
encouraged by Kings Christian IV of Denmark (r. 1588–1648) and
Gustavus II Adolphus of Sweden (r. 1611–1632) to draw from histor-
ical records and folklore a picture of primordial greatness and valor
flattering to their respective kingdoms. This interest quickly extended
to the study of ancient monuments. Royal patronage enabled leading
antiquaries to record these monuments in a thorough and systematic
fashion. Johan Bure (1568–1652), a Swedish civil servant, and Ole
Worm (1588–1654), a Danish medical doctor, documented large
numbers of rune stones. The inscriptions on these stones, which
date from the late Iron Age, permitted a historical archaeological
approach to late prehistoric and early historical times (Figure 3.2).

                                   86
Figure 3.2 Engraving of tumuli and rune stones at Jelling, Denmark, 1591 (Drawing executed for Henrik Ratzau
                                           and published in 1591)

                                                     87
                A History of Archaeological Thought

These antiquaries also collected information about what we now
know were much older megalithic tombs and rock drawings. Yet
Worm was of the opinion that Danish barrow graves and stone cir-
cles were unlikely to date prior to the beginning of the Christian era
(Parry 1995: 284). His publications of Danish antiquities led some
British antiquaries wrongly to identify megalithic remains in their
own country as the work of Danes, who they knew from historical
sources had begun invading and settling in England in the eighth
century ad (Piggott 1989: 104).
   Bure and Worm learned from each other despite the tense polit-
ical rivalries between their respective countries and their opposed
patriotic loyalties (Klindt-Jensen 1975: 14–21). Some of their work
was carried out by means of questionnaires that were distributed
nationwide. Museums also were established in which collections of
humanly fabricated objects and natural curiosities were assembled. In
Denmark one of the first of these was Worm’s own museum, which
became the basis for the Kunstkammer, or Royal Collection, that was
opened to the public in the 1680s. In Sweden, an Antiquaries College
was established at Uppsala in 1666 in order to pursue antiquarian
research and national laws were passed to protect ancient monu-
ments. These required the surrender of valuable finds to the king in
return for a reward. Olof Rudbeck (1630–1702), who taught at the
University of Uppsala, trenched and drew vertical sections of Viking-
age tumuli at Old Uppsala, and in this way determined the relative
age of burials within individual mounds. He wrongly believed that
the thickness of sod accumulated above a grave could be used to indi-
cate to the nearest century how much time had elapsed since a burial
had been placed in it (Klindt-Jensen 1975: 29–31). Unfortunately,
antiquarian research tended to languish in Sweden and Denmark
as the political ambitions of these states and their economies faltered
toward the end of the seventeenth century.
   In late medieval France, historians focused on the Franks, a
German-speaking people who had settled in their country after the
fall of the Roman Empire. Prehistoric, Roman, and post-Roman
structures were ascribed to Germanic heroes, such as Charlemagne
and Roland, or to local saints. With the spread of Renaissance learn-
ing, Roman antiquities were identified for what they were and Francis
I (r. 1515–1547) and Henri IV (r. 1589–1610) built up substantial col-
lections of local and imported classical marble statues and bronzes.

                                  88
                    Antiquarianism without Texts

Much local scholarship was concentrated on Roman inscriptions,
whereas for a long time pre-Roman antiquities were little valued.
The French collector of books and exotic artifacts Nicolas Fabri de
Peiresc (1580–1637) played an important role in disseminating an
understanding of what Italian antiquaries were doing throughout
northern and central Europe.
   Beginning with the publication in Lyon in 1485 of Paolo Emilio’s
(died 1529) De Antiquitate Galliarum (Gallic Antiquities), French
scholars became more aware of the Gauls, who had lived in France
before the arrival of the Romans and the Franks. Yet, because for over
a century French humanists avoided any kind of fieldwork, only in
the eighteenth century did a substantial antiquarian interest develop
in the way of life and origins of these early, Celtic-speaking inhabi-
tants of France. This led to the excavation of some prehistoric mon-
uments. In the 1750s, antiquaries were still debating whether prehis-
toric megaliths in Britanny dated from the Roman period or that of
the Germanic migrations that followed. In the latter part of the eight-
eenth century, a growing desire to document the cultural achieve-
ments of the Celts, who were now recognized as ancestors of the
French, encouraged the study of pre-Roman times to develop inde-
pendently of classical archaeology. This movement, which continued
into the nineteenth century, was linked to growing nationalism. Like
early English studies of pre-Roman remains, it encouraged more fan-
ciful speculation than sober investigations and ultimately contributed
little to the development of archaeology (Laming-Emperaire 1964).
Yet the quality of reporting archaeological finds improved over time.
In 1653 the tomb of the Merovingian king Childeric I, who had
died in ad 481, was accidentally discovered at Tournai. Jean-Jacob
Chifflet’s description of the magnificent objects recovered from this
tomb has been referred to as the first methodical excavation report
ever published (Parry 1995: 256), although the find was not system-
atically excavated (Schnapp 1997: 204). In the 1770s, Pierre-Clément
Grignon published a detailed account of his excavations of a Gallo-
Roman settlement at Châtelet in Champagne, which resembles the
reporting by Weber of his work at Pompeii (Schnapp 1997: 253–7).
   In Germany, the rediscovery in 1451 of the Roman historian
Cornelius Tacitus’s (ca. ad 56–120) Germania, with its detailed
and laudatory descriptions of the customs of the ancient Germans,
encouraged scholars to use classical sources rather than medieval

                                  89
                A History of Archaeological Thought

legends to study their early history. This trend laid the basis for
the first general historical study of ancient Germany, Philip Klüver’s
Germaniae Antiquae (Ancient Germany), published in 1616 (Sklenář
1983: 24–5). As happened elsewhere, this historical orientation
encouraged a growing interest in the material remains of the past.
German antiquaries were precocious in resorting to excavation to
try to study historical problems. Nicolaus Marschalk (ca. 1460–
1527), a Thuringian humanist, investigated the differences between
megalithic alignments and tumuli in an attempt to relate them to
different, historically recorded ethnic groups. In the late sixteenth
century, numerous excavators sought to recover decorated Lusatian
urns and to determine whether these vessels were humanly manufac-
tured or grew naturally in the soil (Schnapp 1997: 148).
   In 1691, the philosopher Gottfried Leibniz (1646–1716) called on
antiquaries to use their skills to reconstruct the ancient history of
Germany. Antiquaries, such as Johann Major (1634–1693), J. H.
Nünningh (1675–1753), Christian Rhode (1653–1717), and his son
Andreas Rhode (1682–1724), excavated to learn more about the cus-
toms of their presumed ancestors. In order to accomplish this task,
megaliths and funerary vessels were classified according to shape and
presumed use. In an essay on the origins of the Germans published
in 1750, Johann von Eckart suggested that graves without metal
artifacts, graves containing bronze and stone but not iron artifacts,
and graves containing artifacts made from all three materials repre-
sented three successive phases in human development, an idea that
had already been suggested to Montfaucon by the Swiss antiquary
Jacques Christophe Iselin. Instructions how to excavate sites were
being published by German antiquaries as early as 1688 (Sklenář 1983:
24–5; Malina and Vašı́ček 1990: 28; Schnapp 1997: 142–8, 205–12).
   Antiquarian studies clearly evolved somewhat differently in Britain,
Scandinavia, France, and Germany. Developments in Hungary and
the western Slavic countries seem to have most resembled those in
Germany. Yet everywhere in northern and central Europe early anti-
quarianism shared important features in common. Political leaders
and scholars incorporated archaeological finds into their collections
of curiosities. In some princes’ collections local discoveries con-
sidered to have artistic merit were displayed alongside statues and
painted vessels imported from Italy and Greece. Some digging was
carried out to recover artifacts and occasionally laws were passed to

                                  90
                     Antiquarianism without Texts

protect antiquities and secure new finds for royal or national collec-
tions (Sklenář 1983: 32–3). Although archaeological discoveries were
often fancifully associated with historically known peoples, no effec-
tive system was devised for dating prehistoric artifacts anywhere in
Europe. In the absence of written inscriptions, it was not even clear
which finds dated before earliest written records in any particular area
and which did not.
   According to Leo Klejn (2001b: 1128), until Russia was “Euro-
peanized” by Peter the Great (r. 1682–1725), no antiquarian tradi-
tion existed there as it did in the rest of Europe. The first substantial
interest in what we regard as the remains of prehistoric times was
directed to the kurgans, or tumuli, many thousands of which had
been constructed over a period of 5,000 years in the steppe lands
that stretch from the Ukraine eastward into Siberia. For centuries,
if not millennia, these tombs had been plundered for treasure. As
Russian colonization spread eastward into Siberia in the seventeenth
century, the plundering of kurgans in that region was carried out on
a massive scale, sometimes under government license. By the 1760s,
not enough Siberian tumuli remained unplundered for these com-
mercial operations to remain profitable (M. Miller 1956: 15).
   In 1718, Peter the Great ordered officials to collect and forward
to his new capital of St. Petersburg old and rare objects as these
were discovered. This order embraced geological and palaeonto-
logical as well as archaeological finds and Peter’s scientific interests
were expressed in his request that sketches be made of the circum-
stances in which the most interesting objects were found. In 1721, a
German naturalist named Messerschmidt was sent to Siberia to col-
lect various categories of material, including archaeological artifacts.
Five years later, a government office turned over more than 250
objects of gold and silver weighing more than 33 kilograms to the
Imperial Art Collection. In 1739, Gerhard Müller (1705–1783), a
professor of German attached to the Russian Academy of Sciences,
who had been sent to study the peoples and resources of Siberia,
supervised the excavation of kurgans in the vicinity of Krasnoiarsk.
He recovered numerous bronze weapons and ornaments that he pre-
pared for publication (Black 1986: 71). After the Russians annexed
and began to settle the steppes along the north coast of the Black
Sea in the second half of the eighteenth century, interests in ancient
treasures shifted to that region. Landowners and peasants began to

                                   91
                A History of Archaeological Thought

dig into mounds in hopes of recovering precious metals and antiqui-
ties. As early as 1763, the governor of the region, Aleksy Mel’gunov,
excavated a Scythian royal kurgan, recovering valuable material now
in the Hermitage Museum.


                    Recognition of Stone Tools
The sixteenth and seventeenth centuries marked the beginning of
worldwide western European exploration and colonization. Mariners
started encountering large numbers of hunter-gatherers and tribal
agriculturalists in the Americas, Africa, and the Pacific. Descriptions
of these peoples and their customs circulated in Europe and collec-
tions of their tools and clothing were brought back as curiosities.
At first the discovery of groups who did not know how to work
metal and whose cultures abounded with practices and beliefs that
were contrary to Christian teaching seemed to confirm the traditional
medieval view that those who had wandered farthest from the Middle
East and thus lost contact with God’s continuing revelation had
degenerated both morally and technologically. Gradually, however,
a growing awareness of these people and their tools gave rise to an
alternative view, which drew a parallel between modern “primitive”
peoples and prehistoric Europeans. Yet it took a long time for this
comparison to be generally accepted and even longer for all of its
implications to be worked out. It did not lead quickly or directly to
the adoption of an evolutionary interpretation of human history.
   The first step in this process, and one of the most important
advances in the development of prehistoric archaeology, was the real-
ization by scholars that the stone tools being found in Europe had
been manufactured by human beings and were not of natural or
supernatural origin. Until the late seventeenth century crystals, pet-
rified plants and animals, stone tools, and other distinctively shaped
stone objects were all classified as fossils. In 1669, Nicolaus Steno
(1638–1686) compared fossil and modern mollusc shells and con-
cluded that they resembled each other more closely than either did
inorganic crystals. On this basis, he argued that fossil shells were the
remains of once living animals instead of objects that had grown as a
result of the same creative forces acting on stone that produced liv-
ing organisms when they acted on animate matter. Ethnographic
analogies played a similar role in establishing the human origin

                                  92
                    Antiquarianism without Texts

of stone tools (Grayson 1983: 5). The possibility that people had once
lived in Europe who did not know the use of metal tools was implicitly
raised early in the sixteenth century by Pietro Martire d’Anghiera
when he compared the indigenous peoples of the West Indies
with classical accounts of a primordial Golden Age (Hodgen 1964:
371). In the late sixteenth century, John Twyne used ancient Greek
ethnographic accounts to suggest that in the first millennium bc,
the northern Europeans had followed a primitive lifestyle that resem-
bled those of the stone-tool using North American Indians of his
own time. In the following century, John Aubrey proposed that life
in prehistoric England might have resembled that of the indigenous
inhabitants of Virginia.
   Already in the sixteenth century, the Italian geologist Georgius
Agricola (1490–1555) had expressed the opinion that stone tools were
probably of human origin (Heizer 1962a: 62) and Michel Mercati
(1541–1593), who was Superintendent of the Vatican Botanical
Gardens and physician to Pope Clement VII, had suggested in his
Metallotheca that, before the use of iron, chipped stone tools might
have been “beaten out of the hardest flints, to be used for the mad-
ness of war” ([1717] Heizer 1962a: 65). He cited biblical and classical
attestations of the use of stone tools and was familiar with ethno-
graphic specimens from the New World that had been sent as presents
to the Vatican. Ulisse Aldrovandi (1522–1605) also argued that stone
tools were human fabrications in his Museum Metallicum, published
in 1648. In 1655, the heterodox Frenchman Isaac de La Peyrère, one
of the first writers to challenge the biblical account of the creation
of humanity, identified thunderstones with his “pre-Adamite” race,
which he claimed had existed before the creation of the first Hebrews,
described at the beginning of the Book of Genesis.
   In Britain, by the seventeenth century increasing knowledge of the
indigenous peoples of the New World was resulting in a growing real-
ization that stone tools had been made by human beings. In 1656, the
antiquary William Dugdale (1605–1686) attributed such tools to the
ancient Britons, asserting that they had used them before they learned
how to work brass or iron. Robert Plot (1640–1696), Dugdale’s
son-in-law and the Keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, shared this
opinion to the extent that in 1686 he wrote that the ancient Britons
had used mostly stone rather than iron tools and that one might learn
how prehistoric stone tools had been hafted by comparing them

                                  93
                A History of Archaeological Thought

with North American Indian ones that could be observed in their
wooden mounts. In 1699, his assistant Edward Lhwyd drew specific
comparisons between elf-arrows and chipped flint arrowheads made
by the Indians of New England. Similar views were entertained by
the Scottish antiquary Robert Sibbald as early as 1684. Around 1766,
Bishop Charles Lyttelton speculated that stone tools must have been
made in Britain before any metal ones were available and therefore
that they dated from some time before the Roman conquest (Slotkin
1965: 223). A decade later the writer Samuel Johnson ([1775] 1970:
56) compared British stone arrowheads with tools made by the mod-
ern inhabitants of the Pacific Islands and concluded that the for-
mer had been manufactured by a nation that did not know how to
manufacture iron. By the eighteenth century such observations had
encouraged a growing realization in Britain that antiquities could be
a source of information about the past as well as curiosities worthy
of being recorded in county topographies. Yet as late as 1655, as dis-
tinguished a European antiquary as Ole Worm continued to believe
it likely that polished stone axes were of celestial origin even though
he had ethnographic examples of stone tools from the New World
in his collection (Klindt-Jensen 1975: 23). The repeated realization
that stone tools had been manufactured by human beings and the
slowness with which this idea was generally accepted indicate how
weak were the networks linking European antiquaries interested in
such questions during the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries. The
slowness also demonstrates that the artifactual nature of such objects
was not self-evident.
   Early in the eighteenth century Bernard de Montfaucon, on the
basis of his examination of a megalithic tomb containing polished
stone axes that had been excavated in Cocherel, Normandy, in 1685,
ascribed this class of tomb to a nation that had no knowledge of
iron. In reaching this conclusion, he was influenced by knowledge
of archaeological research in England and Scandinavia (Laming-
Emperaire 1964: 94). Soon after, the French scholar Antoine de
Jussieu (1686–1758) drew some detailed comparisons between Euro-
pean stone tools and ethnographic specimens brought from New
France and the Caribbean. He stated that “the people of France,
Germany, and other Northern countries who, but for the discovery
of iron, would have much resemblance to the savages of today, had
no less need than they – before using iron – to cut wood, to remove

                                  94
                     Antiquarianism without Texts

bark, to split branches, to kill wild animals, to hunt for their food and
to defend themselves against their enemies” ([1723] Heizer 1962a:
69). In 1738, Kilian Stobeus, Professor of Natural History at the Uni-
versity of Lund, argued that flint implements antedated metal ones in
Scandinavia and compared them with ethnographic specimens from
Louisiana, an opinion echoed in 1763 by the Danish scholar Erik
Pontoppidan (Klindt-Jensen 1975: 35–9). By the eighteenth century,
not only the human fabrication of stone tools but also the possibility
of their considerable antiquity in Europe were widely accepted as
plausible.
   Yet a growing realization that stone tools had probably been
used before metal ones in Europe and elsewhere did not necessi-
tate the adoption of an evolutionary perspective. Stone tools could
be observed being used both instead of metal ones and alongside
metal ones in the contemporary world. Noting that, according to
the Bible, iron working had been practiced at the latest no more
than a few generations after the creation of human beings, Mercati
argued that knowledge of metallurgy must have been lost by nations
who migrated into areas where iron ore was not found ([1717] Heizer
1962a: 66). Similar degenerationist views were held for a long time.
It was frequently suggested that knowledge of metallurgy was lost
by many human groups as they spread across the face of the earth
after Noah’s flood, while at the same time this knowledge persisted
in the Middle East. Stone tools were believed to have been invented
as a substitute for metal ones. Some thought that at a later date
knowledge of bronze and iron working diffused from the Middle
East to places like Europe. Others speculated that bronze and iron
working might have been independently reinvented in Europe. Only
the latter theory postulated an evolutionary sequence, although it,
like the others, remained embedded in the larger context of medieval
degenerationism (Figure 3.3).
   In 1695, John Woodward (1665–1728) hypothesized that human-
ity as a whole might have been barbarized after the flood (Rossi
1985: 217–22), an even more ambitious evolutionary scheme embed-
ded within a degenerationist context. Although the radical English
philosopher Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) adopted a purely evo-
lutionary view of human origins in his Leviathan (1651), it clearly
remained dangerous to question the biblical claim that the earliest
humans had been familiar with agriculture and metallurgy. Still other

                                   95
                    A History of Archaeological Thought

    Europe/Middle East     Europe        Middle East    Europe     Middle East


                                    Ir                       Ir
                    S

        S                           B                        B
                x


            x                   S                            S
                    S           x                            x


                x


            B, Ir                    B, Ir                        B, Ir

      Class/ethnic            Diffusionist                 Evolutionist
      differences

     Technology
    Ir = Iron B = Bronze            S = Stone          x = Knowledge lost

 Figure 3.3 Early speculations about relations between stone, bronze, and
             iron implements in Europe and the Middle East


antiquaries rejected the proposal that a knowledge of metallurgy
had ever been lost in Europe. They argued instead that throughout
human history stone tools had been used alongside metal ones by
social classes or communities that were too poor to afford metal tools
or by a few isolated nations that, unlike their neighbors, had forgot-
ten how to work metal. Because chronological controls did not exist
for the archaeological record anywhere before the earliest written
records, it was impossible to determine how different materials had
been used to make tools over time in different places.
  As late as 1857, it was argued in opposition to the theory that
stone tools antedated metal ones that many stone tools appeared
to be imitations of metal originals (O’Laverty 1857; “Trevelyan”
1857). Without adequate chronological controls and any archaeo-
logical data from most parts of the world, it remained possible that
knowledge and lack of knowledge of iron working had existed side
by side throughout most of human history. Before the nineteenth

                                         96
                    Antiquarianism without Texts

century there was no factual evidence to make an evolutionary view
of human history more plausible than a degenerationist one.


                        The Enlightenment
The development of an evolutionary view of the past was encour-
aged far less by a growing body of archaeological evidence than by
a gradual transformation in thought that began during the seven-
teenth century in northwestern Europe, the region that was rapidly
emerging as the economic hub of a new world economy (Wallerstein
1974; Delâge 1985). This view was based on growing confidence in
the ability of individual human beings to excel and of human soci-
eties to develop both economically and culturally. Early in the seven-
teenth century the English philosopher and statesman Francis Bacon
(1561–1626) protested against the idea that the culture of classical
antiquity was superior to that of modern times. He urged scholars
to ignore the teachings of ancient writers and instead to seek knowl-
edge through observation, classification, and experiment. Although
Bacon did not rule out the use of hypotheses to guide research,
he maintained that both their formulation and testing had to be
grounded in observations. For Bacon, an inductive scientific method
was the only way for humanity to overcome the tyranny of customary
beliefs.
   Bacon’s position was echoed in France in the late-seventeenth-
century Quarrel between the Ancients and the Moderns, in which the
“moderns” argued that human talents were not declining and hence
present day Europeans could hope to produce works that equaled or
surpassed those of the ancient Greeks or Romans (Laming-Emperaire
1964: 64–6). Although Walter Raleigh and many other Elizabethan
writers had continued to believe, in the medieval fashion, that the
world was hastening toward its end, by the second half of the seven-
teenth century a growing number of western Europeans were confi-
dent about the future (Toulmin and Goodfield 1966: 108–10).
   This optimism was encouraged by the acceleration of economic
growth as a result of the application of technological innovations,
especially in agriculture and shipbuilding, in Holland and England;
by the scientific revolutions brought about by Galileo Galilei (1564–
1642) and Isaac Newton (1643–1727), which vastly altered the under-
standing of the universe inherited from classical antiquity; and by

                                 97
                A History of Archaeological Thought

widespread delight in the literary creativity of writers in Elizabethan
England and seventeenth-century France. Especially among the
middle classes, these developments encouraged a growing faith in
progress and a new belief that to a large degree human beings were
masters of their own destiny. They also gradually inclined western
Europeans to regard the ways of life of the technologically less
advanced peoples they were encountering in various parts of the
world as survivals of a primordial human condition rather than as
products of degeneration.
   In the course of the seventeenth century, a growing belief in
progress was complemented by an increasing emphasis on rational-
ism. The French philosopher René Descartes (1596–1650) attempted
to account for all natural phenomena, apart from the human mind
itself, in terms of a single system of mechanical principles. He
expounded the idea that the laws governing nature were universal
and eternal in their application. God was viewed as existing apart from
the material realm, which he had created as a sort of machine that
was capable of functioning without further intervention. These views,
which denied God’s personal involvement in the everyday affairs of
the world, simultaneously promoted Deism and discouraged a belief
in miracles. They therefore encouraged a more rationalistic approach
to understanding nature as well as the belief that human creative
powers were fixed rather than in decline (Toulmin and Goodfield
1966: 80–4).
   Neither the Renaissance discovery that the past had been different
from the present nor the realization that technological development
was occurring in western Europe led directly to the conclusion that
progress was a general characteristic of human history. In the seven-
teenth century, successive historical periods were viewed as a series
of kaleidoscopic variations on themes that were grounded in a fixed
human nature, rather than as constituting a developmental sequence
worthy of study in its own right (Toulmin and Goodfield 1966: 113–
14). The Italian philosopher Giambattista Vico (1668–1744) saw his-
tory as having cyclical characteristics and argued that human societies
evolve through similar stages of development and decay (theocracy,
monarchy, democracy, and ultimately barbarism or chaos) that reflect
the uniform actions of providence. He prudently stressed, however,
that this view of human history as governed by strict laws did not
apply to the Hebrews, whose progress was divinely guided. Although

                                  98
                    Antiquarianism without Texts

he was not an evolutionist, his views helped to encourage the belief
that human history could be understood in terms of regularities anal-
ogous to those being proposed for the natural sciences (Ibid.: 125–9).
   While ideas about cultural evolution were being expounded in
France by Loys Leroy and Jean Bodin already in the late sixteenth
century (Patterson 1997: 32–3), an evolutionary view of human his-
tory that was sufficiently comprehensive to challenge the medieval
one not only on specific points but also in its entirety was not formu-
lated until the eighteenth century. Enlightenment philosophy, the
most ambitious and influential systematization of a century character-
ized by system building, began in France, where it was associated with
leading philosophers such as Charles-Louis, baron de Montesquieu,
François-Marie Arouet Voltaire, Marie-Jean de Caritat, marquis
de Condorcet, and the economist Marie-Robert-Jacques Turgot,
baron de l’Aulne. It also flourished in Scotland in the school of
“primitivist” thinkers, so called because of their interest in the ori-
gins of institutions. These included Francis Hutcheson, Henry Home
(Lord Kames), William Robertson, David Hume, Adam Smith, John
Millar, Adam Ferguson, Dugald Stewart, Thomas Reid, and James
Burnett (Lord Monboddo), best known for his insistence that human
beings and orangutans belonged to the same species (Bryson 1945;
Schneider 1967; Herman 2001).
   The philosophers of the Enlightenment combined a more natural-
istic understanding of social processes with a firm belief in progress
to produce an integrated set of concepts that purported to explain
social change. They also created a methodology that they believed
enabled them to study the general course of human development
from earliest times. In England and the Netherlands, where political
power was already in the hands of the merchant middle class, intel-
lectual activity was directed toward analyzing the practical political
and economic significance of this change. The continuing political
weakness of the French middle class in the face of Bourbon auto-
cracy stimulated French intellectuals to use the idea of progress to
reify change as a basis for challenging the legitimacy of an absolute
monarch, who claimed to rule by divine will and protected the feudal
economic privileges enjoyed by a politically moribund nobility. By
proclaiming change to be both desirable and inevitable, Enlighten-
ment philosophers called into question the legitimacy of the existing
political and religious order.

                                  99
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   Beginning as an intellectual expression of discontent, the French
Enlightenment gradually developed into a movement with revolu-
tionary potential. By arguing that social progress was inevitably in the
general interest of humanity, middle-class proponents of the Enlight-
enment sought to recruit support amongst the French lower classes as
well as the middle class. Like adherents of most revolutionary move-
ments seeking power, they sought to identify their own class’s inter-
ests with everyone’s general good. Their program also took account
of the growth of capitalism and of a world economy dominated by
western Europe and sought to create in France a political system that
more closely resembled those already established in Britain and the
Netherlands, which were more in accord with these developments.
   The Scottish interest in Enlightenment philosophy reflected the
close cultural ties between Scotland and France but also was stimu-
lated by the unprecedented power and prosperity acquired by the
Scottish urban middle class as a result of Scotland’s union with
England in 1707. Southern Scotland was experiencing rapid devel-
opment but the highland areas to the north remained politically,
economically, and culturally undeveloped. This contrast aroused the
interest of Scottish intellectuals in questions relating to the ori-
gin, development, and modernization of institutions. By contrast, in
England at this period questions of origins generally were regarded as
speculative and were avoided. Although Scottish intellectuals made
very important contributions to the development of Enlightenment
thought and the understanding of the modern world, it was the more
revolutionary version of Enlightenment philosophy that developed
in France in the second half of the eighteenth century that would
become popular among the middle classes seeking more political
power for themselves in Europe and North America.
   The following are the main tenets of the Enlightenment that were
to be important for the development of archaeology and the other
social sciences:

1. Psychic unity. All human groups were believed to possess essen-
   tially the same kind and level of intelligence and the same basic
   emotions, although individuals within groups might differ from
   one another in their talents and natural dispositions. Because of
   this there was no biological barrier to the degree to which any race
   or nationality could benefit from new knowledge or contribute to

                                  100
                    Antiquarianism without Texts

   its advancement. All groups were equally perfectable and hence
   all human beings were capable of benefiting from European civi-
   lization. Psychic unity also implied that an advanced technological
   civilization was not destined to remain the exclusive possession of
   Europeans. Closer to home, the doctrine of psychic unity implic-
   itly denied that there was any natural justification for the feudal
   division of French society into three unequal social orders: nobles,
   clergy, and commoners. By contrast, few adherents of Enlighten-
   ment thought supported the political and social equality of men
   and women. Most would have read the “Declaration of the Rights
   of Man and the Citizen,” passed by the revolutionary National
   Assembly in 1789 and regarded as the legal embodiment of the
   political ideals of the Enlightenment, as referring exclusively to
   males.
2. Cultural progress is the dominant feature of human history.
   Change was believed to occur continuously rather than episodi-
   cally and was ascribed to natural rather than supernatural causes.
   The main motivation for progress was thought to be the desire of
   human beings to improve their condition, principally by gaining
   greater control over nature (Slotkin 1965: 441). Many Enlighten-
   ment philosophers regarded progress as inevitable, or even as a
   law of nature, whereas others thought of it instead as something
   to be hoped for (Ibid.: 357–91; Harris 1968a: 37–9).
3. Progress characterizes not only technological development but
   all aspects of human life, including social organization, politics,
   morality, and religious beliefs. Changes in all these spheres were
   viewed as occurring concomitantly and as generally following a
   similar sequence of development. Human beings at the same level
   of development were believed to devise uniform solutions to their
   problems; hence their ways of life evolved along parallel lines
   (Slotkin 1965: 445). Cultural change was frequently conceptu-
   alized in terms of a universal series of stages. These stages were
   usually defined in economic terms. Almost simultaneously Turgot
   and Home spoke of successive periods of savage hunters,
   barbarian pastoralists, and civilized farmers. A fourth period
   of commerce embraced more recent developments in Europe
   (Herman 2001; Pluciennik 2002). Europeans were believed to
   have evolved through all these stages, whereas less developed
   societies had passed through only some of the simpler ones.

                                 101
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   Qualitative cultural differences were generally ascribed to climatic
   and other environmental influences (Slotkin 1965: 423).
4. Progress perfects human nature, not by changing it but by pro-
   gressively eliminating ignorance and superstition and curbing
   destructive passions (Toulmin and Goodfield 1966: 115–23). The
   new evolutionary view of cultural change did not negate either
   the traditional Christian or Cartesian notion of a fixed and im-
   mutable human nature. It was, however, now believed that human
   nature was essentially good and hence that human beings had the
   innate capacity to manage their affairs to both their personal and
   their collective advantage. These ideas had much in common with
   the traditional Confucian beliefs of China, which were known
   to at least some Enlightenment philosophers from accounts by
   Christian missionaries. Human nature as it was now conceived
   was far removed from the medieval preoccupation with sinfulness
   and individual dependence on divine grace as the only means of
   achieving salvation.
5. Progress results from the exercise of rational thought to improve
   the human condition. In this fashion, human beings gradually
   acquire greater ability to control their environment, which in turn
   generates the wealth and leisure needed to support the creation
   of more complex societies and the development of a more pro-
   found and objective understanding of the nature of humanity and
   the universe. The exercise of reason had long been regarded by
   Europeans as the crucial feature distinguishing human beings from
   animals. Most Enlightenment philosophers also viewed cultural
   progress teleologically, as humanity’s realization of the plans of a
   benevolent, if remote, deity. A faith that benevolent laws guided
   human development was long to outlive a belief in God among
   those who studied human societies.

   The Scottish philosopher Dugald Stewart labeled the methodology
that Enlightenment philosophers devised to trace the development
of human institutions “theoretic” or “conjectural” history (Slotkin
1965: 460). This involved the comparative study of living peoples
whose cultures were judged to be at different levels of complexity and
arranging these cultures to form a logical, usually unilinear, sequence
from simple to complex. These studies were based largely on


                                 102
                    Antiquarianism without Texts

ethnographic data derived from accounts by explorers and missionar-
ies working in different parts of the world. There were disagreements
about details, such as whether agricultural or pastoral economies had
evolved first. In the New World, evidence of independent pastoral
economies was totally lacking. Nevertheless, the evidence suggested
similar developmental trends, even if the range of intermediate soci-
eties differed in the two hemispheres. It was believed that the result-
ing pattern could be regarded as an approximation of actual historical
sequences, and in turn be used to examine the development of all
kinds of social institutions. In the writings of the historian William
Robertson and others, the generally similar range of cultures found
in the Eastern Hemisphere and the Americas was interpreted as val-
idating the principle of psychic unity and the belief that humans at
the same stage of development generally respond to similar problems
in similar ways (Harris 1968a: 34–5).
   Turgot suggested that the modern world contains examples of all
the past stages of human development. The systematic comparison
and ordering of existing societies therefore would illustrate the entire
history of human progress. This belief has led ethnologists from the
eighteenth century to the present to claim that they possess the means
required to study the total range of variability in human behavior and
to document the general development of human societies without
having to depend on archaeological data. This untested assumption
has encouraged the formation of the view held by many social anthro-
pologists that archaeology is of minor theoretical importance, if as a
discipline it is needed at all. More productively, the theoretic history
of Enlightenment philosophers questioned the Renaissance belief
that the study of the past could be based solely on written records
and ancient art and architecture. Instead, Enlightenment philoso-
phers addressed changes in everyday life – in subsistence patterns,
social and political organization, and folk beliefs – as well as in phi-
losophy and the arts.
   Enlightenment philosophers were convinced that their beliefs rep-
resented the cutting edge of human creativity and were destined
to spread around the world and transform human life everywhere.
Enlightenment philosophy was both ethnocentric and Eurocentric
(Vyverberg 1989). Yet it should not be presumed that Enlighten-
ment philosophers were inevitably preoccupied with the uniqueness


                                  103
                A History of Archaeological Thought

of Europe. When Napoleon later considered charges that his efforts
to modernize Egypt posed the danger that some time in the future
the Egyptians might conquer France, he replied that it was as natural
for the world to be ruled from Alexandria as from Paris (Herold 1962:
15–16). The progress and enlightenment of humanity as a whole were
of primary importance.
   It is generally acknowledged that a cultural-evolutionary perspec-
tive was widely accepted for explaining human history long before
the publication of Darwin’s On the Origin of Species in 1859. Yet
Glyn Daniel (1976: 41) doubted the importance of Enlightenment
philosophy for the development of archaeology because Enlighten-
ment scholars, with few exceptions (see Harris 1968a: 34), ignored
archaeological data in their own writings. That they did so is scarcely
surprising because, in the absence of any established means for dating
prehistoric material, archaeology had little to contribute to their dis-
cussions of long-term cultural change. This does not mean, however,
that the writings of the Enlightenment did not influence the thinking
of antiquaries. On the contrary, at the very least their evolutionary
view of human development from the most primitive beginnings to
the present suggested that there was much change before the earliest
written records for archaeologists to study.
   More specifically, the Enlightenment encouraged a renewed anti-
quarian interest in the materialist and evolutionary views of cultural
development that had been expounded by the Roman Epicurean
philosopher Titus Lucretius Carus (98–55 bc) in his poem De Rerum
Natura (On the Nature of Things). He had argued that the earliest
implements were hands, nails, and teeth, then stones and pieces of
wood. Only later were tools made of bronze and later still of iron.
Although Lucretius’s scheme was supported by references in earlier
classical texts to a period when bronze tools and weapons had not
yet been replaced by iron ones, it was based largely on evolutionary
speculations, which postulated that the universe and all living species
had developed as a result of irreducible and eternal particles of mat-
ter, called atoms, combining in ever more complex ways. Neither
Lucretius nor any other Roman scholar sought to prove this theory
and it remained only one of many speculative schemes known to the
Romans. A popular alternative postulated the moral degeneration of
humanity through successive ages of gold, silver, bronze, and iron.


                                  104
                    Antiquarianism without Texts

   Early in the eighteenth century, French scholars were familiar both
with the ideas of Lucretius and with the growing evidence that stone
tools had once been used throughout Europe. They also were familiar
with classical and biblical texts, which suggested that bronze tools
had been used before iron ones. In 1734 Nicolas Mahudel read a
paper to the Académie des Inscriptions in Paris, in which he cited
Mercati and set out the idea of three successive ages of stone, bronze,
and iron as a plausible account of human development. Mahudel,
like Mercati, differed from Lucretius in assuming that stones had
been worked as well as used, a change that must have been inspired
by archaeological discoveries (Leroi-Gourhan 1993: 409). In 1758
Antoine-Yves Goguet (1716–1758) supported the Three-Age the-
ory in a book that was translated into English three years later with
the title The Origin of Laws, Arts, and Sciences, and their Progress
among the Most Ancient Nations. He believed that modern “savages
set before us a striking picture of the ignorance of the ancient world,
and the practices of primitive times” ([1761] Heizer 1962a: 14). Yet
to square this evolutionary view with the biblical assertion that iron
working had been invented before the flood, he claimed, like Mercati
and some other contemporary “evolutionists,” that this process had
to be reinvented after “that dreadful calamity deprived the greatest
part of humanity of this, as well as of other arts.”
   Glyn Daniel (1976: 40) correctly warned against exaggerating the
influence that the Three-Age theory exerted on antiquarian thought
during the eighteenth century. Yet, as an interest in cultural progress
grew more pervasive, the Three-Age theory gained in popular esteem.
In Denmark, this idea was presented by the historian P. F. Suhm in his
History of Norway, Denmark, and Holstein (1776) and by the anti-
quary Skuli Thorlacius (1802), as well as by L. S. Vedel Simonsen
in his textbook of Danish history published in 1813. Neverthe-
less, despite a growing number of supporters, the Three-Age theory
remained as speculative and unproved as it had been in the days
of Lucretius. Moreover, during the eighteenth century, the Three-
Age scheme of technological evolution was not combined with the
Enlightenment evolutionary trajectory of economic development
from hunting and gathering to commerce. By comparison, the obser-
vation that sometime in the remote past at least some Europeans had
made and used stone tools was widely accepted.


                                 105
                A History of Archaeological Thought


                   Scientific Antiquarianism
The study of prehistoric antiquities in the seventeenth and eigh-
teenth centuries was influenced by the same elaboration of scien-
tific methodology that had played a role in the development of the
Enlightenment. The ideas of Bacon and Descartes were reflected in
the importance that the Royal Society of London, founded by King
Charles II in 1660, placed on observation, classification, and exper-
imentation. The membership of that society rejected the authority
that medieval scholars had assigned to learned works of antiquity as
the ultimate sources of scientific knowledge and devoted themselves
to studying things rather than what had been written about them,
even if some of them still continued to be pleased when they thought
they had found their most recent discoveries anticipated in the great
scientific writings of ancient times. Antiquaries were elected fellows
of the Royal Society and their work was encouraged and published by
the society, except while Isaac Newton was its president between 1703
and 1727. Although Newton was a great physical scientist, his inter-
ests in human history were mystical and numerological in character.
   The most innovative and celebrated of the seventeenth-century
antiquaries who became members of the Royal Society was
John Aubrey (1626–1697), who worked mainly in the county of
Wiltshire, in south-central England. He had become familiar with
Baconian methodology at Oxford University in the 1650s and had
begun studying the monumental complex of prehistoric stone ruins
at Avebury in 1649 (Figure 3.4). In 1663 Charles II personally
encouraged him to prepare detailed descriptions of Stonehenge and
Avebury for a projected publication that Aubrey titled Monumenta
Britannica. In this work, he argued that these great monuments
had probably been druidical temples. Aubrey also compared other
stone circles, demonstrating that they constituted a distinctive cat-
egory of monument and maintaining that their distribution over
the whole of Britain indicated that they must have predated the
Roman occupation of England and southern Scotland only. Aubrey
was aware of the originality of what he was doing and called his
method “comparative antiquities.” He defined its goal as being
“to make the stones give evidence for themselves” (Parry 1999:
19). Although it was not published until the twentieth century, the
manuscript of Monumenta Britannica was available for consultation

                                 106
                    Antiquarianism without Texts




  Figure 3.4 Aubrey’s plan of Avebury, from his Monumenta Britannica,
            ca. 1675 (Bodleian MS Top. Gen. C. 24, f.39v-40.)

and marks the beginning of the formal study of prehistoric remains
in England. Aubrey also used historically dated material to chart the
evolution of styles in medieval architecture, dress, and handwriting
(Parry 1995: 297).
   Over the years, other members of the Royal Society provided accu-
rate and detailed descriptions of archaeological finds. They identi-
fied animal bones from archaeological sites and sought to determine
by experiment how tools had been made and used. They also tried
to work out how large stones might have been moved and monu-
ments constructed in ancient times. The kinds of research that the
Royal Society encouraged are exemplified by the fieldwork of William
Stukeley (1687–1765) (Figure 3.5). Like Camden, he realized that
the geometrical crop marks that farmers had noted in various parts
of England since the medieval period (and which they believed were
of supernatural origin) resulted from the differential effect that the
buried foundations of some demolished structures had on the growth
of crops (Piggott 1985: 52). Like Aubrey, Stukeley grouped together
as types monuments of similar form, such as linear earthworks or

                                 107
                  A History of Archaeological Thought

different kinds of burial mounds,
in hopes of interpreting them in
the light of the meager historical
evidence that was available. Stukeley
also was one of the first British anti-
quaries to recognize the possibility
of a lengthy pre-Roman occupation,
during which distinctive types of
prehistoric monuments might have
been constructed at different times
and different peoples might have
successively occupied southern
England (Piggott 1985: 67). Such
multiple occupations were histor-
ically attested by Julius Caesar’s
reference to a Belgic invasion of
southeastern England shortly before
the Roman conquest.
   At the same time, Stukeley and
other antiquaries took the first steps
toward trying to ascertain rela-
tive dates for archaeological finds
for which there were no historical
records. Stukeley observed construc-
tion layers in barrows and argued
that Silbury Hill, the largest artificial
mound in Europe, had been built
before the construction of a Roman
road, which curved abruptly to avoid
it (Daniel 1967: 122–3). He also
noted that Roman roads cut through
Bronze Age disc (“Druid”) barrows
in several places (Piggott 1985: 67)
and used the presence of bluestone
chips in some burial mounds near
Stonehenge to infer that those
burials were contemporary with the
building of that structure (Marsden
1974: 5). In 1758, his daughter Anna

                                    108
               Antiquarianism without Texts




Figure 3.5 Stukeley’s view of Avebury published in Abury, 1743




                            109
                A History of Archaeological Thought

dated the White Horse cut in the chalk at Uffington, which had been
thought to be a Saxon memorial, to the pre-Roman period because
of its stylistic similarity to horses portrayed on pre-Roman British
coins (Piggott 1985: 142). In 1720, the astronomer Edmund Halley
had estimated that Stonehenge might be 2,000 or 3,000 years old
on the basis of the depth of weathering he observed on its stones;
whereas a later comparison of relative weathering convinced Stukeley
that Avebury was much older than Stonehenge (Lynch and Lynch
1968: 52). These were creditable conclusions.
   Similar observations were made by antiquaries in other coun-
tries. In Denmark, Erik Pontoppidan carefully excavated in 1744
a megalithic tomb on the grounds of a royal palace in northwest
Sjaelland, the main Danish island. He reported on its structure and
the finds it contained in the first volume of the Proceedings of the
Danish Royal Society, concluding that cremation burials found near
the top of the mound dated from a more recent era than the stone
chamber below them and the mound itself (Klindt-Jensen 1975:
35–6). When three megalithic tombs opened in 1776 were found
to contain stone and bronze artifacts but no iron ones, O. Hoegh-
Guldberg, the excavator, assumed that they were very ancient (Ibid.:
42–3). Likewise, by 1799, in France Pierre Legrand d’Aussy (1737–
1800) proposed a six-period classification of burial practices from
earliest times to the Middle Ages (Laming-Emperaire 1964: 100–1).
   Studies of these sort helped to advance the investigation of prehis-
toric times by encouraging more accurate observations and descrip-
tions of ancient artifacts and monuments, more disciplined thought
about them, and efforts to date a few in either relative or calendrical
terms. Although this research was too fragmentary and the results
too disconnected to constitute a discipline of prehistoric archaeol-
ogy, it helped to lay the groundwork for the eventual development
of such a discipline. Under the influence of rationalism, antiquaries
were making substantial progress in conceptualizing the problems
confronting the study of prehistoric times and taking steps to resolve
these problems.


               Antiquarianism and Romanticism
Yet the growing influence of cultural-evolutionary thought during
the eighteenth century spawned a conservative reaction that at that

                                 110
                    Antiquarianism without Texts

time had far greater influence on antiquarian research than did evo-
lutionism. In 1724, the French Jesuit missionary Joseph-François
Lafitau (1685–1740), who had worked among the Indians of Canada,
published his Moeurs des sauvages amériquains comparées aux moeurs
des premiers temps. Although this book has often been described as
an early contribution to evolutionary anthropology, Lafitau argued
that the religions and customs of the Amerindians and the ancient
Greeks and Romans resembled each other because both were cor-
rupt and distorted versions of the true religion and morality that God
had revealed to Adam and his descendants in the Middle East. In his
opposition to modernity, Lafitau was upholding essentially the same
view of human history as his fellow Jesuit Athanasius Kircher had
done in the previous century. Lafitau’s arguments, which revived the
doctrine of degeneration, also were similar to those of Stukeley, who
was obsessed by his belief that the religion of the ancient druids was
a relatively pure survival of the primordial monotheism that God had
revealed early in human history to the Hebrew patriarchs and hence
closely related to Christianity. He maintained that the druids had
come as priests to Britain from the city of Tyre in the Middle East
with a party of Phoenician colonists (Balfour 1979; Parry 1995: 329).
Stukeley associated all the major prehistoric monuments in Britain
with the druids and based his extravagant interpretations of them
on this premise. His writings on this subject were directed mainly
against the Deists, who believed that reasonable people could appre-
hend God without the help of divine revelation, a view that was in
accord with Enlightenment philosophy.
   Stukeley’s thinking also reflected a growing trend toward roman-
ticism. This literary and philosophical movement, which developed
in the late eighteenth century, was anticipated by the back-to-
nature philosophy of Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778). Although
Rousseau, as an Enlightenment philosopher, believed in the impor-
tance of reason, he also emphasized emotion and sensibility as impor-
tant components of human behavior. In addition, he attributed
greed, envy, and other antisocial forms of behavior to the corrupting
influences of civilization. In Germany and England romanticism was
embraced as part of a popular revolt against French cultural domina-
tion and the literary and artistic restrictions of French neoclassicism.
   In addition to emphasizing the importance of powerful emotional
reactions, romanticism favored the local and culturally specific over

                                  111
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

the general. Romantics were deeply interested in the past, but the past
of individual peoples or countries, not of humanity as a whole. The
poems attributed to the ancient Celtic bard Ossian, allegedly discov-
ered (but actually authored) by the Scottish poet James Macpherson
and published by him in the 1760s, were welcomed across Europe as
evidence that a primitive people could produce great art and there-
fore as a concrete refutation of Enlightenment cultural evolutionism.
These poems inspired Walter Scott’s (1771–1832) historical novels,
which established a literary trend throughout Europe. Romanticism
championed “primitive” or “natural” societies and the “spirit” of
European nations as reflected in their monuments and folklore, espe-
cially of the medieval period, as ideal sources of inspiration for mod-
ern arts and letters (K. Clark 1962: 66). It found its highest philosoph-
ical expression in the relativism of the German scholar Johann Herder
(1744–1803), who regarded every people as culturally unique and cel-
ebrated their diversity as evidence of the creativity of the human spirit
(Barnard 1965, 2003; Zammito 2002).
   In this fashion, romanticism became closely linked to nationalism.
Following the outbreak of the French Revolution, the middle classes
in England feared a rebellion by the English working class, whereas
in Germany, Italy, and elsewhere kings and nobles anticipated, not
without reason, that the oppressed middle classes in their own coun-
tries might welcome French armies as liberators. Conservative ele-
ments throughout Europe embraced romanticism as an antidote to
republicanism and popular liberty, which they believed were dan-
gerous and inevitable products of Enlightenment philosophy. In the
conservative restoration that followed the final defeat of Napoleon
Bonaparte in 1815, a concerted effort was made to suppress Enlight-
enment ideas throughout Europe.
   By encouraging an interest in the histories of specific peoples,
romanticism also stimulated antiquarianism. The “Gothic” literary
movement was preoccupied with ruined castles and abbeys, graves,
and other symbols of death and decay, such as human skeletons
grinning “a ghastly smile” (Marsden 1974: 18). The late eighteenth
century has in the past been portrayed as a time of intellectual decline
in antiquarian studies in Britain (Piggott 1985; cf. Ucko et al. 1991).
Although the rationalism promoted by the Royal Society had stimu-
lated interesting interpretations of archaeological data before 1750,
in the second half of the eighteenth century romanticism appears to

                                  112
                     Antiquarianism without Texts

have encouraged an unprecedented increase in archaeological exca-
vation, especially of graves, that also contributed to the development
of antiquarianism. Nor is there evidence of a decline in standards of
interpretation. Between 1757 and 1773, the Reverend Bryan Fausset
(1720–1776) excavated more than 750 Anglo-Saxon burial mounds
in southeastern England. James Douglas (1753–1819), in his Nenia
Britannica, or Sepulchral History of Great Britain, which was pub-
lished in parts between 1786 and 1793 and based on a massive com-
pilation of information derived from barrow excavations throughout
Britain, assumed that graves containing only stone artifacts were ear-
lier than those that also contained metal ones (Lynch and Lynch
1968: 48).
   Some of the best work done during this period was by William
Cunnington (1754–1810) and his wealthy patron Sir Richard Colt
Hoare. They surveyed a large area in Wiltshire, locating ancient
village sites and earthworks and excavating 379 barrows. Cunning-
ton and Colt Hoare recorded their observations carefully, divided
barrows into five types, and employed stratigraphy to distinguish
between primary and secondary interments. They used finds of coins
to date some barrows from the historical period and, like Douglas
and still earlier antiquaries, thought it possible that graves containing
only stone artifacts might be earlier than prehistoric burials accompa-
nied by metal ones. Yet, despite these tentative advances, they were
unable to demonstrate to “which of the successive inhabitants” of
Britain various classes of monuments were to be ascribed or even that
specific types were the work of only one people. Moreover, Cunning-
ton could not discover enough regularity in the sorts of grave goods
associated with particular barrow styles to implement the antiquary
Thomas Leman’s suggestion that stone, bronze, and iron weapons
could be used to distinguish three successive ages (Chippindale 1983:
123). Thus, as Glyn Daniel (1950: 31) put it, they “failed to find any
way of breaking down the apparent contemporaneity of pre-Roman
remains.” There were always antiquaries prepared to argue that graves
containing only stone tools were not necessarily older than the rest
but merely belonged to ruder tribes or poorer social groups. As yet,
there was no satisfactory rebuttal for this claim. Moreover, as Enlight-
enment ideas fell into disrepute in England, as a consequence of their
association with the French Revolution, the interest of antiquaries in
cultural evolution declined with them.

                                  113
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

   Because of their lack of adequate chronological controls over pre-
historic archaeological data, in the eighteenth century antiquaries
often employed other sources of information about the past. Com-
parative ethnography, comparative philology, physical anthropology,
folklore, and oral traditions all were evaluated as sources of infor-
mation about the prehistory of specific peoples. Monogenists, who
believed that all modern societies were derived from a single source
(often thought to be the biblical Adam and Eve), hoped they could
use these various categories of data to trace the entire history of
humanity. It had long been assumed that, if a single ancestral group
descended from Adam and Eve had spread around the world and
in the course of doing so had split into many descendant peoples,
the differentiation of linguistic, racial, and cultural data would have
occurred together, making it relatively easy to trace the history of
specific human groups into the most remote past. If that were the
case, conclusions based on different sorts of data would harmonize
(J. Lalemant 1641 in Thwaites 1896–1901, vol. 21: 193–5).
   The most important early accomplishment of this sort of research
was the identification of the Indo-European language family initi-
ated by the British orientalist William Jones (1746–1794) in 1786
(G. Cannon 1990). This discovery marked the beginning of compar-
ative philology. It proved surprisingly difficult, however, to correlate
linguistic findings with archaeological data. Differences over time
in human skull morphology were interpreted as evidence of ethnic
change, but harmonizing biological and cultural changes was like-
wise not always possible. In the absence of complementary sets of
data relating to changes in languages, human skeletal morphology,
and material culture, the most abundant category of data in any par-
ticular region tended to be used as a surrogate for the rest. Each of
these methods for studying the past would have to undergo its own
scientific elaboration and how they can be used together remains to
this day controversial.


                           The New World
The study of the past in colonial settings has always been a highly
ideological activity that most often seeks to justify the seizure of land
and the exploitation of indigenous peoples. And so it was beginning
immediately after Columbus’s “discovery” of the New World in 1492.

                                  114
                    Antiquarianism without Texts

The first historical questions that Europeans asked themselves about
the indigenous inhabitants of North and South America were who
were they and from where had they come. Between the sixteenth
and eighteenth centuries, scholars speculated that Indians might be
descended from Iberians, Carthaginians, Israelites, Canaanites, or
Tartars. Still more imaginative writers derived them from the van-
ished continent of Atlantis. Most of these identifications reflected
the pretensions or cultural biases of particular groups of European
settlers.
   Some early Spanish colonists denied that the Indians had souls,
which would have meant they were not human beings. Had that
argument been accepted, colonists would have been free to exploit
the Indians as they did animals. Supporters of this view strove to
document the lack of intelligence and moral sense among indigenous
peoples, whereas opponents such as Bartolomé de Las Casas (1474–
1566) sought to establish the opposite. The Spanish Crown wanted
the Roman Catholic Church to recognize that the Indians had souls,
since that would allow the Spanish government to assert its right
to govern them and curb the independence of the colonists. When
the Church proclaimed indigenous peoples to be human beings,
Christians were required to recognize that the Indians were
descended from Adam and Eve and hence had originated, like other
peoples, in the Middle East (Hanke 1959; Pagden 1982).
   In the seventeenth century, the leaders of the Puritan Massa-
chusetts Bay Colony liked to represent their group as constituting
a New Israel that God had delivered from spiritual enslavement in
England and led to freedom in a new promised land in America.
They compared the local Indians to the Canaanites, God having
delivered their territories into the Puritan settlers’ hands just as the
Bible stated he had reassigned Palestine to the ancient Hebrews. This
was interpreted as granting the Puritan settlers the right to seize land
and enslave the Indians. As late as 1783, Ezra Stiles, the President of
Yale University, was expounding the idea that the Indians of New
England were literally descended from Canaanites who had fled from
Palestine to America when Joshua and his Hebrew followers had
conquered their homeland late in the second millennium bc (Haven
1856: 27–8).
   Over time, however, there was growing support for the theory, first
expounded in 1589 by the Jesuit priest José de Acosta (1539–1600)

                                  115
                A History of Archaeological Thought

in his Historia natural y moral de las Indias, that the Indians had
reached North America by way of Siberia (Pagden 1982: 193–7).
This idea was partly based on the early recognition by Europeans of
physical similarities between the peoples of East Asia and the New
World. Until the middle of the nineteenth century, however, other
scholars maintained that the Indians had reached the New World
across the Atlantic or Pacific Ocean. Acosta believed that the Indians
had lost all knowledge of sedentary life and much of their knowledge
of true religion in the course of their migration from the Middle East.
Once they arrived in the New World some of them had reinvented
agriculture, metallurgy, and civilized life, although knowledge of true
religion, being dependent on divine revelation, was lost forever.
   Later evolutionists and proto-evolutionists saw in North America
evidence of what the childhood of all humanity had been like. This
is what John Locke (1632–1704) ([1690] 1952: 29) meant when he
stated that “in the beginning all the world was America.” By con-
trast, old-fashioned degenerationists interpreted indigenous cultures
as corrupt remnants of the divinely revealed patriarchal way of life
described in the Book of Genesis or saw in them evidence of the
half-remembered teachings of early and forgotten Christian mission-
aries who had managed to reach the New World. In the seventeenth
century, the technological inferiority and alleged moral degeneracy of
indigenous North American peoples by comparison with Europeans
were interpreted in theological terms as evidence of divine displea-
sure with these groups (Vaughan 1982). During the next century,
some leading European scholars proposed in a seemingly naturalistic
vein that a supposed climatic inferiority of the New World to Europe
and Asia accounted for the inferiority of its indigenous peoples as
well as of its plant and animal life. Climatic explanations of differ-
ences in customs and achievements among human groups had been
commonplace since classical times (Haven 1856: 94).
   In Mexico and Peru, during the sixteenth and seventeenth cen-
turies, Spanish political and religious authorities sought to ensure
that archaeological monuments were routinely destroyed, effaced,
or hidden away, as far as this was possible, in order to eliminate the
memories that indigenous peoples had of their pre-Christian past
and religion (I. Bernal 1980: 37–9; Diehl 1983: 169). A particularly
thorough effort was made to destroy symbols of Aztec sovereignty
and national identity (Keen 1971). During the struggles preceding

                                 116
                    Antiquarianism without Texts

Mexican independence in 1821, Spanish officials continued to dis-
courage the study of the pre-Hispanic period but Creoles turned to it
as a source of inspiration and national identity. Only a small number
of European visitors discussed the great pre-Hispanic monuments
of Mexico, Peru, and other Latin American countries before the
nineteenth century, when these monuments were sometimes studied
and publicized to provide symbols of identity to newly independent
nation states (Chinchilla Mazariegos 1998). Through the nineteenth
century, the conservatives among the Mexican ruling elite scorned
the study of prehistoric times as a worthless preoccupation with bar-
barism, whereas liberals supported it as the investigation of a signifi-
cant period of Mexico’s national history (Lorenzo 1981).
   Before the late eighteenth century, almost no notice was taken
of the less spectacular prehistoric remains in North America, apart
from occasional references to rock carvings and rock paintings, which
were usually thought to be the work of more or less contempo-
rary Native peoples. Few collections of artifacts recovered from the
ground were assembled in North America and the excavation of sites
was rarely attempted. Among the exceptions is a splendid collection
of polished stone tools from the late Archaic period found during
the course of construction work near Trois-Rivières, in Quebec, in
1700 and preserved in a convent there until modern times (Ribes
1966). Equally exceptional was Thomas Jefferson’s systematic and
carefully reported excavation of an Indian burial mound in Virginia in
1784 (Heizer 1959: 218–21) and the alleged but questionable explo-
ration of another mound in Kansas a decade earlier (Blakeslee 1987;
Yelton 1989).
   By portraying the Indians as First Americans, Jefferson sought
romantically to transform victims of colonialism into national
symbols of the new republic (McGuire 1992b). Yet, throughout
this period extremely pervasive ethnocentrism caused most Euro-
Americans to doubt that anything significant could be learned from
archaeological remains about the histories of peoples whom they
viewed as savages fit only to be swept aside, or in exceptional cases
assimilated, by the advance of European civilization. A notable excep-
tion was the naturalist and explorer William Bartram, who in 1789
used contemporary ceremonial structures constructed by the Creek
Indians of the southeastern United States as analogues for inter-
preting prehistoric mound sites. This is one of the earliest known

                                  117
                A History of Archaeological Thought

examples of the employment of the direct historical approach to
interpret archaeological remains in North America (I. Brown 1993).


                 The Impasse of Antiquarianism
In North America as well as in Europe, antiquaries who were inter-
ested in what are now recognized to be prehistoric remains looked
to written records and oral traditions to provide a historical context
for their finds no less than did classical archaeologists. Yet in the
case of prehistoric remains there were no adequate written records.
In his book on the antiquities of the island of Anglesey, published
in 1723, the Reverend Henry Rowlands (1655–1723) noted that “in
these inextricable recesses of antiquity we must borrow other lights to
guide us through, or content ourselves to be without any” (Daniel
1967: 43). He went on to declare that “analogy of ancient names
and words, a rational coherence and congruity of things, and plain
natural inferences and deductions grounded thereon, are the best
authorities we can rely upon in this subject, when more warrantable
relations and records are altogether silent in the matter.” Generally
the explanation of a monument consisted in trying to identify what
people or individual mentioned in ancient records had constructed
it and for what purpose. This approach left Camden to speculate
whether Silbury Hill had been erected by the Saxons or the Romans
and whether it had served to commemorate soldiers slain in a battle or
was erected as a boundary survey marker. Although Stukeley demon-
strated stratigraphically that this mound was older than the nearby
Roman road, his conclusion that it was the tomb of the British king
Chyndonax, the founder of Avebury, was a mere flight of fantasy
(Joan Evans 1956: 121). Stonehenge was alternately attributed to the
Danes, Saxons, Romans, and ancient Britons. There was also great
confusion as to whether particular stone, bronze, or iron artifacts
dated from the pre-Roman, Roman, or Saxon periods.
   As a result of their continuing dependence on written records,
throughout the eighteenth and into the early nineteenth centuries
antiquaries generally despaired of ever learning much about the
period before such records became available. In 1742 Richard Wise
commented “where history is silent and the monuments do not speak
for themselves, demonstration cannot be expected; but the utmost is
conjecture supported by probability” (Lynch and Lynch 1968: 57).

                                 118
                     Antiquarianism without Texts

Colt Hoare concluded “we have evidence of the very high antiquity
of our Wiltshire barrows, but none respecting the tribes to whom
they appertained, that can rest on solid foundations.” Later in his
Tour in Ireland he added: “Alike will the histories of those stu-
pendous temples at Avebury and Stonehenge . . . remain involved in
obscurity and oblivion” (Daniel 1963a: 35–6). In 1802, the Danish
antiquary Rasmus Nyerup expressed similar despair: “everything
which has come down to us from heathendom is wrapped in a thick
fog; it belongs to a space of time we cannot measure. We know that
it is older than Christendom but whether by a couple of years or a
couple of centuries, or even by more than a millennium, we can do
no more than guess” (Ibid.: 36). The English essayist and lexicog-
rapher Samuel Johnson (1709–1784), who had little patience with
antiquaries, pressed the case against a future for their research even
more trenchantly: “All that is really known of the ancient state of
Britain is contained in a few pages. We can know no more than what
old writers have told us” (Ibid.: 35). Even J. Dobrovsky, “the father
of Czech prehistory,” who is said to have argued in 1786 that archae-
ological finds were “speaking documents” that by themselves might
illuminate as yet unknown periods of national history (Sklenář 1983:
52), was unable to demonstrate how this could be done.
   Antiquaries continued to believe that the world had been created
about 5000 bc. They also thought that reliable written records were
available as far back as the time of creation for the most crucial region
of human history. If humanity had spread from the Middle East to
the rest of the world, in most regions there was likely to have been
only a brief period between the earliest human occupation and the
dawn of recorded history. Yet scholars remained uncertain whether
the general course of human history had been one of development,
degeneration, or cyclical change.
   Nevertheless, the study of prehistoric times was not as stagnant
at this period as it is often represented. Between the fifteenth and
eighteenth centuries, European antiquaries had learned that stone
tools were artifacts, as well as how to excavate and record finds,
how to describe and classify monuments and artifacts, and how to
use various dating methods, including stratigraphy, to estimate the
relative and even the approximate calendrical age of some prehistoric
finds. The varied nature of finds made in particular areas suggested
to some antiquaries that more than one people had either coexisted

                                  119
                A History of Archaeological Thought

or existed sequentially there. Some antiquaries had concluded on
the basis of archaeological evidence that in the past certain of these
communities or peoples had used stone artifacts but not metal ones.
Others further speculated that an age when only stone and bone
tools had been used might have preceded ages of bronze and iron
tools, but little archaeological evidence could be marshaled to sustain
such a claim. Although these accomplishments seem very limited in
retrospect, they had already carried the study of prehistory a long
way forward.
   Religious constraints continued to hinder the development and
explicit advocacy of an evolutionary interpretation of the archaeolog-
ical record that might have challenged the biblical account of human
history even after Enlightenment philosophers had argued that cul-
tural evolution characterized that history. Enlightenment philoso-
phers remained remote from antiquarianism because they focused on
“theoretical history” rather than on the material remains of the past
and used subsistence patterns rather than tool technologies as their
principal index of cultural development. Yet perhaps the most serious
stumbling block to establishing a relative chronology of prehistoric
times and hence to acquiring more systematic knowledge concerning
early human development was the deeply ingrained assumption that
artifacts and monuments merely illustrated the accomplishments of
peoples who had lived in the past. This view was based on the con-
viction shared with classical archaeologists that historical knowledge
could only be acquired from written records or reliable oral tradi-
tions, without which no systematic understanding of the past was
possible. The evidence from the late eighteenth century suggests
that such an understanding was unlikely to have emerged induc-
tively in the near future. Despite the progress that had been made,
the creation of prehistoric archaeology required that antiquaries lib-
erate themselves from assumptions that continued to restrict their
vision.




                                 120
                                   chapter 4
    The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

     Within no very distant period the study of antiquities has passed,
     in popular esteem, from contempt to comparative honour.
        e. o l d f i e l d, Introductory Address, Archaeological Journal (1852), p. 1


The development of a self-contained, systematic study of prehistory,
as distinguished from the antiquarianism of earlier times, occurred
as two distinct movements, the first of which began in the early
nineteenth century and the second in the 1850s. The first originated
in Scandinavia with the invention of a technique for distinguishing
and dating archaeological finds that made possible the comprehen-
sive study of prehistory. This development marked the beginning
of prehistoric archaeology, which soon was able to take its place
alongside classical and other text-based archaeologies as a signifi-
cant component in the study of human development using material
culture. The second wave, which began in France and England, pio-
neered the study of the Palaeolithic period and added vast, hitherto
unimagined, time depth to human history. Palaeolithic archaeology
addressed questions of human origins that became of major concern
to the entire scientific community and to the general public as a result
of the debates between evolutionists and creationists that followed
the publication of Charles Darwin’s On the Origin of Species in 1859.


                                Relative Dating
The creation of a controlled chronology that did not rely on writ-
ten records was the work of the Danish scholar Christian Jürgensen
Thomsen (1788–1865). The principal motivation for Thomsen’s
work, like that of many earlier antiquaries, was patriotism and the
romanticism associated with it, but the antiquarian research of the
eighteenth century and the evolutionary concepts of the Enlight-
enment were indispensable preconditions for his success. Yet all

                                           121
                A History of Archaeological Thought

these factors would have mattered little had Thomsen not developed
a powerful new technique for dating archaeological finds without
recourse to written records. Unfortunately, because Thomsen never
published a detailed account of his work, its importance has been
underrated, first by poorly informed detractors and later by English,
French, and American historians of archaeology. It is therefore nec-
essary to clarify what he actually accomplished.
   Thomsen was born in Copenhagen in 1788, the son of a wealthy
merchant. As a young man he spent some time in Paris, where he may
have been exposed to Enlightenment ideas about cultural evolution.
After he returned home, he undertook to order a substantial collec-
tion of Roman and Scandinavian coins. Collecting coins and medals
had become a widespread gentleman’s hobby during the eighteenth
century (McKay 1976). From the inscriptions and dates they bore,
it was possible to arrange coins in a series according to the country
and reigns in which they had been minted. It also was often possible
to assign coins on which dates and inscriptions were illegible to such
series using stylistic criteria alone. Working with this coin collection
may have made Thomsen at least intuitively aware of stylistic changes
and their value for the relative dating of artifacts.
   The early nineteenth century was a time of heightened patrio-
tism in Denmark, which was reinforced when the British, who were
fighting Napoleon and his reluctant continental allies, including
Denmark, destroyed most of the Danish navy in Copenhagen harbor
in 1801 and bombarded the city again in 1807. The Danish archaeolo-
gist Jens J. A. Worsaae (1821–1885) later argued that these calamities
encouraged Danes to study their past as a source of consolation and
reassurance to face the future. He also noted that the French Rev-
olution, by promoting greater respect for the political rights of the
middle classes everywhere, had awakened in Denmark an evolution-
ary interest. Denmark, with its absolute monarchy, was politically
and economically less evolved than some other countries of west-
ern Europe. Hence, the ideals of the Enlightenment, which in pop-
ular thinking were closely associated with the French Revolution
(Hampson 1982: 251–83), appealed to many middle-class Danes.
Denmark had a strong antiquarian tradition, although such stud-
ies had not been as flourishing in recent decades as they were in
England. Yet most English antiquaries were conservatives who had
rejected the ideals of the Enlightenment and taken refuge in romantic

                                  122
              The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

nationalism. By contrast, although Scandinavian antiquaries were
inspired to study the past for patriotic reasons, these interests did
not preclude an evolutionary approach. For them, history and evo-
lution were complementary rather than antithetical concepts.
   In 1806 Rasmus Nyerup, the librarian at the University of Copen-
hagen, published a book protesting against the unchecked destruc-
tion of ancient monuments and advocating the founding of a
National Museum of Antiquity modeled on the Museum of French
Monuments established in Paris after the Revolution. The purpose
of this national collection would be to remind Danes of their past
greatness. In 1807, a Danish Royal Commission for the Preservation
and Collection of Antiquities was established, with Nyerup as its sec-
retary. It began to amass a collection of antiquities from all over
Denmark, which soon became one of the largest and most repre-
sentative in Europe. In 1816, the Commission invited Thomsen to
catalogue and prepare this collection for exhibition. His chief quali-
fications for this post, which was not a salaried one, were his knowl-
edge of numismatics and his independent means. For the rest of his
life, Thomsen was to divide his time between managing his family
business and archaeological research.
   The main problem that Thomsen faced was how the diverse assort-
ment of prehistoric material in the collection could be exhibited most
effectively. He decided to proceed chronologically by subdividing
the prehistoric, or heathen, period into successive ages of stone,
bronze, and iron. Presumably he knew of Lucretius’s Three-Age
scheme through the work of Vedel Simonsen, if not the writings
of French antiquaries such as Montfaucon and Mahudel. He also
appears to have been aware of archaeological evidence suggesting an
era when stone but not metal tools had been used and of the classical
and biblical texts, which suggested that bronze had been used before
iron. The notion of successive ages of stone, bronze, and iron was
not mere speculation but a hypothesis for which there was already
some evidence.
   In attempting to sort the prehistoric material in the collection into
three successive technological stages or eras, Thomsen faced a daunt-
ing task. He recognized that even for the stone and metal objects a
mechanical sorting would not work. Bronze and stone artifacts had
continued to be made in the Iron Age, just as stone tools had been
used in the Bronze Age. The challenge was therefore to distinguish

                                  123
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

bronze artifacts made during the Iron Age from those made during
the Bronze Age and to differentiate which stone tools had been made
in each era. There also was the problem of assigning objects made
of gold, silver, glass, and other substances to each period. Individual
artifacts were no help in beginning this work. Yet the Danish national
collection contained sets of artifacts that had been found in the same
grave, hoard, or other contexts and that could safely be assumed to
have been buried at the same time. Thomsen called these “closed
finds” and believed that, by comparing the various items from each
such discovery and noting which types of artifacts occurred together
and which never did, it would be possible for him to determine the
sorts of artifacts that were characteristic of different periods (Gräslund
1974: 97–118, 1981, 1987).
   Thomsen sorted and classified his artifacts into various use cate-
gories, such as knives, adzes, cooking vessels, safety pins, and neck-
laces. He further refined each category by distinguishing the artifacts
according to the material from which they were made and their var-
ious shapes. Having in this way established a set of informal artifact
types, he began to examine closed finds in order to determine which
types did and did not occur together. He also examined the deco-
rations on artifacts and found that these, too, varied systematically
from one closed find to another. On the basis of shape and decora-
tion, it became possible for Thomsen to distinguish types of bronze
artifacts that never occurred together with iron artifacts from ones
that did occur with them. He also was able to demonstrate that large
flint knives and spearpoints that had similar shapes to bronze ones
had been made at the same time as bronze artifacts. Eventually, he
succeeded in dividing the prehistoric artifacts in the collection into
five distinct groups. Once these groups were established, he could
assign single artifacts to each group on the basis of formal similarities.
Thomsen also studied the contexts in which artifacts had been found
and discovered that these varied systematically from one group to
another.
   Thomsen then proceeded to order his groups into a historical
sequence. He identified the simplest assemblages, which contained
only chipped stone artifacts, as the remains of an early Stone Age.
This material came invariably from small, simple sites. Next was a later
Stone Age, which he described as the period when polished as well as
chipped stone tools were manufactured and the first use was made of

                                   124
              The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

metal. At this time, the dead were buried, uncremated, in megalithic
tombs, accompanied by crude pottery vessels with incised decora-
tion. In the full Bronze Age, both weapons and cutting tools were
made of bronze, the dead were cremated and buried in urns under
small tumuli, and artifacts were decorated with ring patterns. In the
proposed Iron Age, tools and weapons were made of tempered iron,
whereas bronze continued to be used to manufacture ornaments and
luxury goods. Thomsen divided the Iron Age into two stages, the ear-
lier characterized by curvilinear serpent motifs and the later by more
elaborate dragons and other fantastic animals (Figure 4.1). The latter
forms of ornamentation were associated with runic inscriptions and
persisted into the historical period ([1837] Heizer 1962a: 21–6).
   In the past, a few antiquaries had attempted to divide prehistoric
materials into various temporal segments. These schemes were based
largely on intuition and failed to convince many people. It had been
repeatedly claimed that such divisions might instead represent dif-
ferent cultures or social classes that had lived alongside one another.
Yet, especially in a small country such as Denmark, had two or more
groups coexisted, some artifacts characteristic of one group ought to
have turned up in the sites of another as a result of exchange, theft,
or warfare. Because of cultural borrowing, archaeologists also might
have expected occasionally to find iron tools decorated with patterns
otherwise associated with assemblages containing only bronze metal
objects. Discrepancies of this sort would have completely under-
mined Thomsen’s assertion that his groups represented temporal
units. Instead, all the characteristics of individual objects and of the
objects found together in closed finds displayed coherent patterns
with respect to material, style, decoration, and contexts of discovery.
This consistency permitted each of them to be assigned to one, and
only one, of Thomsen’s five groups. Thomsen’s crude but effective
technique of occurrence sorting produced classificatory units that
appeared unlikely to have coexisted and, therefore, most probably
represented a chronological sequence.
   Thomsen’s observations of formal similarities among some of the
artifacts that he assigned to the early and later phases of the Iron Age
and between his later Iron Age and the historical period constituted
the earliest, probably unselfconscious, use of a crude form of seri-
ation to produce a prehistoric cultural chronology. Lack of obvious
stylistic cross-ties did not permit a similar chronological ordering of

                                  125
                 A History of Archaeological Thought




 Figure 4.1 Successive styles of ornamentation, from Thomsen’s Guidebook
  (older forms at top) (C. J. Thomsen Ledetraad til Nordisk Oldkyndighed,
                         part 2, Copenhagen 1836)


Thomsen’s earlier periods. Yet, once it was accepted that his group-
ings most likely reflected chronological differences, it was reasonable
to assume that evidence of increasing use of copper and bronze doc-
umented the chronological order of the earlier groups. Thomsen
also observed that concurrent technological trends supported his
sequence: gold and different types of pottery occurred in all the
groups he dated subsequent to the early Stone Age, whereas silver did

                                   126
             The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

not appear before his Iron Age. Likewise, the fact that in his putative
Bronze Age tools as well as ornaments had been made of bronze,
whereas in the Iron Age bronze, which was less easily obtained, was
reserved for making ornaments and cheaper and more abundant iron
was used to make tools, corresponded with his conclusion that the
age of bronze had preceded that of iron. Thomsen also sought to
demonstrate the historicity of his sequence stratigraphically. As early
as 1837, he published a report on a burial mound containing Bronze
Age cremations that was constructed on top of a Stone Age burial
mound. Stratigraphy offered a more convincing demonstration of
cultural change over time than did seriation, although Thomsen’s
five clearly separated groups enhanced the general importance of his
few stratigraphic observations.
   Thomsen’s work constituted the chronological breakthrough that
set the study of prehistory on a scientific basis. His work was as fun-
damental for the development of prehistoric archaeology as were
the major theoretical discoveries in historical geography and biology
during the nineteenth century. Although some antiquaries mocked
Thomsen for not adding ages of glass, wood, and gold to his sequence
and others continued to ascribe his stone, bronze, and iron objects
to different economies that had existed alongside one another, these
critics failed to recognize that his phases did not result from a
mechanical sorting of artifacts but instead were based on the con-
current analysis of style, decoration, and context, which reinforced
each other to produce a rudimentary but effective chronology.
   Thomsen’s Museum of Northern Antiquities, with its prehistoric
collection already divided into Stone, Bronze, and Iron Age compo-
nents, was opened to the public in 1819 (Figure 4.2), but the first
written account of his research appeared only in 1836 in the Lede-
traad til Nordisk Oldkyndighed (Guidebook to Scandinavian Antiq-
uity). Bo Gräslund (1987: 18) believes that Thomsen continued to
refine his sequence as more closed finds became available and that
it may not have reached its final form before 1824–1825. Thomsen’s
publication was available in a German translation by 1837, but not
in English until 1848. Long before 1836, however, detailed infor-
mation about Thomsen’s system was available to antiquaries who
visited his museum. At least some of the appeal of Thomsen’s find-
ings was that they offered independent support for an evolution-
ary view of human development, which was slowly becoming more

                                 127
                A History of Archaeological Thought




       Figure 4.2 Thomsen showing visitors around the Museum
                      of Northern Antiquities

popular, especially in England. As fear of the French Revolution and
of Napoleon receded, the new industrial middle class were increas-
ingly inclined to view progress as universal and themselves as repre-
senting its cutting edge in the modern world.
  Neither Thomsen nor his successors regarded the Three Ages as
constituting an evolutionary sequence within Scandinavia. Instead,

                                128
             The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

they argued that knowledge of bronze and iron working was
introduced to the region either by successive waves of immigrants
from the south or as a result of “intercourse with other nations”
(Daniel 1967: 103). Migration and diffusion were traditional expla-
nations of change. The Scandinavian prehistoric archaeologists did,
however, assume that somewhere in Europe or the Middle East evo-
lutionary development had taken place. Nineteenth-century evolu-
tionary archaeology did not view diffusion and migration as pro-
cesses that were antithetical to evolution but as helping to promote
evolutionary change (Harris 1968a: 174). They also appear to have
regarded the Stone Age as a primal condition and not as the repeated
product of cultural degeneration.


 The Development and Spread of Scandinavian Archaeology
Even in his earliest work, Thomsen was interested not merely in
artifacts and their development over time but also in the contexts in
which they had been found and what those contexts might reveal
about changing burial customs and other aspects of prehistoric life.
He studied incomplete and damaged artifacts in order to learn about
how such artifacts had been made and used. Yet it does not appear
that Thomsen had any firm views about what sort of subsistence
economy was associated with his earlier cultures. During the first
half of the nineteenth century, archaeology continued to develop in
Scandinavia as a discipline concerned with the evolution of ways of
life throughout prehistoric times.
   This development was powerfully promoted by Sven Nilsson
(1787–1883), who for many years was Professor of Zoology at the
University of Lund and whose thinking was deeply influenced by
the writings of the leading French palaeontologist Georges Cuvier.
Nilsson strongly believed in cultural evolution but, unlike Thomsen,
he was more interested in the development of subsistence economies
than in the evolution of technology. From eighteenth-century
Enlightenment philosophers, he had adopted the idea that increas-
ing population had been the principal factor compelling Scandina-
vian hunter-gatherers to become first pastoralist herdsmen and then
agriculturalists. In 1822, he published one of the world’s earliest
reports on animal bones recovered from an archaeological excava-
tion. His most important methodological contribution to the study

                                129
                A History of Archaeological Thought

of prehistory was his systematic effort to determine the uses made
of stone and bone artifacts by means of detailed comparisons with
ethnographic specimens collected from around the world. Because
many Scandinavian stone artifacts had been parts of compound tools
now decayed, inferring the sorts of implements to which they had
belonged was often far from easy. As an exponent of unilinear evo-
lution, Nilsson believed that ethnographic specimens from North
America, the Arctic, and the Pacific Islands could shed light on pre-
historic Scandinavian cultures that were at the same level of devel-
opment. He advocated, however, that ethnographic parallels should
be verified through replicative experiments and the study of wear
patterns on prehistoric artifacts, which could help confirm what they
had been used for. He is recognized as the first archaeologist to use
flint-knapping experience to explain prehistoric artifacts (L. Johnson
1978). In these ways, Nilsson sought to infer prehistoric subsistence
patterns from archaeological data. His most important study of the
Stone Age was published in four parts between 1838 and 1843, and a
later edition was very freely and misleadingly translated into English
as The Primitive Inhabitants of Scandinavia in 1868.
   Nilsson concluded that Thomsen’s Stone Age people had been
hunters and fishers and that farming had been introduced to Scan-
dinavia in the Bronze Age. In this manner, he combined for the
first time an interest in the evolution of technology, derived from
Lucretius, and of subsistence patterns, coming from the Enlighten-
ment. This permitted the development of subsistence to be studied
in relation to technological change and the two to be considered as
coevolving aspects of human behavior. Previously, these two evo-
lutionary schemes had existed independently of each other. Nilsson
believed the Stone Age inhabitants of Sweden to have been Lapps,
the Bronze Age people Celts, and the Gothic ancestors of the mod-
ern Swedes to have arrived in the Iron Age. Nilsson was also the first
person anywhere to coin a word that is translatable as “prehistory” –
the Swedish förhistorie (Clermont and Smith 1990; Welinder 1991).
   Johannes Japetus Steenstrup (1813–1907), a young Danish geol-
ogist who was interested in studying environmental changes, dis-
covered stratigraphic evidence of a prehistoric human presence in
Scandinavia in the course of the excavations that he carried out in
the peat bogs of Denmark. These excavations revealed a pattern of
forest change, beginning with what are now known to have been

                                 130
              The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology




   Figure 4.3 Worsaae boring into one of the large tumuli at Jelling; he
  explains the procedure to King Frederik VII of Denmark (Drawing by J.
                             Korncrup, 1861)


postglacial aspen forests that were replaced in succession by pine,
oak, and finally beech and elm. By the early 1840s, Steenstrup was
convinced that stone and bronze artifacts were associated with his
oak period, linking the evolution of culture to environmental his-
tory. Eventually, he associated pine forests with Stone Age occupa-
tion, oak forests with the Bronze Age, and beech and elm forests
with the Iron Age, thereby correlating Thomsen’s artifact sequence
with major environmental changes (Morlot 1861: 309–10). Because
Steenstrup estimated that each of these forest successions must have
occurred over about 2000 years, he was the first to assign a consid-
erable time depth to the Scandinavian Stone Age.
   Jens Worsaae became the first professional prehistoric archaeolo-
gist and was the first person to be trained in the discipline, albeit
informally as a volunteer working with Thomsen. He was appointed
Denmark’s Inspector for the Conservation of Ancient Monuments
in 1847 and the first Professor of Archaeology at the University
of Copenhagen in 1855. Unlike Thomsen, who remained princi-
pally a museum researcher, Worsaae became a prolific field worker
(Figure 4.3). His excavations helped to confirm Thomsen’s chronol-
ogy by providing more closed finds. One of Worsaae’s major con-
tributions to prehistoric archaeology was his refusal to use local oral
traditions to explain specific archaeological finds.
   In his first book Danmarks Oldtid (The Primeval Antiquities of
Denmark), published in 1843 (English translation 1849), Worsaae
popularized Thomsen’s findings and integrated them with those of

                                   131
                A History of Archaeological Thought

Nilsson and Steenstrup to produce a general account of Denmark’s
prehistory. In 1859, Worsaae formalized Thomsen’s division of the
Scandinavian Stone Age into an earlier and later period and soon after
he observed that both of these periods were later than the Palaeolithic
cultures that were being identified in France. He also divided the
Bronze Age into two periods on the basis of different burial customs
and the Iron Age into three periods. However, his definitions of
these periods remained impressionistic. Both in Danmarks Oldtid
and in many of his later writings, Worsaae sought to use archaeology
to validate Denmark’s national existence, especially in the context of
the wars of 1848–1850 and 1864, in the course of which Denmark
lost much territory to an expanding Prussia.
   In 1846–1847, with financial support from the Danish king,
Worsaae visited Britain and Ireland, mainly to study Viking remains
there. His observations of prehistoric finds in these countries con-
vinced him that Thomsen’s Three-Age scheme was applicable to large
parts of Europe, and maybe to all of it. He also became increasingly
aware, however, of significant stylistic (cultural) differences between
artifacts from the same stage of development in the British Isles and
Scandinavia.
   By 1843, it had become known for the first time that Scandi-
navia’s earliest inhabitants had used stone tools, subsisted by hunting
and gathering, and inhabited an environment different from that of
the present. This understanding was deepened and strengthened by
interdisciplinary work that began late in the 1840s. As early as 1837
on Sjaelland, mounds of oyster and cockle shells containing numer-
ous prehistoric artifacts had been observed a short distance inland
from the present coastline. As the result of a desire to learn more
about geological changes, in 1848 the Royal Danish Academy of
Sciences established an interdisciplinary commission to study these
shell middens. The commission was headed by Worsaae, Steenstrup,
and an older academic, Johan Georg Forchhammer, the father of
Danish geology. In the early 1850s, these scholars published six vol-
umes of reports on their studies of these “kitchen middens.” They
demonstrated that the middens were of human origin and traced the
pattern of their accumulation. They also determined that, when the
middens had formed, the palaeo-environmental setting had consisted
of fir and pine forests and some oak, that the only animals likely to
have been domesticated were dogs, and from the bones of animals

                                 132
              The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

that had been eaten that the middens had been occupied during the
autumn, winter, and spring but not during the summer. The distribu-
tions of hearths and artifacts within the middens also were studied to
learn more about human activities at these sites. Experiments, which
involved feeding chicken carcasses to dogs, were carried out in order
to explain the numerical preponderance of the middle part of the
long bones of birds over other parts of their skeletons (Morlot 1861:
300–1). The one issue Worsaae and Steenstrup did not agree about
was the dating of the middens. Steenstrup maintained that they were
Neolithic, and hence contemporary with the megalithic tombs, but,
because they contained no ground or polished stone implements,
Worsaae correctly concluded that they were earlier (Klindt-Jensen
1975: 71–3).
   The archaeology that was developing in Scandinavia provided
a model for work elsewhere. Contacts with Worsaae inspired the
Scottish antiquary Daniel Wilson (1816–1892) to employ Thomsen’s
Three-Age system to reorganize a large collection of artifacts belong-
ing to the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland in Edinburgh. This
work provided the basis for his book The Archaeology and Prehistoric
Annals of Scotland published in 1851. In this first scientific synthesis
of prehistoric times in the English language, Wilson assigned archae-
ological data to the Stone (Primeval), Bronze (Archaic), Iron, and
Christian eras. Wilson was motivated by the same mixture of evo-
lutionary thinking and romantic nationalism that had inspired the
work of Scandinavian archaeologists. It is not clear, however, that
he fully understood Thomsen’s “closed find” method, as opposed to
simply applying the chronological findings of Danish archaeologists
to Scottish data. Unlike the Scandinavian archaeologists, Wilson also
tended to view the Stone Age, as many Enlightenment philosophers
had done, as a base line to which humanity had often descended.
   Yet, in this work, Wilson coined the term prehistory, which he used
to designate the study of the history of a region before the earliest
appearance of written records relating to it. He also made a signif-
icant contribution to establishing the goals and potential of prehis-
toric archaeology. Wilson stressed that the sort of understanding of
the past that could be derived from artifacts alone was very different
from the kind of understanding derived from written records. In the
nineteenth century, historians were preoccupied with the actions and
ideas of “great men,” which were, and still remain, archaeologically

                                  133
                A History of Archaeological Thought

inaccessible. Yet Wilson expressed the hope that in due course archae-
ologists would be able to learn much about the economy, social life,
and religious beliefs of prehistoric times. He also briefly introduced
gender studies to archaeology by suggesting that the relative amounts
of goods buried with men and women might reveal something about
their respective social status. Among English antiquaries, there was
much more resistance to accepting the Scandinavian approach and
Wilson’s call to reorganize the collections of the British Museum in
accordance with the Three-Age system fell on deaf ears. Unfortu-
nately for British archaeology, Wilson, although he was awarded an
honorary doctorate by the University of St. Andrews for his accom-
plishments, failed to find satisfactory employment in Scotland. In
1853, he left to teach English, history, and anthropology at University
College in Toronto, Canada (Trigger 1992; Hulse 1999).
   Scandinavian archaeology also provided a model for significant
archaeological research in Switzerland, a country where the political
triumph of liberalism in 1847 popularized both Enlightenment and
romantic ideas. As the result of a drought in the winter of 1853–1854,
lake levels in western Switzerland fell unprecedentedly low, revealing
the remains of ancient settlements preserved in waterlogged environ-
ments. The first of these sites, a Bronze Age village at Obermeilen,
was studied the following summer by Ferdinand Keller (1800–1881),
a Professor of English and President of the Zurich Antiquarian Soci-
ety. His report led to the eventual identification of several hundred
such sites, including the Neolithic village at Robenhausen, which
was excavated by Jakob Messikommer beginning in 1858. These so-
called Lake Dwellings were interpreted as settlements built on piles
driven into lake bottoms, based on descriptions of villages of this
sort encountered in lowland New Guinea by the traveler C. Dumont
d’Urville (Gallay 1986: 167). The Swiss ones are now believed to have
been constructed on swampy ground around the edges of lakes.
   These excavations yielded the remains of wooden piles and house
platforms, stone and bone tools still mounted in their wooden han-
dles, matting, basketry, and a vast array of foodstuffs. Villages dating
from both the Neolithic and Bronze Ages provided Swiss archaeol-
ogists with the opportunity to study changes in the natural environ-
ment, economies, and ways of life of these peoples. The Swiss finds
not only revealed many sorts of perishable artifacts not usually found
in Scandinavia and Scotland but also verified the reconstructions

                                  134
             The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

of stone and bone tools by Nilsson and others. Switzerland was
already an important center of tourism and the continuing study of
these prehistoric remains attracted wide interest. This confirmation
played a major role in convincing western Europeans of the reality
of cultural evolution and that ancient times could be studied using
archaeological evidence alone (Morlot 1861: 321–36; Bibby 1956:
201–19; Kaeser 2001, 2004a, 2004b).
   Prehistoric archaeology thus had developed as a well-defined dis-
cipline in Scandinavia, Scotland, and Switzerland before 1859. Arti-
facts were no longer valued primarily as objects, but as sources of
information about human behavior in the past. The essential basis
for this new discipline was the ability to construct relative chronolo-
gies from archaeological data alone using closed finds, simple forms
of seriation, and stratigraphic contexts. For the first time, relative
chronologies could be produced into which all the known archae-
ological data for a region or country could be fitted. This made it
possible for artifacts from reasonably well-documented archaeolog-
ical contexts to be used as a basis for understanding human history
and cultural development.
   The development of prehistoric archaeology has long been
ascribed to influences derived from the study of geological and
biological evolution. It has been assumed that the stratigraphi-
cally derived chronologies of geological time constructed by geol-
ogists and palaeontologists provided a model for the development of
archaeological chronologies of prehistory. Yet, in Thomsen’s work,
we see a chronology of human prehistory inspired by an understand-
ing of the chronological significance of closed finds and implicit
knowledge of stylistic change probably derived from the study of
numismatics. The roots of prehistoric archaeology clearly lie in
European antiquarianism. Prehistoric archaeology did not begin as
the result of borrowing one or more dating devices from other dis-
ciplines. Instead, it started with the development of a new technique
for relative dating that was appropriate to archaeological material.
   The kind of history produced by Scandinavian archaeologists
made sense only in terms of the cultural-evolutionary perspective
of the Enlightenment. Historians had traditionally been concerned
with recounting the thoughts and deeds of famous individuals. Yet
Worsaae pointed out that in many cases prehistoric archaeologists
could not even determine what people had made the implements they

                                 135
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

were studying. He and Wilson also protested against the idea that the
earliest people to be mentioned in the recorded history of a region
were necessarily its original inhabitants. In the early nineteenth cen-
tury, the attraction of Enlightenment views about cultural evolution
was the hope they offered the Scandinavian middle classes of politi-
cal reforms that would better serve their interests. Although Danish
archaeology continued to be strongly nationalistic and to enjoy the
patronage of successive generations of the royal family, its innovators
and increasingly its audience were members of a growing commer-
cial middle class (Kristiansen 1981), for whom nationalism, political
reform, and evolutionism were all attractive concepts. By contrast, in
the politically reactionary environment of post-Napoleonic Germany,
archaeologists, although inspired by nationalism, tended to reject
the Scandinavian approach at least partly because its evolutionism
was too closely aligned with the Enlightenment philosophy that they
opposed (Böhner 1981; Sklenář 1983: 87–91).
   An evolutionary approach made possible an archaeology that was
not based on chronologies derived from written records and dedi-
cated primarily to the recovery and study of texts and works of art.
Scandinavian prehistoric archaeologists and those who were inspired
by them did not, however, limit their efforts to demonstrating the
reality of cultural evolution. They also sought to learn something
about the specific technologies and subsistence economies associated
with the various peoples who had inhabited their countries in prehis-
toric times, as well as about the environments in which these peoples
had lived, their social life, and religious beliefs. Studying social life
mainly involved examining their houses, when these could be identi-
fied, and studying religion was based on investigations of their tombs.
The goal of archaeologists was to learn as much as the archaeological
evidence would permit not only about patterns of life and death at
any one period but also about how those patterns had changed and
developed over time. In order to understand the behavioral signifi-
cance of archaeological finds, archaeologists were prepared to make
systematic comparisons of archaeological and ethnographic data, to
study unfinished and broken tools, to carry out replicative experi-
ments to determine how artifacts had been manufactured and used,
and to perform experiments to explain the attrition patterns on bones
found in archaeological sites. They also learned how to cooperate
with geologists and biologists to reconstruct palaeoenvironments and

                                  136
             The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

determine prehistoric diets. This approach reflected a romantic
nationalist desire to know who had inhabited specific countries in
prehistoric times and how they had lived.
   Thus, in early Scandinavian prehistoric archaeology we discover
the origins of the evolutionary, culture-historical, and functional-
processual approaches that have characterized prehistoric archae-
ology ever since. In the early nineteenth century, Scandinavian
archaeologists evolved a prehistoric archaeology that exhibited in an
embryonic form all the main features of modern prehistoric archae-
ology. Although the database and the analytical resources of pre-
historic archaeology have expanded enormously in the interval, the
founders of prehistoric archaeology would experience little difficulty
in discussing their goals and aspirations with modern archaeologists.
Romantic and evolutionary interests had combined to produce a
complex and multifaceted interest in prehistoric times.
   What these first prehistoric archaeologists did not do was to ques-
tion the traditional biblical chronology, which allowed no more than
a few thousand years for the whole of human history. Beginning dur-
ing the Renaissance, various scholars had challenged the shortness of
the biblical chronology. They observed that in classical times there
had been no fixed view concerning how long human beings had
inhabited the earth. The Egyptians and Mesopotamians seemed to
have believed that humans had done so for 100,000 years or longer.
Christian missionaries also reported that the Chinese and other Asian
peoples had records extending far into the past. Such information was
used by dissident scholars who wished to subvert Christian authority
by arguing that these other cultures were repositories of older and
hence greater wisdom than were the Hebrews. This led to a vigor-
ous defense of the traditional biblical chronology and the repression
of unorthodox views by means of legal and social sanctions (Rossi
1985). For Thomsen, Worsaae, and even Steenstrup, several thou-
sand years appeared long enough to encompass the past that was
being revealed by the archaeological record. Worsaae dated the first
arrival of human beings in Denmark around 3000 bc, the beginning
of the Bronze Age between 1400 and 1000 bc, and the start of the
Iron Age as late as the early Christian era. By an ironic coincidence,
Scandinavia, Scotland, and Switzerland had all been covered by
glaciers during the Würm glaciation and to this day have produced
little evidence of human habitation prior to the Holocene era. Hence,

                                 137
                A History of Archaeological Thought

the absolute chronology imagined by the Scandinavian, Scottish, and
Swiss archaeologists for their finds was not significantly out of line
with reality as we currently understand it. Like the Enlightenment
philosophers of the eighteenth century, Scandinavian archaeologists
neither challenged the traditional biblical chronology nor embraced
an evolutionary view of human biological origins.


                   The Antiquity of Humanity
The prehistoric archaeology pioneered by the Scandinavians was
largely ignored in France and England, where antiquaries seem to
have been reluctant to follow the example set by colleagues in periph-
eral and seemingly backward countries. During the first half of the
nineteenth century, archaeology in England and France remained
antiquarian in orientation. Although in the 1840s and 1850s there
was increasing emphasis on the use of physical anthropological, folk-
loric, and linguistic data, alone or in combination, to study prehis-
tory, the examination of archaeological remains remained focused
on historical peoples such as the Celts, Romans, Anglo-Saxons, and
Merovingians and on the medieval period (Van Riper 1993; M. Morse
1999; T. Murray 2001b: 204–10). Only rarely did these antiquaries
seriously consider Thomsen’s Three-Age system. This conservative
attitude ensured that the scientific study of prehistoric archaeology
did not begin in these countries before the late 1850s.
   Unlike Scandinavia, early scientific archaeology in England and
France was concerned primarily with the Palaeolithic period and
ascertaining the antiquity of humanity. This archaeology was mostly
created not by antiquaries but by people interested in geology and
palaeontology and it eventually replaced, rather than transformed,
antiquarianism as a method for studying the material remains of all
prehistoric periods. The presence in France and southern England
of caves and glacial deposits containing traces of human activities
going as far back as Lower Palaeolithic times provided archaeolo-
gists in these countries with opportunities for studying early phases
of human existence that were lacking in Scandinavia, Scotland, and
Switzerland.
   The development of Palaeolithic archaeology depended on the
emergence of an evolutionary perspective in geology and also of
some knowledge of palaeontology. Progress in these fields was

                                 138
              The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

necessary for a scientific study of human origins to replace reliance
on the traditional biblical accounts. Although the major archaeo-
logical breakthroughs in studying the antiquity of humanity slightly
preceded the first major statement of Darwinian evolutionism, Palae-
olithic archaeology was quickly drawn into the controversies that
surrounded Darwin’s work and was strongly influenced by concepts
derived from biological evolution.
   When a flint handaxe was discovered near the tooth of a mammoth
beneath a street in London in 1690, the antiquary John Bagford inter-
preted the find as that of a Roman war elephant brought to Britain by
the emperor Claudius in ad 43 and slain by an ancient Briton armed
with a stone-tipped spear. This explanation was accepted as rea-
sonable, even though it was known from historical records that the
ancient Britons fought with iron swords (Burkitt 1921: 10; Grayson
1983: 7–8). Such an interpretation was squarely in the tradition of
text-based archaeology, which often used historical records very
selectively. By contrast, in 1797 John Frere described a collection
of Acheulean handaxes that were found together with the bones
of unknown animals at a depth of four meters at Hoxne, in eastern
England (Figure 4.4). He argued that the carefully documented
overlying strata, which included a presumed incursion of the sea and
the formation of half a meter of vegetable earth, could only have
been built up over a long period and concluded that “the situation
in which these weapons were found may tempt us to refer them to a
very remote period indeed; even beyond that of the present world”
([1800] Heizer 1962a: 71). By this he meant that they were probably
more than 6,000 years old. The Society of Antiquaries judged his
paper to be worthy of publication but it aroused no contemporary
discussion. Although the intellectual climate was clearly opposed to
assigning a great antiquity to humanity, Donald Grayson (1983: 58)
has pointed out that Frere’s failure to identify either the animal
bones or the shells in his stratigraphy did not demand agreement
with his claims.
   In the course of the eighteenth century, scientists such as Georges
Buffon (1707–1788) began to propose naturalistic origins for the
world and to speculate that it might be tens of thousands or even
millions of years old. This in turn suggested the need for a sym-
bolic rather than a literal interpretation of the biblical account of the
seven days of creation. As early as 1669, Nicolaus Steno (1636–1686)

                                  139
                A History of Archaeological Thought




   Figure 4.4 Acheulean handaxe found by Frere at Hoxne, published in
                          Archaeologia, 1800

had recognized that in any geological formation lower strata can be
assumed to have formed before the layers that cover them. In the
course of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, more was learned
about geological stratification because of the increased mining, quar-
rying, and construction of canals that resulted from the industrial
revolution.
   The French geologist Georges Cuvier (1769–1832), who estab-
lished palaeontology as a scientific discipline and whose work inspired

                                  140
             The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

Nilsson’s studies of prehistoric artifacts, viewed the bones of each
animal as parts of a system and used his knowledge of compara-
tive anatomy to reconstruct hitherto unknown fossil animals on the
basis of what he knew about what he determined were similar living
species. In this fashion, he assembled evidence that numerous species
of animals had become extinct. He also observed that older geolog-
ical strata contained animal remains that were increasingly dissimi-
lar to those of modern times. Because he assumed a relatively brief
amount of time had passed since the creation of the world, he con-
cluded that a series of regional natural catastrophes had destroyed
local species of animals and altered the geological configuration of
limited areas. He believed that these devastated areas were repop-
ulated by migrations of animals from areas that had been spared,
resulting in the number of species worldwide declining over time.
This theory can be called regional catastrophism.
   As the palaeontological record became better known, it was
observed that many more complex life forms had appeared over
time and that the biota as a whole grew to be more like that of
the present. As a result, geologists, such as William Buckland (1784–
1856), an Anglican priest and Professor of Mineralogy at Oxford
University, came to view geological catastrophes as universal ones
that had wiped out almost all species. This required God to create
new species to replace them. The increasing complexity of plant and
animal life observed in successive geological strata was therefore not
viewed as a developmental sequence but, rather, as a series of ever
more complex supernatural creations. Buckland conceived of evolu-
tion as occurring in God’s mind rather than in the natural world.
This un-Cartesian view can be labeled general catastrophism.
   Beginning with finds reported by Johann Esper (1732–1781)
in 1774, naturalists and antiquaries encountered human physical
remains and stone tools associated with the bones of extinct ani-
mals in stratified deposits in cave sites in many parts of western
Europe. The most important finds were those made in the early
nineteenth century by Paul Tournal (1805–1872) near Narbonne
and Jules de Christol (1802–1861) northeast of Montpellier, both
in France, Philippe-Charles Schmerling (1791–1836) near Liège in
Belgium, and the Reverend John MacEnery (1796–1841) at Kent’s
Cavern in England. Each of these men believed that his discoveries
might constitute evidence of the contemporaneity of human beings

                                 141
                A History of Archaeological Thought

and extinct animal species. Yet their techniques of excavation were
not sufficiently developed to rule out the possibility that the human
material was intrusive into older deposits. MacEnery’s finds were
sealed beneath a layer of hard travertine that would have taken a
long time to form. Buckland maintained that ancient Britons had
dug earth ovens through the travertine and that their stone tools
had found their way through these pits into much older levels con-
taining the bones of fossil animals. Although MacEnery denied the
existence of such pits, he accepted that the tools, even though old,
need not have been contemporaneous with the bones of extinct ani-
mals. It was argued that deposits elsewhere contained animal bones
and artifacts from diverse periods that had been mixed together when
they were washed into caves by flooding that had occurred in fairly
recent times (Grayson 1983: 107). It became obvious that it was not
easy for evidence from caves to be conclusive. James Sackett (2000:
47) has suggested that before 1859 Edouard Lartet had accepted the
high antiquity of humans on the basis of cut marks he observed on
the bones of extinct animals. If so, his failure to publish his evidence
until more convincing arguments were forthcoming suggests that he
did not believe that his observations were likely to win widespread
acceptance.
   A much-debated question was whether it was reasonable to expect
that traces of human beings and their works might be found in
contexts that revealed them to be coeval with extinct mammals.
The bones of mammoth and wooly rhinoceros were encountered
frequently in the glacial deposits that covered parts of France and
southern England. At the beginning of the nineteenth century these
deposits were generally believed to have resulted from Noah’s flood,
the last great catastrophe to convulse the earth’s surface. Because the
Bible recorded the existence of human beings before that time, it
seemed possible that human remains might be found in these dilu-
vial deposits. Nevertheless, fundamentalist Christians believed that
the Bible implied that as a result of divine intervention all existing
animal species had survived the flood; hence, the presence of extinct
species in these levels was interpreted as indicating that they dated
before the creation of humanity rather than simply before the last
flood. Even those palaeontologists who were inclined to interpret
the Bible less literally tended to believe that a beneficent God would
have brought the earth to its modern state prior to creating the

                                  142
              The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

human species. By the 1830s, it was generally accepted that all the
diluvium had not been deposited at the same time. It also was widely
believed to antedate the most recent creation and, therefore, that it
should not contain human remains (Grayson 1983: 69).
   The intellectual problems of this period are clearly exemplified by
the work of Jacques Boucher de Crèvecoeur de Perthes (1788–1868),
who was the director of customs at Abbeville, in the Somme Valley
of northwestern France. In the 1830s, Casimir Picard, a local doctor,
reported discoveries of stone and antler tools in the region. Boucher
de Perthes began studying these finds in 1837. Soon after, in the
canal and railway excavations of the period, he started to find what
are now known to be Lower Palaeolithic handaxes associated with
the bones of extinct mammoth and wooly rhinoceros, deeply buried
in the stratified gravel deposits of river terraces that predated the local
peat formations (Figure 4.5).




Figure 4.5 Profile showing location of Palaeolithic material, from Boucher
         de Perthes’s Antiquités celtiques et antédiluviennes, 1847

                                   143
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

   Boucher de Perthes’s sound stratigraphic observations convinced
him that the stone tools and extinct animals were equally old. Yet,
as a catastrophist, he decided that these tools belonged to an ante-
diluvian tool-making race that had been completely annihilated by
a massive flood that had occurred “prior to the biblical deluge.”
After a lengthy period of time God had created a new human race –
that of Adam and Eve and their descendants (Grayson 1983: 126–30).
It is scarcely surprising that when these fanciful ideas were pub-
lished in the first volume of his Antiquités celtiques et antédiluviennes
in 1847, they were dismissed by French and English scholars alike.
Yet, even when his field observations were duplicated by the physi-
cian Marcel-Jérôme Rigollot (1786–1854) at St. Acheul and another
site near Amiens, 40 kilometers upstream from Abbeville, and these
deposits were confirmed to be of “diluvial age” by geologists, includ-
ing Edmond Hébert from the Sorbonne, geologists and antiquaries
continued to express concern that the artifacts might be intrusive
and, hence, of later date. Grayson (1983: 207) has concluded that
the rejection of Rigollot’s sound evidence “stemmed from the sheer
belief that such things could not be” and from Rigollot’s status as an
outsider with respect to the scientific elite of his day.
   The resolution of controversies concerning the antiquity of
humanity required an improved understanding of the geological
record. In 1785, the Edinburgh physician James Hutton (1726–1797)
proposed a uniformitarian view of geological history in which the
slow erosion of rocks and soil was balanced by the uplifting of land
surfaces. He believed that all geological strata could be accounted
for in terms of the geological forces currently at work operating over
very long periods of time. In the years that followed, William (Strata)
Smith (1769–1839) in England and Georges Cuvier and Alexandre
Brongniart (1770–1847) in France recognized that strata of different
ages each possessed its own characteristic assemblage of organic fos-
sils and concluded that such assemblages could be used to identify
coeval formations over large areas. Smith, unlike Cuvier, accepted
the principle of the orderly deposition of rock formations over long
periods of time.
   Between 1830 and 1833, the English geologist Charles Lyell (1797–
1875) published his Principles of Geology, in which he assembled an
overwhelming amount of data, much of it based on his observa-
tions around Mount Etna in Sicily, to support the uniformitarian

                                   144
              The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

assumption that geological changes had occurred in the past as a
result of the same natural agencies acting over long periods and at
approximately the same rate as they do at present. Lyell quickly won
support for the principle of uniformitarianism in geology. Contrary
to catastrophism, it indicated the past to have been a long and geo-
logically uninterrupted period, during which other events could have
happened. This provided a setting for scholars to consider the possi-
bility of biological evolution, a concept that Lyell rejected, although
Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (1744–1829) had already argued in favor of it,
and Robert Chambers (1844) (anonymously) and others were soon
to do so.
   This new view of geological history also left the question of the
antiquity of humanity requiring an empirical answer. The favorable
reception given to Lyell’s geology reflected the increasing willingness
of English intellectuals and the general public to embrace evolution-
ary ideas. In the early nineteenth century, the concepts of biological
and cultural evolution had still been associated with radical politics
in England and therefore were anathema to the respectable middle
classes (Desmond 1989). By the middle of the nineteenth century,
Britain had become the “workshop of the world” and the growth
of industrialism had greatly strengthened the political power and
self-confidence of the middle classes, who, especially after the period
of economic contraction and social turmoil that lasted from 1826 to
1848 had ended (Wolf 1982: 291), came to view themselves as a major
force shaping the history of the world for the benefit of all humanity.
   This new confidence was reflected in the writings of the philoso-
pher Herbert Spencer (1820–1903), who in the 1850s began to cham-
pion a general evolutionary approach to scientific and political prob-
lems. He argued that the development of everything in the universe
moved from simple, uniform homogeneity to increasingly complex
and differentiated entities. Atoms combined to form molecules and
these in turn to create cells, organisms, primitive societies, and ulti-
mately European civilization. By claiming that individual initiative
and free enterprise were the driving forces behind cultural evolution
and that the self-interested behavior of middle-class entrepreneurs
in the course of the industrial revolution was a continuation and
intensification of those processes that had brought about progress
throughout human history, Spencer cleansed the concept of socio-
cultural evolution of its former politically subversive associations and

                                  145
                A History of Archaeological Thought

helped to make it the ideology of a substantial portion of the British
middle classes whose faith in progress had already been expressed by
the Great Exhibition celebrating industrial creativity held in London
in 1851 (Harris 1968a: 108–41). In this way, Spencer encouraged the
middle class to sympathize with arguments favoring biological evo-
lution and the great antiquity of humanity. This shift in sentiment
led to a growing interest in what the archaeological record might
reveal about human origins.
   In 1858, William Pengelly (1812–94), who was a schoolteacher by
profession, excavated in Brixham Cave near Torquay in southwestern
England. This was a newly discovered site known to contain fossilized
bones. His work was sponsored by the Royal and the Geological
Societies of London and was carefully supervised by a committee of
prestigious scientists, including Charles Lyell. In the course of exca-
vations, stone tools and fossil animal bones were found beneath an
unbroken layer of stalagmitic deposits 7.5 centimeters thick, which
suggested considerable antiquity (Gruber 1965; Warren and Rose
1994). As a result of growing interest in the antiquity of humanity, in
the spring and summer of 1859, first the geologist Joseph Prestwich
(1812–1896) and the accomplished amateur archaeologist John Evans
(1823–1908) and then a number of other British scientists, including
Charles Lyell, visited the sites in the Somme Valley. All these scien-
tists were convinced of the validity of the finds Boucher de Perthes
and Rigollot had made there and the geologists also recognized that
the strata in which these finds occurred must have been deposited
long before 4000 bc. In their reports to leading British scientific
associations, including the British Association for the Advancement
of Science, the Royal Society of London, and the Geological Soci-
ety of London, they agreed that there was now solid evidence that
human beings had coexisted with extinct mammals at a time that
was far removed from the present in terms of calendar years (Chorley
et al. 1964: 447–9; Grayson 1983: 179–90). This new view of the antiq-
uity of human beings received what amounted to official approval in
Lyell’s The Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man (1863).
   Charles Darwin’s On the Origin of Species was published in Novem-
ber 1859. This book, which summarized the results of almost thirty
years of research that had been inspired by uniformitarian geology,
accomplished for evolutionary biology what Lyell’s Principles had
done for geology. Darwin’s concept of natural selection was accepted

                                 146
              The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

by many scientists and members of the general public as providing a
mechanism that made it possible to believe that a process of biolog-
ical evolution accounted for the origins and distributions of modern
species and explained the changes observed in the palaeontological
record. Natural selection was widely viewed as the biological equiv-
alent of capitalist competition, which was believed to be the driving
force behind economic and cultural advancement. Spencer encour-
aged this conflation by renaming natural selection the “survival of
the fittest.” Yet the enduring preoccupation of prehistoric archaeol-
ogists and anthropologists with unilinear cultural evolution accorded
with the views of Spencer and the eighteenth-century Enlightenment
philosophers rather than with Darwin’s. Darwin conceived of bio-
logical evolution as occurring in a dendritic, or branching, rather
than a unilinear manner and he believed that natural selection was
determined by fortuitous circumstances and not by foresight and
conscious decisions, as sociocultural evolution was assumed to be.
   The obvious implication of Darwin’s theory, that humanity had
evolved from some apelike primate, not only made the antiquity of
the human species a burning issue that had to be empirically studied
but also identified this investigation as being a vital part of the broader
controversy that was raging concerning Darwin’s theory of biolog-
ical evolution. Palaeolithic archaeology therefore quickly acquired
a high-profile role alongside geology and palaeontology in debates
relating to questions of escalating public interest.


                      Palaeolithic Archaeology
The subject matter of Palaeolithic archaeology was first identified
in 1865 when, in his book Pre-historic Times, the English banker
and naturalist John Lubbock (1834–1913) divided the Stone Age
into an earlier Palaeolithic or Archaeolithic (Old Stone) and a more
recent Neolithic (New Stone) period. The Palaeolithic Age was
defined as an early period of human development when only chipped
stone tools had been manufactured and numerous animal species
that are now extinct had still been alive. The Neolithic was a later
period when many special purpose stone tools, such as axes and
gouges, were ground and polished and only modern species of
animals were alive. Although Lubbock’s observation that chipped
stone tools had been manufactured before polished ones was derived

                                   147
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

from Worsaae ([1859] Fischer and Kristiansen 2002: 45–56), Lub-
bock failed to note that Thomsen and Worsaae had already defined
an intermediary period, which is now labeled the Mesolithic. In the
Mesolithic, only chipped stone tools had been manufactured, but
the array of animal species already resembled the present. The failure
of early Palaeolithic archaeologists to recognize this period suggests
the lack of a detailed understanding of the work of Scandinavian
archaeologists by their counterparts in France and England. Even the
term Mesolithic, as first used by Hodder Westropp in 1872, included
what we now designate as the Middle and Upper Palaeolithic periods
rather than referring specifically to the cultures of postglacial hunters.
It was not employed in its modern sense before the twentieth century
(Gräslund 1987: 38; Rowley-Conwy 1996).
   After 1860, the main advances in Palaeolithic archaeology took
place in France, where the river terraces of the north and the rock
shelters of the south provided better evidence than was available in
England. The principal goals of these studies were to determine how
long human beings had been in the area and whether evolutionary
trends could be detected within the Palaeolithic period. Evolutionary
theory predicted that over time human beings should have become
both morphologically and culturally more complex. The first goal
of Palaeolithic archaeologists was therefore to arrange their sites in
chronological order and see if this pattern had occurred.
   The leading figure in early Palaeolithic research was Edouard Lartet
(1801–1871), a French magistrate who had turned to the study of
palaeontology and had publicly acknowledged the importance of
Boucher de Perthes’s discoveries in 1860. Financially supported by
the English banker and amateur anthropologist Henry Christy, he
began to explore cave sites in the Dordogne in 1863. He quickly
realized that the Palaeolithic was not a single phase of human devel-
opment but a series of phases that could be distinguished according
to artifacts and associated prehistoric animals. He preferred a clas-
sification based on palaeontological criteria and identified four ages
or periods, which from most recent to oldest were: (1) Aurochs or
Bison Age; (2) Reindeer Age, of which the cave sites at Laugerie
Basse and La Madeleine were typical; (3) Mammoth and Wooly
Rhinoceros Age; and (4) Cave Bear Age, although he gradually rec-
ognized that the last two periods could not be temporally separated.
The Le Moustier site was designated as typical of a new Cave Bear

                                   148
              The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

and Mammoth period. To Lartet’s periods, Félix Garrigou added
a still earlier Hippopotamus Age, when human beings had inhab-
ited mainly open sites and that was not represented in the caves of
southern France.
   Lartet’s work was continued by Gabriel de Mortillet (1821–1898),
a geologist and palaeontologist who turned to the study of archaeol-
ogy. He was assistant curator at the Museum of National Antiquities
at Saint-Germain-en-Laye for eight years before becoming Profes-
sor of Prehistoric Anthropology at the School of Anthropology in
Paris in 1876. Mortillet was a radical socialist and a materialist, who
believed that promoting an evolutionary understanding of the ori-
gins of human beings and their cultures in opposition to the cre-
ationist views of French monarchists and conservatives was a way to
encourage the development of socialism in France (Dennell 1990).
Although he admired Lartet’s work, he maintained that an archae-
ological subdivision of the Palaeolithic had to be based on cultural
rather than palaeontological criteria, in part to minimize the risk
of ecological differences being mistaken for temporal ones. In this
respect, he chose to follow the example of Lubbock and Worsaae
(Mortillet 1883, 1897).
   In spite of this, Mortillet’s approach to archaeology was greatly
influenced by his knowledge of geology and palaeontology. He
sought to distinguish each period by specifying a limited number
of artifact types that were characteristic of that period alone. These
diagnostic artifacts were archaeological equivalents of the index fos-
sils that geologists and palaeontologists used to identify the strata
belonging to a particular geological epoch. Mortillet also followed
geological practice in naming each of his subdivisions of the Palae-
olithic after the type site that he had used to define it. Like palaeontol-
ogists, he relied on stratigraphy to establish a chronological sequence.
In the Palaeolithic research of the nineteenth century, seriation
played only a minor role as a means for establishing chronology.
This was partly because technological and stylistic sequences were
harder to recognize in Palaeolithic stone tools than in later artifacts,
as so little was known about how stone tools had been manufactured,
and also because the issues being discussed were so controversial and
socially consequential that only the clearest stratigraphic evidence
was universally agreed to be able to provide convincing temporal
sequences.

                                   149
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   The Hippopotamus Age became the Chellean Epoch (later to be
divided into the Chellean and Acheulean Epochs), named after a
site north of Paris, and most of Lartet’s Cave Bear and Mammoth
Age became the Mousterian, although Mortillet assigned finds from
Aurignac that Lartet had placed late in his Cave Bear and Mammoth
Age to a separate and later Aurignacian Epoch. Lartet’s Reindeer Age
was divided into an earlier Solutrean Epoch and a later Magdalenian
one. Mortillet was uncertain about the date of the Aurignacian.
He later placed it after the Solutrean and finally dropped it from
his classification of 1872 (Figure 4.6). Although the criteria were
not evident in advance, because so little was understood about
flint-knapping, Mortillet’s sequence displayed increasing techno-
logical virtuosity and greater economy in the use of raw material
over time. Bifacial Chellean and Acheulean handaxes gave way to
Mousterian tools prepared from Levallois cores and these in turn
to Upper Palaeolithic blade tools. Mortillet added still more epochs
to incorporate the Neolithic, Bronze, and Iron Ages into his system,
although it is doubtful that he was ever serious about the universal-
ity of these highly distinctive western European epochs, as opposed
to the technological ages of which they were subdivisions (Childe
1956a: 27).
   Mortillet also proposed a Thenaisian and a more recent Puycour-
nian Epoch to cover pre-Chellean finds. Between 1863 and 1940
archaeologists discovered eoliths, or presumed artifacts of exception-
ally crude manufacture, in early Pleistocene as well as still earlier
Pliocene and Miocene deposits in France, England, Portugal, and
Belgium. Evolutionary theory implied that the earliest tools would
be so crude that they could not be distinguished from naturally bro-
ken rocks; hence, in the absence of human bones or other convincing
proofs of human presence the authenticity of these finds was chal-
lenged. In the late 1870s, Mortillet and others who supported the
artifactual status of eoliths began to develop a set of criteria that
might be used to distinguish intentional stone working from natu-
ral breakage. Challenges to these criteria alternated with efforts to
elaborate new and more convincing tests. Comparative studies were
made of eoliths and rocks coming from formations hundreds of mil-
lions of years old, and that therefore could not be artifactual. Exper-
imental work also was carried out, including S. H. Warren’s (1905)
observations of striations on flints broken by mechanical pressure,

                                 150
Figure 4.6 Mortillet’s epochs of prehistory, from Formation de la nation
                            française, 1897


                                  151
                A History of Archaeological Thought

Marcelin Boule’s (1905) study of flints that had been churned about
in a cement mixer, and A. S. Barnes’s (1939) quantitative comparison
of edge angles fabricated by human hands and by natural processes.
In the course of these studies, much was learned about stone work-
ing and many sites were disqualified as evidence of human antiq-
uity (Grayson 1986). Either as a result of direct influence or by
coincidence, this research replicated the traditions of archaeologi-
cal experimentation established by Scandinavian investigators in the
1840s.
   Mortillet’s training in the natural sciences was reflected in more
than his classificatory approach. He and most other Palaeolithic
archaeologists were primarily concerned with establishing the antiq-
uity of humanity. Within their evolutionary framework, this meant
trying to trace evidence of human presence back as far as possible
in the archaeological record and demonstrating that older cultures
were more primitive than later ones. The sequence that Lartet and
Mortillet established carried out this task admirably. Comparing later
with earlier stages of the Palaeolithic, there was evidence of a greater
variety of stone tools, a more complicated manufacturing sequence
and greater precision in the preparation of stone tools, and an increas-
ing number of bone tools. This demonstrated that the technological
progress that Thomsen and Worsaae had documented from the Stone
to the Iron Ages had already been occurring through the Palaeolithic
period.
   Although Palaeolithic archaeologists discussed what Palaeolithic
populations had eaten at different stages and debated whether cer-
tain art work might indicate that horses had been domesticated in
the Magdalenian period (Bahn 1978), they were far less interested in
studying how people had lived in prehistoric times than Scandina-
vian archaeologists were. In this respect, Palaeolithic archaeologists
resembled palaeontologists, who at that time were more interested in
establishing well-documented evolutionary sequences than they were
in studying ecological relations among the plant and animal species
preserved in rock formations from individual periods. The main units
of archaeological excavation were accumulations of microstrata con-
taining similar artifact types. Sites were frequently excavated with
minimal supervision, which meant that detailed cultural stratigra-
phy and the features within major deposits, which would have been
noted in Scandinavia, went unrecorded. Especially in rock shelters

                                  152
              The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

where living floors had been preserved, this resulted in a severe loss
of information about how people had lived. Evidence of hearths and
tent rings often went unnoticed, as did the spatial relations of artifacts
and faunal remains to such features. The artifacts that were kept for
study in museums often were only those recognized as being of diag-
nostic value (fossiles directeurs) for confirming the age and cultural
affinities of sites. Debitage and artifacts that were not believed to have
diagnostic significance because they did not change significantly over
long periods of time were frequently discarded. This encouraged a
narrow view of artifacts as dating devices and evidence of progress,
which was very different from the Scandinavian approach to studying
archaeological data.
   Finally, Palaeolithic epochs were viewed as a unilinear series of
stages with little attention being paid to synchronic diversity that
might have developed as a result of ecological or ethnic differences.
Unilinear evolutionism encouraged the belief that archaeologists
could use modern ethnographic cultures to illustrate the ways of
life that had been associated with particular epochs. The Chelleans
often were compared to the aboriginal Tasmanians, alleged to be the
most primitive people alive in the nineteenth century, the Mouste-
rians with the somewhat more advanced Australian Aborigines, and
the Solutreans with the Inuit. Such dependence on holistic ethno-
graphic analogies for the behavioral interpretation of archaeological
data inhibited the development of techniques for inferring specific
aspects of human behavior from particular types of archaeological
data and subordinated prehistoric archaeology to ethnology in the
sphere of functional-processual interpretation. Even Boyd Dawkins
(1874), who criticized Mortillet for his preoccupation with evolution-
ary development and his failure to allow that some differences among
Palaeolithic assemblages might reflect ethnic variation or varying
access to different types of stone, did not produce any satisfactory
historical analyses.
   Mortillet, like the geologists and palaeontologists of the mid-
nineteenth century, was caught up in the evolutionary enthusiasm
that characterized scientific research at that time. He viewed his
Palaeolithic sequence as a bridge between the geological and palaeon-
tological evidence of biological evolution prior to the Pleistocene
era and the already established documentation of cultural progress
in Europe in post-Palaeolithic times. As Glyn Daniel (1950: 244) has

                                   153
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

noted, one of the keynotes of evolutionary archaeology was the idea
that the development of different groups of human beings could be
represented in a single sequence and read in a cave section, just as
the geological sequence could be read in stratified rocks.
   Mortillet also was influenced by a strong ethnological interest in
cultural evolution during the second half of the nineteenth cen-
tury. In 1851, the German ethnologist Adolf Bastian (1826–1905)
began a series of scientific voyages around the world in the course of
which he built up the collections of the Royal Museum of Ethnol-
ogy in Berlin. Impressed by the cultural similarities that he encoun-
tered in widely separated places, he emphasized the Enlightenment
doctrine of psychic unity by arguing that, as a result of universally
shared “elementary ideas” (Elementargedanken), peoples at the same
level of development who are facing similar problems will, within
the constraints imposed by their environments, tend to develop
similar solutions to such problems (Koepping 1983; Zimmerman
2001).
   After 1860, there was a great revival of theoretic history, as ethnolo-
gists sought, by comparing modern societies assumed to be at differ-
ent levels of development, to work out the successive stages through
which European societies had evolved in prehistoric times. These
researches ranged from studies of specific issues, such as Johann
Bachofen’s (1861) theory that all societies had evolved from matrilin-
eal beginnings and John McLennan’s (1865) arguments that the old-
est human societies had been polyandrous, to general delineations of
development from savagery through barbarism to civilization by E. B.
Tylor (1865) and Lewis H. Morgan (1877). Unlike the “theoretic”
histories of the eighteenth century, these ethnological formulations
generally were presented as scientific theories rather than as philo-
sophical speculations. Although reflecting the vogue for evolution-
ary studies in the mid-nineteenth century and usually addressing
questions that archaeological data were ill-equipped to handle, these
works derived much of their self-confidence from growing archaeo-
logical evidence that technological advances had been a significant
feature of human history. Reciprocally, these ethnographic formula-
tions encouraged archaeologists to interpret their data from a uni-
linear perspective. Although Mortillet did not claim that every detail
of the development of material culture in France during the Palae-
olithic period had been duplicated elsewhere, he did believe that,

                                   154
              The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

because this sequence represented a logical process of technological
elaboration, all but its most specific features would have characterized
the sequences that early human development would have followed
in all other parts of the world.
   In his guide to the archaeological displays at the Paris Exposition
of 1867, Mortillet proclaimed that prehistoric studies had revealed
human progress to be a law of nature, that all human groups passed
through similar stages of development (although clearly at differ-
ent speeds), and that humanity was of great antiquity (Daniel 1967:
144). The first two concepts had their roots in the philosophy of
the Enlightenment and the third had been recognized as a result of
archaeological research carried out before the publication of On the
Origin of Species. Yet, although Palaeolithic archaeology had vindi-
cated an evolutionary origin for humanity, Mortillet’s first two laws
were far from validated. Not enough work had been done outside of
western Europe to determine whether or not human groups every-
where had developed – insofar as they had developed at all – through
the same Palaeolithic sequence. Although many scholars were pre-
pared to accept the multiple invention of simple artifacts, such as
spears or calabash containers, some of them suspected that more
complex inventions, such as boomerangs or bows and arrows, must
each have had a single origin and diffused from its place of origin
to other parts of the world (Huxley [1865] 1896: 213). Likewise,
overly rigid applications of notions about what constituted progress
led many archaeologists to reject the authenticity of cave paint-
ings because they seemed stylistically too advanced to have been
produced at an early stage of human development. In 1889
Mortillet claimed in a letter that the cave paintings at Altamira were
a plot by the Spanish priesthood to discredit prehistory as a sci-
ence. This view was only overcome as fresh discoveries of cave paint-
ings were made in contexts that clearly dated this art to the Upper
Palaeolithic period. Even when European cave art was validated,
however, it was interpreted largely by analogy with the totemism
associated with the Australian aborigines (Reinach 1903; Ucko and
Rosenfeld 1967: 123–8; Moro Abadı́a and González Morales 2003,
2004).
   Palaeolithic archaeology was scientifically important and aroused
great public interest because it revealed the hitherto unexpected
antiquity of humanity and the evolution of European civilization

                                  155
                A History of Archaeological Thought

from very primitive beginnings (Moro Abadı́a 2002). Palaeolithic
archaeology also enjoyed great prestige because of its close ties with
geology and palaeontology, which were both sciences in the forefront
of creating a new vision of the history of the world. All three disci-
plines were valued because they were viewed as demonstrating the
reality of progress before the dawn of history. Palaeolithic archae-
ology also attracted more attention than Scandinavian prehistoric
archaeology had done because it evolved in France and England,
which were the main centers of political, economic, and cultural
development in the world at that time. Yet Palaeolithic archaeol-
ogy’s view of artifacts mainly as dating devices and evidence of cul-
tural evolution was a very narrow one by comparison with Scan-
dinavian prehistoric archaeology, which was concerned with study-
ing cultural evolution but also sought to learn as much as possible
about specific human groups that had lived in the past and how
human beings had adapted to individual prehistoric environments.
The reciprocal interdisciplinary cooperation of Scandinavian archae-
ologists with geologists and biologists in their pursuit of these objec-
tives contrasts with the wholesale modeling of archaeological research
on often inappropriate natural science methods by Palaeolithic
archaeologists. As a result, the prehistoric archaeology that developed
in France and England was limited in the range of its interests just as
it was enhanced in its time depth by comparison with Scandinavian
archaeology.


                    Reaction against Evolution
Individual archaeologists served on both sides in the struggle
between the supporters of revealed religion and evolutionism dur-
ing the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Those who
objected to evolutionary explanations of human origins or the denial
of biblical accounts of human history fought evolutionists in various
ways. During the 1860s, creationists who accepted current interpreta-
tions of the archaeological record could admit that human beings had
been created much earlier than had previously been thought and con-
tinue to hope that early hominid skeletons, when discovered, would
resemble those of modern human beings rather than the “pithecoid
forms” predicted by the Darwinians (Casson 1939: 207–8; Grayson
1983: 211). Other creationists rejected an evolutionary interpretation

                                  156
             The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

of the archaeological record. As early as 1832, Richard Whately, the
Anglican Archbishop of Dublin (1787–1863), had sought to breathe
new life into the doctrine of degenerationism. He argued that there
was no evidence that savages, unaided, had ever developed a less
barbarous way of life. It followed that humanity originally must have
existed in a state “far superior” to that of modern savages, a view
that he felt was in accord with the Book of Genesis (Grayson 1983:
217–20). This position became increasingly popular among conserva-
tives in the 1860s, although not all degenerationists denied the great
antiquity of humanity or attributed its earliest cultural achievements
to divine revelation.
   One of the most eminent degenerationists was the Canadian geolo-
gist and amateur archaeologist John William Dawson, who was Prin-
cipal of McGill University in Montreal from 1855 to 1893. Dawson
accepted the association between human remains and extinct mam-
mals but argued that these associations only confirmed the recency of
the Pleistocene gravels in which they were found. On a trip to Europe
in 1865, he inspected the geological deposits of the Somme Valley
and described his former mentor Charles Lyell as taking very “good-
naturedly” his opinion that evidence was lacking “of the excessive
antiquity at that time attributed to [these formations] by some writ-
ers” (Dawson 1901: 145). In this case, Dawson was simply ignoring
the unwelcome findings of uniformitarian geologists. Elsewhere, he
noted that North American ethnographic evidence revealed that the
indigenous peoples who had produced the best-made stone imple-
ments also had produced the rudest ones (this was probably a ref-
erence to cores and debitage). More generally, he suggested that
the developmental sequence found in Europe might represent an
idiosyncratic local trend or the accidental interdigitation of neigh-
boring, contemporary groups with different cultures. From this, he
concluded that there was no evidence that cultures at different levels
of complexity had not coexisted throughout human history (Dawson
1888: 166–7, 214; Trigger 1966). Although, in retrospect, Dawson
can be seen as defending a lost cause, in the nineteenth century it
was easier for his opponents to ignore his criticisms of the limita-
tions of important aspects of their research than to refute them. In
particular, not enough was yet known about prehistoric sequences
outside Europe to establish evolution as a general trend in human
history.

                                 157
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   Still more affinities existed between Middle Eastern archaeologists
and those who sought to prove the literal truth of the Bible. Intense
public interest in Mesopotamian archaeology revived in the 1870s
after George Smith published a clay tablet from Nineveh containing
a Babylonian account similar to the biblical one of Noah’s flood.
The Daily Telegraph newspaper offered 1,000 pounds sterling to
send an expedition to Iraq in search of the missing portions of this
tablet, which were duly found (Daniel 1950: 132–3). Much of the
early work of the Egypt Exploration Society was directed to sites
in the Nile Delta, such as Tell el-Muskhuta, that might have been
associated with biblical accounts of the Hebrew sojourn in Egypt. In
1896, W. M. F. Petrie was quick to identify the ethnic name I. si. ri.
ar (the ancient Egyptian script did not distinguish r and l), which
appeared on a newly discovered stela of the Pharaoh Merneptah
(r. 1236–1223 bc), as the first known mention of Israel in Egyptian
texts (Drower 1985: 221). As late as 1929, Leonard Woolley excited
great interest by claiming that the thick silt deposits that he had
found in his excavations of prehistoric levels at Ur attested a great
flood in Mesopotamia that might have given rise to the biblical
account of the deluge (Woolley 1950: 20–3; Moorey 1991: 79–80).
Until the 1890s, historical archaeologists, fearing to question the bib-
lical chronology, maintained that there were no prehistoric sites in
the Middle East. They argued that all sites yielding stone artifacts
dated from historical times (Gran-Aymerich 1998: 285–6, 292, 443).
Although Egypt and Mesopotamia produced spectacular archaeo-
logical discoveries that excited the public because of their intrinsic
beauty and interest, those that related to the Bible and appeared
to confirm scriptural accounts ensured widespread financial support
for archaeological research carried out in those countries and in
Palestine.


                  Archaeology in North America
Although European visitors and to a limited degree local scholars
studied isolated facets of Latin American prehistory (I. Bernal 1980:
35–102), the United States was the only country outside Europe to
develop a substantial tradition of prehistoric archaeological research
before the late nineteenth century. By the time European settlers
began to press west of the Appalachian Mountains, starting in the

                                  158
              The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

1780s, the spread of Enlightenment rationalism among more edu-
cated Euro-Americans was creating the need for nonreligious explan-
ations of Indian inferiority. As a consequence, racial myths eclipsed
religious ones as a justification for seizing Indian lands and violating
Indian treaty rights. It was widely maintained that the Indians were
brutal and warlike by nature and biologically incapable of significant
cultural development. They also were alleged, despite substantial evi-
dence to the contrary, to be unable to adjust to a European style of
life and therefore destined to die out as “civilization” spread west-
ward (Vaughan 1982). Even Thomas Jefferson, who regarded the
Indians as having been a noble and vibrant race before European
discovery, did not believe they possessed the power to resist the cor-
rupting influences of civilization (R. McGuire 1992b; Wallace 1999).
These ideas were not the invention of a single individual but sponta-
neous expressions of widely held prejudices. Many Americans viewed
the assumed natural inferiority of the Indians as a manifestation of
divine providence, which indicates that the new biological expla-
nations of the supposed inferiority of indigenous peoples did not
necessarily exclude older religious ones.
   When Europeans began to settle west of the Appalachians, they
discovered elaborate earthworks and large earth mounds in the Ohio
and Mississippi watersheds. The earthworks are now known to have
been associated with the Adena and Hopewell cultures that were
centered in the Ohio Valley between 800 bc and ad 500 and many
of the mounds with the Mississippian culture that flourished across
the southeastern United States from ad 500 to 1550. These con-
structions, which often contained elaborate artifacts made of pot-
tery, shell, mica, and native copper, challenged the belief that indige-
nous American cultures were invariably primitive. They also quickly
became the focus of the most varied speculations. Some Americans,
such as the naturalist William Bartram, the Reverend James Madison,
and, most important, the Baltimore physician James McCulloh, con-
cluded that they had been constructed by Indians, but most rejected
this identification. The traveler Benjamin Barton attributed these
structures to Danes, who had gone on to become the Toltecs of
Mexico, whereas De Witt Clinton, the Mayor of New York, said
they were the work of Vikings, and the lawyer and soldier Amos
Stoddard identified them as being of Welsh origin. The sagacious
ethnologist Albert Gallatin linked them with Mexico, although he

                                  159
                A History of Archaeological Thought

was uncertain whether Mexicans had moved north or the builders
of these mounds had relocated south (Silverberg 1968; Willey and
Sabloff 1980: 19–25; Blakeslee 1987).
   Although the American public often denigrated the accomplish-
ments of their country’s indigenous peoples, they were anxious that
North America should have its own history to rival that of Europe
and, hence, were intrigued by these finds, just as they were to be
intrigued by John L. Stephens’s discovery of lost Maya cities in the
jungles of Central America in the 1840s. Yet, apart from those who
interpreted the prehistoric mounds and earthworks as evidence of
degeneration (Bieder 1986: 33–4), most scholars and the general
public attributed them to a race of Moundbuilders who were imag-
ined to have been destroyed or driven out of North America by
savage hordes of Indians. The various Moundbuilder speculations
thus offered a chronicle of American prehistory but, by attributing
the major accomplishments of the past to a vanished non-North
American Indian people, continued to emphasize the static and
hence potentially uncivilizable nature of the Indians. The archae-
ological record was widely interpreted as further evidence of the
menace posed by the Indians, who were thereby revealed as destroy-
ers of civilization when given the opportunity. Indians whose lands
and other resources were being seized and who were being con-
fined on reservations or forced to relocate farther west were por-
trayed by their oppressors as bloodthirsty monsters and new rea-
sons were provided to justify American citizens waging war on
them and seizing their lands. Books, such as Josiah Priest’s Ameri-
can Antiquities and Discoveries in the West (1833), expounding the
idea that the Moundbuilders were a lost race of civilized people,
quickly became best-sellers. So great was the attraction of these
narratives that, even after the American physician and anatomist
Samuel Morton (1799–1851) had failed to discover any signifi-
cant differences between the skulls of Moundbuilders and those
of recently deceased Indians, he divided his American race into
Toltec and Barbarous families on purely cultural grounds (Silverberg
1968).
   More positively, the discovery of mounds and earthworks west
of the Appalachians created for the first time a widespread interest
in the United States in describing prehistoric monuments and col-
lecting artifacts from them. These finds were viewed as far more

                                160
              The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

sophisticated, both technologically and artistically, than anything
produced by Indians. Between 1780 and 1860, archaeology in the
eastern and central United States passed through an antiquar-
ian phase, which recapitulated the development of archaeology in
England and Scandinavia between 1500 and 1800. In the late eigh-
teenth century, army officers stationed in the Ohio Valley began to
draw plans of the earthworks and the Reverend Manasseh Cutler
counted the number of rings of trees that had grown on top of the
earthworks at Marietta as these were cleared for town building. In
1813, H. H. Brackenridge distinguished between burial and temple
mounds and as we now know correctly suggested that the burial ones
were earlier (Willey and Sabloff 1980: 23).
   Research and the publication of research gradually became more
systematic. The American Philosophical Society took an active inter-
est in the Moundbuilder debate. In 1799, as one of its numerous
scientific projects, its President, Thomas Jefferson, distributed a cir-
cular soliciting information about prehistoric fortifications, tumuli,
and Indian artifacts. In 1812, the publisher Isaiah Thomas founded
the American Antiquarian Society, which provided a focal point for
the still diffuse but growing interest in archaeological questions. The
first volume of the society’s Transactions, which appeared in 1820,
contained Caleb Atwater’s “Description of the antiquities discovered
in the State of Ohio and other western states.” This study incorpo-
rated valuable plans and descriptions of earthworks, many of which
have since been leveled (Figure 4.7). Atwater divided the earthworks
into three classes: modern European, modern Indian, and Mound-
builder. He speculated, on the basis of a single three-headed ceramic
vessel, that the ancient mounds had been constructed by Hindus,
who had come to North America from Asia and later moved south
into Mexico.
   The next major contribution to American archaeology was Ancient
Monuments of the Mississippi Valley (1848) by Ephraim G. Squier
(1821–1888) and Edwin H. Davis (1811–1888). Squier, a newspa-
per editor, and Davis, a physician, both lived in Ohio. They care-
fully surveyed a large number of mounds and earthworks, excavated
some, and systematically compiled the findings of other researchers.
They recorded a vast amount of data about prehistoric earthworks
over the eastern United States, many of which relate to sites that
have since been destroyed. Their classification, which was based

                                  161
                 A History of Archaeological Thought




   Figure 4.7 Plan of prehistoric earthworks at Portsmouth, Ohio, from
 Atwater’s “Description of the antiquities discovered in the State of Ohio”
         (Transactions of the American Antiquarian Society, 1820)


on formal criteria, distinguished between the effigy mounds of the
upper Mississippi Valley, the symmetrical enclosures of Ohio, and
the truncated mounds to the south. Speculation was generally lim-
ited to posing questions about the possible uses of such structures
(Figure 4.8).
   Although Squier and Davis both strongly supported the Mound-
builder hypothesis, the general tone of their volume was set by Joseph
Henry, a renowned physicist and the first secretary of the Smithso-
nian Institution, which had been established in Washington, DC,
in 1846. Their volume was the Smithsonian’s first publication and
began its Contributions to Knowledge series. Henry was determined
to purge American archaeology of its speculative tendencies and to
encourage scientific research in the Baconian tradition. To achieve
that end, he insisted on excising all of what he judged to be Squier
and Davis’s unsubstantiated speculations about the Moundbuilders
so that their “positive addition to the sum of human knowledge
should stand in bold relief ” (Washburn 1967: 153; Tax 1975; Willey
and Sabloff 1980: 36). Henry also commissioned Samuel Haven, the
librarian of the American Antiquarian Society, to prepare a historical
review of the Archaeology of the United States, which was published
in 1856. In it, numerous speculations about American prehistory

                                    162
              The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology




   Figure 4.8 Grave Creek Mound, West Virginia, from Squier and Davis
              Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley, 1848



were systematically examined in the light of available information
and shown to be untenable. The Moundbuilder theory was one of
the principal objects of Haven’s attacks.
   In order to encourage a more professional outlook, Henry also
published reports on developments in European archaeology in the
Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution, which was widely dis-
tributed in North America. The most successful of these reports was
“General Views on Archaeology,” a translation of a paper originally
published in French by the Swiss geologist and amateur archaeologist
Adolf Morlot (1861). Morlot carefully summarized recent advances
in European archaeology, especially in Denmark and Switzerland.
His account of the excavation of Danish “kitchen middens” stimu-
lated the excavation of shell mounds along the east coast of North
America from Nova Scotia to Florida beginning in the early 1860s
(Trigger 1986a). Although Henry’s efforts to counteract specula-
tions did not significantly diminish fanciful interpretations of the past
among amateur archaeologists and the general public, his official
encouragement of archaeology and promotion of more systematic

                                  163
                A History of Archaeological Thought

research helped to prepare Americans who were interested in doing
archaeology for the more professional era that was to dawn after
1860.


                            Conclusions
In Europe, prehistoric archaeology developed in the early and mid-
dle nineteenth century as a rationalist study of cultural evolution
and a romantic investigation of how Europeans had lived before the
earliest historical records. It revealed not only that the most complex
modern technologies had developed from Stone Age beginnings but
also that the Stone Age itself bore witness to the gradual elabora-
tion of the ability of human beings to create technology. Prehis-
toric archaeology originated in two waves. The first, which began in
Denmark in 1816, mainly studied cultural development in Neolithic,
Bronze Age, and Iron Age times, while the second, which started
fifty years later in England and France, developed around the study
of the Palaeolithic period. Although Palaeolithic archaeology did not
begin completely independently of the prehistoric archaeology prac-
ticed in Scandinavia, the two approaches were distinctive in terms of
goals and methods. Palaeolithic archaeology tended to model itself
on the natural sciences, whereas Scandinavian archaeology was more
interested in learning from archaeological data how specific peoples
had lived in the past. Although Palaeolithic archaeology tended to
remain evolutionary in orientation, Scandinavian prehistoric archae-
ologists pioneered the beginnings not only of the evolutionary but
also of the culture-historical and functional-processual approaches of
later times. They did not view these as alternative approaches but as
complementary perspectives on the past.
   Both branches of prehistoric archaeology reveal themselves to have
been intellectual products of the Enlightenment. They shared the
belief that the evolution of material culture betokens social and moral
improvement as well. Large numbers of middle-class people, whose
economic and political power was increasing as a result of the Indus-
trial Revolution, were pleased to view themselves as participating in a
wave of progress that was inherent in human nature and perhaps more
generally in the very constitution of the universe. Euro-Americans
were happy to share this optimistic view, but they were not prepared
to extend it to embrace the indigenous peoples whose lands they

                                 164
             The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology

were seizing. For them, indigenous people were an exception, who
as a result of their biological inferiority were unable to participate
in the progress that destiny had made the prerogative of Europeans,
wherever they lived in the world. Far from being discordant, these
differing views about Europeans and non-Europeans were soon to
be combined in a powerful international synthesis.




                                 165
                                 chapter 5
                  Evolutionary Archaeology

    Few of us can observe such indications of the habits and physical
    condition of the earliest inhabitants of this island [Britain] as are
    afforded by the remains of their rude dwellings, and by the rude
    implements occasionally found, without a sense of thankfulness that
    our lot has been mercifully cast in times of improved knowledge, of
    advanced civilization, and more refined habits.
          e a r l o f d e v o n , “Inaugural Address” at Exeter Congress, 1873,
                         Archaeological Journal 30 (1873), p. 206




A shared commitment to an evolutionary approach promoted a close
alignment between prehistoric archaeology and ethnology in west-
ern Europe and the United States beginning in the 1860s. In Europe,
the foundation for this alignment was the belief in unilinear cultural
evolution forged a century earlier by Enlightenment philosophers.
It was accepted that arranging modern cultures in a series from sim-
plest to most complex illustrated the earlier stages through which the
most advanced cultures had developed in prehistoric times. French
and British Palaeolithic archaeologists did not try harder to eluci-
date the past using archaeological data because their commitment to
unilinear evolutionism led them to believe that ethnology revealed
almost everything they wished to know about prehistoric times.
   In the United States, where it was assumed that relatively little
cultural evolution had occurred in prehistoric times, archaeology,
ethnology, physical anthropology, and linguistics had begun by the
1840s to be regarded as different branches of anthropology, which
was identified as the study of American indigenous peoples. The
principal goal of American anthropology was romantically defined by
the ethnologist Henry Schoolcraft (1793–1864) as being to preserve
some records of a dying race for future ages (Hinsley 1981: 20).
   One of the main problems that had confronted evolutionism from
the beginning was to explain why some societies had developed

                                         166
                       Evolutionary Archaeology

rapidly while others had remained static for thousands of years. In the
eighteenth century, such disparities commonly had been attributed
to environmental factors. A century later, it was still maintained that a
temperate climate encouraged cultural development to a far greater
degree than did a less demanding tropical or an extremely harsh
arctic one and that the physical conditions in the Old World were
naturally more conducive to cultural progress than they were in the
Americas – a position still supported by Jared Diamond (1997). Yet
specific environmental explanations often were far from convincing.
A renewed interest in cultural evolution inevitably focused attention
on this problem.


                         The Rise of Racism
At the same time that a close relationship between prehistoric
archaeology and ethnology was developing in western Europe and
America, some of the principal ideas on which the Enlightenment had
been based were undergoing significant modifications and were even
being abandoned. In particular, the nineteenth century witnessed the
slow erosion in western Europe of a belief in psychic unity. Especially
after Napoleon had stabilized the reforms of the French Revolution
in a manner that specifically benefited the middle classes, his con-
quests tended to be welcomed by these classes in Italy, Germany,
and other countries where disadvantaging semifeudal political struc-
tures had persisted. His conquests simultaneously provoked nation-
alist reactions, which continued to be promoted by the conservative
regimes that were restored to power in France, Germany, and Italy
after his defeat. In place of the rationalism of the Enlightenment, this
new conservatism encouraged a romantic celebration of national and
ethnic differences in the hope of diverting the middle classes from
continuing to demand political and social reform. Although Johann
Herder (1744–1803), the German philosopher who was very influ-
ential in promoting these ideas, was not a racist or even opposed
to reform, this sort of thinking encouraged many intellectuals to
view alleged national characteristics as being rooted in biological
disparities between human groups that were impervious to change.
This belief began to challenge the eighteenth-century Enlightenment
assumption of the intellectual and emotional similarity of different
ethnic groups (Grayson 1983: 142–9).

                                  167
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

   Racist ideas found expression in the writings of Joseph-Arthur,
comte de Gobineau (1816–1882), especially his four volume Essai sur
l’inégalité des races humaines (Essay on the Inequality of the Human
Races) (1853–1855). A member of an aristocratic French family,
Gobineau believed that the fate of civilizations was determined by
their racial composition and that the more a successful civilization’s
racial character was “diluted,” the more likely it was to sink into stag-
nation and corruption. Gobineau subscribed to the prerevolution-
ary belief that the French aristocracy was descended from German-
speaking Franks, whereas French commoners were descended from
Gauls and Romans. He celebrated the supposed superiority of the
Aryans or northern Europeans, including the Germans, and inter-
preted the execution and exiling of aristocrats during the French
Revolution as having deprived France of its most capable leaders.
As a result, he believed, France was doomed to lose its national
preeminence in Europe. Gobineau also warned that Germans could
dominate others only so long as they avoided “miscegenation” with
“inferior” peoples, such as Jews, Celts, and Slavs. Gobineau’s writings
were to influence European racists, including the composer Richard
Wagner and the Nazi leader Adolf Hitler, and his ideas were popular-
ized in America by works such as Madison Grant’s The Passing of the
Great Race (1916), which argued against allowing large numbers of
immigrants from southern and eastern Europe to enter the United
States. Gobineau was not the only source of racist ideas. Already in
the 1840s, the German ethnologist Gustav Klemm (1802–1867) was
distinguishing between culturally creative and culturally uncreative
peoples (Klemm 1843–1852, 1854–1855). It was not long before nov-
elists as well as scholars were routinely invoking alleged racial factors
instead of environmental ones to explain the varying degrees to which
the cultures of different human groups had evolved.
   Some of these theories were founded on the doctrine of polygen-
esis, or multiple origins of human beings, which can be traced as far
back as the twelfth century (Slotkin 1965: 5–6), but was first raised
as a major issue in modern times by the French Calvinist librarian
Isaac de La Peyrère (1594–1676) in 1655. He argued that the biblical
Adam was the ancestor of the Jews alone, whereas God had created
the ancestors of other human groups earlier and on different con-
tinents, thereby implying in modern terminology that these groups
were not simply separate races but separate species.

                                  168
                      Evolutionary Archaeology

   Although church authorities compelled La Peyrère to retract his
thesis, his ideas continued to be debated. Beginning in the late sev-
enteenth century, scholars such as François Bernier (1620–1688),
Carolus Linnaeus (1707–1778), and Johann Blumenbach (1752–
1840) assigned the peoples of the world to major racial divisions
to which they attributed significant differences in behavior as well
as physical appearance. Little distinction was drawn between what
would now be considered as innate and learned behavior in these
classifications. Polygenists identified these groups as separately cre-
ated species. In 1774, Edward Long (1734–1813), who had worked
in the West Indies, argued that Europeans and Africans were sepa-
rate species and in 1799 Charles White (1728–1813) proclaimed that
Europeans, Asians, American Indians, black Africans, and Hottentots
constituted a graded sequence of increasingly primitive human
groups.
   In the United States, the Philadelphia physician Samuel Morton
(1799–1851) suggested in his Crania Americana (1839) that the
American Indian constituted a homogeneous type that providence
had created in the New World. In his Crania Aegyptiaca, published
five years later, he argued that Egyptian skulls and depictions of eth-
nic groups on Egyptian monuments revealed that human types had
not changed in that part of the world for forty-five hundred years;
almost as far back as the biblically recorded creation of the earth
(Morton 1844). Although Morton initially believed that God had
differentiated the races after he had created a common humanity,
by 1849 he was advocating divine polygenesis, a position that was
endorsed by the influential Swiss-American naturalist Louis Agassiz
(1807–1873) and popularized by the Alabama physician Josiah C.
Nott (1804–1873) and the amateur Egyptologist George R. Gliddon
(1809–1857) in their book Types of Mankind (1854). Yet, in the
United States, polygenism was generally repudiated by pious Chris-
tians, who were offended by its rejection of orthodox interpretations
of the Bible. Even among devout slave owners in the southeastern
United States, Nott and Gliddon were not popular, despite their
alleged proof that negroes were inferior to whites (Stanton 1960:
161–73).
   Nevertheless, racist ideas spread. Even the leading British mono-
genist James Cowles Prichard (1786–1848), who argued that all
human beings had differentiated from a single ancestral stock as the

                                 169
                A History of Archaeological Thought

result of a process of self-domestication, maintained in the first edi-
tion of his Researches into the Physical History of Man (1813) that
the more civilized peoples became the more they physically resem-
bled Europeans. Although the most primitive groups had black skins,
more civilized ones had become progressively lighter (pp. 174–242;
Bowler 1992).
   Belief in the inequality of races gained in scientific stature as a
result of Darwinian evolutionism. In their desire to make credible the
evolutionary origins of the human species, Darwin and many of his
supporters argued that human groups varied in their biological evo-
lutionary status from highly evolved to ones that were only slightly
superior to the most evolved apes. Darwin believed that less civilized
peoples were less developed intellectually and emotionally than were
Europeans; hence, his estimation of human biological development
corresponded with the conventional scale of cultural evolution. In
1863, Thomas Huxley noted similarities between two Neanderthal
skulls and those of modern Australian Aborigines, which consisted
mainly of both having large brow ridges, and argued on this basis
that they must have been culturally similar (Huxley [1863] 1896).
Culturally advanced societies were viewed as ones in which the oper-
ation of natural selection had produced individuals who possessed
superior intelligence and greater self-control.
   Alfred Wallace (1823–1913), the codiscoverer of natural selection,
had as a naturalist lived for long periods of time among tribal groups
in South America and Southeast Asia. On the basis of his personal
knowledge of these groups, he denied that these peoples differed sig-
nificantly from Europeans in their intelligence or other innate abili-
ties and maintained that humanity’s higher mental capacities, which
so greatly exceeded those of any other animal, could not have been
produced by natural selection. Darwin deplored these observations as
lack of support for their joint theory of evolution (Eiseley 1958). To
those who were predisposed to believe in racial inequality, Darwin’s
concept of natural selection offered a far more convincing expla-
nation of how biological inequalities had developed among human
groups than polygenism had done. Although Darwin vehemently
opposed the mistreatment and exploitation of non-Western peo-
ples, his theorizing about human evolution gave an unprecedented
measure of scientific respectability to racial interpretations of human
behavior. These interpretations provided a biological counterpart to

                                 170
                      Evolutionary Archaeology

romantic nationalism in challenging and ultimately superseding a
belief in psychic unity.


                        Lubbock’s Synthesis
A Darwinian view of human nature was incorporated into prehis-
toric archaeology by the versatile John Lubbock (1834–1913), who
later became Lord Avebury, with his book Pre-historic Times, as Illus-
trated by Ancient Remains, and the Manners and Customs of Modern
Savages. Between 1865 and 1913, this book went through seven edi-
tions both in England and the United States, and it long served as
a textbook of archaeology. It was the most influential work dealing
with archaeology published during the nineteenth century. A second
book, The Origin of Civilisation and the Primitive Condition of Man
(1870), also went through several editions. It expounded Lubbock’s
ideas in a more extreme fashion and with less emphasis on archae-
ological data. Lubbock grew up as a neighbor of Charles Darwin,
whose property bordered on the Lubbock family’s estate in Kent.
At the age of twenty-two, he became a partner in his father’s bank
and later in life, as a member of Parliament, he secured passage of
an act to provide protection for some ancient monuments (1882)
(T. Murray 1989). His research as a naturalist established him as a
leading authority on animal behavior. It was as an early supporter
of Darwin’s theory of evolution that he began to study prehistoric
archaeology (Figure 5.1).
   At first glance, Prehistoric Times (to adopt the spelling of later
editions) appears to be a curious compilation of disparate mate-
rial. A first section, comprising more than half the book, presents
a series of chapters dealing in roughly chronological order with
archaeological topics: the use of bronze in ancient times, the
Bronze Age, the use of stone, megaliths and tumuli, lake-dwellings,
kitchen middens, North American archaeology, Quaternary mam-
mals, “primeval man,” Pleistocene deposits, and the antiquity of
human beings. Lubbock then argued that just as modern elephants
provide information about the anatomy of extinct mammoths, so
modern primitive societies shed light on the behavior of prehis-
toric human beings. This observation is followed by a series of
sketches of the ways of life of modern tribal societies: Hottentots,
Veddahs, Andaman Islanders, Australian Aborigines, Tasmanians,

                                 171
                A History of Archaeological Thought




         Figure 5.1 John Lubbock (Lord Avebury) (1834–1913)
                 (Radio Times Hulton Picture Library)


Fijians, Maoris, Tahitians, Tongans, Eskimos, North American Indi-
ans, Paraguayans, Patagonians, and Fuegans. The ordering of these
chapters is clearly geographical rather than evolutionary and no
attempt was made to indicate what particular modern groups pro-
vided evidence about specific stages of prehistoric development. The
only common features studied by both archaeologists and ethnol-
ogists, and hence the sole basis for justifying broad comparisons of
this sort, would have been similarities in material culture. Among the
few specific parallels of this sort that Lubbock noted was the long-
standing Scandinavian claim that Inuit stone tools were very similar
to those of the European Upper Palaeolithic. He also drew a parallel
between the Fuegans and the people who had produced the Danish
kitchen middens, although he observed that the prehistoric Danes
excelled the Fuegans because they manufactured pottery.
   Although nineteenth-century ethnologists often left material cul-
ture poorly described, collections of objects from around the world
were available for study in many European museums. Lubbock’s fail-
ure to present a detailed comparison of stone tools from Fuegan and

                                 172
                       Evolutionary Archaeology

Danish kitchen-midden sites or to identify modern cultures manu-
facturing Chellean handaxes or Levallois cores before using ethno-
graphic comparisons to reconstruct Chellean and Mousterian ways
of life suggests that he was at least to some extent aware that parallels
of this sort in material culture were exceedingly rare. His observa-
tion that there was no clear evidence that humanity had invented
specific types of tools in precisely the same order everywhere and
his affirmation that environmental factors clearly had produced dif-
ferences in “kind” as well as “degree” among human groups were
ways to explain the lack of specific correlations between ethnographic
evidence and the western European archaeological sequence. Yet
Lubbock remained deeply committed to the idea of unilinear cul-
tural evolution. The parallel that he drew between, on the one
hand, Cuvier’s reconstruction of extinct species of animals using
living species as analogues and, on the other, his own analogies
between “primitive” peoples and “prehistoric” ones was an attempt
to enhance the scientific respectability of his cultural comparisons.
Neither this comparison nor his caveats concerning the limitations
of a unilinear approach were new.
   What was new was Lubbock’s Darwinian insistence that, as a result
of natural selection, human groups had become different from each
other not only culturally but also in their biological capacities to
utilize culture. Lubbock viewed modern Europeans as products of
intensive cultural and biological evolution. He believed that tech-
nologically less advanced peoples were not only culturally but also
intellectually and emotionally more primitive from a biological point
of view than were civilized ones. He also maintained that, as a result of
the differential operation of natural selection within European soci-
eties, the criminally inclined and the lower classes were biologically
inferior to the more successful middle and upper classes. He further
contended that, because women had been protected and cared for
by men throughout history, they had remained biologically inferior
to men in terms of intellectual capacity and emotional self-control.
Thus, his male, middle-class readers did not have to journey to dis-
tant lands to observe less evolved types of human beings. Examples
of such people were present in their own communities and even in
their own families. At a time when the genetic mechanisms of biolog-
ical inheritance remained unknown, the Darwinian concept of nat-
ural selection could inspire the creation of a single explanation that

                                  173
                A History of Archaeological Thought

sought to account for and justify the nineteenth-century European
class system, gender discrimination, and colonialism.
   The widespread support for such ideas among the middle
classes suggests that, having achieved political power, middle-class
European males had become anxious to regard their exalted status
not as a passing phase in human history but as a reflection of their own
biological superiority. The Industrial Revolution had terminated the
domination of society by the physically strong and martially inclined,
as in the feudal period, and provided an opportunity for intelli-
gent and prudent males to rise to the top of society. The new elite
wanted to believe that no one was biologically able to challenge their
dominance.
   Like other late-nineteenth-century evolutionists, Lubbock oppo-
sed the idea that cultural degeneration had played a significant role
in human history. He consistently described degenerationism as an
old-fashioned and discredited doctrine. He also sought to counter
the romantic followers of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who maintained
that the development of civilization had resulted in a decrease of
human happiness. In order to reinforce an evolutionary perspec-
tive, Lubbock consistently sought to portray “primitive” peoples
as few in number, wretched, and morally depraved by comparison
with civilized ones. He described modern tribal peoples as being
unable to control the natural world and having intellects resembling
those of European children. Their languages were alleged to lack
abstract words and they were claimed to be incapable of understand-
ing abstract concepts. They also were said to be slaves to their pas-
sions, being unable to control anger or to follow a predetermined
course of action for more than a short time. He maintained that
they were more deficient in moral sense than was generally believed
and took pains to document how specific primitive groups regu-
larly mistreated children, murdered aged parents, practiced human
sacrifice, and ate human flesh. To draw attention to their lack of
the most basic middle-class virtues, he also consistently emphasized
their alleged dirtiness. He further argued that cultural development
inevitably resulted in an increasing population; whereas, left to their
own devices, primitive peoples remained static or declined in num-
bers. Cultural evolution also expanded human consciousness and led
to growing material prosperity and spiritual progress.


                                  174
                        Evolutionary Archaeology

   Lubbock maintained that cultural evolution would continue indef-
initely, creating a future marked by ever greater technological and
moral improvement and by increasing human happiness and comfort.
Pre-historic Times ended with a rousing expression of this evolution-
ary credo:
    Even in our own time, we may hope to see some improvement;
    but the unselfish mind will find its highest gratification in the belief
    that, whatever may be the case with ourselves, our descendants will
    understand many things which are hidden from us now, will better
    appreciate the beautiful world in which we live, avoid much of that
    suffering to which we are subject, enjoy many blessings of which we
    are not yet worthy, and escape many of those temptations which we
    deplore, but cannot wholly resist. (Lubbock 1869: 591)

The growth of a capitalist industrial economy, in conjunction with
the operation of natural selection on human beings, was clearly seen
as leading to an earthly paradise. By offering evidence that such
progress was the continuation of what had been occurring ever more
rapidly throughout human history, prehistoric archaeology bolstered
the self-confidence of the middle classes and confirmed the crucial
role they were playing in world history.
   Yet not all human groups were believed to be destined to share in
this happiness. The most primitive peoples were doomed to vanish as
a result of the spread of civilization, as no amount of education could
compensate for the thousands of years during which natural selection
had failed to adapt them biologically to a more complex and orderly
way of life. Nor was their replacement by more evolved peoples to be
seriously regretted, as this process was believed to result in an over-
all improvement of the human race. By applying Darwinian princi-
ples, Lubbock came to the same conclusion about the unbridgeable
biological differences between Europeans and indigenous peoples
that American amateur anthropologists and historians had evolved
in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. His views of
such peoples justified British colonization and the establishment of
political and economic control abroad on the grounds that such
policies promoted the general progress of the human species. He
also absolved British and American settlers of much of the moral
responsibility for the rapid decline of indigenous peoples in North
America, Australia, and the Pacific. These populations were vanishing


                                     175
                A History of Archaeological Thought

not because of what colonists were doing to them but rather because,
over thousands of years, natural selection had not equipped them to
survive as civilization spread. Lubbock was not thinking of their lack
of resistance to many communicable diseases introduced by Euro-
peans, about which there was as yet little scientific awareness, but of
what he believed was their biological inability to cope with a more
complex and demanding way of life. Thus, the imposition of inferior
roles on indigenous groups was made to appear less a political act
than a natural consequence of their limited innate abilities. Whether
dealing with the working classes in Britain or with indigenous peo-
ples abroad, social Darwinism transferred human inequality from
the political to the natural realm by explaining it as a consequence
of biological differences that could be altered only very slowly,
if at all.
   This view marked a major break with the ideals of the Enlighten-
ment. The bourgeoisie of eighteenth-century France, wanting more
political power and seeking to rally as much support as possible
for their cause, had expressed their hopes for the future in terms
of a belief in progress in which all human beings could partici-
pate. In contrast, the middle classes that dominated Britain in the
mid-nineteenth century were increasingly concerned to defend their
political and economic gains and did so by trying to assign natural
limits to who could reasonably hope to benefit from progress. Begin-
ning in the 1860s, Darwinian evolutionism performed this function
admirably. Through Lubbock’s version of cultural evolution, prehis-
tory was linked to a doctrine of European biological as well as cultural
preeminence.
   Although Lubbock’s synthesis was clearly a product of Victorian
England, there was nothing narrowly chauvinistic about it. Argu-
ments about superiority were formulated in terms of a contrast
between European civilization and technologically less developed
societies. These arguments sought to explain the expanding world
system that was dominated by western Europe. At that time, Britain’s
political and economic hegemony was so great, compared to the
power of any other European nation, that it did not require ideologi-
cal reinforcement. Hence Lubbock took his own country’s leadership
for granted. Because of that, the ideas he promoted had appeal far
beyond Britain and influenced the interpretation of archaeological
data in many parts of the world.

                                  176
                      Evolutionary Archaeology


           Colonial Archaeology in the United States
Lubbock’s writings played a significant role in reinforcing and shap-
ing the development of American evolutionary archaeology in the
late nineteenth century, even though not all American archaeolo-
gists accepted the relevance of Darwinian concepts for understanding
human affairs (Meltzer 1983: 13). Euro-American anthropologists
had no difficulty, however, in applying an evolutionary perspective
to their own society. The Enlightenment concepts of reason and
progress that had played an important role in the American Revo-
lution, and the economic and territorial expansion of the United
States throughout the nineteenth century, sustained a belief that
progress was inherent in the human condition. In works such as
Lewis Henry Morgan’s (1818–1881) Ancient Society (1877) and Otis
Mason’s (1838–1908) The Origins of Invention (1895), anthropolo-
gists traced the overall development of culture from a perspective that
placed Euro-American society at the forefront of human advance-
ment. Lubbock provided Americans with a Darwinian explanation
for the biological inferiority that they had attributed to American
Indians since the late eighteenth century. Many found his explanation
more persuasive than any previous one, no doubt partly as a result of
the great prestige that many leading biologists accorded to Darwin’s
work. The declining numbers of indigenous people and their lessen-
ing ability to withstand Euro-American expansion also encouraged a
growing belief that they were doomed to extinction, which accorded
with Lubbock’s views. As a result of their belief in the incapacity of
indigenous societies to change, most North American archaeologists
continued to stress the changeless quality of the archaeological record
and tried hard to attribute changes to processes other than creativity
in indigenous cultures.
   What was known about the archaeology of Mexico, Central
America, and Peru constituted a challenge to this view. Some
writers, including those who identified the indigenous peoples of
Mexico with the Moundbuilders, regarded them as racially supe-
rior to the North American Indians. J. L. Stephens’s discovery of
the ruins of Maya cities in Mexico and Central America was wel-
comed as proof that the New World had developed its own civi-
lizations by American scholars who were anxious to refute the claims
advanced by eighteenth-century European naturalists and historians,

                                 177
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

including Georges-Louis Leclerc, comte de Buffon, Guillaume-
Thomas Raynal, and William Robertson, that the climate of the
New World was conducive to the degeneration of plant, animal,
and human life (Haven 1856: 94). William H. Prescott’s celebrated
History of the Conquest of Mexico (1843) and his later History of the
Conquest of Peru (1847) portrayed the Aztecs and Inkas as civilized
peoples, although he maintained that, as a result of their superstitions
and aggressiveness, by the sixteenth century the Aztecs were destroy-
ing the accomplishments of their more civilized predecessors. The
ethnologist Albert Gallatin (1761–1849) defended Enlightenment
views concerning cultural evolution and strongly opposed polyge-
nesis, but by the 1840s his arguments appeared old-fashioned and
unconvincing (Bieder 1975). Nevertheless, E. G. Squier continued to
defend both unilinear evolutionism and psychic unity (Bieder 1986:
104–45).
   In 1862 Daniel Wilson, who was now teaching at University
College in Toronto, published the first edition of Prehistoric Man:
Researches into the Origin of Civilisation in the Old and the New
World. This book was a remarkable synthesis of all that was known
about the anthropology of the Americas. Wilson, as a product of
the Edinburgh Enlightenment, continued, like Gallatin, to resist
racial interpretations of human behavior. He concluded, based on
his demonstration of their cranial diversity, that aboriginal peoples
had reached the Americas from many directions, but he argued that
in the course of settling there they had lost all the advanced knowl-
edge they possessed and reverted to a Stone Age level of existence.
The agricultural societies and prehistoric civilizations of the New
World had thus evolved locally. Wilson believed that, given enough
time, North American Indian tribes living in the temperate zone,
such as the Iroquois and the Micmacs, could have created cultures as
advanced as those of western Europeans. In 1862 Wilson was still a
creationist and accepted the traditional biblical chronology. Only in
a later edition of Prehistoric Man (1876) did he embrace biological
evolution, while continuing to reject ideas of racial inequality.
   In the United States, any position that ascribed creativity to indige-
nous people encountered much resistance. The war between the
United States and Mexico that ended in 1848 incited a flood of
anti-Mexican feeling. The Mexicans were generally agreed to be
inferior to Euro-Americans because Spanish settlers had interbred

                                  178
                      Evolutionary Archaeology

extensively with the indigenous population (Horsman 1975). Lewis
Henry Morgan, doggedly ignoring archaeological evidence, main-
tained that, in the sixteenth century, Spanish writers had exaggerated
the sophistication of the Aztecs and Inkas in order to magnify their
own accomplishments in conquering them. He argued that the ways
of life of these supposedly civilized peoples had differed little from
that of the Iroquois of New York State in the seventeenth century
and that no indigenous group anywhere in the New World had ever
evolved beyond the level of a tribal society. Although Morgan (1881)
published a comparative study of the indigenous architecture of the
New World, he continued to equate Mesoamerican stone buildings
with Iroquois longhouses. He did not rule out the possibility that
on their own indigenous Americans eventually might have evolved
more complex cultures, but he believed that cultural advancement
depended on an increase in brain size that could occur only very
slowly (Bieder 1986: 194–246). This position was long embraced by
many Euro-Americans, who saw little to admire among the indige-
nous peoples of the United States. There was widespread support by
the 1860s for the view that the surviving indigenous peoples of the
entire hemisphere were biologically primitive and that their cultures
had remained static throughout prehistoric times.
   It has been suggested that the lack of concern with chronology in
North American archaeology before the twentieth century resulted
from three causes: the failure of any indigenous group to advance
beyond the Stone Age, a dearth of stratified sites, and lack of famil-
iarity with techniques for deriving chronology in the absence of major
technological changes (Willey and Sabloff 1993: 39–64). These fac-
tors do not, however, agree with the evidence. The low frequency of
stratified post-Palaeolithic sites among those known in northern and
western Europe during the nineteenth century did not inhibit the
use of simple forms of seriation to construct detailed chronologies
in those regions (Childe 1932: 207). All the chronological meth-
ods used in Europe were known in America and had been success-
fully applied by archaeologists in situations in which they sought to
emulate European research. Beginning at least by the 1860s, shell
mounds were studied both seriationally and stratigraphically, and in
this way local cultural chronologies were constructed that were char-
acterized by changing pottery styles or adaptive patterns. Such obser-
vations were made by Jeffries Wyman (1875), S. T. Walker (1883),

                                 179
                A History of Archaeological Thought

and Clarence B. Moore (1892) in the southeastern United States;
William Dall (1877) in Alaska; and the visiting German archaeolo-
gist Max Uhle (1907) in California. Stratigraphic methods also were
employed in mound studies by Squier and Davis in the 1840s and by
Cyrus Thomas in the 1880s, as well as by W. H. Holmes and F. W.
Putnam in their “Palaeolithic” research in the 1880s (Meltzer 1983:
39). R. L. Lyman, M. J. O’Brien, and R. Dunnell (1997a: 23–8) have
demonstrated that stratigraphic techniques were being employed at
archaeological sites across the United States in the late nineteenth
century, even if not all these sites were being excavated layer by layer
(Browman and Givens 1996).
   The evidence of local cultural change that these early archaeolo-
gists adduced was rejected or dismissed as being of trivial significance
by most contemporary archaeologists, including sometimes by those
who employed these methods (C. Thomas 1898: 29–34). Discussing
Max Uhle’s demonstration of evidence for “the gradual elaboration
and refinement of technical processes” within the Emeryville shell
mound in California, A. L. Kroeber (1909: 16) observed that the
indigenous cultures found in that region in historical times had been
so primitive as to rule out any possibility that there could have been
significant cultural development among them in the past. Similar
doubts that evidence of any significant change was being found in
the archaeological record continued to be expressed by other ethnol-
ogists (Dixon 1913; Wissler 1914). Mainly because of the scarcity and
mobility of research personnel, local archaeological studies also did
not necessarily display continuous cumulative development at this
time. The most insightful and productive research in any one region
was not necessarily the most recent (Trigger 1986a).
   In accordance with the belief that change had been minimal in
prehistoric times, the systematic study of cultural variation in the
archaeological record was oriented primarily toward defining geo-
graphical rather than chronological patterns. This paralleled the ten-
dency of American ethnologists late in the nineteenth century to
organize the study of cultural similarities and differences in terms
of cultural areas. In 1887 the German-born and -educated ethnolo-
gist Franz Boas (1858–1942) had argued that the ethnological mate-
rial from across the United States that was accumulating in major
museums should be exhibited according to geographical areas and
tribes rather than in terms of a hypothetical evolutionary sequence or

                                  180
                       Evolutionary Archaeology

typological categories applicable to the entire continent. In advocat-
ing this display technique, Boas was following the standard German
museological practice of that period (Zimmerman 2001). Otis Mason
published the first detailed ethnographical treatment of the cultural
areas of North America in 1896 and was followed in this approach by
Clark Wissler (1914).
   Archaeologists had long been aware of geographical variations in
the distributions of certain classes of archaeological data, such as the
different types of mounds attributed to the Moundbuilders. Cyrus
Thomas (1825–1910), an entomologist who worked as an archaeolo-
gist for the Bureau of American Ethnology, subdivided these mounds
into eight geographical units, which he suggested represented more
than one nation or group of tribes, some of which had survived into
historical times (1894). Later, in his Introduction to the Study of North
American Archaeology (1898), he divided all of North America into
three major cultural zones: Arctic, Atlantic, and Pacific, with the
latter subdivided into several districts. J. D. McGuire (1842–1916)
examined the distribution of different types of Indian pipes in terms
of fifteen geographical divisions (1899) and W. H. Holmes (1846–
1933), who had been trained as an artist, used stylistic analyses as well
as technological criteria to define a series of pottery regions for the
eastern United States (1903). In 1914, he divided the whole of North
America into twenty-six general “cultural characterization areas” on
the basis of archaeological data, in a manner that paralleled the pro-
cedures being followed by ethnologists (Figure 5.2). Little effort was
made to assign relative chronological significance to different units
or to trace chronological changes within them.
   Cultural areas frequently tended to correspond with major natu-
ral ecological zones. Today, many of the features shared by cultures
located in the same ecological zone would be interpreted as skill-
ful adaptations by indigenous peoples to the environments in which
they lived. In the nineteenth century, they were instead regarded as
evidence of the domination of indigenous peoples by natural forces.
It was generally believed that soon after Indians first arrived in vari-
ous regions of the New World their cultures had been reshaped by
environmental demands and, once they were adjusted to these forces,
they tended to remain the same. Such a passive adaptation of Native
Americans to their environmental settings was contrasted with the
ability of prehistoric Europeans to create new tool technologies

                                  181
                A History of Archaeological Thought




 Figure 5.2 “Cultural characterization areas” of North America, based on
    archaeological criteria, by Holmes (American Anthropologist, 1914)

that allowed them to impose their will on the environment and
transform it.
   Thus, evidence of later change in the archaeological record was
generally interpreted as resulting from movements of people rather
than from alterations within individual cultures. For example, the
change from what would now be called Archaic to Middle Woodland
cultures in upper New York State was attributed to the northward
movement of an original Inuit-like population that was replaced by

                                  182
                      Evolutionary Archaeology

Algonquian-speakers. These in turn were pushed farther north and
east by Iroquoian-speaking peoples carrying yet another distinctive
cultural pattern northward from the Mississippi Valley. That pattern
included incised pottery and an agricultural subsistence economy
that in general was thought to resemble more closely the ways of life
found in the southeastern United States than it did earlier cultures in
its historical homeland (Beauchamp 1900; Parker 1916, 1920). The
elaborate prehistoric Pueblo sites found in the southwestern United
States were similarly assumed to have been built by Mesoamericans
who had migrated north and because of that some of them were
assigned fanciful names, such as Aztec Ruins and Montezuma Castle.
The ethnologist R. B. Dixon (1913) interpreted the complexity of
the archaeological record, which by that time was becoming evident
to archaeologists in eastern North America, as a “palimpsest” result-
ing from repeated shifts of population in prehistoric times. These
shifts were viewed as largely random movements that characterized
aboriginal life on a large and thinly populated continent.
   It also was agreed, however, that, where there had been no major
shifts in population, ethnographic data concerning tribes that had
lived in a region in historical times could be used relatively straight-
forwardly to explain prehistoric archaeological data. Cyrus Thomas
(1898: 23) argued that once America had been settled by indige-
nous peoples they had tended to remain in the same place; hence,
the archaeological record had mainly been produced by the same
people who had lived in particular regions in historical times. He
even suggested that such stability might be assumed unless there
was clear evidence to the contrary. Archaeologists such as Frank
Cushing (1857–1900) and J. W. Fewkes (1850–1930), in their studies
of the Pueblo Indians, paid much attention to determining by means
of careful ethnographic parallels for what purposes prehistoric arti-
facts had been used and how they had been made (Cushing 1886;
Fewkes 1896). It was generally assumed that there were no signifi-
cant differences between life in prehistoric pueblos and in modern
ones. Hence, efforts to learn about the past brought archaeologists
into close contact with ethnologists and often with indigenous peo-
ple. In regions where indigenous people were no longer living in
a traditional manner, archaeologists tried to learn how prehistoric
artifacts had been made and used by consulting early European his-
torical records about local Indian cultures as well as by replicative

                                  183
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

experiments and studying only partly finished artifacts. The studies
based on local ethnographic or historical data demonstrate increasing
use of the direct historical approach to interpret archaeological data
(I. Brown 1993; Lyman and O’Brien 2001). Although W. H. Holmes
and other archaeologists working with him have been credited with
first systematically applying this approach (Meltzer 1999: 183), its ear-
lier employment by William Bartram and by many European archae-
ologists suggests that it was a method that was invented many times.
Only Edgar Lee Hewett (1865–1946) expressed significant reserva-
tions about its relevance (1906: 12).
   The anthropologists employed by the Bureau of Ethnology
(renamed the Bureau of American Ethnology in 1894) favored this
“flat” view of aboriginal history because it organically united the
study of ethnology and prehistoric archaeology as closely related
branches of anthropology. Founded as an arm of the Smithsonian
Institution in 1879, the Bureau grew under the leadership of its
director, the renowned geologist and explorer John Wesley Powell
(1834–1902), into the leading center of anthropological research in
North America. Established to study ethnographic and linguistic
problems in order to promote the more effective administration of
Indian affairs, it also laid “the empirical foundations of archaeology
in the United States . . . on a broad geographical scale” (Hallowell
1960: 84). Although the “flat” past was advocated as a self-evident
means for understanding archaeological data, the application of this
approach required the assumption that life in prehistoric times was
not qualitatively distinct from that recorded soon after European
contact. Long before the founding of the Bureau of American
Ethnology, Samuel Haven (1864: 37) had observed that “The
flint utensils of the Age of Stone lie upon the surface of the
ground. . . . The people that made and used them have not yet entirely
disappeared.” This denial of cultural change, to no less a degree than
the extreme unilinear evolutionism of European archaeologists, sub-
ordinated archaeological to ethnological research by implying that
nothing could be learned from archaeological data that could not be
ascertained more easily ethnographically. Although unifying anthro-
pology, the “flat” view subordinated archaeology as a discipline to
ethnology and reinforced negative stereotypes about indigenous peo-
ples. As Meltzer (1983: 40) observed, this view was “a predictable
consequence of the government approach to archaeological research

                                  184
                      Evolutionary Archaeology

[which was] grounded in a subliminal and denigrating stereotype of
the Native American.”
   In order to validate their program, the anthropologists at the
Bureau of American Ethnology sought to discredit those aspects of
prehistory that could not be studied by means of the direct historical
approach (Meltzer 1983). The most influential of these anomalies was
the idea of the lost Moundbuilder race. Because of great public inter-
est, the United States Congress had insisted that the Bureau should
spend the then large sum of $5,000 each year on mound studies. In
1882 Powell selected Cyrus Thomas to direct this research. Thomas
began an extensive program of survey and excavation which led him
to conclude that many mounds had been constructed after earliest
European contact and, largely on the basis of the direct historical
approach (O’Brien and Lyman 1999b), that all of them had been
built by the ancestors of modern Native Americans (Thomas 1894).
He also sought to demonstrate that the cultures of the Indians who
had built the mounds were not more advanced than those of Indian
groups who had lived in the eastern United States in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries.
   Thus, the refutation of the Moundbuilder myth involved not only
the rejection of inflated claims that had been made about their way of
life (such as that they had worked iron) but also undervaluing many
of the genuine accomplishments of the various Indian groups that
had built the mounds. It appears that at this time archaeologists had
either to credit the Moundbuilders with possessing an advanced cul-
ture and deny that they were Indians or to accept them as Indians and
deny that their culture had been more advanced than those of any
Indian groups living north of Mexico in historical times. No archae-
ologist in the late nineteenth century seems to have been prepared to
believe that in prehistoric times indigenous North Americans might
have evolved cultures that were more complex than those observed in
the seventeenth century, when most Indian groups had already been
severely reduced by epidemics of European diseases and many also
had been shattered and dislocated by European aggression and by
intertribal warfare arising as a result of European settlement. Under
these circumstances, it is scarcely surprising that the demolition
of the Moundbuilder myth “did nothing to change the prevailing
popular attitudes against the Native American” (Willey and Sabloff
1993: 48).

                                 185
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   The archaeologists at the Bureau of American Ethnology also
adopted a very sceptical attitude toward claims that there existed in
North America evidence of human antiquity to rival the Palaeolithic
assemblages of Europe. The most significant of these assertions was
based on excavations that Charles C. Abbott (1843–1919), a physician
by training, carried out in gravel deposits on his ancestral farm near
Trenton, New Jersey. By 1877, he was convinced that these finds
had been produced not by the recently arrived ancestors of mod-
ern indigenous Americans but by inhabitants of the region during
the glacial period who were probably not related to the American
Indians. Abbott thought it possible that there might have been a
long period between the Palaeolithic settlers and the arrival of the
first Indians, during which North America was again uninhabited by
human beings, although he later suggested that this earlier “race”
might have been ancestral to the Inuit (Abbott 1881). For a time, his
research enjoyed the limited support and patronage of Frederic W.
Putnam (1839–1915), who had been trained as an ichthyologist but
since 1874 had been the curator of the Peabody Museum of American
Archaeology and Ethnology at Harvard University. Meanwhile, sci-
entists in other parts of the United States began to discover simi-
lar “Palaeolithic” tools, sometimes in geological contexts suggesting
great antiquity. Holmes and Thomas led the attack on these claims on
behalf of the Smithsonian Institution. Their careful research demon-
strated that the so-called Palaeolithic tools closely resembled quarry
refuse marking the early stages in the manufacture of implements by
more recent American Indians. Doubt also was cast on the geo-
logical contexts in which so-called Palaeolithic finds were being
made.
   Later, Aleš Hrdlička (1869–1943), a Czech physical anthropolo-
gist who was brought to the United States National Museum in
1903, investigated what was known about all the skeletal material
that had been claimed as evidence of “Early Man” and demonstrated
that there was no clear evidence that any of it dated prior to the
post-glacial period. Although these onslaughts led archaeologists and
geologists to abandon the idea of a strictly Palaeolithic age in North
America, they did not exclude the possibility that human beings had
lived in the New World for many thousands of years. They did, how-
ever, indicate the need for more rigorous evidence to prove this had
actually happened. It is clear that in this case scientists employed by

                                 186
                      Evolutionary Archaeology

the federal government were using their power and prestige not only
to put archaeology on “a really scientific basis” but also to promote
an understanding of the past that accorded with their personal view
of how archaeology and ethnology fitted together as branches of
anthropology (Meltzer 1983).
   Archaeologists were prepared to acknowledge that a limited
amount of innovation had occurred in prehistoric times. Warren K.
Moorehead (1866–1939) even believed that some progress was likely
because “the Indian brain is finer than the Australian or African
brain” (1910, vol. 1: 331). There was, however, a tendency, when
clear chronological indications to the contrary were lacking, to inter-
pret high-quality artifacts, such as stone effigy pipes or elaborately
decorated stone and metal ornaments, as reflecting European influ-
ence, in the form of iron carving tools and artistic inspiration. J. D.
McGuire (1899) argued that all but the simplest Iroquoian pipes
were based on European models, although archaeologists working
in the lower Great Lakes region were able to demonstrate that many
of the elaborate pipes dated before European contact (Boyle 1904:
27–9). The implication of McGuire’s interpretation was that indige-
nous cultures had been even simpler, and hence more primitive, than
the archaeological remains of the past, if viewed uncritically, might
suggest.
   The period between 1860 and 1910 witnessed the growing profes-
sionalization of archaeology in the United States. Full-time positions
became available for prehistoric archaeologists in major museums
in the larger cities and later teaching positions were established in
universities, beginning with Putnam’s appointment as Peabody Pro-
fessor of American Archaeology and Ethnology at Harvard in 1887.
The first doctorate in prehistoric archaeology in the United States
was granted at Harvard in 1894 (Hinsley 1985: 72, 1999; Conn 1998).
Euro-Americans expressed their sense of their own ethnic superior-
ity by locating collections of indigenous American archaeological
and ethnological material in museums of natural history rather than
together with European and Middle Eastern antiquities in museums
of fine art and by teaching prehistory in departments of anthropology
rather than of history. Despite the pleas of anthropologists such as
John W. Powell and Lewis H. Morgan that “humble Indian antiq-
uities” should not be allowed to perish, it was generally more diffi-
cult to secure the support of wealthy patrons for research on North

                                 187
                A History of Archaeological Thought




 Figure 5.3 Drawing of the Great Serpent Mound of Ohio, from a popular
          article by Putnam (Century Illustrated Magazine, 1890)

American Indian prehistory than for collecting classical antiquities
from Europe, which it was argued would “increase the standard of
our civilization and culture” (Hinsley 1985: 55).
   Despite these problems, much new information was collected,
new standards of research were established, and the first steps were
taken to preserve major prehistoric monuments, such as the Great
Serpent Mound in Ohio (Figure 5.3) and Casa Grande in Arizona.
The Smithsonian Institution and the Bureau of American Ethnol-
ogy played a major role in providing leadership to archaeology. This
sometimes involved directing their prestige and resources against
amateurs, who bitterly resented interference in their activities by pro-
fessional scientists employed by the federal government (McKusick
1970, 1991). Although Putnam, who was employed by a univer-
sity, encouraged valuable archaeological research in the Ohio Valley
and the use of systematic excavation techniques, his work did little
to promote a clearer understanding of North American prehistory
(Browman 2002). It is possible that the interest he had in chronol-
ogy was discouraged by the widespread rejection of the evidence for
an American Palaeolithic period, which he had supported.
   Despite the progress that was made, there was no change in the
view of Indians that had prevailed in archaeology, and American
society generally, since the late eighteenth century. On the contrary,
the belief that Indian societies were fossilized entities, incapable of
progress and therefore doomed to extinction was reinforced as a

                                  188
                      Evolutionary Archaeology

result of being rationalized in terms of Darwinian evolution and seen
to accord with the universal perspective on human evolution that had
been popularized by John Lubbock. The view of American Indians
as inherently primitive and static was now shared not only by vast
numbers of Euro-Americans at all social levels but also by an inter-
national scientific community that was increasingly receptive to racist
explanations of human behavior. Without making any significant
changes, the traditional view that Euro-American archaeologists had
held of American prehistory could be identified as congruent with
that part of Lubbock’s evolutionary archaeology that applied to colo-
nial situations.


                       Australian Prehistory
Developments in American archaeology foreshadowed what was to
occur later in other colonial settings. In Australia, studies of Aborig-
inal customs began with the first European explorers and settlers. By
1850, most of southern Australia was occupied by Europeans and the
Aborigines had been driven from their lands or were dead as a result
of disease, neglect, and murder (Figure 5.4). As in North America,
racial prejudice helped to lessen any sense of guilt that European
settlers might have felt about the way they were treating indigenous
people.
   Beginning in the second half of the nineteenth century, ethnol-
ogists in Europe and America encouraged the study of Aborigines
as examples of the “most primitive tribes” known to anthropolog-
ical science. By 1900, major works, such as Baldwin Spencer and
F. J. Gillen’s The Native Tribes of Central Australia (1899), had
placed Aboriginal ethnography on an internationally respected basis.
Spencer, like his English mentors, was to describe the Aborigines as
“a relic of the early childhood of mankind left stranded . . . in a low
condition of savagery” (Spencer 1901: 12).
   Early investigations of Aboriginal prehistory failed to uncover any
clear evidence of an association between human beings and prehis-
toric animals, such as had been found in Europe. Nor did the artifacts
discovered in archaeological sites appear to differ significantly from
those in recent use. By 1910, naturalists had abandoned the search
for evidence of the early presence of aboriginal people in Australia.
The assumptions that they had arrived recently and that their cultures

                                  189
              A History of Archaeological Thought




Figure 5.4 “Native police dispersing the blacks,” Western Queensland,
           ca. 1882 (C. Lumholtz Among Cannibals, 1890)




                                190
                      Evolutionary Archaeology

had not changed significantly since that time agreed with the ethnol-
ogists’ claims that these cultures were extremely primitive and essen-
tially static. From 1910 until the 1950s, most amateur archaeologists
collected artifacts “secure in the knowledge that Aborigines were an
unchanging people, with an unchanging technology” (Murray and
White 1981: 256). Spencer, alleging that Aboriginal culture was char-
acterized by technological opportunism and a lack of concern with
formal tool types, attributed variations in the form and function of
artifacts to differences in raw material, thereby ignoring the alterna-
tive possibilities of change over time, cultural preferences, and func-
tional adaptation (Mulvaney 1981: 63). John Mulvaney (1981: 63–4)
has argued that the concept of the “unchanging savage,” which was in
accord with the popular denigration of Aboriginal culture, inhibited
the development of prehistoric archaeology in Australia throughout
this period. Significantly, the first archaeology department that was
established in Australia, at the University of Sydney in 1948, initially
studied only the archaeology of Europe and the Middle East.
   Norman Tindale’s (1900–1993) excavations, beginning in 1929,
at the Devon Downs rock shelter in South Australia of a strat-
ified series of different tool types suggested a longer occupation
and called into question the image of a static prehistory. Fred
D. McCarthy (1905–1997) made similar discoveries in 1935 at the
Lapstone Creek rock shelter in the Blue Mountains of New South
Wales. Cultural change was attributed initially, however, to shift-
ing groups replacing one another, some of them recent invaders. In
1938, Norman Tindale linked his sequence to the American physical
anthropologist, J. B. Birdsell’s, triracial hybrid theory of Australian
origins. Tindale also suggested that environmental changes might
have occurred during the period of Aboriginal occupation. A sys-
tematic concern with cultural change and regional variation did not
characterize Australian archaeology until a number of young profes-
sional archaeologists began to study Australian prehistory following
John Mulvaney’s (b. 1925) appointment in the history department
at the University of Melbourne in 1953. Most of these archaeol-
ogists had been trained at Cambridge University, where Grahame
Clark had encouraged them to study prehistory from an ecolog-
ical perspective. Their research soon made it clear that humans
had lived in Australia for at least 40,000 years. Since the 1950s,
professional archaeologists have documented numerous changes in

                                  191
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

environment, adaptation, and nontechnological aspects of Aboriginal
culture. Their cultural chronologies also have dispelled the belief that
all cultural changes in prehistoric times occurred as a result of external
stimuli.
   The changing interpretation of archaeological data also reflected
a growing concern for a distinctive national identity among white
Australians. White artists have drawn inspiration from indigenous
art forms and Aboriginal art has been viewed as part of Australia’s
national heritage to a far greater degree than is the case with indige-
nous art in North America. Within the context of this growing
nationalism, Australian archaeologists were no longer content to
treat their country’s prehistory as a mirror of the Palaeolithic stage
of human development. Instead they began to emphasize the singu-
larities of Australian prehistory, including the considerable degree to
which Australian Aborigines managed and altered significant aspects
of their environment. The current image of prehistoric Aborigines as
“firestick farmers” is far removed from the traditional view of them
as Upper Palaeolithic hunter-gatherers (Murray and White 1981;
Mulvaney 1981; McBryde 1986; Byrne 1993: 144–5; Griffiths 1996).
   It took longer for Australian archaeologists to consider the possi-
bility that their country’s prehistory might be more than nineteenth-
century ethnology extending back unchanged for fifty millennia and
to overcome the accompanying predilection to project the direct his-
torical approach ever further back in time (Murray and White 1981:
258; Mulvaney and White 1987). By the 1980s, however, it was being
discussed whether it was legitimate to regard the whole of Australian
prehistory as that of the ancestors of the modern Aborigines (White
and O’Connell 1982; Flood 1983; T. Murray 1992).
   Archaeologists also have been compelled to reassess their goals as
a result of the increasing political activities of Aborigines. The fed-
eral Labour Party that was elected in 1972 passed legislation grant-
ing Aborigines significant membership on decision-making bodies
considering matters of concern to them, including the protection
of archaeological sites. As a result, archaeologists have come under
growing pressure to consider the relevance of their research for
indigenous people (Ucko 1983; McBryde 1986; Moser 1995b). The
general orientation of modern Australian archaeologists toward a his-
torical rather than an evolutionary view of prehistory, which results
from their British training, has made the resolution of these problems

                                   192
                       Evolutionary Archaeology

in some respects easier than it has been for anthropologically trained
North American archaeologists.


                   Archaeology in New Zealand
In New Zealand, the small and dispersed British settlements that
began to be established in the 1840s, in the wake of earlier activ-
ities by European missionaries and whalers, were for a long time
unable to subdue the indigenous Maori, a Polynesian-speaking peo-
ple who, especially on the North Island, were numerous and warlike.
Armed conflict between the natives and settlers lasted until 1847 and
broke out again in the 1860s. Although the Maori were weakened by
European diseases, their continuing resistance won them a measure
of grudging respect from the European settlers. The Maori remain a
dynamic and integral part of New Zealand’s cultural mosaic.
   No full-time archaeologist was appointed to a university position
in New Zealand prior to 1954. Yet, as early as 1843, European settlers
had noted stone tools associated with the bones of the giant moa and
other extinct species of birds. In the 1870s, Julius von Haast (1822–
1887), who was influenced by the writings of Lyell and Lubbock
concerning the antiquity of human beings in Europe, argued that the
Moa-hunters were a vanished Palaeolithic people, who had subsisted
mainly on fish and shellfish and were distinct from the much later
Neolithic Maori. He was soon compelled, however, to admit that
in terms of their material culture the Moa-hunters were not very
different from the Maori (von Haast 1871, 1874).
   Hereafter, the main historical research concerned the origins of
the Maori. In the course of the nineteenth century, a strong interest
developed in their customs, mythology, folklore, and physical anthro-
pology. Much of this research was stimulated by a decline in Maori
population and by rapid cultural change, which suggested that soon
little of their traditional culture might be available for study. Between
1898 and 1915 S. Percy Smith (1913, 1915) sought to reconcile vari-
ous tribal accounts of Maori migrations that had been collected in the
1850s, in order to produce an integrated history of their settlement
in New Zealand. He concluded that they were Polynesian seafar-
ers who had ultimately originated in India. New Zealand had first
been settled by the Maruiwi, an allegedly inferior Melanesian peo-
ple who were later conquered by the Maori. In 1916, Elsdon Best

                                  193
                A History of Archaeological Thought

(1856–1931) identified the Maruiwi with the South Island Moa-
hunters. Some Maori tribes were claimed on the basis of oral tra-
ditions to have reached New Zealand around ad 950 and 1150 and
these were followed in ad 1350 by a Great Fleet, which carried the
groups from which the major tribes are descended. It was generally
accepted that the basic pattern of Maori culture had remained the
same since that time (Sorrenson 1977).
   This scheme of origins was widely accepted by New Zealanders
of British and Maori origin, including the Maori anthropologist
Peter Buck (Te Rangihiroa, 1877–1951). Peter Gathercole (1981:
163) has drawn attention to the parallels that this account, based
on Maori traditional scholarship, drew between the coming of the
Maori and the arrival of the Europeans in New Zealand. The Maori
were portrayed as being recent colonists in New Zealand, who had
seized it from an earlier, culturally less developed people. This sug-
gested that they had little more historical claim to New Zealand than
the European settlers had. It also was assumed that ethnology and
oral traditions revealed all that needed to be known about Maori
prehistory.
   In the 1920s, Henry D. Skinner, who had studied anthropology
at Cambridge University, began to examine Moa-hunter sites on
the South Island. Combining archaeological, ethnographic, phys-
ical anthropological, and linguistic data with oral traditions, he
sought to demonstrate that the Moa-hunters were Maori, and hence
Polynesian, in origin. By debunking the Maruiwi myth, he estab-
lished the role of the Maori as the “first people of the land” and put
archaeology in the forefront of the movement for reenfranchising
them (Sutton 1985). Skinner also was sensitive to regional variations
in Maori culture, which he interpreted as partly adaptive in nature.
In addition, he acknowledged that significant cultural changes had
occurred after their arrival in New Zealand.
   Yet Skinner’s archaeological work lacked any systematic treatment
of temporal sequences or cultural change apart from his considera-
tion of the economic impact of the extinction of the moa (Skinner
1921). Like colonialist archaeologists elsewhere, he continued to view
archaeology mainly as a way to recover material culture that would
complement ethnological collections rather than be an independent
source of historical information. He did, however, support the expan-
sion of archaeological research, including the appointment of David

                                 194
                      Evolutionary Archaeology

Teviotdale (1932) at the Otago Museum. Teviotdale thus became
the first professional archaeologist in New Zealand. Into the 1950s,
archaeological research continued to concentrate on the study of the
Moa-hunters (Duff 1950), whereas later periods remained understud-
ied (Gathercole 1981). Although oral traditions recounted numerous
historical events, New Zealand archaeologists had not yet developed
an interest in searching for changes in material culture and styles of
life that would have stimulated a comprehensive study of alterations
in the archaeological record.
   In recent decades, New Zealand archaeology has become increas-
ingly professionalized and developed a more critical and self-
conscious relation with Maori ethnology, which has encouraged the
study of later prehistory. Much recent work has been done on the
North Island, which archaeologists had hitherto ignored, but where
most of the Maori population lived and the greatest elaboration of
their culture had occurred. This work, which is increasingly involving
the Maori themselves, has discovered evidence of dramatic changes
in the prehistoric material culture and the economic and social organ-
ization of the Maori, which partly reflects climatic changes and
regional diversification as Polynesian settlers adapted to living in New
Zealand. The Moa-hunters are now interpreted as an episode, pos-
sibly a very short one, in the settlement of the South Island. There
is increasing archaeological investigation of contacts between New
Zealand and neighboring regions of the Pacific, including when and
under what conditions people first arrived in New Zealand (H. Allen
2001). New Zealand archaeology provides an example of a colo-
nial situation in which a grudging measure of respect was shown
for the indigenous inhabitants. Yet amateur archaeologists there, as
elsewhere, viewed indigenous cultures as static and long attributed
alterations in the archaeological record to ethnic changes rather than
to internal developments. In the course of the twentieth century, a
more professional archaeology has played a significant role in dis-
pelling such beliefs.


                   Racist Archaeology in Africa
Archaeological research was carried out sporadically in sub-Saharan
Africa by European visitors beginning in the eighteenth century.
According to Brian Fagan, the earliest recorded excavation was by

                                  195
                A History of Archaeological Thought

the Swedish naturalist Andrew Sparrman in 1776. He dug into one
of a number of stone mounds near the Great Fish River in South
Africa. Although he discovered nothing, he concluded that these
mounds offered irrefutable proof that a more powerful and numer-
ous population had lived in the area before being “degraded to the
present race of Cafres, Hottentots, Boshiesmen, and savages” (Fagan
1981: 42).
   In South Africa, the first stone tools were collected by Thomas
Bowker in 1858 near the mouth of the Great Fish River. This inspired
much local collecting, and by 1905 G. W. Stow had published a
speculative but archaeologically informed migrationist prehistory of
southern Africa. Systematic archaeological research did not begin in
the rest of sub-Saharan Africa before the 1890s, by which time polit-
ical control of most of the continent had been divided among var-
ious European colonial powers. Archaeologists and colonizers both
regarded the indigenous cultures of sub-Saharan Africa as a living
museum of the human past. There was, however, much more diver-
sity among these cultures than among those of North America, which
all could be formally assigned to the Stone Age. In Africa technolo-
gies were based on iron as well as stone tools and societies ranged
in complexity from tiny hunting bands to large kingdoms. Yet most
European scholars agreed that the technological, cultural, and polit-
ical achievements of African people were less significant than they
appeared to be. Many would have concurred with the English trav-
eler Mary Kingsley’s (1897: 670) opinion that “the African has never
made an even fourteenth-rate piece of cloth or pottery.” Yet archae-
ological discoveries were made that seemed too sophisticated to be
the work of people who were as primitive or indolent as Africans were
imagined to be (Nederveen Pieterse 1992).
   The most spectacular and best studied example of the colonialist
mentality at work in African archaeology is provided by the contro-
versies surrounding the stone ruins found in what is now Zimbabwe.
Fagan (1981: 43–4) has observed that these controversies constituted
an African counterpart to the Moundbuilder debate in North Amer-
ica. Early European investigators of these monuments saw them as
proof of prehistoric white colonization in southern Africa.
   In the sixteenth century, Portuguese colonists in Mozambique
heard reports of stone buildings in the interior. These accounts
encouraged European speculation that those buildings had been

                                196
                     Evolutionary Archaeology

constructed by King Solomon or the Queen of Sheba in the course
of gold-mining activities that were recorded in the Hebrew Bible.
The identification of the rumored stone constructions of Zimbabwe
with the land of Ophir, mentioned in the Bible, continued to excite
the imagination of those who studied the geography of Africa in suc-
ceeding centuries. In the late nineteenth century, these speculations
greatly appealed to the Afrikaaners, who were newly settled in the
Transvaal and whose Calvinist faith led them to welcome the thought
that their new homeland bordered on a region that had biblical asso-
ciations. Information collected in the Transvaal about ruins to the
north inspired H. M. Walmsley’s The Ruined Cities of Zululand,
a novel published in 1869. Already in 1868 the German missionary
A. Merensky had persuaded the young German geologist Carl Mauch
to look for these ruins. In 1871, Mauch became the first European
known to have visited the ruins of Great Zimbabwe, which, on the
basis of what Merensky had told him, he concluded was the lost
palace of the Queen of Sheba.
   Speculations of this sort were actively promoted by the business-
man Cecil Rhodes after a private army assembled by his British South
Africa Company occupied Mashonaland in 1890 and neighboring
Matabeleland three years later in order to seize control of those
regions’ gold resources. Great Zimbabwe soon became a symbol
of the justice of European colonization, which was portrayed as the
white race returning to a land that it had formerly controlled. The
first serious study of Great Zimbabwe was sponsored by the British
South Africa Company with the help of the Royal Geographical Soci-
ety and the British Association for the Advancement of Science. The
man chosen for this task was J. Theodore Bent (1852–1897), a Mid-
dle Eastern explorer with antiquarian interests. Although his excava-
tions revealed evidence of Bantu occupation containing foreign trade
goods no more than a few centuries old, he concluded on the basis
of a few architectural and stylistic features that the ruins had been
built by “a northern race” that had come to southern Africa from
Arabia in biblical times. Supposed astronomical orientations were
used to date the stone ruins between 1000 and 2000 bc (Bent 1892)
(Figure 5.5).
   In 1895, a company called Rhodesia Ancient Ruins Limited was
licensed to hunt for gold artifacts in all the archaeological sites
with stone buildings in Matabeleland except Great Zimbabwe. This

                                197
                 A History of Archaeological Thought




Figure 5.5 “Approach to the acropolis,” from J. T. Bent’s The Ruined Cities
                          of Mashonaland, 1892




                                   198
                      Evolutionary Archaeology

operation, which largely involved robbing graves, was stopped in
1901; after which, in an effort to give his plundering some respectabil-
ity, one of the prospectors, W. G. Neal, collaborated with Richard
Hall (1853–1914), a local journalist, to produce The Ancient Ruins
of Rhodesia (Hall and Neal 1902). This book presented the first
general survey of the ruins of the region. On the strength of this
book, the British South Africa Company appointed Hall as Curator
of Great Zimbabwe, where he proceeded to remove still more strat-
ified archaeological deposits on the grounds that he was clearing the
site of “the filth and decadence of the Kaffir occupation.” Later he
defined three architectural styles, which he claimed revealed progres-
sive degeneration from the early, finely dressed walls of the elliptical
enclosure, and interpreted early Great Zimbabwe as the metropolis
of an ancient Phoenician colony (R. Hall 1909). In recent years, care-
ful architectural studies have revealed that the regularly coursed and
dressed walls at Zimbabwe are later than short, wavy ones but were
followed by walls with uncoursed stones (Garlake 1973: 21–3).
   Criticism of Hall’s work by professional archaeologists led to
his dismissal in 1904, following which the British Association for
the Advancement of Science, using funds provided by the Rhodes
Trustees, invited David Randall-MacIver (1873–1945), a professional
archaeologist who had worked with the distinguished Egyptological
archaeologist M. W. F. Petrie, to investigate Great Zimbabwe and
other ruins in Rhodesia (1906). More extensive and stratigraphically
sophisticated work was carried out under the same auspices by the
celebrated British archaeologist Gertrude Caton Thompson (1893–
1985) in 1929 (Caton Thompson 1931). These two archaeologists
demonstrated conclusively that the ruins were entirely of Bantu ori-
gin and dated from the Christian era. Yet, in accordance with the
generally low opinion of African cultures, both Randall-MacIver and
Caton Thompson offered, as proof of the relatively recent construc-
tion of Great Zimbabwe, that it was shoddily constructed, so poorly
that in Caton Thompson’s opinion it could not have remained stand-
ing for several thousand years (H. Kuklick 1991b: 152–3).
   Although the conclusions of Randall-MacIver and Caton
Thompson were accepted by the world archaeological community,
they were unwelcome among the European settlers in Rhodesia and
South Africa, where amateur archaeologists kept alive the claim that
the ruins of Zimbabwe were the work of invaders, merchants, or

                                  199
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

metalworkers said to have come from such varied places as the Middle
East, India, or Indonesia (Posnansky 1982: 347). In 1909 Hall, sup-
ported by subscriptions from a broad cross-section of leading white
South Africans, published Prehistoric Rhodesia, a massive, polemical
work in which he attempted to refute Randall-MacIver’s findings. He
maintained that the “decadence” of the African, which he attributed
to a “sudden arrest of intelligence” that “befalls every member of the
Bantu at the time of puberty” (p. 13), is a “process which has been
in operation for very many centuries [and] is admitted by all authori-
ties.” Thus, as Peter Garlake (1973: 79) has noted, Hall made explicit
for the first time the racial biases that had been implicit in exclud-
ing Africans from the consideration of Zimbabwe’s past. Notions of
exotic origin were kept alive after that time by A. J. Bruwer (1965),
R. Gayre (1972), Wilfrid Mallows (1985), and Thomas Huffman in
an official guidebook to Great Zimbabwe written under the illegal
white-settler regime headed by Ian Smith. For the European settlers,
who constituted less than 10 percent of the population of South-
ern Rhodesia, such claims served to disparage African talents and
past accomplishments and to justify their own domination of the
country. These claims became particularly insistent after those set-
tlers proclaimed Rhodesia to be independent in 1965. In 1971, Peter
Garlake, who had been Inspector of Monuments since 1964, resigned
in protest over a secret order issued by the settler regime that no offi-
cial publication should agree that Great Zimbabwe had been built by
blacks. By this time, the government was increasingly concerned that
the ruins were becoming a powerful symbol of their cultural heritage
to local Africans struggling for majority rule. Since the independence
of Zimbabwe in 1980, some nationalists have claimed that only Black
Africans have the moral right or cultural understanding necessary to
interpret the ancient ruins of Zimbabwe and attempts have been
made to promote new, and in this case Black African, speculations
(Mufuka 1983; Garlake 1973, 1983, 1984).
   The comparison of the controversies surrounding the Mound-
builders in North America during the nineteenth century and
Zimbabwe beginning in the 1890s reveals striking similarities as well
as significant differences. In both cases, amateur archaeologists and
public opinion rejected an association of these remains with indige-
nous peoples in order to avoid having to acknowledge the latter’s
accomplishments. Similarly, the scientific establishment of the day

                                  200
                      Evolutionary Archaeology

expressed some reservations about the more fanciful interpretations
that were being offered of these monuments. There is also a strik-
ing similarity between Caton Thompson’s disparaging of the quality
of the architecture at Great Zimbabwe after she had proved that
it was constructed by Africans and Cyrus Thomas’ belittling of the
accomplishments of moundbuilding cultures in North America after
he had established that these cultures were the creations of North
American Indians. What is significantly different, however, is that
soon after 1905 the international archaeological community rejected
claims that Zimbabwe had not been constructed by Bantus, leaving
the maintenance of the Zimbabwe myth to local amateur archaeol-
ogists and the general public. By contrast, the Moundbuilder myth
had survived for over a century. This suggests that, although the
same social pressures to distort the past existed on both continents,
by 1905 advances in archaeological techniques for resolving histor-
ical questions had reached the point at which these pressures no
longer gave free rein to the interpretations of most professional
archaeologists. Research carried out in Zimbabwe since the 1950s
by locally based professional archaeologists, such as Keith Robinson,
R. Summers, and Peter Garlake, has made a distinguished contri-
bution to understanding the history of Zimbabwe during the late
Iron Age.
   Belief in the biological inferiority of Africans, despite archaeo-
logical and ethnographic evidence of major cultural achievements
everywhere south of the Sahara, was sustained by ascribing these
accomplishments to influences coming from the north. Explorers and
missionaries who first encountered sub-Saharan Africa’s many com-
plex societies concluded that agriculture, metallurgy, urban life, and
various art forms had been introduced from circum-Mediterranean
or Middle Eastern civilizations (Fagan 1981: 43; Schrire et al. 1986).
The German ethnologist Leo Frobenius interpreted the naturalis-
tic bronze and terracotta heads that he found at Ife, Nigeria, in
1910 as evidence of an early Greek colony along the Atlantic coast
of Africa (Willett 1967: 13–14). Miles Burkitt (1890–1971), a lec-
turer at Cambridge University, saw northern, and frequently specif-
ically European Lower Palaeolithic, Mousterian, and Upper Palae-
olithic influences in South African stone-tool assemblages and rock
art (Burkitt 1928). His view of southern Africa as a cul-de-sac where
older forms of cultures managed to survive was shared by many

                                 201
                A History of Archaeological Thought

Palaeolithic archaeologists during the early twentieth century
(Gamble 1992).
   In 1880, the German Egyptologist Karl Lepsius suggested that the
indigenous peoples of Africa were composed of two major stocks: a
lighter-skinned Hamitic population in the north and a Negro popula-
tion to the south. A large number of ethnologists, including Charles
Seligman (1930), identified the Hamites as the “great civilizing force”
of sub-Saharan Africa. They sought to account for the more advanced
features of sub-Saharan cultures by claiming that culturally more cre-
ative Hamitic pastoralists had conquered and imposed the rudiments
of a more advanced technology and culture, that were ultimately of
Middle Eastern origin, on the culturally “inert” Negro population of
Africa until their own creativity was undermined as a result of “misce-
genation.” This dichotomy between Negroids and Caucasoids, and
the accompanying disparagement of African creativity, lingered on in
studies of prehistory and ethnology into the 1960s. The role assigned
to the prehistoric Hamitic conquerors bore a striking resemblance to
the civilizing missions that European colonists had been claiming
for themselves since the late nineteenth century (MacGaffey 1966).
Such ideas also played an important role in racializing the percep-
tion of ethnic differences among indigenous peoples, such as those
of Rwanda and Burundi (A. Reid 2003: 73). These historical inter-
pretations were based almost entirely on ethnographic and linguistic,
rather than archaeological, data. Until after World War II, no cul-
tural chronologies existed outside of South Africa that might have
been used to test the validity of such interpretations of African pre-
history. On the contrary, these speculations provided the context for
interpreting isolated archaeological finds.
   These and similar ideas affected Egyptology, which was signifi-
cantly influenced by racist beliefs as late as the 1960s. It was com-
monly maintained that ancient Egyptian civilization was created
around 3000 bc, when conquerors from the Middle East, a so-called
Dynastic Race, imposed their superior culture on a primitive African
population (W. Emery 1961). Likewise, civilization was thought to
have been introduced several times to the Sudan by Egyptians or
Libyans and then to have decayed as northern contacts became atten-
uated (Arkell 1961). The cultural status of the Nile Valley south
of Egypt at any given period was often correlated directly with the
amount of “white” as opposed to “black” blood quotient (genetic

                                 202
                       Evolutionary Archaeology

material) believed to be present in the population (Reisner 1910, I:
348; Randall-MacIver and Woolley 1909: 2). In these interpretations,
Africa was equated with barbarism and civilization with a northern
presence. George Reisner (1923a, 1923b) wrongly construed his seri-
ation of the royal cemetery at Kerma as running from complex to
simple, rather than from simple to complex, because he believed that
Kerma had been established by Egyptian officials and then decayed
as these rulers lost contact with their homeland (O’Connor 1993).
Although more archaeological research had been done on the devel-
opment of complex societies in the Sudan than anywhere else in
sub-Saharan Africa, that evidence was still being interpreted in accor-
dance with the belief that the ancient Egyptians had been imperial
precursors to Europeans (Trigger 1994b; O’Connor and Reid 2003;
S. T. Smith 2003).
   The Senegalese physicist Cheikh Anta Diop’s (1974) writings were
a justified protest against such denials of African creativity (M. Bernal
1987). Unfortunately, he had no more archaeological data on which
to base his understanding of African prehistory than did those whom
he opposed. His identification of the ancient Egyptians as a black
African people and the source of African, as well as world, civilization,
would later be shown to have grossly underestimated the cultural
creativity of peoples living in all parts of Africa.
   Another feature of African colonial archaeology was the great
attention paid to Palaeolithic studies. In the 1890s, the geologist
J. P. Johnson studied the geological contexts of Palaeolithic tools in
the Orange Free State and Transvaal. In 1911, Louis Péringuey, the
Director of the South African Museum in Cape Town, divided South
African prehistory into a Palaeolithic phase, characterized by imple-
ments from river gravels, and a later Bushman phase, represented in
shell middens and rock shelters (Fagan 1981: 42–3). In the 1920s,
A. J. H. Goodwin and Clarence Van Riet Lowe (1929) subdivided
the South African Stone Age into Early, Middle, and Late stages
that were characterized by Acheulean, Levalloisian, and microlithic
tools respectively. At the same time, the Afrikaaner palaeontologist
Egbert Van Hoepen (1884–1966) divided the South African Stone
Age into a series of cultures that were eventually incorporated (with
their names anglicized) into the Goodwin–Van Riet Lowe system
(Schlanger 2003). Between 1913 and 1924, remains of fossil hominids
were discovered in South Africa tracing human development from

                                  203
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

Upper Palaeolithic Homo sapiens back to the first identified skull of
an Australopithecine.
   Stone tools were identified in Kenya as early as 1893, but systematic
work did not begin there until 1926, when the Kenyan-born Louis
Leakey (1903–1972) organized the first East African Archaeological
Expedition from Cambridge University. In The Stone Age Cultures of
Kenya Colony (1931), Leakey outlined a culture-historical framework
for East Africa that continued to be used into the 1950s. Stone-tool
assemblages were labeled, as before, with terms used in European
Palaeolithic studies, such as Chellean, Acheulean, Mousterian, and
Aurignacian. Leakey also worked out a succession of pluvial and inter-
pluvial periods that were generally believed to correlate with glacial
and interglacial periods in Europe. In due course, it was realized
that many finds did not conform to European categories and after
the 1920s Goodwin–Van Riet’s nomenclature was adopted for cul-
tural assemblages that were recognized to be specific to Africa. The
two systems continued to be used alongside one another until the
1960s, when the European one was discarded, except as a source
of designations for tool-manufacturing techniques (Posnansky
1982: 348).
   Between 1936 and 1962, a large number of Australopithecine dis-
coveries were made at Sterkfontein, Kromdraai, Makapansgat, and
Swartkrans in South Africa. These finds encouraged growing interest
in earlier phases of cultural development than had been studied any-
where else in the world. In the late 1950s, new geological chronolo-
gies were established for the Pleistocene and Pliocene epochs in Africa
and potassium–argon dating stretched the period that was covered
by evidence of cultural remains back from an estimated 600,000 to
2 million years. Palaeolithic artifacts found in river gravels were shown
to be of limited interpretative value and interest shifted to the exca-
vation of presumed “living floors,” which favored the preservation
of fossil pollens and other palaeoenvironmental data.
   In 1959, Louis and Mary Leakey, who had pioneered Palaeolithic
living-floor archaeology at Olorgesaillie in the 1940s, made the first
of many spectacular early hominid finds in the primitive Oldowan
tool levels at Oldovai Gorge (M. Leakey 1984). These finds aroused
worldwide interest in Lower Palaeolithic archaeology. International
funding for such research increased vastly and large numbers of
archaeologists from America and Europe began to work in East

                                  204
                     Evolutionary Archaeology

Africa. Their discoveries were seen as confirming Darwin’s prediction
that Africa was likely to have been the cradle of humanity. Although
these finds were proclaimed to be of great scientific importance,
much of their interest resulted from their being celebrated in the
mass media as marking the origins not only of humanity as a whole
but more specifically of Europeans and Euro-Americans. Although
the earliest segments of European and Euro-American prehistory
were clearly not going to be found in Europe, it was now believed
that they could be discovered in Africa. Just as many archaeologists
had once regarded the study of ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia as
being of interest mainly for what it might reveal about the origins
of European civilization, so the African Palaeolithic seemed to be
primarily of interest for what it would reveal about the origins of
Europeans (Dennell 1990).
   Before the late 1950s, Europeans generally regarded recent phases
of African prehistory as a time of cultural stagnation. To archaeol-
ogists in other parts of the world, these late periods were of little
interest compared to the early Palaeolithic ones and many foreign
archaeologists living and working in Africa were preoccupied with
Palaeolithic archaeology. Fagan (1981: 49) has observed that simi-
larly almost no historians were concerned with precolonial Africa. As
late as 1966, the eminent British historian H. R. Trevor-Roper was
to state that nothing significant had happened in Africa prior to the
arrival of Europeans (p. 9). Such opinions reinforced the belief that
there was little for archaeologists to discover about recent millen-
nia. In Grahame Clark’s World Prehistory (1961), sub-Saharan Africa
received far less attention than any comparable region of the world.
There were, however, some significant exceptions. Kenneth Murray,
an art teacher who had long sought to conserve Nigeria’s indigenous
traditions and to convince scholars that these traditions were worth
studying, was appointed first Director of the Nigerian Antiquities
Service in 1943. He persuaded Bernard Fagg, a Cambridge-trained
archaeologist, to join his staff and founded a number of regional
museums throughout the colony. This work brought traditional art
and culture closer to the currents of emerging African nationalism.
John Schofield’s Primitive Pottery (1948) presented the first typol-
ogy of Iron Age ceramics from sites in Rhodesia and the Transvaal,
although major uncertainties about the chronology of the Iron Age
were not resolved until the 1950s (Fagan 1981: 48–9).

                                205
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   After 1945, there was a marked expansion of museums, antiqui-
ties services, and university departments employing archaeologists,
especially in the British and French colonies. Expatriate archaeol-
ogists, such as Charles Thurston Shaw (b. 1914) and J. Desmond
Clark (1916–2002) used the most recent technical and conceptual
advances of European archaeology to build on the pioneer efforts of
local amateur archaeologists, most of whom were European colonists
or their descendants. As the prospects for independence brightened,
there was in some colonies a growing, more broadly based inter-
est in learning more “about the actual peoples who were now to
govern Africa rather than about their remote Stone Age ancestors”
(Posnansky 1982: 349). There was, in addition, a growing demand
that African and not merely European and colonial history be taught
in African schools, as had been done in the past; hence, African his-
torians insisted that more attention should be paid to the prehistoric
Iron Age. Archaeologists began to investigate important late pre-
colonial sites such as Benin, Gedi, and Kilwa, and to study the devel-
opment of early African states. The 1960s witnessed the introduction
of the first regular courses in archaeology at universities in Uganda
and Ghana (Posnansky 1976).
   Iron Age archaeologists learned to draw on historical and ethno-
graphic sources to help them to interpret their findings. At the same
time, they ceased to attribute changes in prehistoric times almost
exclusively to external stimuli and began to try to understand the
internal dynamics of prehistoric African development. Many of these
archaeologists had been influenced by Grahame Clark’s ecological
approach at Cambridge University; others sought to explain changes
economically or politically. This reorientation was made possible by
rapidly accumulating evidence that in precolonial times Africans had
played a major role in the development of agriculture and metallurgy
and that without major external stimuli they had created numerous
civilizations. The same reorientation further encouraged the recovery
of such data.
   The history of colonial African archaeology reveals that changing
social conditions have influenced the periods of prehistory that were
studied at different times, the sorts of questions that were asked,
and the degree to which internal or external factors were invoked
to explain change. It is also clear that a growing corpus of archae-
ological data, produced by an increasing number of professional

                                 206
                      Evolutionary Archaeology

archaeologists, and the application of new, internationally accepted
techniques for studying the past restricted the freedom of archaeolo-
gists to support the views of prehistory that were congenial to colo-
nial ideologies. At the same time, changing fashions in archaeological
interpretations in the European countries where most archaeologists
who worked in Africa were trained also influenced the interpretation
of African prehistory. These fashions were not directly related to the
changing colonial milieu. Nevertheless, there was a significant but
complex relationship between archaeology and the colonial settings
in which it was practiced in Africa.


            The Legacy of Evolutionary Archaeology
In the 1860s and 1870s, archaeologists continued to be preoccupied
with the evolutionary origins of European societies. Especially in
Britain, cultural evolution remained popular with the middle classes
because it justified their economic and political ascendancy. Yet, by
then, sociocultural evolution was no longer regarded as a project that
benefited everyone equally. The privileged position of the middle
classes was attributed to the superior intelligence and managerial
abilities of middle-class males and the working class was regarded
as biologically unfit to share in the governing of society. Thus, the
existing social order came to be thought of as biologically grounded
and immutable.
   Racial explanations also were offered for the failure of other soci-
eties to evolve to the same extent as European ones had done. The
Darwinian explanation of these differences that was popularized by
Lubbock reinforced the racism that had long influenced the inter-
pretation of the prehistoric archaeological evidence in the United
States and played a major role in shaping archaeological interpreta-
tion in other parts of the world that experienced substantial European
settlement and exploitation. These archaeologies differed from one
another in many ways but nevertheless shared some key features.
Indigenous societies were assumed to be static and, when evidence
of change was noted in the archaeological record, it was generally
attributed to prehistoric migrations rather than to internal dynamism.
Cultural evolutionists had never denied the importance of migration
and diffusion as processes bringing about sociocultural change. Yet
change brought about in these ways indicated less inherent creativity

                                 207
                A History of Archaeological Thought

than characterized societies that appeared to be autonomous centers
of innovation, such as those of Europe.
   Colonialist archaeology served to denigrate the indigenous soci-
eties that European colonists were seeking to dominate or replace by
offering evidence that in prehistoric times they had lacked the initia-
tive to develop on their own. Such archaeology was closely aligned
with ethnology, which documented the primitive condition of tradi-
tional native cultures and their general inability to change. This prim-
itiveness was widely believed to justify Europeans seizing control of
the territories of such peoples. In its early stages colonial archaeol-
ogy tended to reflect, and reinforce, the prejudices of the colonizing
group. Although these archaeological interpretations did not long
survive the systematic collection of archaeological evidence, which
invariably indicated that internal changes had occurred in indigenous
cultures, they often impeded the search for such evidence. They also
significantly delayed the development of prehistoric archaeology in
countries such as Australia, where it was assumed that archaeology
had little to reveal about the past. Finally, although it was recog-
nized that migration and diffusion could speed up the rate of change
and complicate the archaeological record, it was not believed that
these processes could alter the basic pattern of cultural development,
which insofar as it occurred at all was believed invariably to exhibit
the same general sequence of changes.
   Unilinear evolutionism, whether of Lubbock’s racist variety or
the older, universalistic sort championed by Mortillet, shared cer-
tain major weaknesses as a model for collecting and interpreting
archaeological data. By arguing that modern cultures, arranged from
simplest to most complex, recapitulated the sequence through which
European societies had slowly evolved, unilinear evolutionists denied
that anything novel might be learned from the archaeological record.
The main value of archaeology was its proof that evolution had
in fact occurred, to varying degrees and hence at varying rates,
in different parts of the world. Lubbock and other archaeologists
argued that ethnographic evidence provided an easy way to achieve
a rounded understanding of how people had lived in prehistoric
times. They believed that, so long as archaeological data, in the
form of diagnostic artifacts, could reveal the level of development
that a particular culture had reached, ethnographic data concerning
modern societies at the same stage of development were capable of

                                  208
                      Evolutionary Archaeology

supplying all the information that was needed to know what sorts
of human behavior had been associated with that culture. Only
the earliest archaeological finds were likely to lack corresponding
ethnographic evidence. As late as 1911, it was believed that life in
Lower and Middle Palaeolithic times must have been generally sim-
ilar to that of the modern Tasmanians and Australian Aborigines
(Sollas 1911).
   Little effort was made to try to infer behavior from specific
sorts of archaeological data, as had already been done, in the con-
text of culture-historical and functional-processual approaches, by
Scandinavian-style prehistoric archaeologists. In these approaches,
behavioral analogues were based on similar forms of material culture
encountered in archaeological and ethnographic contexts rather than
on the comparison of whole cultures. Holistic analogues invited a
revival of antiquarianism, in as much as they returned archaeology to
a situation in which artifacts once again merely illustrated the past,
rather than constituting a basis for investigating prehistoric human
behavior. Evolutionary archaeologists had failed to address the task
of inferring such behavior from archaeological data.
   They also had failed to devise a methodology for implementing
holistic comparisons. No systematic effort was made to correlate spe-
cific tool types with particular stages of cultural development so that
these tool types could be used to draw detailed and controlled com-
parisons between ethnographic and archaeological assemblages. It
went unnoted that Tasmanians did not manufacture Chellean hand-
axes or Australian Aborigines Levallois cores, although Mortillet
argued that these types constituted a logical sequence of technologi-
cal evolution. Efforts to take account of such differences might have
revealed some of the limitations of cultural evolutionism. Archaeol-
ogists also were aware of the difficulties posed by geographical and
environmental variations, but they never confronted this issue sys-
tematically. As a result, comparisons between archaeological assem-
blages and ethnographic cultures remained impressionistic.
   The failure to deal adequately with these problems produced a
growing sense of impasse and sterility in evolutionary archaeology
after the European Palaeolithic sequence had been delineated. The
problem with unilinear evolutionary archaeology was that it had
become too integral a part of anthropology and too dependent on
ethnology. Far more creativity had survived in Scandinavian-style

                                 209
                A History of Archaeological Thought

post-Palaeolithic archaeology, although it had been temporarily
eclipsed by the momentous discoveries concerning still earlier phases
of human development. Because of their growing realization of the
inadequacies of the unilinear evolutionary approach, a new genera-
tion of professional archaeologists was to view its decline as a libera-
tion rather than a loss.




                                  210
                                   chapter 6
              Culture-Historical Archaeology

     We Danes . . . have a fatherland in which ancient monuments lie
     spread out in fields and moors . . . this feeling of having a history
     and a fatherland actually means that we are a nation.
             j o h a n s k j o l d b o r g, quoted by K. Kristiansen (1993), p. 21


     Generally speaking, nationalist ideology suffers from pervasive
     false consciousness. Its myths invert reality: it . . . claims to protect
     an old folk society while in fact helping to build up an anonymous
     mass society.
                 e. g e l l n e r, Nations and Nationalism (1983), p. 124



The culture-historical archaeology of the late nineteenth century
was a response to growing awareness of geographical variability in
the archaeological record at a time when cultural evolutionism was
being challenged in western and central Europe by declining faith
in the benefits of technological progress. These developments were
accompanied by growing nationalism and racism, which made eth-
nicity appear to be the most important factor shaping human history.
Nationalist fervor increased as spreading industrialization heightened
competition for markets and resources. Toward the end of the cen-
tury, it was encouraged by intellectuals who sought to promote soli-
darity within their own countries in the face of growing social unrest
by blaming economic and social problems on neighboring states.


                        Early Interests in Ethnicity
National consciousness has a long history. Already in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries it had played a significant role in the devel-
opment of antiquarianism in northern and western Europe. Political
scientists frequently distinguish this early patriotism, which tended
to be expressed by loyalty to a king or hereditary prince, from the

                                            211
                A History of Archaeological Thought

nationalism that developed in Europe along with industrialization
and has since spread around the world. Nationalism is defined as
an all-embracing sense of group identity and loyalty to a common
homeland that is promoted by mass media, widespread literacy, and a
comprehensive educational system. This new concept was a product
of the French Revolution but in France national identity was at first
not explicitly linked to ethnicity. As a result of their allegiance to
the new French Republic, minority groups such as Celtic-speaking
Bretons, German-speaking Alsatians, and Italian-speaking Corsicans
became as much French citizens as anyone else. Even so, French
authorities sought to ensure national unity by using the educational
system to promote the French language and culture at the expense
of ethnic diversity. Hence, even in France, national identity gradually
became equated with cultural unity (Gellner 1983; Anderson 1991;
Dumont 1994).
   Most European nation states came to be viewed as political expres-
sions of ethnic identity that was grounded in linguistic, cultural,
and racial unity as well as in a shared history. Citizens often were
encouraged to regard themselves as constituting an immutable and
indivisible biological entity. Efforts were made to strengthen exist-
ing states by identifying them with single ethnic groups, by ethnic
groups to achieve the status of nation states, and by some countries to
expand their borders on the pretext that they were justified in doing
so because they were politically uniting a single people. Nationalism
also tended to identify racial divisions, which before the nineteenth
century had often been thought to correspond with class divisions
within countries, with national or ethnic boundaries. Gobineau was a
transitional figure in this process. Under these circumstances, prehis-
toric archaeologists were encouraged to study the origins and early
histories of specific ethnic groups.
   Throughout the nineteenth century in England and France,
nationalism was powerfully expressed in historical writing, which
emphasized the internal solidarity of national groups. Yet its influence
on archaeology was quite muted, in part as a result of the continuing
importance of Lubbock’s and Mortillet’s evolutionary interests. Dur-
ing the French Revolution, the suppression of the aristocracy was rep-
resented as the expulsion of foreign conquerors and the restoration of
sovereignty to the descendants of France’s indigenous Celtic inhabi-
tants. Henceforth, the origin of the French people was traced back to

                                  212
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

the Celtic-speaking Gauls. In 1803, Napoleon Bonaparte established
the Académie Celtique whose members employed archaeological,
historical, folkloric, and linguistic data to cultivate a sense of direct
continuity between the Gauls and the modern French, despite
the replacement of their Celtic language by that of their Roman
conquerors.
   In the 1860s, Napoleon III (r.1852–1870), who had proclaimed
himself Emperor of the French after being elected President of the
French Republic, supported major excavations at three Celtic oppida,
or fortified towns, that had been identified as ones that were asso-
ciated with major events that had occurred during Julius Caesar’s
conquest of Gaul in the first century bc. These excavations revealed
a close resemblance to the late Iron Age culture found at the La
Tène site in Switzerland in 1856. It is suggested that Napoleon III
supported these excavations because of his desire to use belief in
a common ethnic heritage to craft a uniform national culture that
would help to unite modern France (Dietler 1994, 1998; Weber
1976). Yet Napoleon III claimed to sponsor these excavations as part
of a massive program of historical and archaeological research that
he was carrying out for a biography of Julius Caesar he was writing
(Gran-Aymerich 1998: 142). His admiration for Caesar was proba-
bly inspired by a tendency for French monarchs, beginning during
the Renaissance, to regard themselves as the true spiritual heirs of the
Roman imperial tradition (M. Heffernan 1994: 30–1). Napoleon III’s
uncle, Napoleon Bonaparte, had shared this fascination with ancient
Rome.
   In Britain, fantasizing about possible Druidical associations of
Neolithic and Bronze Age sites, which had been the main form of
patriotism antiquaries had indulged in during the eighteenth cen-
tury, was banished to the realms of popular history and folklore
(Owen 1962: 239). The British were as proud of their supposed
Nordic or Aryan racial affinities as were the Germans. Yet, unlike the
Germans, who could trace themselves back into prehistoric times as
the sole occupants of most of their modern homeland, the British
were keenly aware from historical records that England had been con-
quered and settled in turn by Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans.
Beginning in the late nineteenth century, British archaeologists reg-
ularly assumed that similar invasions had occurred in prehistoric
times (T. Holmes 1907). Although some English specified that the

                                  213
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

prehistoric Celtic peoples were only their predecessors and not their
ancestors, most historians argued that what was biologically and cul-
turally most desirable in successive indigenous populations had com-
bined with what was most advanced in invading groups to produce
a people whose hybrid vigor, composed of various European stocks,
made them the best in the world (Rouse 1972: 71–2). This historical
chain of increasing biological and cultural superiority corresponded
with the modern regional and ethnic hierarchy within Britain. The
dominant upper and upper-middle classes viewed themselves as the
spiritual, if not the biological, heirs of the Normans, whereas
the English as a whole were identified with the earlier Saxons, and
the more remote Celtic fringe with the still earlier and more primitive
British. It was also argued that, as a result of natural selection, each
ethnic group in Britain was best adapted to the locality and condition
in which they were living. Each of these interpretations was related
to Boyd Dawkins’s (1874) proposal that over time in Europe cultur-
ally more advanced peoples had pushed aside less developed ones.
Already by the middle of the nineteenth century, British archaeolo-
gists were interpreting the distributions of distinctive types of pot-
tery as evidence of migrations (Latham and Franks 1856) and by
1913 E. T. Leeds was using similar artifacts found in graves on the
European continent and in England to trace the English migrations
into Britain following the collapse of the Roman Empire.
   In northern and central Europe, the study of prehistory remained
closely associated with nationalism throughout the nineteenth cen-
tury. Although Scandinavian archaeologists continued to be inter-
ested in learning about how peoples had lived in the past and in
cultural evolution (Fischer and Kristiansen 2002), they were mainly
concerned with working out cultural chronologies that elucidated
the prehistories of their respective countries and provided them with
a source of pride and deeply rooted cultural identity. The revival of
German literature in the eighteenth century had been characterized
by a glorification of Germany’s medieval and ancient past. At the
end of that century, the philosopher Johann Herder had defined his-
tory as the account of the development of a people as exemplified
by their language, traditions, and institutions (Hampson 1982: 241,
248–9; Zammito 2002). By encouraging a sense of pan-German eth-
nic identity, antiquaries and archaeologists played a significant role in
promoting the unification of Germany, which was achieved in 1871.

                                  214
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

Yet the study of German prehistory remained largely an amateur
activity. It was not encouraged by the conservative Prussian leaders,
who exploited German national feeling but, especially after the popu-
lar uprisings of 1849, feared to promote it. In eastern Europe, archae-
ologists, by helping to encourage a sense of national identity amongst
Poles, Czechs, Hungarians, Lithuanians, and other ethnic groups liv-
ing under Austrian, Russian, and Prussian domination, played a role
in weakening those multinational empires and promoting the even-
tual emergence of a series of nation states. For this reason, archaeol-
ogy was supported by nationalist elements such as the Czech middle
class and the Polish landed aristocracy.
   During the nineteenth century, growing amounts of archaeo-
logical material were collected throughout Europe as a result of
more intensive agriculture and land reclamation projects; the con-
struction of roads, railways, canals, and factories; the founding of
increasing numbers of museums and research institutes; and the
establishment of teaching positions for archaeologists in universities.
Nonprofessional recovery peaked in the early nineteenth century,
whereas recovery by professional archaeologists gradually increased
thereafter (Schnapp and Kristiansen 1999: 29). As more evidence was
collected, the attention of archaeologists turned increasingly to the
study of artifacts and with that came a growing awareness of vari-
ations in their geographical distributions. In the 1870s and 1880s,
archaeological research in central and eastern Europe was influ-
enced by the evolutionary archaeology of France and England and
by work being done by Scandinavian archaeologists, which encour-
aged the more detailed classification and comparison of archaeo-
logical finds. The development of local chronologies was retarded
in some areas, however, by a longstanding reluctance to adopt the
Scandinavian Three-Age system, which was opposed, because of per-
sonal rivalries and for nationalistic reasons, by a number of promi-
nent German archaeologists (Böhner 1981; Sklenář 1983: 87–91). A
concern with historical and ethnic issues nevertheless led archaeol-
ogists to pay increasing attention to the geographical distribution
of distinctive types of artifacts and artifact assemblages in an effort
to relate them to historical peoples. In addition, a nationalist ori-
entation encouraged archaeologists to concentrate on the study of
the Neolithic and more recent periods rather than on Palaeolithic
times.

                                 215
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

   The culture-historical approach also drew prehistoric and clas-
sical archaeologists closer together than they had been previously
in terms of goals, methods, and common interests. The ancient
Greeks and Romans had interacted with peoples who had lived to
the north of them, which made the findings of classical archaeolo-
gists and European culture-historical archaeologists of mutual inter-
est. Among Italians and Greeks, the study of classical archaeology
was accompanied by an interest in the prehistoric and postclassi-
cal periods of their respective countries that promoted communi-
cation between different types of archaeology, even though classi-
cal archaeology maintained its distinctive art-historical approach. In
Germany, France, Britain, the United States, and elsewhere, clas-
sical archaeology remained a separate discipline, but its focus had
always been culture-historical in a generic sense, inasmuch as clas-
sical archaeologists were devoted to the study of only two eth-
nic groups and two national cultures. In France and England, the
study of local classical sites frequently led prehistoric and classical
archaeologists to work together. In southern and western Germany,
studies of the Roman frontier played a vital role in the develop-
ment of prehistoric archaeology, as indicated by the establishment
of the Roman-Germanic Central Museum at Mainz in 1852. The
creation in 1892 of a special commission to investigate the Roman
frontiers of central Europe is credited with making the resources of
the well-funded German Archaeological Institute, hitherto reserved
for classical archaeology, available for the study of late central
European prehistory (Veit 2001: 580–1). Like classical studies, Egyp-
tology and Assyriology were generically culture-historical from the
beginning.
   Finally, although prehistoric archaeologists frequently were inter-
ested in the pre- and protohistory of specific peoples or countries, this
did not rule out a concern with the archaeology of Europe as a whole
or even of Europe and the Middle East. Ian Morris (1994b: 11) calls
this “continentalist,” as distinguished from “national,” archaeology.
Very often, this sort of archaeology sought to define the distinctive
features of European civilization and to account for the development
of what was believed to be its superiority over all others. Many Euro-
pean archaeologists viewed the national and continental approaches
as entirely complementary to one another.


                                  216
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology


                            Diffusionism
Although evolutionary archaeologists attributed cultural change to
diffusion and migration as well as independent invention, the rejec-
tion of evolutionism led to diffusion and migration becoming priv-
ileged explanations and independent development being almost
totally abandoned. By the 1880s, growing social and economic diffi-
culties in western Europe were encouraging a new emphasis on the
conservatism and rigidity of human nature in the heartland of evo-
lutionary anthropology. The problems of the Industrial Revolution
had been becoming increasingly evident for some time, especially in
Britain where it had been going on the longest, in the form of slums,
economic crises, and growing foreign competition. The political
supremacy of the middle classes also was being challenged by the first
labor movements, which sought either to share power by electoral
means or to seize it through revolution. As a result of these devel-
opments, the younger generation of intellectuals turned against the
idea of progress. Industrialism, which had formerly been a source of
pride, was now seen as a cause of social chaos and ugliness (Trevelyan
1952: 119). The influential writer and art critic John Ruskin (1819–
1900) had long argued that the preindustrial past had been superior to
the present and sought to revive artisanal skills. His views promoted
romanticism and devalued rationalism and Enlightenment values.
   The efforts that were made at this time to externalize the eco-
nomic and social conflicts that were going on within nation-states
also encouraged a growing emphasis on racism. It was argued that
French, Germans, and English were biologically different from one
another and that their behavior was determined, not by economic
and political factors, but by essentially immutable racial differences.
Middle-class intellectuals sought to assure their readers that work-
ers of different nationalities were so different in temperament that
they could never unite to pursue a common goal. In contrast, these
intellectuals sought to promote national unity by arguing that within
each nation everyone, regardless of social class, was united by a com-
mon biological heritage, which constituted the strongest of human
bonds. Therefore, instead of seeking political power for themselves,
the working classes should trust that middle-class politicians would
do their best to help ordinary people.


                                 217
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   Disillusionment with progress, together with the belief that human
behavior was biologically determined, encouraged growing scepti-
cism about human creativity. Writers and social analysts maintained
that human beings were not inherently inventive and that change
was therefore contrary to human nature and potentially harmful to
people. It was argued that an unchanging society was most congenial
to human beings, who were naturally predisposed to resist alterations
in their styles of life. This led to declining credence in independent
development, to a belief that particular inventions were unlikely to
be made more than once in human history, and hence to a grow-
ing reliance on diffusion and migration to explain cultural change.
It also encouraged an increasing interest in the idiosyncratic features
associated with particular ethnic groups rather than with the gen-
eral characteristics of successive stages of cultural development. If
the insecurity of the middle classes of western Europe in the 1860s
had led Lubbock and other Darwinians to abandon the doctrine of
psychic unity and view indigenous peoples as biologically inferior to
Europeans, the still greater insecurity of the 1880s led intellectuals
to jettison the doctrine of progress and regard human beings as far
more resistant to change than they had been viewed since before the
Enlightenment.
   Increasing reliance on diffusion and migration, as well as the con-
cept of cultures as ways of life related to specific ethnic groups,
were soon evident in the work of German ethnologists such as
Friedrich Ratzel (1844–1904) and Franz Boas (1858–1942). Ratzel, a
geographer and ethnologist, rejected the German ethnologist Adolf
Bastian’s concept of psychic unity. In works such as Anthropogeogra-
phie (1882–1891) and The History of Mankind ([1885–1888] 1896–
1898), he argued that, because the world was small, ethnologists must
beware of thinking that even the simplest inventions were likely to
have been made more than once, let alone repeatedly. Both inven-
tion and diffusion were described as capricious processes; hence, it
was impossible to predict whether a particular group would borrow
even a useful invention from its nearest neighbors. Ratzel maintained
arbitrarily that because of this it was necessary to rule out the pos-
sibility of diffusion in order to prove that the same type of artifact
had been invented more than once. He asserted that items such as
the blowpipe and the bow and arrow, wherever they occurred in the
world, could be traced back to a common source. This argument was

                                 218
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

directed against Bastian’s claim that, in the absence of evidence to
the contrary, all similarities should be attributed to the operation of
psychic unity (Zimmerman 2001: 204). Both positions were equally
unscientific, as most archaeologists appear to have intuitively real-
ized, but there was as yet no detailed archaeological record against
which each claim might be evaluated. Ratzel also argued that, despite
its capriciousness, the prolonged diffusion of traits created culture
areas or blocks of similar cultures located adjacent to each other
(H. Kuklick 1991a: 121–30; Zimmerman 2001: 203–6).
   Ratzel’s ideas influenced the younger Boas, who introduced them
to North America. Boas opposed the doctrine of cultural evolution
and argued that each culture was a unique entity that had to be under-
stood on its own terms. Doing this required accepting two concepts:
cultural relativism, which denied the existence of any universal stan-
dard that could be used to compare the degree of development or
worth of different cultures, and historical particularism, which viewed
each culture as the product of a unique sequence of development in
which the largely chance operation of diffusion played the major role
in bringing about change. Boas believed that, if the development
of cultures displayed any overall regularities, these were so complex
as to defy understanding. The only way to explain the past was to
determine the successive idiosyncratic diffusionary episodes that had
shaped the development of each culture (M. Harris 1968a: 250–89).
About the same time, the Viennese school of anthropology, devel-
oped by the Roman Catholic priests Fritz Graebner (1877–1934) and
Wilhelm Schmidt (1868–1954), argued that a single series of cultures
had developed in central Asia, from where these cultures had been
carried to various parts of the world. The complex cultural variations
observed on every continent resulted from the mingling of cultures at
different levels of development (M. Harris 1968a: 382–92; Andriolo
1979). This approach was applied to European archaeology and then
carried to Argentina after World War II by the Austrian archaeolo-
gist Oswald Menghin (1888–1973) (Kohl and Pérez Gollán 2002).
Menghin’s religious conservatism and his hostility to socialism led
him to embrace a variant of culture-historical anthropology that not
only rejected cultural evolution and psychic unity but also embraced
primitive monotheism and degenerationism.
   Diffusion displaced an evolutionary approach in English ethnol-
ogy as a result of the work of the Cambridge scholar W. H. R.

                                 219
                A History of Archaeological Thought

Rivers (1864–1922) (1914). Unable to detect an evolutionary pat-
tern in his detailed study of the distribution of cultural traits in
Oceanic societies, he rejected evolutionism and adopted a diffusion-
ist approach (Slobodin 1978). Diffusionism was carried further in
British anthropology by Grafton Elliot Smith (1871–1937). Born in
Australia, Smith studied medicine and became interested in mummi-
fication while he taught anatomy at the University of Cairo, before
moving to the University of London. Noting that embalming was
practiced in various forms elsewhere, he decided that it had been
invented in Egypt, where it had reached its most highly developed
form, and that it had degenerated as it spread to other parts of the
world. He went on to theorize that all early cultural development had
occurred in Egypt. Before 4000 bc, there had been no agriculture,
architecture, religion, or government anywhere in the world. Then
the accidental harvesting of wild barley and millet in the Nile Valley
led to the discovery of agriculture, which was followed by the inven-
tion of pottery, clothing, monumental architecture, and divine king-
ship, producing what hyperdiffusionists called the “Archaic Civiliza-
tion.” Smith maintained that these events had occurred in a unique
environment and were unlikely ever to have happened elsewhere.
Egyptian innovations were carried to all parts of the world by mer-
chants who were searching for raw materials that had the power to
prolong human life. Although these influences acted as an “exotic
leaven” encouraging the development of agriculture and civilization
in other parts of the world, many secondary civilizations, such as that
of the Maya, declined when cut off from direct contact with Egypt
(Smith 1911, 1915, 1928, 1933).
   Smith’s hyperdiffusionist ideas were elaborated using ethnographic
data by W. J. Perry, who taught cultural anthropology at the Univer-
sity of London. His two major works, The Children of the Sun (1923)
and The Growth of Civilization (1924), still make fascinating read-
ing, although the real explanation of the worldwide parallels that he
noted in political organization and religious beliefs remains illusive.
Lord Raglan (1939) also advocated hyperdiffusionism but believed
Mesopotamia rather than Egypt to have been its source. The ideas
on which these three men agreed were that most human beings are
naturally primitive and will always revert to a state of savagery if not
stopped from doing so by the ruling classes; that savages never invent
anything; that the development of civilization, and by extrapolation

                                  220
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

the Industrial Revolution, were accidents that produced results con-
trary to human nature; and that religion was a prime factor promot-
ing the development and spread of civilization. Yet, in denying that
progress was natural or that there was any plan to human history, the
hyperdiffusionists were only carrying to an extreme ideas that had
come to be shared by a growing number of anthropologists since the
1880s.
   Some European archaeologists were influenced by Smith to the
extent that they argued that megalithic tombs might be a degener-
ate form of pyramid, the idea of which had been carried from Egypt
to western Europe by Egyptian agents seeking for life-giving nat-
ural substances (Childe 1939: 301–2, 1954: 69). Yet, by the 1920s,
the archaeological record was sufficiently well known that hyper-
diffusionism had little appeal to archaeologists as an explanation of
world prehistory. Insofar as archaeologists thought about the prob-
lem, cultures in the Old and New Worlds were recognized to be
distinct stylistically and in many other ways and hence were assumed
to have developed largely independently of one another from hunt-
ing and gathering to civilization. Yet, within the diffusionist intel-
lectual milieu that had begun to evolve in the 1880s, the human
capacity for innovation was considered to be sufficiently limited and
quixotic that basic discoveries, such as pottery and bronze work-
ing, seemed unlikely to have been invented twice in human history
and hence they were believed to have spread from one part of the
world to another. The chronologies that had been elaborated before
radiocarbon dating, especially on an intercontinental scale, were not
sufficiently cross-dated to rule out such interpretations. Almost all
cultural change in the archaeological record was attributed to the
diffusion of ideas from one group to another or to migrations that
had led to the replacement of one people and their culture by another.
   Because they accepted the capacity of one group to learn from
another, archaeologists who emphasized diffusion tended to be more
optimistic about the capacity of human societies to change than were
those who attributed almost all change to migration. The latter fash-
ion is exemplified by the work of W. M. F. Petrie (1939), who, in dis-
cussing the prehistoric development of Egypt, attributed all cultural
changes either to mass migrations or to the arrival of smaller groups
who brought about cultural change by mingling culturally and bio-
logically with the existing population. According to Petrie, the early

                                 221
                A History of Archaeological Thought

Neolithic Fayum culture represented a “Solutrean migration from
the Caucasus,” which also was the homeland of the Badarian people.
Amratian white-lined pottery was introduced by “Libyan invasions,”
whereas the Gerzean culture was brought to Egypt by an “East-
ern Desert Folk” who invaded and dominated the country. Finally,
Egypt was unified by the “Falcon Tribe” or “Dynastic Race” that
“certainly had originated in Elam” (Iran) and came to Egypt by way
of Ethiopia and the Red Sea. In each case, Petrie’s arguments were
based on tenuous resemblances between a few traits in Egyptian cul-
ture and those in some culture or cultures outside Egypt, while the
general patterns were ignored. Petrie saw no possibility of signifi-
cant cultural change without accompanying biological change. Still
earlier, he had written in a Vicoesque style about millennium-long
cycles of growth and decay in which he believed racial struggle to be
of paramount importance (Petrie 1911).
   Archaeological interpretation everywhere in Europe was influ-
enced by growing pessimism about human creativity. Changes in
the archaeological record were attributed mainly to migration and
diffusion. Multiple inventions of the same items were now believed to
be highly improbable. There also was no sense of pattern to human
history. The archaeological record made it hard for archaeologists
to deny that cultural development had taken place, but few now
regarded this development as universal, inevitable, or even desirable.
   The transition between evolutionary and migrationist-diffusionist
modes of thought was gradual and “diffusionist” explanations often
shared many of the features of evolutionary ones. W. J. Sollas, in
his Ancient Hunters and their Modern Representatives (1911), based
on a series of lectures delivered in 1906, appears to be following
an evolutionary model when he compares successive ages of Palae-
olithic development with different modern hunter-gatherer groups.
Thus, the Mousterians are “represented” by the Tasmanians, the
Aurignacians in part by the Bushmen, and the Magdalenians by the
Inuit and the American Indians. Yet Sollas maintains that most of
these modern counterparts are appropriate analogues because they
are the literal descendants of these Palaeolithic groups, who, as more
“intelligent” races emerged, were “expelled and driven to the utter-
most parts of the earth” where they remained in an arrested state of
development (1924: 599). Under the impact of diffusionism, holistic
analogies based on the assumption that historically unrelated groups

                                 222
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

at the same level of development would be culturally similar gradually
were replaced by the assumption that because cultures are inherently
static only the comparison of historically related ones could facilitate
the interpretation of archaeological data (Wylie 1985a: 66–7; Bowler
1992).


        The Montelian Synthesis of European Prehistory
The growing interest in cultural variation and diffusion in the social
sciences provided a theoretical framework that allowed archaeolo-
gists to account for the evidence of spatial as well as temporal varia-
tion that was becoming obvious as archaeological data accumulated
across Europe. As early as 1847, Worsaae had noted major stylistic
differences between Bronze and Iron Age artifacts in Scandinavia
and Ireland. In the course of the nineteenth century, archaeologists
in Britain, France, Switzerland, Germany, and central Europe traced
the geographical and temporal distributions of coins (J. Evans 1864),
megaliths, and other Stone (J. Evans 1872), Bronze (J. Evans 1881),
and Iron Age remains. As La Tène finds were more firmly identified
with late prehistoric Celtic groups, their status as a culture rather
than a stage of development or a period became clearer; a process
that was accelerated in 1870 when Mortillet interpreted La Tène
artifacts found in northern Italy as archaeological evidence of a his-
torically recorded Celtic invasion of that country. In 1890, Arthur
Evans identified a late Celtic urnfield in southeastern England with
the Belgae, who the Romans reported had invaded England in the
first century bc. John Abercromby (1841–1924) (1902, 1912) associ-
ated Early Bronze Age beaker pottery, probably wrongly (Harrison
1980), with a putative “Beaker folk” who he believed had migrated
over much of western Europe. In 1898, the Danish archaeologist
Sophus Müller (1846–1934) argued that, although the Single Graves
and Megalithic Burials of the Danish Neolithic were at least partly
contemporary, the weapons, pottery, and ornaments associated with
them were different and hence they must represent two distinct peo-
ples (Childe 1953: 9). As early as 1874, Boyd Dawkins (p. 353) had
suggested the possibility of regional variations in the Palaeolithic.
   This growing emphasis on the geographical distribution as well
as the chronology of archaeological finds led to important creative
work being done by archaeologists who were interested primarily

                                  223
                A History of Archaeological Thought




                Figure 6.1 Oscar Montelius (1843–1921)

in the European Neolithic, Bronze, and Iron Ages rather than the
Palaeolithic period. Their work would replace the evolutionary pre-
occupation that western European prehistoric archaeologists had
with a succession of cultural stages with a historical orientation
focused on cultures, but this change occurred slowly. The major
figure in initiating this transition was the Swedish archaeologist
Gustaf Oscar Montelius (1843–1921) (Figure 6.1). He was trained
in the natural sciences but became interested in archaeology and
was employed full time at the Museum of National Antiquities in
Stockholm beginning in 1868. He shared Thomsen’s and Worsaae’s
interest in elaborating a prehistoric chronology. Between 1876 and
1879, he also traveled throughout Europe in order to study collec-
tions, thus becoming the first archaeologist to investigate prehistory
on a continental scale. The enlarged scope of his research was made
possible by the increasing tempo of archaeological activity through-
out Europe and by the development of a network of railways, which
made travel easier.
   During the mid-nineteenth century, Scandinavian archaeologists
had subdivided the Bronze and Iron Ages into an increasing number
of periods, often using limited criteria, such as grave types or dated
trade goods, and without taking account of whole assemblages. The
typological method, as Montelius developed it, was a refinement
of Thomsen’s chronological approach. The creation of systematic

                                 224
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

typologies or classifications of prehistoric artifacts began with the
Swedish archaeologist Hans Hildebrand (1842–1913). He derived
the idea of a clearly defined type from numismatic work by his father,
Bror Emil Hildebrand (1806–1884), who in 1846 formally identified
different types of Anglo-Saxon coins (Gräslund 1987: 96–101). Hans
Hildebrand was, however, little interested in chronology. Montelius,
by contrast, carefully defined artifact types on the basis of variations
in form and decoration for numerous classes of artifacts throughout
Europe and on this basis sought to work out and correlate a series
of regional chronologies. He did this by examining, as Thomsen
had done, material from closed finds, such as graves, hoards, and
single rooms, to determine what types of artifacts occurred and never
occurred together. Experience taught him that, after comparing two
hundred to three hundred finds of this sort, clusters of association
would form that represented, not large units of time such as the
Bronze Age, but subdivisions of these ages that he believed must
each have lasted for only a few hundred years. Because of the vastly
greater amount of data available and Montelius’ more detailed artifact
classifications, it was possible for him not only to identify shorter
periods but, by identifying artifact types that were common to more
than one period, to order these periods chronologically. For such
a sequence to be persuasive, materials, techniques of manufacture,
shape, and decoration had to covary in a coherent pattern. Montelius
established seriation as a self-contained and convincing technique for
constructing archaeological sequences.
   After Montelius had established chronological sequences on the
basis of formal criteria and closed finds, he drew attention to evolu-
tionary trends in these sequences. Bronze celts, for example, began
as flat axes that were later flanged to strengthen them. Next they
were provided with a crossbar and cylindrical shaft and finally with
a heavy cast socket to facilitate mounting and use (Figure 6.2).
Montelius viewed such a developmental sequence as a natural and
logical one and drew parallels between the evolution of material cul-
ture and of biological organisms. Yet, as Gräslund (1974) has shown,
despite Montelius’s training in the natural sciences, his thinking
about human behavior owed little to Darwinism. On the contrary,
it continued the traditions of Scandinavian archaeology. Montelius
believed, as had the philosophers of the Enlightenment, that technol-
ogy developed because human beings used their powers of reason to

                                  225
            A History of Archaeological Thought




Figure 6.2 Bronze Age artifacts arranged according to Montelius’s
                          system, 1881



                              226
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

devise more effective ways of coping with nature and thereby making
their lives easier and more secure. His references to biological evo-
lution seem to have been intended mainly as analogies designed to
enhance the status of archaeology in an era dominated by Darwinian
evolution. It is also significant that not all Montelius’s evolutionary
patterns were unilinear. He demonstrated, for example, that during
the Bronze Age fibulae (safety pins), which were used to fasten cloth-
ing, had been manufactured in Italy as one piece with a coiled spring
and in Scandinavia as two pieces with a hinge (Bibby 1956: 180–1).
In due course, the best features of both types were merged to form a
new pan-European variety. Hence, Montelius took account of how
idiosyncratic historical factors as well as logical ones influenced the
evolution of material culture.
   By the 1880s, Montelius (1885) had worked out a detailed chronol-
ogy of the Scandinavian Bronze Age. By 1903, he had divided the
European Neolithic into four periods, the Bronze Age into six peri-
ods, and the Iron Age into ten periods. Although he regarded such
periods as applicable in general terms to the whole of Europe, he
had noted considerable regional variation within each period and had
come to doubt the assumption that all parts of Europe had reached
the same stage of development at the same time. Instead, he sought
to use artifacts that he assumed had been exchanged from one region
to another, or been copied from more advanced areas, as geographi-
cal cross-ties to temporally correlate various periods in different parts
of Europe. As a result of the discovery of Mycenaean Greek pottery in
historically dated Egyptian sites and Egyptian goods in Greece, it was
possible for archaeologists to date the Mycenaean period in Greece
to the fifteenth century bc. Cylindrical faience beads found across
Europe that were presumed to have come from Egypt through the
Mycenaean civilization provided a benchmark calendrical dating for
a number of Bronze Age cultures. In general, these beads turned up
in typologically less evolved Bronze Age contexts in central, western,
and northern Europe than in the southeast, suggesting that the far-
ther a region was from the Middle East, the later most technological
innovations had been adopted there. This correlation gave rise to
what was later called the “short chronology” of European prehistory
(Bibby 1956: 181–2). Other periods were aligned using goods that
on the basis of stylistic criteria appeared to have been traded from


                                  227
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

one part of Europe to another. It was assumed that all these goods
were exchanged soon after they had been manufactured.
   Montelius believed that his cultural chronology of European pre-
history was derived objectively from the archaeological evidence.
Today, archaeologists are not so certain that presuppositions did not
play a significant role in determining his selection of the cross-ties that
he used to correlate the chronologies of different parts of Europe.
Montelius thought that his chronology indicated that in prehistoric
times cultural development had occurred in the Middle East and
achievements had been carried from there to Europe by waves of
diffusion and migration making their way through the Balkans and
Italy. Because of that, the level of cultural development in southeast-
ern Europe in prehistoric times was always ahead of that to the north
and west and Europe as a whole “was for long but the pale reflection
of Eastern civilization.” Montelius became the most distinguished
exponent of a diffusionist explanation of European cultural devel-
opment, the so-called ex oriente lux (“light from the east”) school
(Renfrew 1973a: 36–7).
   Montelius’s (1899, 1903) interpretation of the development of
European civilization required a belief not only in diffusion but
also that over long periods innovation tended to occur in particu-
lar areas and to diffuse outward from those areas to peripheries. A
similar concept of cultural cores and peripheries played a significant
role in Boasian anthropology, together with the age/area assump-
tion, which maintained that more widely distributed traits tended
to be older than ones spread over a smaller territory. In general,
American anthropologists tended to view broad natural zones, such
as the Great Plains or boreal forests of North America, as consti-
tuting the most active spheres of diffusion. The concepts of cultural
cores and age/area were later subjected to a withering critique by the
anthropologist R. B. Dixon (1928). In Europe, however, these theo-
retical assumptions were neither articulated nor criticized so clearly.
   Many archaeologists supported Montelius’s interpretation of
European prehistory. Moreover, the most vocal objections were
directed not against his idea of diffusion from a center of innova-
tion but, rather, against his claim that this center was located in the
Middle East. Some archaeologists objected to an interpretation that
ran counter to European convictions of their own superior creativ-
ity by deriving civilization from beyond Europe. Carl Schuchhardt

                                   228
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

(1859–1943), Adolf Furtwängler (1853–1907), and other German
archaeologists maintained that the Mycenaean civilization of Greece
was the creation of “Aryan” (Indo-European-speaking) invaders
from the north. Montelius’s thesis was opposed on more general
principles by the Austrian archaeologist Matthäus Much (1832–1909)
(1907) and by the French prehistorian Salomon Reinach (1858–1932)
in Le Mirage oriental (The Eastern Mirage) (1893). Overthrowing
Montelius’s scheme required, however, either ignoring or refuting
his chronology, which most impartial prehistorians were convinced
was based on sound evidence.
   There were, however, subjective reasons as well as scientific ones
for the support given to Montelius. His diffusionist views clearly
accorded with the conservative opinions denying human creativity
that were fashionable at the end of the nineteenth century. Trac-
ing the origins of European civilization to the Middle East also
appealed to many Christians because it appeared to offer support
for the biblical view of world history. In the late nineteenth cen-
tury, growing social and economic problems led many members of
the middle class in western Europe to turn once more to religion.
Montelius’s scheme also accorded with a biblically based interpre-
tation of history dating from the medieval period that saw succes-
sive empires – Babylonian, Persian, Hellenistic Greek, and Roman –
gradually transferring the center of power and creativity westward
from the Middle East to Europe. Finally, throughout the nine-
teenth century, European powers, especially England and France,
had been intervening to an ever greater degree in the political and
economic affairs of North Africa and the Middle East (Silberman
1982; Gran-Aymerich 1998). A scheme of prehistory that treated
the western European nations rather than the modern Arab peo-
ples as the true heirs of the ancient civilizations of the Middle East
helped to justify European colonial interventions in that region, just
as myths about the nonindigenous origin of Great Zimbabwe were
used to support the European colonization of sub-Saharan Africa.
Montelius’s demonstration that early technological innovations in
the Middle East had constituted the origins of European civilization
may help to explain why his arguments were of greater interest in
France and England than in Germany, where political interventions
in the Middle East began only toward the end of the nineteenth
century.

                                 229
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

   Montelius did not subscribe to racial interpretations of human
history. Moreover, although he believed that diffusionary processes
accounted for the spread of civilization to Europe in prehistoric
times, he saw evolutionary ones explaining its origins in the Middle
East. As the citizen of a geographically peripheral European nation
whose cultural and academic life was being transformed during the
nineteenth century by influences coming principally from Germany,
he must have regarded diffusion as a powerful stimulus for ben-
eficial change. His views about the origins of European technol-
ogy were generically similar to those of Thomsen and Worsaae.
Furthermore, despite his pioneering contributions to the study of
pan-European prehistory, the primary focus of his research remained
Scandinavia. Although he was the first great archaeological innovator
to be strongly influenced by a specifically diffusionist view of cultural
change, his position in the debate about human inventiveness was a
moderate one and much of his thinking continued in an evolutionist
mode.
   Montelius’s influence was not limited to central and western
Europe. In the late nineteenth century, Russian archaeology, inspired
by patriotism and romanticism, shifted rapidly from being an anti-
quarian to being a scientific pursuit. The models Russian archaeol-
ogists followed were the Scandinavian and German archaeologists
who were in the process of creating culture-historical archaeology.
The Russian government’s forbidding as early as 1826 of the publi-
cation of any studies dealing with human evolution had effectively
discouraged the consideration of evolutionary archaeology during
the mid-nineteenth century (Klejn 2001b: 1130–1).
   In the second half of the nineteenth century, Russia experienced
rapid development in industry, transport, trade, and educational
opportunities. The middle classes expanded and the educated seg-
ment of the population became interested in natural science, philos-
ophy, history, and political economy. Archaeological research, pub-
lications, museums, associations, and congresses proliferated. All the
archaeologists at this period were landowners, teachers, civil servants,
or military officers who were self-instructed in the discipline. Yet they
carried out research comparable to that being done elsewhere in
Europe (M. Miller 1956: 28). The rapid development of archaeology
in Russia, and a growing number of remarkable finds, led the govern-
ment to establish the Imperial Russian Archaeological Commission

                                  230
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

in St. Petersburg in 1859. It was intended to safeguard archaeo-
logical remains. Already in 1851 a Russian Archaeology Society had
been founded in St. Petersburg and in 1864 Count Aleksey Uvarov,
who had excavated over 7000 burial mounds, organized the Moscow
Archaeological Society, which he, and later his widow, Countess
Praskovia Uvarova, directed until 1917. Each of these bodies estab-
lished major publications series, which continued until the Bolshevik
revolution of that year. In the late 1870s and 1880s, regional archae-
ological societies were established in Tbilisi, Kazan, Pskov, and other
provincial cities. Although the Russians, like the Americans and other
European colonizing powers, were seizing control of regions occu-
pied by tribal peoples, the Russians did not invoke archaeological
evidence to justify their actions racially. Having been conquered and
ruled for centuries by the Mongols, they were less inclined to despise
racially different peoples than were the Americans.
   Beginning in the 1870s and continuing into the early twentieth
century, archaeological interests diversified. Kurgans and classical
sites continued to be excavated, but there was a growing empha-
sis on settlements and cemeteries from all periods of Russian history.
The Palaeolithic sites at Kostenki, in the Ukraine, began to be studied
in 1879 and Neolithic sites, including those of the Tripolje culture,
as well as Bronze and Iron Age ones were excavated across western
Russia. There also was much interest in Slavic and medieval Russian
archaeology, especially among the members of the Russian Archaeol-
ogy Society, where a special section was established for such research.
This interest reflected the pan-Slavism that played a significant role in
Russian foreign policy in the late nineteenth century and supported
the government’s efforts to strengthen Russian influence throughout
eastern Europe. By this time archaeology was being taught, although
not yet in separate departments, at the universities in St. Petersburg
and Moscow.
   Many archaeologists working in Moscow and St. Petersburg were
influenced by recent developments in prehistoric archaeology in
northern and central Europe. The most prominent of these was Vasily
Gorodtsov (1860–1945), who began to excavate in the 1880s but
remained employed as a military officer until 1906. In the early 1900s,
he became senior curator at the Moscow Historical Museum and also
a lecturer at the Moscow Archaeological Institute, where he trained
a large number of professional archaeologists. Gorodtsov was the

                                  231
                A History of Archaeological Thought

outstanding exponent of what later was labeled the formalist school
of Russian archaeology, which was inspired by the work of Montelius
and other Scandinavian typologists. His systematic classification of
Neolithic ceramics according to material, then shape, and finally
decoration enabled him to trace the distribution and establish the
boundaries of clusters of similar sites and to note material evidence of
contacts between such clusters. He accepted that diffusion and migra-
tion were important processes bringing about cultural change. He
also produced the first periodization of pre-Scythian burial mounds
along lines similar to those employed by Sophus Müller in Denmark.
In 1899, Aleksander Spitsyn (1858–1931), who was the leading mem-
ber of the St. Petersburg school, combined archaeological data about
temple ring types and historical information to trace the distribution
of some early Russian tribes in a manner resembling that being devel-
oped by the German archaeologist Gustaf Kossinna.


                      The Concept of Culture
In the late nineteenth century, a growing interest in ethnicity encour-
aged increasing use of the concept of the archaeological culture.
Archaeologists in Scandinavia and in central and eastern Europe
began to draw an explicit parallel between the numerous geograph-
ically restricted remains of a distinctive character they were finding
and ethnographic cultures. The term “culture” seems first to have
been used in Italian and Spanish, where it originally referred to the
cultivation of the human mind. By the seventeenth century, it was
employed to designate the distinctive way of life of a people and
in the late eighteenth century, Herder was maintaining that each
people (Volk) had their own culture (Kultur). The equivalent term
in French was civilisation (Dı́az-Andreu 1996a: 51–7). In Germany,
Kultur came to be used more narrowly to designate the slowly chang-
ing ways of life ascribed to tribal or peasant groups, or modern rural
dwellers, as distinguished from the cosmopolitan, rapidly changing
“Zivilisation” of urban centers.
   After 1780, works on Kulturgeschichte (culture history) began
to proliferate and, beginning in 1843, the German ethnologist
Gustav Klemm published books titled Allgemeine Cultur-Geschichte
der Menschheit (General Culture History of Humanity) (1843–1852)
and Allgemeine Kulturwissenschaft (General Ethnology) (1854–1855).

                                  232
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

Friedrich Ratzel based his antievolutionary theories on the use of
the concept of culture to denote distinctive ways of life transmit-
ted by specific peoples from one generation to another as well as on
the concept of diffusion. The English ethnologist Edward B. Tylor
(1832–1917) was aware as early as 1865 of Klemm’s use of the term
culture, but it was only in Primitive Culture (1871) that he adopted
the word and provided it with its now classic English definition as
“that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, morals,
law, custom, and other capabilities and habits acquired by man as
a member of society” (p. 1). In general, nineteenth-century evo-
lutionary archaeologists tended to use the term culture only in the
singular. It referred to all the knowledge and beliefs of humanity that
were transmitted by teaching and imitation and that were believed
to grow more complex and refined over time. This holistic usage
contrasted with the German use of the word (often in the plural)
to designate the distinctive ways of life of various peoples (Stocking
1987: 18–19).
   The labeling of geographically and temporally restricted assem-
blages of formally similar prehistoric archaeological material as cul-
tures or civilizations and identifying them as the remains of ethnic
groups seem to have occurred independently to a number of archae-
ologists. In V. G. Childe’s (1935b: 3) view, the concept of the archae-
ological culture was “forced” on Scandinavian and central European
archaeologists by the wealth of material that their excavations had
produced for the Neolithic and later periods. The early Scandinavian
archaeologists were aware of the German ethnographic use of the
concept of culture, and the oldest known use of the term culture
to designate an archaeological unit is found in Thomsen’s contribu-
tion to the Ledetraad (1836). In his discussion of the Bronze Age,
Thomsen refers to the diffusion in prehistoric times of technolog-
ical knowledge from one culture to another. In Danmarks Oldtid
(1843), Worsaae made even more use of the term culture to des-
ignate archaeological entities, referring to “higher cultures,” “later
cultures,” and “Roman culture” among others. No need was felt to
explain this usage, which seems to have been regarded as self-evident.
Nor, because of the general homogeneity of prehistoric cultures at
any one time in Denmark, was a need perceived to assign specific geo-
graphic boundaries to archaeological cultures. Yet both Thomsen
and Worsaae were aware that different cultures had coexisted in

                                 233
                A History of Archaeological Thought

different parts of Europe and even different parts of Scandinavia in
prehistoric times.
   In 1866, the Norwegian archaeologist Olof Rygh interpreted dis-
tinctive spear points and arrowheads found in his country as the
products of a particular Stone Age “culture and people” and by 1871
he had noted the existence of two “Stone Age cultures” and “Stone
Age peoples” in Norway (Meinander 1981: 106). In his multivolume
Geschichte des Alterthums (History of Ancient Times), which began to
appear in 1884, the historian Eduard Meyer (1855–1930) wrote casu-
ally of the Egyptian, Greek, Trojan, and Mycenaean cultures, while
in the works of Heinrich Schliemann and others the terms Aegean,
Mycenaean, Helladic, and Cycladic were used to distinguish vari-
ous Bronze Age “civilizations” of the eastern Mediterranean region
(Daniel 1950: 243; Meinander 1981).
   By 1891, A. Götze was referring to the Bandkeramik and other
Neolithic cultures; V. V. Hvojko wrote about the Tripolje culture in
1901; and Spitsyn about the Fatyanovo culture in 1905 (Meinander
1981). In 1908 Raphael Pumpelly (1837–1923), an American geol-
ogist turned archaeologist, who was excavating at the stratified site
of Anau in central Asia, used the term culture to distinguish suc-
cessive levels of occupation at that site, explaining that “culture”
was employed as a synonym for “civilization” (p. xxxv). In some
cases, it is possible to trace the process by which specific cultures
were recognized. Following the excavations at a Bronze Age ceme-
tery at Únětice in Czechoslovakia, archaeologists began to identify
Únětice-like finds in nearby regions and finally organized these to
establish a Únětice culture. In a similar manner, the Burgwall-type
pottery that had been defined in central Europe in 1870 was broad-
ened into the concept of a Burgwall culture (Sklenář 1983: 110).
These developments generally occurred first in northern and cen-
tral Europe, where there had been a longstanding interest in tracing
ethnic identities in the archaeological record. Yet, despite the enor-
mous influence that the concept of the archaeological culture was to
exert on the development of archaeology, it would be erroneous to
regard the development of a culture-historical approach at this time
as inherent in the nature of archaeology. Had archaeologists in north-
ern and central Europe been more interested in studying ecological
adaptation than in nationalism, race, and ethnicity, it is possible that
their concern with geographical variation in the archaeological record

                                  234
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

might instead have led to the early development of an ecological
approach.


          The Birth of Culture-Historical Archaeology
A growing interest in the concept of the archaeological culture did
not lead immediately to the development of culture-historical archae-
ology, which occurred in Germany. There anthropology had evolved
as a positivist, human-science alternative to the text-based humanism
of German universities. Most of its practitioners were employed in
museums. Led initially by Adolf Bastian, they advocated the study of
all cultures, not simply ones that had produced “great” art and lit-
erature. The professionalization of prehistoric archaeology began in
Germany with the establishment of the German Society for Anthro-
pology, Ethnology, and Prehistoric Archaeology (Urgeschichte) in
1869, three years after the first meeting of the Congrès international
d’anthropologie et d’archéologie préhistorique was held in Neuchâtel,
Switzerland. The leading figure in this new German society was the
eminent pathologist and left-wing politician Rudolf Virchow (1821–
1902), who had become actively involved in archaeological research
in Germany. He advocated the incorporation of prehistoric archae-
ology, along with physical anthropology and ethnology, into a com-
prehensive prehistoric anthropology. Together with his followers,
he sought to identify prehistoric cultures, to trace their origin and
movements, and if possible to associate them with known peoples,
often largely on the basis of pottery types, although grave types,
settlements, and historical data were also considered. The excava-
tions of prehistoric sites carried out by archaeologists such as Carl
Schuchhardt were modeled on the best work being done by classi-
cal archaeologists (Ottaway 1973; Fetten 2000). Yet, although their
work offered insights into European prehistory, it did not provide an
understanding of the past that was comprehensive enough to chal-
lenge Mortillet’s evolutionary approach. This was to be produced
by a professional librarian who had little interest in doing fieldwork
and who regarded prehistoric archaeology not as a branch of anthro-
pology but as an independent discipline dedicated to the study of
German prehistory.
   Gustaf Kossinna (1858–1931) first presented his views in 1895 in a
lecture that traced the German tribes historically recorded as living

                                  235
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

between the Rhine and Vistula Rivers about 100 bc back to the
Neolithic period. His approach was expounded in greater detail in
Die Herkunft der Germanen (The Origin of the Germans) (1911) and
his two-volume Ursprung und Verbreitung der Germanen (Origin
and Expansion of the Germans) (1926–1927). A fanatical German
patriot, Kossinna declared archaeology to be the most national of
sciences and the ancient Germans the most noble subject for archae-
ological research. He criticized German archaeologists for their inter-
est in classical and Egyptian archaeology, which he viewed as indi-
cating a lack of patriotism. Before 1918, however, some caution was
required, as the German emperor, Wilhelm II, was both a zealous
nationalist and an enthusiastic supporter of classical and Middle East-
ern archaeology. Although Kossinna had been trained in philology,
he turned from linguistics to archaeology in an effort to discover
the original homeland of the Indo-European speaking peoples and
hence of the Germans. He was appointed Professor of Archaeology
at the University of Berlin and in 1909 founded the German Society
for Prehistory (Vorgeschichte), which was soon renamed the Soci-
ety for German Prehistory to publicize more clearly its nationalist
commitments.
   Die Herkunft der Germanen, the first systematic exposition of
Kossinna’s approach to archaeology, was a mixture of important
theoretical innovations and a fanciful glorification of German pre-
history. His work helped to reinforce German nationalism and won
the favor of high-ranking conservatives, such as Field Marshall Paul
von Hindenburg, who was to be elected President of Germany in
1925. Because of Kossinna’s misuse of archaeological data for polit-
ical purposes, careful attention is required to separate his positive
contributions from the pernicious aspects of his work. It also should
be remembered that, in interpreting archaeological evidence in a
way that encouraged Germans to regard Slavs and other neighbor-
ing European peoples as inferior to themselves and which justified
German aggression against these peoples, Kossinna was not acting
differently from the amateur and semiprofessional archaeologists of
other countries who at the same time were portraying the indigenous
peoples of North America, Africa, Asia, and Australia as inferior to
Europeans. In different ways archaeology in all these countries was
reflecting racist attitudes that in the course of the late nineteenth cen-
tury had become widespread not only in Germany but throughout

                                   236
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

Western civilization (Césaire 1955). The Polish archaeologist Józef
Kostrzewski (1885–1969), who had studied with Kossinna, sought
to use his methods to emphasize the great achievements of Poland’s
prehistoric Slavic inhabitants.
   Kossinna proposed that from Mesolithic times onward the archae-
ological record of central Europe could be organized as a mosaic of
cultures (Kulturen, Kultur-Gruppen), the location and content of
which had altered over time. On the basis of his belief that cultures are
invariably a reflection of ethnicity, he argued that similarities and dif-
ferences in material culture correlate with similarities and differences
in ethnicity. Hence, clearly defined cultural provinces always corre-
late with major ethnic groups or peoples, such as the Germans, Celts,
and Slavs, whereas individual cultures correspond with tribes, such as
the Germanic-speaking Saxons, Vandals, Lombards, and Burgundi-
ans. Like many other archaeologists, Kossinna believed that cultural
continuity indicated ethnic continuity. Hence, he argued that, by
mapping the distributions of types of artifacts that were characteris-
tic of specific tribal groups, whose homelands could be pinpointed
for the early historical period by using written sources, it would be
possible to identify the material culture associated with each of these
groups and use that information to determine archaeologically where
they had lived at earlier periods of prehistory. He called this proce-
dure Siedlungsarchäologie (settlement archaeology), which did not
signify the study of habitation sites but, rather, determining where
particular ethnic groups had lived in earlier times. At some point in
the past, it would not be possible to distinguish individual German
tribes, as they would not yet have differentiated from each other, but
archaeologists could still differentiate among Germans, Slavs, Celts,
and other major groups of Indo-Europeans. For still more remote
periods, it might only be possible to differentiate Indo-Europeans
from non-Indo-Europeans.
   In all of his later writings, Kossinna specifically identified cultural
and ethnic variations with racial differences. In particular, he accepted
the commonly held belief that the original Indo-European speaking
peoples and hence the direct ancestors of the Germans were mem-
bers of the blond, longheaded Nordic (or Aryan) racial group. He
also believed that racial characteristics were the fundamental deter-
minants of human behavior. Kossinna also accepted Klemm’s dis-
tinction between Kulturvölker, or culturally creative peoples, and

                                   237
                A History of Archaeological Thought

Naturvölker, or culturally passive peoples. For him, this was a dis-
tinction between Indo-Europeans, and above all Germans, and all
other peoples. He believed that the Indo-Europeans could be traced
back to the Mesolithic Maglemosian culture found in northern
Germany. In particular, he traced their origins to the vicinity of
Schleswig and Holstein, which Germany had recently annexed from
Denmark. By claiming maximum antiquity for the cultural chronol-
ogy of Germany, he sought to demonstrate that this region had been
the center of cultural development for Europe and the Middle East.
Late Neolithic flint daggers were interpreted as evidence of a noble
German pride in weapons and as prototypes for later bronze ones
and Bronze Age trumpets were construed as evidence of the supe-
rior musical ability of the Germans in prehistoric times. In another
flight of fantasy, Kossinna proposed that even the alphabet had a
Stone Age European origin rather than a Phoenician one.
   Because more advanced cultures were believed to manifest the bio-
logical superiority of their creators, it was assumed that they could
spread from one region to another only as a result of migrations
of people, not by diffusion. Kossinna acknowledged that diffusion
occurred but assigned it a minor role in bringing about cultural
change. Although most of his studies were limited to northern and
central Europe, Kossinna stated that race was the key to under-
standing world history. He proclaimed an original Indo-European
mentality to be common to the Greeks, Babylonians, and Sumerians
(Schwerin von Krosigk 1982: 53, 69). These ideas conjured up visions
of waves of Indo-Europeans migrating south and east, conquering
indigenous populations and using them to build civilizations in the
Middle East, Greece, and Italy. Each of these waves in turn, however,
interbred with local populations and as a result impaired their creative
abilities. Hence, even the Indo-European speaking peoples of ancient
Greece and Italy eventually became incapable of sustained cultural
creativity. Kossinna argued that, because the Germans had stayed in
their original homeland, they remained the racially purest and there-
fore the most talented and creative of all the Indo-European peoples.
They alone were still capable of carrying out the historical respon-
sibility of creating civilization and imposing it on inferior peoples.
Hence, the Germans became the first-born (Erstgeborenen) of the
Indo-Europeans. These fantasies resembled the “Hamitic” hypoth-
esis and other speculations that attributed ancient civilizations to

                                  238
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

conquering peoples coming from the north. Kossinna also viewed
archaeology as establishing a historical right to territory. Wherever
allegedly German artifacts were found was declared ancient German
territory, which modern Germany either held by right or was entitled
to win back. The same argument did not, of course, apply to non-
German groups, such as the Slavs, who in medieval times had settled
as far west as the recent border between East and West Germany
(Klejn 1974).
   Finally, Kossinna stressed the need to learn as much as possible
about how human groups, or at least Germans, had lived in prehis-
toric times. Cultures were not to be defined simply as artifact assem-
blages but archaeologists were urged to try to determine the nature
of prehistoric lifestyles. Yet, in his own work, Kossinna paid little
attention to archaeological evidence of house types, burial customs,
and rituals but based his interpretations on artifacts in museum col-
lections. His speculations about prehistoric German life often were
fanciful in the tradition of Stukeley and his latter-day druidical fol-
lowers. Nevertheless, in its intention, Kossinna’s desire to understand
individual archaeological cultures as evidence of how people had lived
in prehistoric times had more in common with the Scandinavian
approach to archaeology than it had with a “scientific” archaeology
modeled on French and English Palaeolithic studies.
   There was much about Kossinna’s work that was not new and
much that remained controversial. The idea that the Indo-Europeans
had originated in northern Europe had been supported for some time
by various linguists and physical anthropologists on the basis of evi-
dence that is no longer persuasive. Much of Kossinna’s understanding
of northern European prehistory and archaeological method was bor-
rowed with little public acknowledgement from Montelius, including
the principle that continuity of material culture in the archaeological
record indicates ethnic continuity. Virchow and the Polish archae-
ologists Erzam Majewski (1858–1922) and Leon Kozlowski (1892–
1944) expressed reservations about Kossinna’s defining of cultures
and his migrationism. More specifically K. H. Jacob-Friesen (1886–
1960) (1928), A. M. Tallgren (1885–1945) (1937: 156–7), and Ernst
Wahle (1889–1981) (1941) questioned his uncritical interpretation
of archaeological cultures as being the same as ethnographic ones
and argued that data derived from different sources could not be
expected always to coincide. It also was observed that, especially in

                                 239
                A History of Archaeological Thought

his later work, his culture units tended to be defined on the basis
of only one or a few items of material culture that he assumed were
correlated with ethnic identity. It is possible that the variations in
brooches that he used to equate late Iron Age cultures with specific
historical German tribes may in fact correlate with production centers
and not with ethnic differences.
   Yet Kossinna’s work, for all its chauvinistic nonsense and its often
amateurish quality, marked the final replacement of an evolution-
ary approach to prehistory by a culture-historical one. By organizing
archaeological data for each period of prehistory into a mosaic of
archaeological cultures, he sought not simply to document where
different groups of Europeans had lived at different stages of pre-
historic development but also to learn how particular peoples, many
of whom he believed could be identified as the ancestors of specific
modern groups, had lived in the past and what had happened to them
over time. To many of his contemporaries his approach, grounded in
the familiar concept of ethnicity, offered a plausible means to account
for the growing evidence of geographical as well as chronological
variations in the archaeological record. Kossinna must therefore be
recognized as an innovator whose work was of very great importance
for the development of culture-historical archaeology.
   Although Kossinna died in 1931, in his final years he was increas-
ingly attracted to the Nazi party (Grünert 2002). Calling themselves
National Socialists, the Nazis promoted an ethnic policy that sought
to unite all German-speakers within a single state. When the Nazi
party came to power in 1933, much of Kossinna’s interpretation
of German prehistory was incorporated into a new history curricu-
lum for German schools (Frick 1934). A large number of teaching
and research positions in German prehistory were established for
Kossinna’s followers in German universities, whereas archaeologists
who were politically or racially anathema to the regime were dis-
missed from their positions. Most German prehistoric archaeologists
had been nationalists already before 1933 and their sort of archaeol-
ogy benefited sufficiently from Nazi patronage that opposition from
within the archaeological community was limited. One of the chief
uses that the Nazis made of archaeology was to reinforce or create
myths about German behavior in antiquity that were designed to pro-
mote their own policies, such as the claim that Germans had always
respected and obeyed their leaders (Hassmann 2000). Two rival Nazi

                                 240
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

organizations recruited archaeologists to carry out research for ide-
ological and propaganda purposes. Curiously Adolf Hitler, the Nazi
leader, was enamored of ancient Greek and Roman art and archi-
tecture. He is reported to have deplored prehistoric archaeology for
revealing how culturally primitive the ancient Germans had been
(Speer 1970: 141) and appears to have believed that the alleged bio-
logical superiority of the modern Germans resulted from selective
pressures exerted during the medieval period. His personal views
were never made public.


       Childe and The Dawn of European Civilization
Kossinna’s interpretations of prehistory had little direct influence on
archaeology outside German-speaking countries, except in Poland,
no doubt because his chauvinism was so repellant. Because of their
positive attitude towards foreign influences, British archaeologists
were receptive to Montelius’s arguments that prehistoric Europe
owed much of its cultural development to the Middle East. Yet they
did not hold his views and those of more Eurocentric archaeologists
to be mutually exclusive. One of the two main themes of John L.
Myres’s (1869–1954) The Dawn of History (1911) was the spread of
technology from Egypt and Mesopotamia to Europe. The second
was his belief that all hierarchical societies developed when politi-
cally dynamic, pastoral peoples, such as the Semites and the Indo-
Europeans, were forced by drought to leave their homelands and
to conquer and rule politically less innovative peasant societies. This
scenario was, like the Hamitic hypothesis, based on the widespread
belief that pastoralists, who were equated with the medieval Euro-
pean aristocracy, were natural rulers, while farmers, like medieval
peasants, were by nature submissive and predisposed to be ruled by
others. According to Myres the Indo-Europeans, whom he believed
to be nomads from the steppes of central Asia, were particularly
adept at imposing their language, beliefs, and social customs on con-
quered peoples, while adopting the latter’s material culture. Out of
the encounter between cultural influences that had been transmitted
to Europe from the Middle East and Indo-European political skills a
vital and distinctive European way of life was created. Similar views
were held by Arthur Evans (1851–1941) (1896), who was Myres’s col-
league at Oxford University. Yet, although Myres wrote of “peoples”

                                 241
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

in The Dawn of History, he did not yet refer to archaeological
cultures.
   In the early 1920s, individual cultures were being mentioned by
British archaeologists such as M. C. Burkitt (1921), Stanley Casson
(1921), J. L. Myres (1923a, 1923b), Harold Peake (1922), and Cyril
Fox (1923). Burkitt idiosyncratically defined industries, cultures, and
civilizations as nested cultural units of increasing generality, but
he referred indiscriminately to entities such as the Mousterian and
Solutrean as both cultures and civilizations. In Man and his Past,
O. G. S. Crawford (1921: 78–9) discussed geographical methods for
delineating the origins, extent, and frontiers of cultures. Yet no effort
was made to apply the concept of the archaeological culture in a
systematic fashion in Britain before the publication of V. Gordon
Childe’s (1893–1957) The Dawn of European Civilization (1925a).
Through this book, which Glyn Daniel (1950: 247) called “a new
starting-point for prehistoric archaeology,” the archaeological cul-
ture became the working tool of all European archaeologists.
   Childe was born in Sydney, Australia in 1893, the son of a conser-
vative Church of England minister. He studied Classics at the Uni-
versity of Sydney, where he became committed to socialist politics. At
an early stage he also grew interested, like Kossinna, in locating the
homeland of the Indo-European-speaking peoples. He went on to
Oxford University where he studied with Myres and Evans. In 1916
he returned to Australia and political activities became the focus of
his life until 1921. Then, disillusioned with politics, he returned to
the study of archaeology. His already extensive command of Euro-
pean languages and an acute visual memory enabled him to visit and
assemble a vast amount of data from museums and excavations across
the whole of Europe (Figure 6.3). He presented the results of this
research in two books: The Dawn of European Civilization (1925a),
which was a synthesis of European prehistory to the end of the Bronze
Age, and The Danube in Prehistory (1929), a more narrowly focused
and more detailed examination of a hitherto little-known region. In
1927, as part of his research for the latter book, Childe participated
in a joint Cambridge University–Hungarian excavation at the site of
Tószeg in Hungary (Makkay 1991). The theoretical basis of both
books was outlined at the beginning of The Danube. At this period,
theoretical discussions were not a common feature of archaeological
literature.

                                  242
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology




 Figure 6.3 Childe (wearing tie) with a party of workmen at Skara Brae,
Orkney, 1928–1930 (Royal Commission on Ancient Monuments, Scotland)

  In The Dawn of European Civilization, Childe adopted Kossinna’s
basic concept of the archaeological culture and his identification of
such cultures as the remains of prehistoric peoples, while exhibiting
no awareness of the racist connotations that Kossinna had attributed
to both of these concepts. It is possible that Childe had come to
understand Kossinna’s concept of the archaeological culture mainly
through his close associations with the Polish archaeologist Leon
Kozlowski (1892–1944) (he visited Poland in 1923), and hence was
not fully aware of the ethnic and racial prejudices that Kossinna
had built into it (Lech 1999: 49–51). Childe combined this concept
with Montelius’s chronology and Montelius’s belief that in prehis-
toric times technological skills had diffused to Europe from their
place of origin in the Middle East. This is one of the earliest exam-
ples of an archaeologist’s combining the different approaches and
results of more than one previous researcher to create a new way of

                                 243
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

interpreting archaeological evidence. Childe’s doing this constitutes
evidence of the existence of a growing body of archaeological theory.
His interpretations of European prehistory were also influenced by
those of Myres and Evans, inasmuch as he stressed the creativity of
prehistoric Europeans to a much greater extent than Montelius had
done.
   Childe defined an archaeological culture, unfortunately with
deceptive brevity, as “certain types of remains – pots, implements,
ornaments, burial rites, house forms – constantly recurring together”
(1929: v–vi). He stressed that each culture had to be delineated indi-
vidually in terms of constituent artifacts and that cultures could not
be created simply by subdividing the ages or epochs of the evolution-
ary archaeologists either spatially or temporally. Instead, the duration
and geographical limits of each culture had to be established empir-
ically and individual cultures aligned chronologically by employing
stratigraphy, seriation, and synchronisms. In this way, he interpreted
the prehistory of the whole of Europe as a complex mosaic of cul-
tures. Although this mosaic was represented using small-scale maps
and tables in The Dawn of European Civilization, a detailed chart
showing the chronological and geographical distributions of all the
archaeological cultures known in the Danube Valley was published
in The Danube in Prehistory (Figure 6.4) and a chart by Childe and
M. C. Burkitt covering all of Europe appeared in Antiquity in 1932.
In preparing this chart, the authors were able to utilize cultures that
had already been provisionally identified by local archaeologists to a
far greater extent for central and eastern than for western Europe.
These charts were the prototypes for ones that other archaeolo-
gists would use to represent regional cultural chronologies around
the world.
   Most of Childe’s cultures were defined on the basis of a small
number of diagnostic artifacts. Yet his selection of these artifacts was
based on a functionalist view of material culture. Childe argued that
the historical significance of different types of artifacts could only be
ascertained by considering what role they had played in prehistoric
cultures. He decided, apparently on the basis of common sense, that
home-made pottery, ornaments, and burial rites tended to reflect
local tastes and were relatively resistant to change; hence, they were
useful for identifying specific ethnic groups. By contrast, the marked
utilitarian value of tools, weapons, and other items of technology

                                  244
                      Culture-Historical Archaeology




Figure 6.4 Childe’s first chart correlating the archaeological cultures of central
                Europe, from The Danube in Prehistory, 1929




caused them to diffuse rapidly from one group to another, as a result
of either trade or copying. Hence, he considered these types of arti-
facts especially valuable for assigning neighboring cultures to the
same period and establishing cultural chronologies before the inven-
tion of radiocarbon dating (Childe 1929: viii, 248; cf. Binford 1983a:
399–400). Childe concluded that the synchronisms produced by this
operation supported the same picture of the diffusion of material
culture westward across Europe as had emerged from Montelius’s
work.

                                      245
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   Childe believed that although diagnostic artifacts might serve to
define an archaeological culture, they did not suffice to describe it.
For that purpose every type of artifact was relevant. Childe was inter-
ested in viewing archaeological cultures not simply as collections of
traits but also as the means for providing an ethnographic inter-
pretation of how specific groups had lived in prehistoric times. Yet
he went about doing this more systematically than Kossinna had
done. In the first edition of The Dawn of European Civilization he
attempted to summarize what could be inferred about the way of
life associated with each major culture. In later editions, he sur-
veyed each culture more systematically, covering – insofar as this was
possible – economy, social and political organization, and religious
beliefs (Childe 1939, 1956a: 129–31). When it came to interpret-
ing cultural change, Childe paid equal attention, as Montelius had
done, to diffusion and migration. He interpreted diffusion as the
spread of functionally advantageous or stylistically more attractive
traits from one culture to another, whereas migration resulted in the
replacement of one culture by another or in cultural mixing. Cultural
continuity was ascribed to ethnic continuity in the absence of these
processes. Childe’s approach thus bore a close resemblance to the
diffusionist ethnology found in Europe and North America in the
1920s.
   Yet, although equating archaeological cultures and peoples, as
Kossinna had done, Childe developed grave doubts about the possi-
bility of tracing specific peoples in the archaeological record. Unlike
Kossinna, he attributed great importance to diffusion and had come
to believe that over time this process could obscure even the most
tenacious cultural continuities. Because of this he abandoned his
efforts to use archaeological data to identify the homeland of the
Indo-Europeans. In Prehistoric Migrations in Europe (1950a), he ten-
tatively associated the Indo-Europeans with the Urnfield culture but
that identification was refuted within a decade (Childe 1958b: 73).
His avoidance in The Dawn of European Civilization of the Iron
Age, with its connecting links to the historic period, may have been
related to his decision to avoid discussing specific ethnic identities.
In any case, although not doubting that cultures had been produced
by prehistoric peoples, as a diffusionist Childe was far more sceptical
than Kossinna, or even Montelius, had been about it being possible
to trace specific ethnicities far back in the archaeological record.

                                 246
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

   The Dawn of European Civilization provided a model that was to
be applied to the study of archaeology throughout much of Europe
into the 1950s. It was an approach that Childe, despite his own chang-
ing interests, followed closely in his later regional syntheses, such
as The Prehistory of Scotland (1935a) and Prehistoric Communities
of the British Isles (1940a). The primary aim of archaeologists who
adopted this approach was no longer to interpret the archaeological
record as evidence of stages of cultural development. Instead, they
sought to identify often nameless prehistoric peoples by means of
archaeological cultures and to trace their origins, movements, and
interactions. The Neolithic period was no longer seen primarily as
a stage of cultural development but, rather, as a mosaic composed
of sharply delineated cultural groups. The questions being addressed
were of a particularist, historical variety. There also was a general
interest in learning about how specific peoples had lived in prehistoric
times.
   Childe was fully aware of the revolution that he had brought about
in archaeology. In 1925, he noted with satisfaction that the clarity
with which the migrations of nameless prehistoric peoples stood out
in the archaeological record when it was studied as a mosaic of cul-
tures was a revelation to fellow archaeologists (Childe 1925b). He
thus distinguished between an older evolutionary archaeology and
a new culture-historical approach. He also observed, with reference
to the British and French rather than the Scandinavian school, that
in the nineteenth century evolutionary archaeologists had become
more interested in artifacts than in their makers. He claimed that
in constructing evolutionary sequences they had treated artifacts
as dead fossils rather than as expressions of living societies (1940a:
3). In his opinion, scientific progress had left archaeologists with
no alternative but to adopt the concrete methods of history. Yet
the concept of the archaeological culture, which he had borrowed
from Kossinna, and the diffusionist views of Montelius were both
closely related to the widely held interpretations of human behav-
ior that had developed as a reaction against cultural evolutionism
in western Europe beginning in the late nineteenth century. The
new culture-historical view of prehistory was as deeply rooted in
a pessimistic assessment of cultural change and human creativity
as the previous evolutionary one had been rooted in an optimistic
assessment.

                                  247
                A History of Archaeological Thought

  Childe, despite his left-wing political radicalism, did not wholly
escape the racism that was part of this new outlook. In The Aryans
(1926), which may have been based on material he had written
before The Dawn of European Civilization, he argued that the Indo-
Europeans succeeded, not because they possessed a material culture
or natural intelligence that was superior to those of other peoples,
but because they spoke a superior language and benefited from the
more competent mentality it made possible. He pointed out that the
Greeks and Romans had only a diluted Nordic physical type but that
each had realized the high cultural potential that was inherent in their
language. This interpretation contrasted with Kossinna’s belief that
ethnic and racial mixture in these countries had resulted in cultural
decline. Yet, at the end of The Aryans, Childe bowed to prevailing
racist sentiments by suggesting that the “superiority in physique” of
the Nordic peoples made them the appropriate initial bearers of a
superior language (Childe 1926: 211). In later years, as he adopted
other explanations for cultural variation, he repudiated these early
speculations, which he had come to regard as shameful.


            European Archaeology and Nationalism
The gradual development of culture-historical archaeology in
Scandinavia, Germany, and England took place while prehistoric
archaeology was being professionalized across Europe and strongly
influenced the sort of archaeology that emerged. Prehistoric archae-
ology clearly developed differently in every country (Ucko 1995b:
8). Yet that does not rule out identifying some shared features.
Hodder (1991b) has observed that European archaeology has been
and remains deeply historical. Most archaeologists seek to learn about
the history and prehistory of specific parts of Europe or the whole
continent. Their original goal was to extend history as it was known
from written sources back into the still more remote past. They did
this by defining archaeological cultures and trying to explain their
origins and changes by means of diffusion and migration. Because
nationalism was ubiquitous in Europe, it seems likely that it played
a significant role in shaping the practice of archaeology. Yet it is
going too far to claim that nationalism was embedded in the very
concept of archaeology and was the only cause of its development
(Dı́az-Andreu and Champion 1996b: 3) or that nationalism cannot

                                  248
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

do without archaeology (Slapšak and Novaković 1996: 290). Every-
where in Europe, the discipline of document-based history played an
early and continuous role in cultivating ethnic identities and encour-
aging patriotic and later nationalist sentiments. These studies usu-
ally focused on the early modern and medieval periods or on any
earlier ages for which there were written records. The role played
by archaeology was generally subordinate to that of history, while
at the same time not all archaeology was national in orientation
(Kaeser 2002).
   Archaeology’s greatest asset was the heightened and immediate
sense of connection with the past that material objects can pro-
vide. Sites such as Tara in Ireland or Biskupin in Poland at var-
ious times have played important roles as foci of national senti-
ment in their respective countries. Archaeological finds also have
provided enduring symbols of national identity. Examples include
Neolithic barrows, bronze lurs (trumpets), golden drinking horns,
and a ceremonial object, the sun wagon, in Denmark and the Tara
brooch and Ardagh chalice in Ireland (Sørensen 1996; Cooney 1996).
In recent years, the right to use the star of Vergina, associated
with the Greek-speaking kings of ancient Macedonia, has been bit-
terly contested between the governments of Macedonia and Greece
(K. Brown 1994). Yet the sentiments associated with such archae-
ological finds can also be transitory and they can as easily be local
or regional as they are national in scope. Much important archaeo-
logical research has been done by archaeologists who were primar-
ily interested in sites or historical problems that were of only local
concern.
   The significance of archaeology for national projects has varied
greatly in duration and intensity. Political unrest, national crises, and
rapid economic and social change frequently stimulate interest in
a nation’s past, which often is romantically represented as having
been more stable than the present and therefore as having valuable
lessons to teach modern times. Greeks have long derived a sense of
ethnic continuity and identity from their combined prehistoric, clas-
sical, and Byzantine archaeological heritage, which has helped them
to cope with repeated episodes of political instability and multiple
foreign threats to their country’s survival. The urgent concern of
Greek archaeologists to control this past has been sustained by their
resistance to the efforts of foreign archaeologists to appropriate the

                                  249
                A History of Archaeological Thought

study of ancient Greek civilization for themselves (Kotsakis 1991:
66–7). Throughout much of the nineteenth century, a strong pub-
lic interest in Danish prehistory was spurred by the military threat
posed to Denmark by more powerful European nations (Sørensen
1996). By contrast, Norwegian archaeology played a prominent role
in supplying symbols of ancient achievements mainly in the period
that immediately followed Norway’s political independence in 1905
(Dommasnes 1992: 2), whereas in France Celtic archaeology appears
to have been invoked by political leaders to promote unity in the
1860s and again only in 1985 (Dietler 1998).
   Political events also can influence how archaeological data are
interpreted. After the unification of Italy in 1861 by the north-
ern Italian kingdom of Piedmont, archaeologists working for Luigi
Pigorini (1884–1925) attributed the cultural development of pre-
historic Italy to the spread southward during the Bronze Age of
more advanced northern Italian peoples who superimposed them-
selves on the Neolithic southerners. Although the implications were
not explicitly emphasized by Pigorini, this interpretation made the
modern political domination of southern Italy by the north appear
to be merely another example of a long established historical process
(Guidi 1996: 111–2).
   Archaeological research has been suppressed or controlled by gov-
ernments for political reasons in some European countries. The study
of Polish archaeology was interrupted by the repression that followed
the Polish November Uprising of 1831 against the Russian occupa-
tion of eastern Poland and the Russians banned the study of local
archaeology by Lithuanians between 1863 and 1904 after a Lithuanian
nationalist uprising was crushed (Puodžiūnas and Girininkas 1996).
In Spain, where archaeological research had previously displayed
strong regional tendencies, during the dictatorship of Francisco
Franco (1939–1975) the study of prehistory from such multiple per-
spectives was suppressed. Archaeologists were to some extent encour-
aged to identify the origin of the Spanish people with the prehistoric
arrival of the Celts, which was construed as the triumph of Euro-
peans over earlier African elements of the population. Nevertheless,
the Franco government’s recognition of the period that followed
the discovery of America in ad 1492 as Spain’s Golden Age resulted
in chronic underfunding of prehistoric archaeology (Dı́az-Andreu
1993, 1997; Ruiz Zapatero 1996; Ruiz et al. 2002). Culture-historical

                                 250
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

archaeology also was controlled for political purposes in Italy, where
the fascist regime of Benito Mussolini (1922–1943) promoted classi-
cal archaeology as a means of identifying itself as the modern reincar-
nation of the ancient Roman state. Despite lavish financing, much
of the archaeological research that was carried out during the fascist
period aimed to publicize the grandeur of ancient Rome rather than
to understand ancient Rome better (Guidi 1996).
   In 1935, when the Soviet Union was threatened by Nazi expansion,
the Communist party ordered archaeologists to combat German
claims of racial and cultural superiority and strengthen Russian patri-
otism by bolstering the image of the Slavic peoples in prehistoric
times. This involved demonstrating that Slavic culture had evolved
independently of German influence, that it was older and more devel-
oped than German culture, and that no Germans had ever lived on
modern Slavic territory in prehistoric times. This endeavor expressed
itself in a growing concern with “ethnogenesis,” which involved
searching for ways to trace the origins of specific national groups
in the archaeological record. Previously, Soviet archaeologists had
ridiculed the debates between Polish and German archaeologists as
to whether the late Neolithic and early Bronze Age Lusatian culture
was Slavic or German, observing that those two linguistic groups
had probably not yet differentiated at that time (M. Miller 1956: 83–
4). In the late 1930s, Russian archaeologists sought to demonstrate
that from ancient times their ancestors, the East Slavs, had occu-
pied the European territory of the Soviet Union, as well as to refute
German claims that throughout history the Slavs had been culturally
backward peoples. Both before and after World War II research was
carried out to trace the origins of the Russian people and the devel-
opment of their ancient culture and handicrafts (M. Miller 1956:
135–44).
   The post-World War II study of medieval Russian towns, espe-
cially the excavations at Novgorod, set new standards for urban
archaeology for that period (Figure 6.5). The recovery at Novgorod
of numerous letters written on birch bark revealed an unexpected
degree of literacy that was not restricted, as many scholars had pre-
viously believed, to the clergy. These studies demonstrated that the
development of towns in ancient Russia started at the same time
as, and proceeded simultaneously with, the development of towns in
central and western Europe. They also showed that the Russians were

                                 251
                A History of Archaeological Thought




         Figure 6.5 Excavations at Novgorod after World War II
                 (Institute of Archaeology, St. Peterburg)


abreast of other European groups in the development of crafts, trade,
and culture (M. Thompson 1967). The long-held view that Russian
towns had begun as Scandinavian colonies was vehemently rejected.
Yet in studies of ethnogenesis the concept of autochthonous devel-
opment was frequently ignored and cautious use was made of diffu-
sion and migration to explain changes in the archaeological record.
Leo Klejn (1974) has observed that Russian archaeologists adopted a
German culture-historical approach but used it, as Polish archaeolo-
gists had done, to counter German myths concerning their own racial
and cultural superiority. As with much Soviet archaeology, the gen-
eral nature of the results was ordained by the government before the
research was carried out. After 1945, when Eastern Europe was rec-
ognized as a Soviet sphere of influence, an International Congress of
Slavic Archaeology was founded to encourage closer relations among

                                 252
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

Slavic nations. In the Soviet Union, the allocation of substantial
resources for researching Slavic ethnogenesis did not result in the
significant curtailment of research on other problems.
   European archaeologists were not always successful in using the
potential national relevance of their research to secure govern-
ment funding. In Portugal, foreign and local archaeologists had by
the 1930s produced what they believed was evidence of continuity
between the local Copper Age and the modern nation and also estab-
lished that still earlier Portugal had been a major center of the devel-
opment of megalithic culture. Yet the right-wing regime of António
Salazar, which controlled Portugal from 1932 to 1974, chose, like
the Franco regime in Spain, to ground Portuguese nationalism on
historical accounts of the medieval period and the Age of Explo-
ration. The lack of support for archaeological research resulted in
Portuguese archaeology falling behind that of all other countries in
Europe (Oliveira and Jorge 1995; Lillios 1995; Fabião 1996).
   In Ireland, a strong identification with the past developed in the
mid-nineteenth century as part of the Celtic revival (Sheehy 1980).
Perhaps because of the Irish perception of their struggle for inde-
pendence from Britain as being as much a religious conflict as it
was an ethnic one, their interest in the past did not stimulate a
major involvement with prehistoric archaeology, despite the pres-
ence of Newgrange and other extraordinary prehistoric monuments
in Ireland. Instead, Ireland’s Golden Age was identified with the his-
torically documented early Christian period that followed the con-
version to Christianity of a supposedly ethnically pure Celtic society.
The Keeper of Irish Antiquities of the National Museum of Ireland
from 1927 to 1939 was the Austrian archaeologist and Nazi sympa-
thizer Adolph Mahr and the first large-scale scientific excavations in
Ireland were carried out by the Harvard Archaeological Expedition
beginning in 1932.
   The scientific prestige and predominance of evolutionary archae-
ology in nineteenth-century England and France impeded the devel-
opment of culture-historical archaeology in those countries. It also
tended to identify prehistoric peoples as generic savages rather than
heroic national ancestors, although for romantics these two cat-
egories were not mutually exclusive. Nor was there much doubt
among intellectuals in these countries that for much of human his-
tory cultural development in the Middle East had been in advance of

                                  253
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

that in western Europe. Although these factors limited the political
scope of ethnic archaeology, they did not prevent archaeology from
serving the cause of nationalism in other ways. By appropriating the
archaeological heritage of foreign lands – especially ones that had
produced great civilizations in ancient times – it was possible for
European nations to affirm their leading role in the modern world.
In 1794 the victorious Napoleon Bonaparte systematically carried off
many major classical art works from Italian museums to Paris, on the
grounds that the cultural supremacy of the French allowed them to
be better appreciated there than in Italy. In 1816, the British Museum
purchased from Lord Thomas Elgin the marble sculptures that he had
removed from the Acropolis in Athens in 1801–1802 and competition
between French and English agents to acquire ancient works of art
from Egypt and northern Mesopotamia continued throughout the
first half of the nineteenth century (R. Chamberlin 1983; M. Larsen
1996; Ridley 1998; Mayes 2003). Only powerful and wealthy nations
could afford to carry out such activities on a truly impressive scale.
Chief among these were Britain, France, Germany, the United States,
and to a lesser extent Italy. Another expression of national preemi-
nence was the ability to carry out archaeological research not only in
one’s own country but around the world. In such endeavors, the same
five nations excelled. Although such activities did not contribute
to an understanding of national prehistory, they were a source of
national distinction and pride (Jenkins 1992). In that sense, although
it collected artifacts from all parts of the world, the British Museum
was, despite recent claims to the contrary (Champion 1996: 130–2),
truly a national museum (Dı́az-Andreu 2004).
   It was not until after World War I that a culture-historical approach
replaced an evolutionary one in Britain and France. Childe was the
leading archaeologist, but not the only one, who brought this about
in Britain. In France, Joseph Dechélette (1862–1914) had already
worked out a detailed pottery chronology for the Gallo-Roman
period and published a manual of prehistoric, protohistoric, and early
historical archaeology. Yet his primary focus was artifact types not cul-
tures and his career was cut short when he was killed in action early in
World War I (Binétruy 1994). Beginning in the 1920s, Henri Breuil
(1877–1961), a Roman Catholic priest and the first Professor of Pre-
history at the Collège de France, applied a culture-historical approach
to the evolutionary stronghold of French Palaeolithic archaeology.

                                  254
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

His interpretation of the European Palaeolithic was based on the
belief of the physical anthropologist Marcellin Boule (1861–1942)
that modern-type human beings had existed in Europe alongside the
Neanderthals and their ancestors and on Hugo Obermaier’s (1877–
1946) division of the Lower Palaeolithic into contemporary flake and
core traditions. All three men were opposed to Gabriel de Mortillet’s
unilinear evolutionism and his anticlericalism. Breuil argued that
archaeological evidence indicated that two hominid groups had
coexisted in France from earliest times. One group, making bifa-
cial tools, had produced the Abbevillian, Acheulean, and Micoquian
cultures, whereas the other, producing flake tools, accounted for the
Clactonian, Languedocian, Levalloisian, Tayacian, and Mousterian
sequence. Breuil argued that the Aurignacian culture had been intro-
duced to France by Homo sapiens coming from the east and that in
France some bearers of this culture had mingled with the Mousterian
Neanderthals. He also maintained that the Solutrean culture origi-
nated in central Europe and the Magdalenian came from the north-
east (C. Cohen 1999). After World War II, François Bordes (1919–
1981) defined sixty-three tool types that were recurring features of
Middle Palaeolithic assemblages and used these to identify several
archaeological cultures that he associated with a number of distinct
Neanderthal tribes that he believed had lived in southern France.
The replacement of an evolutionary by a culture-historical approach
in Palaeolithic archaeology epitomized the success of this approach
in French archaeology (Binford 1983b: 79–94; Bisson 2000).
   In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, European
archaeologists became interested in the prehistory of Egypt and the
Middle East. In the 1870s and 1880s, Heinrich Schliemann (1822–
1890) excavated late prehistoric sites in Greece and Turkey in an effort
to confirm Homeric legends. At the same time, historical archaeol-
ogists generally extended their research back into prehistoric times
when they inadvertently encountered prehistoric material. System-
atic study of the prehistory of the Middle East increased after World
War I, when large areas of the former Ottoman Empire were placed
under French and British political control. In the 1920s and 1930s
work was carried out in the Middle East by archaeologists famil-
iar with European prehistory, such as Dorothy Garrod (1892–1968),
or who specialized in studying the prehistory of the Middle East,
such as Gertrude Caton Thompson. These archaeologists sought to

                                  255
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

define prehistoric cultures and trace their origins and the influence
they had exerted on each other. To do this, they had to rely far
more on stratigraphy and cross-dating cultural sequences than did
historical archaeologists working in the region. Gradually, a set of
local cultural sequences was produced extending temporally from
Palaeolithic times to the historical period and geographically from
Europe and North Africa eastward through the Middle East to India.
This research reinforced the idea of the Middle East as the cradle
of European civilization. It also established the maximum effective
range of interest for most European archaeologists before the inven-
tion of radiocarbon dating. Although European archaeologists also
carried out research in East Asia and the Americas, their inability to
correlate findings in these areas with cultural developments in Europe
and the Middle East precluded the development of world prehistory.
When Henri Berr launched his global history project L’évolution de
l’Humanité, its volumes dealing with prehistory were restricted to
covering Europe and the Middle East (Gran-Aymerich 1998: 268–98,
349–57, 408–16). In general, prehistoric archaeology in the Middle
East reflected and confirmed the Montelian view of the priority of
cultural development in this region and of its impact on Europe.
   In most European countries, the cruder and more obvious uses of
archaeology to promote ethnic and nationalist agendas disappeared
after 1945, as growing political and economic cooperation and grad-
ually improving standards of living resulted in less blatant political
manipulations of nationalist sentiments. One of the strongest contin-
uing engagements of archaeology in national projects was in Poland,
the borders of which had been radically altered after World War II
and were not universally accepted until the early 1970s. By the 1960s,
the culture-historical approach, as it had been defined by Childe in
1925, also was being abandoned as many archaeologists sought for
other explanations of cultural change to supplement or replace diffu-
sion and migration. Yet European archaeologists did not become less
interested in studying the history of Europe at the local, national, and
continental levels. In part, this continuing influence was assured by
the institutionalization of prehistoric archaeology as an independent
historical discipline or a branch of history in many universities. It also
reflected a strong, broadly held conviction among Europeans that
archaeology was first and foremost a study of their past. Under these
circumstances, it is not surprising that archaeological interpretation

                                   256
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

continued to be influenced in various ways by national political,
ethnic, and cultural concerns that were sometimes serious and some-
times fanciful in nature (Gjessing 1968; Rowlands 1984b).
   In Scandinavia, a commitment to peace and social welfare was
accompanied by a compensatory, whimsical fascination with the
Viking period, which was conceptualized as a violent, wanton, and
romantic time in contrast to the dull and peaceful present. In
the 1970s, 20 to 25 percent of all archaeological publications were
devoted to these 300 years (Moberg 1981: 215). As Britain’s role as a
world power declined, there was a resurgence of popular interest in
that country’s rich assemblage of megalithic circles and stone align-
ments, which were interpreted as evidence that highly skilled engi-
neers and “astronomer priests” had lived there in prehistoric times.
On these grounds, some archaeologists maintained that Britain had
been a center of scientific excellence since the Neolithic period
(Ellegård 1981; Fowler 1987). According to Gabriel Cooney (1995:
273), Irish archaeology remains essentially nationalistic in outlook.
Migration is still an important explanatory device, reflecting a con-
tinuing interest in ethnicity. On the other hand, suggestions of links
with Britain generally tend to be played down (Cooney 1995, 1996;
Woodman 1995; Crooke 2000). The evidence produced by the exca-
vations at Wood Quay of Dublin as a Viking center during the Dark
Ages, although exciting much local public interest, accorded less well
with a Celtocentric nationalist view of Irish history (Sheehy 1980;
T. Heffernan 1988).
   Other archaeological projects have played a major role in coun-
tering centrist narratives and the prejudices associated with them.
In England, the discovery that during the Dark Ages the Viking
settlement at York was a center of manufacturing and trade has con-
firmed to northerners that their region was culturally as advanced
as southern England, contrary to establishment history, which por-
trays Saxon Wessex as an outpost of civilization valiantly resisting
the incursions of barbarous Scandinavians who eventually settled
in the north (Graham Campbell and Kidd 1980). In Spain, following
the demise of the Franco regime, regional archaeologies reemerged in
various parts of the country, including for the first time in the south,
where archaeologists began seriously to study that region’s Islamic
period (Dı́az-Andreu 1996b). Yet archaeological findings were used
much less for polemical purposes than they had been in the past.

                                  257
                A History of Archaeological Thought

Across Europe, nations seemed more interested in achieving and
affirming modernity than in recalling past hostilities and injustices.
   Culture-historical archaeology survived more completely than any-
where else in West Germany and in neighboring German-speaking
Austria and Switzerland. Despite the devastation of World War II
and the denazification program that followed, a large number of
professional archaeologists who had been working before and dur-
ing the war continued to do so after 1945. The experiences these
archaeologists had with adjusting to new political programs dur-
ing and immediately after the Nazi period led to a heightened mis-
trust of all theories and generalizations and an even greater emphasis
than in the past on empirical and inductive approaches. In 1987, the
distinguished prehistorian Ulrich Fischer declared that, with a few
minor exceptions, all the basic theoretical knowledge that prehis-
toric archaeologists required had been invented before the end of
the nineteenth century. All that was needed was to discover better
ways of applying such knowledge. Racial interpretations were aban-
doned immediately after the war and a growing emphasis was placed
on the technical excellence of excavation, typological analysis, the
production of artifact catalogues, and using seriation to create more
refined chronologies. These all were aspects of archaeology in which
German archaeologists had taken pride before World War II.
   Although the concept of the archaeological culture continued to
be regarded as a valuable classificatory device, Kossinna’s belief that
this entity necessarily coincided with a specific people or language
group was widely abandoned (Eggers 1950; Veit 1989). Ethnic inter-
pretations of archaeological cultures were replaced by ones refer-
ring to economic spheres, trading zones, political or social struc-
tures, and cult activities. A heavy emphasis was placed by Herbert
Jahnkuhn (1905–1990) (1977), B. Sielmann (1971), Georg Kossack,
and others on the study of prehistoric settlements in their ecological
and economic settings. This type of analysis was favored because the
examination of zoological and botanical finds, soils, and sources of
raw materials added the prestige of “value-free” scientific research to
such studies. It was generally accepted that the best way to interpret
archaeological data was by employing the direct historical approach,
although comparisons of this sort often were made in an impres-
sionistic and uncontrolled fashion (Härke 1991, 1995; Kossack 1992;
Arnold and Hassmann 1995; Wiwjorra 1996; Wolfram 2000).

                                 258
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

   Despite the emphasis on empiricism, some highly innovative theo-
retical work was accomplished. In 1950, Hans-Jürgen Eggers (1906–
1975) published a study of how knowledge concerning the depo-
sition, survival, and recovery of archaeological material influenced
an understanding of the past that anticipated modern taphonomic
studies in Britain and the United States by several decades. In keep-
ing with the historical orientation of German archaeology, Eggers
thought of these procedures as the archaeological equivalents of his-
torical source criticism. In 1964, Günter Smolla analyzed the role
of uniformitarian assumptions for evaluating analogies in a way that
anticipated some aspects of middle-range theory. He received sup-
port from Karl Narr, one of Germany’s few senior archaeologists who
had an understanding of anthropology. Although Eggers’s practical
suggestions were incorporated into German archaeological practice,
neither his publications nor Smolla’s gave rise to significant archaeo-
logical discussion (Wolfram 2000: 189–92). While efforts have been
made since the late 1980s, mainly by younger archaeologists, to
encourage theoretical debates, German archaeology appears to have
persisted as a culture-historical approach from which the concept of
ethnicity has been largely eliminated. There has been little serious
examination of the reasons for cultural change. In a world in which
archaeological interpretations have been changing rapidly, German
archaeology remains characterized by craft, continuity, consensus,
and an abiding faith in the efficacy of accumulating data (Härke 1995:
47–51). The empirical approach has been strongly championed by the
students and followers of Otto von Merhart (1866–1959), who begin-
ning in 1928 held the first German chair in prehistoric archaeology,
which was established at Marburg University.
   Although nationalism continues to influence European archae-
ology to varying degrees in different countries, the concern with
Europe as a whole and with the status of Western Civilization in
world perspective that was evident in the work of Montelius and
Childe still seems to be as strong as it was in the past, or even more
so. Colin Renfrew (1973a), by using calibrated radiocarbon dates to
argue that metallurgy may have developed independently in Europe
as early as it did in the Middle East and to demonstrate that megalithic
structures were being erected in Malta and western Europe before any
known monumental constructions in the Middle East, except perhaps
at Jericho, played a major role in challenging the Montelius–Childe

                                  259
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

diffusionary model of European prehistory and emphasizing the tech-
nological superiority of Europe in prehistoric times. His more recent
proposal to link the arrival of the Indo-Europeans in Europe with
that of agriculture also assigns most modern European peoples a
longer in situ history there than was previously envisaged (Renfrew
1988). The neoconservatism of the 1980s was accompanied by a resur-
gent emphasis on economic dynamism, equality before the law, and
the sharing of political power within a society as special features of
Western Civilization (Wells 1984; Lamberg-Karlovsky 1985; Willey
1985). Ian Hodder in The Domestication of Europe (1990) has
attempted to use archaeological evidence to trace assumed distinc-
tive patterns of European thought back to the Neolithic or even
the Upper Palaeolithic period. With the growing importance of the
European Union, efforts were made to adopt the widespread Celtic
culture of the Iron Age as a symbol for European unity. This endeavor
has been criticized by various archaeologists (Collis 1996; Dı́az-
Andreu 1996a: 56–7; Fitzpatrick, A. P 1996) and does not appear
to have generated much public enthusiasm.
   A concern with heritage management began in Europe in the late
nineteenth century, but for a long time it was mainly concerned
with preserving a small number of buildings and archaeological sites
deemed to be of special importance. It thus reflected, often in an
extreme manner, the historical values of specific times and places.
In the late twentieth century, governments increasingly competed
in ensuring the conservation and rational management of cultural
resources. Where this management process has resulted in archaeo-
logical surveys and investigations being extended to cover all peri-
ods of a nation’s history and all parts of its territory, it has helped
to counter the biases introduced into archaeology by political par-
tisanship. In France, this approach is said to have resulted in the
development of a “national,” rather than a “nationalist,” archaeology
(Fleury-Ilett 1996). Such an approach also has increased the ability of
regional and local concerns to influence archaeological research and
in some cases has produced “community archaeology,” which seeks
to involve local groups in the planning and carrying out of research
projects that are of direct interest to them (S. Moser 1995b; Marshall
2002). Similar engagements of dispersed ethnic minorities, occupa-
tional groups, social classes, and alternative life styles further increase
the multivocality of inputs into archaeological research. The ongoing

                                   260
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

acrimonious debates concerning the use, management, and interpre-
tation of Stonehenge indicate how difficult it can be to accommodate
conflicting demands (Bender 1998). Although contributions of this
sort help to counteract narrow, elite biases and to generate valu-
able research problems, Kristian Kristiansen (1996: 143) has appro-
priately stressed the need for archaeologists to be critical of all efforts
to manipulate archaeological findings for political and ideological
purposes. Doing this requires archaeologists to exercise their profes-
sional judgment about what is archaeologically possible and to strive
as much as possible to be objective in their designing and execution
of research projects.


                   Other National Archaeologies
The European culture-historical approach, with its emphasis on
studying the prehistory of specific peoples, provided a model for
national archaeologies around the world. It remains the dominant
approach to archaeology in many countries. Like nationalist history,
to which it is usually closely linked, the culture-historical approach
can be used to bolster the pride and morale of nations or ethnic
groups. It is most often used for this purpose among peoples who feel
thwarted, threatened, or deprived of their collective rights by more
powerful nations or in countries where appeals for national unity are
being made to counteract serious internal divisions. It is also used to
strengthen insecure political regimes, and to justify aggression against
neighboring peoples and the oppression of ethnic minorities. As in
Europe, the culture-historical approach often promotes its agenda
by stressing specific periods of history and assigning particular eth-
nic identities to archaeological finds. It celebrates the achievements
of indigenous early civilizations and usually pays more attention to
the recent past than it does to the Palaeolithic period. History and
late prehistory tend to be treated as a continuum. This section will
examine a few examples of the culture-historical approach from Asia,
Africa, and Latin America.
   Western-style field archaeology was introduced into Japan by
American and European natural scientists and physicians who were
hired to teach there after the Meiji revolution of 1868, when the
new government determined to catch up with advances in West-
ern science, technology, and medicine. The most important of these

                                   261
                A History of Archaeological Thought

visiting scholars was the American zoologist Edward Morse (1838–
1925), who had participated in shell-mound research in the eastern
United States. He identified and excavated a shell mound at Omori in
1877 and recorded a great interest in archaeology among the Japanese
he encountered (Morse 1879). Those who became Japan’s leading
archaeologists in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
were often educated in other disciplines and many of them had stud-
ied in Europe. Hence, their backgrounds were similar to those of
self-trained or informally trained professional archaeologists in the
West during the nineteenth century.
   Although Morse was an evolutionist, the Japanese archaeologists
who followed him had more in common with the European culture-
historical archaeologists of the late nineteenth century. The first gen-
eration of Japanese professional archaeologists was led by Tsuboi
Shogoro (1863–1913). In 1884, he and several other science stu-
dents established the Anthropological Society of Tokyo and nine
years later he was appointed Professor of Anthropology at the Uni-
versity of Tokyo. Tsuboi conceived of anthropology, in the conti-
nental European fashion, as a branch of zoology interested in human
physical remains and regarded archaeological evidence as providing
clues for identifying racial groups. He specialized in the study of the
Mesolithic Jomon culture, which he attributed to a pre-Ainu popu-
lation. Already by 1919 Matsumoto Hikoshichiro had demonstrated
stratigraphically that some variations in Jomon ceramics were the
result of chronological rather than tribal differences.
   In 1895, historians working at the Imperial Museum (today the
Tokyo National Museum) founded the Archaeological Society. It
had closer links with pre-Meiji antiquarian scholarship than did the
Anthropological Society of Tokyo. Its aims were to study the “archae-
ology of our country, with the view to throwing light on customs,
institutions, culture and technologies in the successive periods of
our national history” (Ikawa-Smith 1982: 301). These scholars con-
centrated on the late prehistoric Yayoi and the protohistoric Kofun
periods and had a special interest in fine art, as exemplified by bronze
mirrors and elite weapons. The main tradition of Japanese archaeol-
ogy was established by Hamada Kosaku (1881–1938), an art histo-
rian by background who was appointed Professor of Archaeology at
Kyoto University after he returned from Europe in 1916, where he
had studied archaeology with W. M. F. Petrie. Hamada encouraged

                                  262
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

the development in Japan of systematic excavation techniques, which
he combined with a rigorous typological approach within the gen-
eral framework of culture-historical archaeology. His reports on sites
he excavated in Japan, Korea, and China provided models for many
Japanese researchers. His ablest student and successor at Kyoto Uni-
versity, Umehara Suezi (1893–1983), excavated more than 200 sites.
Umehara’s primary interest was the detailed study of artifacts, includ-
ing Chinese and early Japanese metal objects.
   Before World War II, Japanese archaeologists of all schools contin-
ued to pursue a culture-historically oriented archaeology, which did
not preclude an interest in understanding “the outline of human
development and regularities of social transformations” (Ikawa-
Smith 1982: 302). Political pressures, particularly those associated
with efforts to promote national unity by stressing the veneration of
the emperor as the direct descendant of the gods and the divinely
appointed head of the Japanese national family, impeded archaeolog-
ical development at certain periods. Government regulations issued
in 1874 and 1880 made it difficult to excavate large burial mounds
that were identified as tombs of the royal family. Some excavations
of tombs of this sort were carried out in the politically relaxed atmo-
sphere of the 1920s. At that time, historians also published Marxist
interpretations of Japanese history in which archaeological data were
used. From the nineteenth century onward, however, most archae-
ologists were careful not to contradict officially sponsored accounts
of ancient Japanese history based on the Kojiki, Nihon Shoki, and
other chronicles recorded in the eighth century ad. The Jomon cul-
ture, which was dated before 1500 bc and therefore antedated the
events described in these accounts, was ascribed to the Ainu by the
anatomist Koganei Yoshikiyo (1859–1944) and to a pre-Ainu people
by Morse and Tsuboi, but was not associated with a people regarded
as ancestral to the modern Japanese. Either interpretation justified
the late-nineteenth-century colonization of the island of Hokkaido,
where the Ainu lived, by representing it as the continuation of a
historical expansion of the Japanese people northward through the
Japanese archipelago (Fawcett 1986). In the ultranationalist atmo-
sphere of the 1930s, it became extremely dangerous to engage in any
research that even inadvertently might cast doubt on Shinto myths
concerning the divine origin of the royal family. Those involved in
such activities risked removal from their posts and imprisonment.

                                 263
                A History of Archaeological Thought

As a result of these pressures physical anthropologists and linguists
avoided discussions of ethnicity, while archaeologists concentrated
on elaborating artifact typologies and did not engage in discussions
of cultural change that could have any bearing on the official version
of history.
   After 1945, archaeologists helped to provide a view of the devel-
opment of the Japanese people that filled the ideological vacuum
left following military defeat in World War II. Immediately after the
war, Wajima Seiichi (1909–1971) used Marxist theories and informa-
tion about pre- and protohistoric settlement systems to infer social
transformations that had produced the early Japanese state and class
system. Kobayashi Yukio (1911–1988) studied similar developments
from a technological perspective. As Japan was steered politically
away from left-wing radicalism and toward a more centrist position,
the culture-historical approach that was entrenched before the war
prevailed. Japanese archaeology provided tangible contact with the
past and helped to reinforce a sense of stability through successive
phases of postwar economic and cultural change and uncertainty. It
was looked to as an important source of information about what was
distinctively and inalienably Japanese.
   In keeping with new ideas about the sovereignty of the people,
popular accounts of archaeological discoveries were characterized by
a fascination with the origin of the Japanese people and their culture.
There has been a growing tendency to trace the Japanese as an eth-
nic group as far back as the Jomon or even the Palaeolithic period
(Fawcett 1986). The following Yayoi period is celebrated as a prehis-
toric analogue of modern times that was characterized by the selec-
tive adoption of items of culture from abroad and their integration
into Japanese life. The leading role assigned to the upper classes as
mediators in this process resembles interpretations of British history
offered by nationalist historians and prehistorians in England in the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries (Mizoguchi 2002). By
tracing current features of Japanese life deeply into the past, change
and foreign ideas are made to appear less threatening to the nation’s
core values.
   Archaeological activities have expanded enormously in Japan since
the 1940s. Japanese archaeologists are proud of the technical excel-
lence of their work and most of them seek to understand their find-
ings from the perspective of Japan’s national history. Public interest

                                 264
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

in archaeology is high, surveys and rescue work are mandatory,
and archaeological finds are exhibited to the public in many places
(Tanaka 1984). The high quality of excavation and artifact analysis
has produced detailed intrasite chronologies that permit questions
about changes in social organization to be addressed in ways that are
equalled in few other countries (Mizoguchi 2002).
   The political problems and revolutionary changes that overtook
China beginning in the nineteenth century produced a renewed
interest in historiography and the development of a more critical
attitude toward ancient texts as sources of information about the
past. In particular, it was suggested that accounts of the two ear-
liest royal dynasties were largely mythical creations of later times
(G. Wang 1985: 184–8). The study of art objects and calligraphy was
a long-established part of the Chinese tradition of historiography.
Field archaeology developed, however, for the first time within the
context of the reformist May 4th Movement, which, beginning in
1919, sought to replace literary scholarship with scientific knowledge
from the West. There was a receptive audience for geology, palaeon-
tology, and other sciences capable of collecting empirical data from
the earth.
   The first major archaeological fieldwork was carried out by West-
ern scientists attached to the Geological Survey of China, which had
been established in Peking (Beijing) in 1916. The Swedish geologist
J. G. Andersson (1874–1960) (1934: 163–87) identified the Neolithic
Yangshao culture in 1921 and major work at the lower levels of the
Palaeolithic site of Zhoukoudian began under the direction of the
Canadian anatomist Davidson Black (1884–1934) in 1926 (Hood
1964). The first indigenous Chinese scholar to direct the excava-
tion of a major archaeological site was Li Ji (Li Chi) (1895–1979),
who had earned a doctorate in anthropology at Harvard Univer-
sity in 1923. From 1928 to 1937, as first head of the Department
of Archaeology in the National Research Institute of History and
Philology of Academia Sinica, he dug at the late Shang site of Yinxu,
near Anyang. These excavations, carried out at a site that yielded
many inscriptions and works of art, played a major role in training a
generation of Chinese archaeologists and also in turning the new sci-
ence of archaeology into an instrument for studying Chinese history.
Ironically, the written materials excavated at Anyang confirmed tradi-
tional historical sources concerning the late Shang Dynasty, contrary

                                 265
                A History of Archaeological Thought

to the expectations of the science-oriented Doubters of Antiquity
(yigupai), who had grown out of the reformist May 4th Movement
and had promoted Western-style archaeology. The work done at
Anyang fueled a resurgence of pride in China’s ancient past.
   Foreign scholars, such as Andersson, sought to trace the origins
of Chinese culture, or at least of major aspects of it, such as the
Neolithic painted pottery, back to the Middle East, thereby implying
that Chinese civilization was derived from the West. Chinese archae-
ologists sought the origin of Chinese civilization in the Neolithic
Longshan culture, where what was assumed to be Western influence
seemed less evident. Later they argued that Yangshao and Longshan
represented an indigenous continuum of development that culmi-
nated in Shang civilization (W. Watson 1981: 65–6). Archaeological
research was curtailed by the Japanese invasion in 1937 and, follow-
ing the Communist victory in 1949, many archaeologists, including
Li, retreated to Taiwan taking valuable collections with them.
   Marxism had begun to influence the study of ancient China as
early as 1930 in the works of Guo Moruo (1892–1978). A writer and
revolutionary, Guo had been forced to flee to a still relatively liberal
Japan in 1927 to escape the death squads of Chiang Kai-Shek, the
current military dictator of China. During the ten years Guo lived in
Japan, he produced a series of studies on ancient inscriptions and the
stylistic evolution of bronze artifacts. Unlike Li and his associates,
who were primarily interested in art, religion, and ideology, Guo
stressed production as the basis of society and interpreted the Shang
and Zhou Dynasties as examples of a slave society. More than any
other Chinese scholar, Guo sought to place his country in a com-
parative framework of world history (G. Wang 1985: 188). After the
Communist revolution, he became a major figure in Chinese intel-
lectual life. From 1950 until his death in 1978, he was President of
the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
   Following the Communist victory of 1949, archaeology became a
state-directed activity. Except briefly, when the value of any study of
the past was challenged by extremists near the beginning of the Cul-
tural Revolution (1966–1977), archaeology has been supported as an
important instrument of political education. This was done in accor-
dance with Mao Zedong’s dictum that “the past should serve the
present.” A National Bureau of Cultural Relics administered thou-
sands of provincial and local museums either directly or through

                                  266
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

provincial and district Bureaus of Culture. Vast amounts of archae-
ological data were unearthed throughout China in the course of
unprecedented industrial and agricultural development (Chang 1981:
168). Within the research divisions of Academia Sinica, Palaeolithic
archaeology was separated from the study of the Neolithic and his-
torical periods and attached to the Institute of Vertebrate Palaeontol-
ogy and Palaeoanthropology. This arrangement may have reflected a
lack of close identification of the earliest periods of human develop-
ment with a specifically national history, although pride was officially
expressed about the great antiquity of China’s Palaeolithic record.
On a practical level, this division reflected the close working relations
among Palaeolithic archaeologists, geologists, and palaeontologists
in China.
   In keeping with nationally sanctioned Marxist tenets, the Chinese
past was conceptualized in terms of a unilinear sequence of stages:
primitive society, slave society, and feudal society. No questioning
of this model was tolerated. Yet very little archaeological research
was directed towards actually utilizing Marxist theories of social
evolution, which would have involved the detailed investigation of
social and political organization, subsistence systems, settlement pat-
terns, and trade. This may partly have resulted from the scarcity of
well-trained personnel, but unpredictable shifts in Chinese govern-
ment policy also may have discouraged archaeologists from address-
ing problems that politically were potentially dangerous. Instead,
archaeological finds were interpreted as required by the government
to promote a variety of specific political goals. They were used to
remind people of the cruelty and exploitation that had character-
ized life for the Chinese masses under successive royal dynasties. The
great tombs, temples, and other monuments of the past also were
interpreted as testimonials to the skills and energy of the workers
and artisans who had created them. Archaeological finds were used
to promote national dignity and pride and respect abroad by docu-
menting China’s accomplishments over the ages. Despite a Marxist
veneer, these functions encouraged the continuation of an archaeol-
ogy that remained culture-historical in practice and nationalistic in
its goals (Falkenhausen 1993).
   Chinese archaeology also played a significant role in promoting
national unity, as historiography in general had done before 1949.
The interpretation of the archaeological record continued to accord

                                  267
                A History of Archaeological Thought

with long-standing northern-centered Chinese traditions. Chinese
material culture and institutions were interpreted as first having
evolved in the Yellow River Valley and spreading out from there to
produce the pan-Chinese culture of the Iron Age. The cultural cre-
ativity of other parts of China was thereby minimized, even though
under the Communists China was officially recognized to be a multi-
ethnic nation and the past chauvinism of its Han majority was offi-
cially repudiated.
   During the 1980s, as a result of the decentralization brought
about by the government of Deng Xiaoping, decision-making pow-
ers increasingly became the responsibility of provincial archaeolog-
ical institutions. Archaeologists began to develop culture-historical
sequences for individual provinces and to identify these sequences
with ancient nations and ethnic groups that had been incorporated
into the Chinese state, usually in the first millennium bc. By drawing
attention to the special roles individual provinces had played within
China, archaeologists were accommodating to new sources of finan-
cial support. At the national level, beginning in the early 1980s, Su
Bingqi (1909–1997) evolved a model in which, in accordance with
Marxist “laws of social evolution,” distinctive cultures were seen as
having developed alongside one another in the different regions of
China. This model accounted far better than did the older north-
ern core-periphery one for the growing evidence of regional cultural
diversity and increasing social and cultural complexity throughout
China in prehistoric and early historical times. Su’s multiregional
model of cultural origins also validated the current regionalist ten-
dences of Chinese archaeology within a broader national context
(Falkenhausen 1995, 1999). These early regional divisions had been
noted earlier by Western archaeologists (Meacham 1977) and by
Chinese archaeologists working abroad (Chang 1986: 234–94) but
their interpretations had been publicly rejected by archaeologists in
China (W. Watson 1981: 68–9). National unity remains a crucial issue
in China. Su’s formulation struck an even balance between Marxist
and culture-historical interpretative trends and between central and
provincial interests in contemporary China.
   Archaeological research in India began in a colonial setting and
for a long time remained remote from traditional Indian scholarship.
European travelers noted ancient monuments as early as the sixteenth
century and systematic scholarly interest in these monuments began

                                 268
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

about 1750. This interest was further stimulated beginning in 1786
by the realization that the modern languages of northern India were
related to the Indo-European ones of Europe (G. Cannon 1990).
In the nineteenth century, amateur British archaeologists began to
examine and report on megaliths, Buddhist stupas, and other mon-
umental sites with some regularity. Often, they treated these monu-
ments as evidence of a Golden Age in India’s remote past and implied
that these finds indicated that the duty of British colonial rulers
was to rescue India from the decline that had followed (Harding
2003). The Archaeological Survey of India, first established in 1861,
published an immense amount of research under directors such as
Alexander Cunningham (in charge from 1861 to 1865) (U. Singh
2004), John Marshall (1902–1929), who discovered the Indus Val-
ley civilization, and Mortimer Wheeler (1944–1948). Wheeler trained
many Indian students in modern field methods and encouraged sev-
eral Indian universities to begin offering instruction in archaeology.
Lallanji Gopal (1985: i) has observed that the “glorious cultural her-
itage, which was unearthed by archaeologists . . . aroused the self-
confidence of the Indian people [and] was one of the major factors
contributing to the Indian renaissance, which ultimately ushered in
independence.”
   In general, the British justification of colonialism was based on
historical and linguistic data rather than archaeology. Colonial his-
torians argued that cultural progress had been brought about by the
migration into India of successive waves of racially superior northern
peoples who introduced important innovations but then interbred
with the general population. The primary message was that India
was unable to change without external influences. In this scheme, the
British presented themselves as the latest and most advanced standard
bearers of progress in India, while acknowledging a distant ethnic
affinity to the allegedly racially purer Indo-European elements in the
population of northern India. In this way, the Indian caste system was
racialized and the higher castes portrayed as a separate ethnic group.
Dilip Chakrabarti (2001: 1192) notes that British-educated colonial
collaborators and freedom fighters alike were pleased to believe that
they stood racially aloof from the non-Aryan autochthonous peoples
at the lower end of the caste hierarchy. This use of “Aryanism” to
coopt the Indian elite into a high status position in the racial and class
hierarchy of colonial India may explain why most Indian historians

                                   269
                A History of Archaeological Thought

did not seriously challenge a migrationary view of their country’s
past (Chakrabarti 1997). Because direct historical sources for early
Indian history are few, historians had to rely on ancient religious and
literary texts and on archaeological evidence and tended to interpret
both in conformity with the migrationary model. It is largely within
the framework of this model that India’s archaeological heritage was
understood by those who brought India to independence in 1947.
   In the years following independence, archaeological activities con-
tinued to receive moderate levels of government financial support and
there was little interference by governments or public opinion with
what archaeologists did. Indian archaeology became well established
in universities and much research was carried out (Thapar 1984).
Many archaeologists kept abreast of world trends in archaeology and
adopted the most recent scientific methods for analyzing their finds.
More so than in China and Japan, researchers were aware of new the-
oretical trends, such as processual archaeology, and some participated
in international discussions relating to these developments (Jacobson
1979; Paddayya 1980, 1982, 1983, 1986; Lal 1984). Yet archaeology
remained closely attached to the study of ancient history and most
archaeologists remained content to work out cultural sequences and
attach ethnic and linguistic labels to cultures rather than trying to
explain cultural processes. As late as the 1980s, it appeared to out-
siders that Indian archaeologists continued to adhere to what they
had learned during the late colonial period.
   With the growing influence of Hindu nationalism in Indian pol-
itics, marked changes have occurred in archaeology. Archaeologists
who support Hindu nationalism have challenged traditional expla-
nations that derive changes from outside India. There now is a ten-
dency to search for innovations inside India, including ones that
relate to the domestication of plants and animals, iron-working,
and the development of Indian scripts. Some Indian archaeolo-
gists assign the “Aryans” a local origin along the now dried-up
Sarasvati River in northwestern India. In southern India, Dravidian-
speaking archaeologists analogously emphasize the primordial status
of Dravidians as India’s first people. Reacting against such tenden-
cies, Dilip Chakrabarti (2003) rejects ethnicity as a legitimate focus
of archaeological enquiry and stresses the importance of an approach
that traces the gradual development of Indian culture in relation


                                 270
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

to India’s landscape as a way of uniting India’s ethnically diverse
peoples. Although the Hindu and Dravidian nationalist approaches
remain resolutely culture-historical, Chakrabarti’s might better be
described as processual-historical. The internalist viewpoint that is
shared by his approach and the nationalist ones has the great advan-
tage of encouraging archaeologists to examine India’s prehistory and
early history on their own terms rather than treating them as reflec-
tions of what was happening elsewhere.
   Most Arab and other Moslem countries in the Middle East
have extensive bureaucratic organizations to protect and adminis-
ter cultural heritage. The duty of these organizations is to guard
and develop archaeological sites, control museums, regulate foreign
archaeologists working in the country, and perform rescue excava-
tions. Yet in these countries there is relatively little public interest
in the archaeological remains of pre-Islamic times. Archaeology, as
we have seen, was introduced by Europeans who developed and
long monopolized research under de facto, if not official, colonial
regimes. In the early part of the twentieth century, the Egyptian
middle class developed considerable interest in ancient Egyptian civ-
ilization within the context of a secular and modernizing nation-
alism. Ancient Egypt provided symbols and a shared past around
which both Moslem and Christian Egyptians could rally to resist
continuing British domination of their country. During this period,
monuments displaying Pharaonic motifs were constructed to com-
memorate heroes of the struggle for national independence. Yet,
beginning as early as the late 1920s, Moslem intellectuals were claim-
ing that Egypt could not exist in isolation but had to take part in, or
lead, a broader pan-Arab or pan-Islamic world. To do this, the revival
of paganism implied by an interest in Egypt’s Pharaonic past had to
be swept away. They reminded Egyptians that in the Quran pharaohs
were portrayed as archetypal villains. Since the 1940s, the growing
influence of pan-Arabism and more recently of Islamic movements
has resulted in a political discourse that is increasingly hostile to the
glorification of ancient Egypt. The Pharaonic heritage has largely
been reduced to being a source of tourist revenue (J. Wilson 1964:
159–77; D. Reid 1997; Hassan 1998; Wood 1998).
   In Iraq, during the 1970s and 1980s, the secularist Baath Party
stressed the country’s distinctive Mesopotamian heritage as a focus


                                  271
                A History of Archaeological Thought

of national loyalty that might symbolically help to counter modern
Iraq’s powerful religious and ethnic divisions, especially as relations
with neighboring Arab and Moslem states became more troubled.
Iraq’s dictator, Saddam Hussein, liked to be portrayed as an ancient
Babylonian king. However, as his regime’s difficulties increased, this
interest in pre-Islamic times was played down in an effort to stress his
regime’s Islamic religious credentials (Bahrani 1998; Bernhardsson
2005).
   In Iran, Persian ethnicity long has played an important political
role. Before the Islamic Revolution of 1979, much of the archaeolog-
ical research in Iran was carried out by foreign expeditions. The work
done by Iranian archaeologists also tended to be focused on the more
recent Parthian, Sassanian, and Islamic periods. The last Shah of Iran,
Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, sought to emphasize the glories of pre-
Islamic Persian civilization and to identify his secularist and modern-
izing regime with the ancient Persian Achaemenian dynasty (539–330
bc) rather than with a more recent Islamic past. This included a mag-
nificent celebration in 1971 of the supposed 2,500th anniversary of
the founding of that monarchy held in the ruins of its greatest palace
at Persepolis. Archaeological fieldwork came to an almost total stand-
still in the decade following the Islamic Revolution and now seems
to be heavily focused on the Islamic period (Abdi 2001; S. Brown
2001). Although Iranian concerns with their national identity have
traditionally encouraged more interest in the study of pre-Islamic
periods than has been common in Arab countries, in recent decades
there has been an increasing emphasis on Islamic archaeology in most
Arab and Islamic countries (Masry 1981).
   In few areas of the world has the development of culture-historical
archaeology been more complex, or its history more studied, than
in Palestine and Israel. In the nineteenth century, European and
American archaeologists conducted surveys in an effort to locate
places mentioned in the Old and New Testaments. Beginning in the
late nineteenth century, excavations were carried out at important
sites that were thought to be associated with biblical accounts. Bibli-
cal archaeologists, such as the American William F. Albright (1891–
1971), were mainly believing Christians, who sought to confirm the
historical truth of biblical accounts. As a consequence, little research
was done on prehistoric sites, the most important work being that
carried out by Kathleen Kenyon (1906–1978) in the lower levels at

                                  272
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

Jericho in the 1950s. The primary motive for doing archaeology in
Palestine was religious (Dever 2001a).
   Israeli archaeology, as it developed in the 1950s and 1960s, served
the very different purpose of affirming links between an immigrant
population and the homeland that they believed God had given to
their ancestors (Benvinisti 2000). Israeli archaeology was not primar-
ily religious in orientation but was promoted by the Zionist move-
ment to heighten national consciousness and strengthen Israeli ties
to the land they were settling. By encouraging Israelis to view the
Bible as a source of national history, archaeologists also were pro-
moting a secular view of modern Israel. Although Israeli archaeol-
ogy was closely related to biblical archaeology in terms of many of
the problems both groups of archaeologists studied, and there was
close cooperation between biblical and Israeli archaeologists in the
early stages of the development of Israeli archaeology, archaeology in
Israel from the beginning was primarily a nationalist not a religious
enterprise.
   Like many other nationalists, Zionists viewed archaeology as a
source of potent symbols. After it was excavated with great publicity
by Yigail Yadin (1917–1984) between 1963 and 1965, Masada, the
site of the last Jewish resistance to the Romans in ad 72–73, became
a monument possessing great emotional and ceremonial value as a
symbol of the will to survive of the new Israeli state (Paine 1994).
This site and the heroic narrative associated with it also were used
to promote a more proactive sense of Jewish personal identity to
replace that of the diaspora (Ben-Yehuda 1995, 2002). The identifi-
cation of ancient Hebrew sites throughout Israel reinforced a sense
of unity between present and past at the local level that aided the
formation of a national identity. Archaeological projects, by altering
the landscape, in some instances erased evidence of Arab settlement
and materially enhanced a sense of continuity between ancient and
modern Jewish settlement (Abu El-Haj 2001: 167), a process also pro-
moted by the imposition of Hebrew place names (Benvenisti 2000).
Zionists interested in archaeology further encouraged an interest in
the past to ensure the protection of biblical sites at a time of rapid
Jewish settlement and economic expansion (Abu El-Haj 2000: 49).
   Like most national archaeologies, Israeli archaeology was selective.
It was primarily interested in studying the history of Jewish settlement
and culture in the region and relatively little attention was paid to

                                  273
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

the archaeology of the Christian and Islamic periods (Bar Yosef and
Mazar 1982; Dever 2001b). Most Israeli archaeologists were trained
in historical and biblical research and devoted much time to study-
ing history, philology, and art history. Palaeolithic archaeology was of
relatively little interest and the influence of anthropological archae-
ology was generally limited to encouraging the use of new technical
aids to analyse data (Hanbury-Tenison 1986: 108).
   In the 1970s, archaeology was becoming less important for Israeli
nation-building. Nevertheless, political and religious groups used the
archaeological discovery of numerous early Iron Age settlements on
the West Bank, following the annexation of the region in 1967, to
help promote Jewish settlement in the “heartland of ancient Israel”
(Hallote and Joffee 2002). Reacting to this partisan political exploita-
tion of archaeological data, some Israeli archaeologists sought to
upgrade the professional status of Israeli archaeology by advocat-
ing a more critical attitude toward historical data when they were
being used to interpret archaeological finds. This development also
was related to a broader trend among biblical scholars to question
the historicity of biblical narratives dealing with the period before the
eighth century bc (Finkelstein and Silberman 2001; Dever 2003: 137–
42). Efforts also were made to expand the temporal range of Israeli
archaeology to make it national in scope rather than simply ethnic or
nationalist, a development that some commentators associate with a
new, “post-Zionist” appropriation of all the history associated with
the national territory claimed by Israel. Processual archaeology also
encouraged a growing concern with economic and ecological inter-
pretations of the past. Today, Israeli archaeology is interpretationally
far less unified than it was in the 1960s and 1970s. It is challenged
from within by critical scholars and by the commitments of Israeli
archaeologists to various political agendas and research priorities.
It is also challenged by ultraorthodox Jewish religious groups who
oppose it on the grounds that excavation violates ancient Hebrew
burials (Paine 1983).
   William Dever, an American archaeologist, sought to replace
biblical archaeology with a local variant of processual archaeology
that he called “Syro-Palestinian” archaeology (2001a). His approach
involved ignoring texts and emphasizing ecology. Yet even he has
found it difficult to avoid questions of ethnicity (Dever 2003).
Recent decades have also witnessed the emergence of Palestinian

                                  274
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

archaeology. Specifically, Palestinian archaeology seeks to fill the gaps
caused by the failure of most Israeli and Christian archaeologists to
study the material remains of recent phases of Palestinian history
(Ziadeh 1995); but, more generally, it claims the right to study the
material remains of all the people who have ever lived in Palestine,
and hence are referred to as Palestinians, as a continuity extending
from earliest times to the present (E. Fox 2001); thus completely
overlapping with Israeli “national” archaeology.
   The decolonization of sub-Saharan Africa in the 1960s accelerated
the changes in the archaeology of that region that had begun in the
late colonial period. This was a time of great hope for the continued
development of archaeology at least within some of Africa’s most
prosperous nation states. Archaeologists of African descent were not
necessarily interested in the same problems as were foreign schol-
ars. Like nationalist archaeologists elsewhere, they were more con-
cerned with recent prehistory and issues related to national history
than with Palaeolithic archaeology. Topics of interest included the
origin of specific states, the development of regional trade, the evo-
lution of historically attested social and economic institutions, and
the history of relations among ethnic groups living within the bor-
ders of modern African states (Tardits 1981; Posnansky 1982: 355;
Andah 1985). Later Bassy Andah (1995), Nigeria’s leading archaeol-
ogist, maintained that African archaeologists had to study the past in
terms of local, culturally specific meanings, as daily life was guided by
such concepts. This required archaeologists to become familiar with
local ethnography and to use such information rather than West-
ern anthropological generalizations to explain archaeological data.
Thus, he advocated a cognitively oriented form of the direct historical
approach.
   There also was much interest in the study and preservation of major
sites that related to precolonial African history. Although archaeol-
ogy was seen as a means of increasing awareness of, and pride in,
Africa’s past, there also was political concern about how the presen-
tation of archaeological findings might help to enhance national unity
or promote regional and local self-awareness (Nzewunwa 1984).
While African archaeologists, who were often tied to administra-
tive positions, generally welcomed research by anthropologically
trained colleagues from abroad, anthropology as a discipline was not
well regarded. Across Africa, archaeology was becoming increasingly

                                  275
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

aligned with history in the 1960s, just as ethnological studies were
being redefined as sociology (Ki-Zerbo 1981). As a result of this
realignment, as well as a growing involvement with the study of
oral traditions and historical linguistics, it was believed that Africans
would be equipped to investigate periods of their history for which no
written records were available and that archaeology would become
African rather than colonial in its orientation (McCall 1964; Ehret
and Posnansky 1982). Yet these dreams have not been realized. As a
result of economic downturns, wars, political instability, lack of con-
cern by governments, and other misfortunes, African archaeology has
generally been unable to live up to the hopes of the 1960s. Where
it did not die out completely, archaeologists were either starved of
resources or compelled to collaborate with foreign institutions or
partners, often on the latter’s terms (McIntosh 2001: 28–34). Over
most of Africa, colonial archaeology seems to have been followed,
not by national, but by neocolonial archaeology.
   Throughout Latin America, individual archaeologists, such as
Julio C. Tello (1880–1947) and Rafael Larco Hoyle (1901–1966)
in Peru, have made distinguished contributions to understanding
pre-Columbian culture-history. Yet, lack of funds, political instabil-
ity, government interference, and the massive intervention of large
numbers of foreign archaeologists and archaeological projects have
impeded the development of coherent national traditions of doing
archaeology in many Latin American countries (Politis and Alberti
1999; Funari 2001; Politis 2003; Politis and Pérez Gollán 2004). The
most successful development of a national archaeology has been in
Mexico. It began with Leopoldo Batres’s massive restoration projects
at Teotihuacán that were carried out to celebrate the 1910 centenary
of Mexico’s independence from Spain.
   Porfirio Dı́az’s lengthy dictatorship was brought to an end by the
Mexican Revolution of 1910–1917, which was successful largely as a
result of armed support by peasants, who were mainly Indians and
constituted a majority of the population. The revolution resulted
in major changes in government policy towards these people. The
injustices of the colonial period were acknowledged and far-reaching
economic and social reforms promised. The government undertook
to integrate Indians into national life and increase their sense of self-
respect by encouraging the study of Mexico’s rich pre-Hispanic her-
itage and making its findings an integral part of Mexican history. In

                                  276
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

this way the government also hoped to assert Mexico’s cultural dis-
tinctiveness to its own citizens and the rest of the world (Gamio
1916). Large sums of money were allocated for archaeological
instruction and research. A Department of Anthropology was estab-
lished in 1937 at the National Polytechnical School, which had as
one of its duties to train archaeologists. It later became part of the
National Institute of Anthropology and History, which was granted
an absolute monopoly to license archaeological excavations through-
out Mexico.
   Since the revolution, Mexican archaeology has exhibited a strong
historicist orientation. Already in 1913, Manuel Gamio (1883–1960)
conducted a series of stratigraphic excavations at San Miguel Amantla
that provided the first prehistoric cultural sequence for the Valley of
Mexico. Since then, Mexican and foreign archaeologists have pro-
duced cultural chronologies for all the diverse regions of the coun-
try. Mexican archaeologists accepted that it was their duty to pro-
vide Mexicans with a past of their own that would promote national
unity by formulating a historical understanding that could be shared
by all sections of the population. This required the humanization
and popularization of prehistory. An important feature of this policy
was the creation of public museums and the development of major
archaeological sites or zones for the entertainment and instruction
of Mexicans and foreign visitors alike (Lorenzo 1981, 1984). Early
projects included Gamio’s excavations at the Ciudadela complex
at Teotihuacán and Alfonso Caso’s work at Monte Albán. Today,
over 100 major archaeological zones have been at least partially
restored and are open to the public. Archaeology continues to doc-
ument a continuity in Mexican history from earliest pre-Hispanic
times to the present. It also seeks symbolically to unite all the peo-
ple of Mexico and to affirm Mexico’s uniqueness by documenting
the country’s vast cultural achievements prior to the Spanish con-
quest. This approach reinforces the culture-historical orientation of
Mexican archaeology, even though Mexican archaeologists are famil-
iar with and make use of alternative approaches (I. Bernal 1983). Yet,
in recent decades, the continuing political uses of archaeology have
been accompanied by chronic underfunding of scientifically oriented
research. Many of the most important longterm research projects in
Mexico continue to be carried out by foreign expeditions. Archae-
ology done by Mexicans looks increasingly like tourist archaeology

                                 277
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

and a token way to honor indigenous peoples while ignoring the
current daily needs of large numbers of them (Vázquez León
2003).
   The national archaeologies we have examined all have much in
common with the culture-historical archaeology that developed in
Europe. All have as their primary objective to trace the histories
of specific nations or ethnic groups in the archaeological record.
They also tend to focus on those periods and cultures that are of
greatest interest to the people whose past they are studying. Only
a strong commitment to cultural resource management results in
equal attention being paid to all periods and all cultures. Even where
ideas derived from processual and postprocessual archaeology have
deflected attention from migration and diffusion as explanations of
cultural change, a nationalist orientation tends to preserve a historical
perspective.
   Culture-historical archaeologists also wish their findings to be pop-
ular. Although they validate their scientific credentials by employ-
ing internationally recognized archaeological methods, the histori-
cal narratives they construct tend to be highly intuitive and subject
to change as political conditions alter. Their interpretations also
diversify in situations in which political debate encourages alterna-
tive views of the past. Public interest in the findings of archaeolo-
gists fluctuates according to changing social, political, and economic
circumstances. There is also considerable variation in the extent to
which national and foreign archaeologists work together. In China
and Japan, most research is carried out by local archaeologists; Indian
and Mexican archaeologists work together with, or compete with,
foreign archaeologists; whereas in many smaller and poorer countries
foreign archaeologists tend to dominate archaeological practice.


     Culture-Historical Archaeology in the United States
In the United States, a culture-historical approach was adopted soon
after 1910 as a response to growing familiarity with the archaeologi-
cal record. Archaeology also was increasingly influenced by Boasian
cultural anthropology, which during the first half of the twentieth
century enjoyed great prestige as a result of many of the nation’s key
social problems relating to the assimilation of various ethnic groups
being defined in cultural terms. The spread of central European

                                  278
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

cultural theory to North America as a result of the activities of Boas
and his followers encouraged similar developments in archaeological
interpretation on both continents.
   Continuing archaeological research revealed temporal changes
that could not be explained by the simple replacement of one group
of people by another. As a result of the first confirmed Palaeo-Indian
finds, made in a late Pleistocene context at Folsom, New Mexico,
in 1927, it also became evident that indigenous people had lived
in North America for longer than most archaeologists had hith-
erto believed and that their cultures must have changed consider-
ably over time (Willey and Sabloff 1993: 141–3). Boasian anthro-
pology had already popularized the ethnographic culture as a basic
unit of study and diffusion as the major cause of cultural change.
In addition, Boas’s persuasive advocacy of cultural relativism and
his strong opposition to racism encouraged the view that Indians
were capable of change. Yet, although Boas had some interest in
archaeology, which he actively promoted in Mexico, there is no evi-
dence that he introduced the European concept of the archaeolog-
ical culture to the United States. On the contrary, the distinctive
way in which this concept developed in North America and the fact
that the term as applied archaeologically was used in North America
before it received any formal definition in Europe suggest an indepen-
dent origin. By contrast, the American concept of the ethnographic
culture had its roots in the teachings of Friedrich Ratzel, which
were expounded in America in an explicit, albeit modified, form by
Franz Boas.
   We have already noted that, during the nineteenth century,
American archaeologists became increasingly aware of geograph-
ically circumscribed cultural manifestations in the archaeological
record, especially in the central United States, where a concern
with the Moundbuilders had led to much archaeological activity.
In 1890, G. P. Thruston defined a prehistoric Stone Grave “race”
in Tennessee, which he believed was the remains of a single tribe
or a group of related tribes (pp. 5, 28). The term culture was first
applied to groups of sites containing distinctive artifact assemblages
in the Ohio Valley. By 1902, William C. Mills had distinguished the
Fort Ancient and Hopewell cultures. In 1909, W. K. Moorehead
identified the Glacial Kame culture and soon after H. C. Shetrone
(1920) was noting more such units in that area. These archaeological

                                 279
                A History of Archaeological Thought

“cultures” differed from European or later American ones inas-
much as they remained primarily cultural-geographical, not culture-
historical, entities; their temporal relations to one another not yet
being established. Not until 1936 was the Hopewell culture securely
dated as being earlier than the Fort Ancient one.
   In 1913, the American ethnologist Berthold Laufer (1913: 577)
diagnosed the most serious shortcoming of American archaeology
as being its lack of chronological control. This was a problem that
American archaeologists had already recognized and begun to rem-
edy. Stratigraphic excavations had been undertaken with increasing
frequency since the 1860s and for a long time important conclusions
had been flowing from such excavations, such as Richard Wetherill’s
demonstration that the Basketmaker culture had preceded the more
sedentary Pueblo one in the American Southwest (Kidder 1924:
161). Wetherill may have learned the value of observing stratigraphy
from the Swedish explorer and scientist Gustaf Nordenskiold when
Nordenskiold collected archaeological material in the southwestern
United States in 1891 (McNitt 1990: 38–43). On somewhat specu-
lative typological grounds, Adolf Bandelier in the 1880s and Edgar
Lee Hewett in 1904 had attempted to work out a rough chronol-
ogy of prehistoric Pueblo sites (Schwartz 1981). In many parts of the
United States, archaeological evidence was being collected which
showed that local cultures had varied markedly over time.
   The systematic study of North American culture history devel-
oped in the southwestern United States, beginning with the work
of Nels C. Nelson (1875–1964) and Alfred Kidder (1885–1963). In
1914, Nelson carried out important stratigraphic excavations at the
San Cristóbal Pueblo site in New Mexico (Nelson 1916). His ear-
lier excavations at the Ellis Landing shell midden near San Francisco
already seem to have been influenced by Max Uhle’s stratigraphic
work at nearby Emeryville. In 1913, Nelson toured Hugo Ober-
maier’s and Henri Breuil’s stratigraphic excavations at Palaeolithic
sites in Spain and dug at the Castillo Cave. His excavations in New
Mexico were done using arbitrary levels. Kidder had studied archaeo-
logical field methods at Harvard University with the celebrated Egyp-
tologist George Reisner, who was one of the most meticulous exca-
vators of the early twentieth century (Givens 1992a: 25; Wauchope
1965: 151). Beginning in 1915, Kidder excavated in the thick refuse
deposits at Pecos Pueblo, New Mexico, collecting artifacts from

                                280
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology




Figure 6.6 Kidder’s profile of refuse stratigraphy and construction levels at
       Pecos Ruin, New Mexico, from An Introduction to the Study
                    of Southwestern Archaeology, 1924


distinct depositional units (Figure 6.6). Both archaeologists discov-
ered that in these middens the frequencies of various pottery types
varied in an orderly fashion from top to bottom. They interpreted
these variations as evidence of gradual changes in preferred pottery
styles. Such alterations provided evidence of simultaneous cultural
continuity and cultural change (Browman and Givens 1996; Lyman
et al. 1997a: 34–55). These excavations and the innovative observa-
tions that Nelson and Kidder made while carrying them out laid the
basis for the development of culture-historical archaeology in the
United States. By 1917, Clark Wissler was describing the revolution
that the preoccupation with cultural chronology was bringing about
as a “new archaeology.”
   Kidder believed that studying the spatial distributions of combina-
tions of artifact types was as important as studying their chronological
transformations. In his An Introduction to the Study of Southwestern
Archaeology (1924), he attempted the first culture-historical synthesis
of the archaeology of any part of the United States. This study was
published one year before Childe’s The Dawn of European Civiliza-
tion. In it, Kidder discussed the archaeological material from nine
river drainages in terms of four successive periods, or stages, of cul-
tural development: Basket Maker, Post-Basket Maker, Pre-Pueblo,

                                    281
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

and Pueblo. He sometimes called each period a culture but also des-
ignated regional variants of each period that were associated with
individual river drainages as the Chihuahua Basin culture, Mimbres
culture, and Lower Gila culture. Kidder’s imprecise utilization of the
concept of “culture” closely paralleled the way it was being used in
Britain before 1925. Although the term culture had not yet acquired a
standard meaning in the Southwest, as a result of chronological stud-
ies supplementing an existing knowledge of geographical variation,
something approaching the concept of an archaeological culture was
beginning to evolve.
   Yet what interested other archaeologists most about Kidder’s work
was his chronology. At the first Pecos Conference, held in 1927, the
archaeologists who were working in the area adopted a general clas-
sificatory scheme made up of three Basketmaker periods followed by
five Pueblo ones. H. S. Gladwin (1883–1983) complained, however,
that among its other shortcomings the Pecos classification was better
suited to the northern Pueblo area of the Southwest than to more
southerly regions, where quite different cultures were found. In a
paper entitled “A method for designation of cultures and their vari-
ations” (1934), he and his wife Winifred Gladwin (born McCurdy)
proposed a hierarchical classification of cultural units for the region,
the most general of which were three roots called Basketmaker (later
Anasazi), Hohokam, and Caddoan (later Mogollon). Each of these
roots, which respectively were found in the northern, southern, and
intervening mountainous areas of the Southwest, was subdivided into
stems, that were named after regions, and these in turn into branches
and phases that were given more specific geographical names. Phases
could follow one another in the same locality and each was defined as
a set of sites with a high degree of similarity in artifact types. Although
the Gladwin classificatory hierarchy was based on relative degrees
of trait similarities, its dendritic pattern involved geographical con-
siderations and it was implicitly chronological; roots formed before
stems and stems before branches. The Gladwins followed much ear-
lier archaeologists in believing that Indians, after they had arrived in
North America, adapted to increasingly specific areas, but they dif-
fered from their predecessors in assuming that once a specific group
was established in a particular location, its material culture might
continue to change. Willey and Sabloff (1993: 123) observed that the
Gladwins’s belief that the prehistoric cultures of the southwestern

                                   282
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

United States had become increasingly differentiated “while a possi-
bility, was by no means demonstrated.”
   A different and even more influential classificatory scheme was
proposed in 1932 by a group of archaeologists, including Thorne
Deuel, Carl Guthe, and James B. Griffin, all of whom worked in the
midwestern United States. The leader and chief spokesman for this
group was William C. McKern (1892–1988) (1939). This scheme,
called the Midwestern Taxonomic Method, was soon used through-
out the central and eastern United States to classify material being
recovered in a region where few stratified sites displaying occupa-
tions over long periods of time were yet known. The goal of the
Midwestern Taxonomic Method was to classify finds on the basis
of formal criteria alone. Artifact assemblages representing a single
period of occupation at a site were designated a “component” and
they in turn were grouped to form five nested taxa. Components
sharing an almost identical set of artifact traits were assigned to
the same focus; foci with a “preponderating majority of traits” to
the same aspect; aspects sharing only more general characteristics
to the same phase; and phases sharing a few broad traits to the same
pattern. The traits used to define a pattern were said to be “a cul-
tural reflection of the primary adjustments of peoples to environ-
ment, as defined by tradition.” The patterns that were identified
were Mississippian, with sedentary sites, incised pottery, and small
triangular points; Woodland, characterized by semisedentary sites,
cordmarked pottery, and stemmed or sidenotched projectile points;
and Archaic, which lacked pottery but was marked by ground slate
artifacts.
   Foci and aspects were defined by drawing up lists of various sorts of
cultural traits (types, attributes, and burial patterns) for each compo-
nent and determining how many of these traits different components
had in common. This approach corresponded with the historical par-
ticularist conception championed by Boas during the early part of his
career, which viewed cultures not as integrated systems but as collec-
tions of traits that had come together as a result of random patterns
of diffusion. No inferences about human behavior were included in
defining traits, nor was any attention paid, unlike Childe, to the func-
tional significance of different types of artifacts or the ecological sig-
nificance of what was being found. The prevalence of different traits
also was rejected in favor of simply noting their presence or absence

                                   283
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

in each unit being compared. Contrary to what was being done in
the Southwest, changing frequencies of traits were not viewed as hav-
ing chronological or functional significance. The problem was noted,
but not resolved, that artifacts that were stylistically highly variable,
such as pottery, were a potential source of many more traits than
were stone or bone tools. It also was recognized that cemeteries and
habitation sites belonging to the same culture might contain a dif-
ferent selection of artifact types. Because of this, some archaeologists
proposed to base foci on a range of different types of sites or on a
balanced selection of traits from various functional categories of finds
representing the complete cultural manifestations of a people, rather
than simply on components (McKern 1939: 310–11). McKern recom-
mended rather obscurely “the selecting, from the traits comprising a
complex subject, of those trait details which have sufficient cultural
significance to qualify them as cultural determinants” (p. 306). He
also argued that these considerations, as well as the incompleteness
of archaeological data, precluded the statistical method from being
used to establish degrees of relations among components, although
he accepted that quantitative similarity was important for determin-
ing the classificatory status of archaeological manifestations. John
C. McGregor (1941) proposed that components should have more
than 85 percent of traits in common, foci 65 to 84 percent, aspects
40 to 64 percent, phases 20 to 39 percent, and patterns fewer than
20 percent. These recommendations were ignored.
   Both the Gladwin system and the Midwestern Taxonomic Method
eschewed the term culture, which McKern (1939: 303) believed
archaeologists used to designate too broad a range of phenomena.
Nevertheless, these two systems initiated the systematic use of cul-
tural traits for classifying archaeological data as cultural units in the
United States, in the guise of the Gladwins’ phases and McKern’s foci
and aspects. These units were widely regarded as the archaeological
expression of a tribe or group of closely related tribes. The Gladwin
scheme assumed that cultures, like biological species, differentiated
along irreversible paths, thereby ignoring the convergence brought
about by diffusion. McKern and most others who formulated the
Midwestern Taxonomic Method appear to have regarded foci and
phases as culturally and historically significant taxa. They acted on
the assumption that formal differences among such units in a sin-
gle locality usually indicated temporal differences, whereas similar

                                  284
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

cultures distributed over large areas dated from the same period. By
contrast, they generally understood the higher taxa of the Midwest-
ern Taxonomic Method as pragmatic groupings that were useful for
classifying foci and aspects on the basis of formal similarities until
they could be understood historically. Yet many archaeologists who
used this system in its early days assumed that shared traits at all
levels signified common origins, history, and ethnicity. They also
believed that traits that were more generally shared were older than
more culturally specific ones, a fallacy that even in the 1930s would
have made the Coca-Cola bottle older than the Acheulean hand-
axe. This view had some retrograde effects on the interpretation
of archaeological data. For example, in New York State McKern’s
Woodland pattern embraced prehistoric cultures that archaeologists
traditionally had associated with Algonquian-speakers, whereas his
Mississippian pattern embraced the historical cultures of linguisti-
cally unrelated Iroquoians. The assumption that cultures could not
evolve from one pattern to another, any more than an Algonquian
language could change into an Iroquoian one, hindered the real-
ization that the historical Iroquoian cultures had developed from
local Middle Woodland antecedents (Ritchie 1944; MacNeish 1952).
As a result of this misunderstanding, the Midwestern Taxonomic
Method, although struggling for classificatory objectivity and quan-
titative precision, inadvertently helped to perpetuate the pessimistic
views about the Indians’ capacity to change that had characterized
American archaeology during the nineteenth century.
   Yet in practice this misunderstanding was of short duration. Phases
in the Southwest and foci in the East were soon being aligned to form
local chronologies by means of stratigraphy and seriation, as was
being done with cultures in Europe. As this happened, the higher
levels of both the Gladwin scheme and the Midwestern Taxonomic
Method were abandoned and archaeological cultures were viewed
as forming mosaics, in which each culture had to be assigned its
own empirically determined spatial and temporal boundaries. Cul-
tures, as well as artifact types, were viewed as persisting in particular
areas, possibly with slow modifications, to form traditions, or spread-
ing geographically to create cultural horizons, which were used to
align traditions chronologically. As regional cultural chronologies
were constructed and archaeologists became increasingly aware of
the complex patterning of material culture both within and among

                                  285
                A History of Archaeological Thought

archaeological cultures, they began increasingly to credit diffusion
with playing an important role in bringing about cultural change.
Yet diffusion was employed mechanically. Most archaeologists con-
tinued to pay little attention to understanding the internal dynamics
of cultural change or trying to determine why a particular innova-
tion did or did not diffuse from one group to another. By 1941,
enough data had been collected for James A. Ford and G. R. Willey
to present a synthesis of the culture history of eastern North America
in which the known cultures were grouped to form five stages of
development: Archaic, Burial Mound I (Early Woodland), Burial
Mound II (Middle Woodland), Temple Mound I (Early Mississip-
pian) and Temple Mound II (Late Mississippian) (Figure 6.7). In
this arrangement, the three patterns of the Midwestern Taxonomic
Method were transformed into three stages of cultural development.
Each new stage was viewed as coming from the south, and ultimately
from Mesoamerica, and then spreading north through the Mississippi
Valley. Thus an interpretation of eastern North American prehis-
tory was created that closely resembled what had been presented
sixteen years earlier for prehistoric Europe in The Dawn of European
Civilization.
   Although diffusion implied recognition of the capacity for indige-
nous cultures to change, diffusionist explanations were employed
very conservatively. Innovations, such as pottery, burial mounds,
metal working, and agriculture were almost always assigned an
East Asian or Mesoamerican origin (Spinden 1928; McKern 1937;
Spaulding 1946), thus implying that indigenous North Americans
were imitative rather than creative. Moreover, archaeologists still
tended to attribute major changes in the archaeological record to
migrations. For example, into the 1950s the transitions from the
Archaic to the Woodland pattern and from Woodland to Missis-
sippian in the northeastern United States were usually explained as
resulting from the entry of new populations into that region. As
had happened in Europe, theories of cultural change and chronolo-
gies became linked to form a closed system of interpretation. A very
short chronology was adopted in which late Archaic cultures, that are
now radiocarbon dated around 2500 bc, were placed no earlier than
ad 300 (Ritchie 1944). This short chronology reflected the belief that
major changes had been brought about quickly by migrations. Yet, so
long as that chronology was accepted, it discouraged archaeologists

                                 286
Figure 6.7 Chronological chart from Ford and Willey’s synthesis of eastern North American prehistory (American Anthropologist, 1941)
                A History of Archaeological Thought

from considering internal developments as an alternative explanation
of cultural change in that area.
   With the notable exception of Ford and Willey (1941), interpreta-
tions of archaeological data during the culture-historical period were
characterized by a lack of will to discover, or even to search for, any
overall pattern to North American prehistory. Only a tiny portion
of P. S. Martin, G. I. Quimby, and Donald Collier’s Indians Before
Columbus (1947) was devoted to interpreting rather than describ-
ing the archaeological record. The authors concluded that from the
arrival of the first Asian immigrants “there existed a continuous pro-
cess of adaptation to local environments, of specialization, and of
independent invention” that “led to the development of a series of
regional Indian cultures” (p. 520). Yet they believed that the innova-
tions they had selected as representing basic trends of cultural devel-
opment, such as pottery making, were of external origin. Although
their book documented change as a basic feature of North American
prehistory, it made little effort to explain that change. Kidder was
a rare exception to the prevailing diffusionist perspective when he
maintained in 1924 that the prehistoric southwestern United States
owed little more than the “germ” of its culture to the outside and
that its development had been a local and almost wholly independent
one that was cut short by the “devastating blight of the white man’s
arrival” (1962: 344). In this, as in much else, Kidder was intelligently
far-sighted.
   American culture-historical archaeology did not remain a passive
victim of the stereotypes of Indians as being incapable of change that
had dominated archaeology throughout the nineteenth century. Yet,
although in the decades after 1914 cultural change and development
were perceived for the first time as being a conspicuous feature of the
archaeological record for North America, the main product of this
period was a series of regional chronologies. Although overtly racist
views concerning indigenous peoples were abandoned, the stereo-
types of the American Indian that had been formulated before 1914
remained largely unchallenged. Major changes documented in the
archaeological record continued to be attributed whenever possible
to migration and diffusion was only grudgingly admitted to indi-
cate creativity on the part of North American Indians. Because there
was less concern than previously with reconstructing prehistoric pat-
terns of life, the links between archaeology and ethnology, as well as

                                  288
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

between archaeologists and indigenous people, were weakened. No
alternative links were forged and to a large degree American archae-
ologists came to be preoccupied with creating typologies of artifacts
and cultures and working out cultural chronologies.
   The most influential programmatic statement of culture-historical
archaeology was G. R. Willey and Philip Phillips’s Method and Theory
in American Archaeology (1958), based on two earlier and much dis-
cussed papers (Phillips and Willey 1953; Willey and Phillips 1955; see
also Phillips 1955). Their primary concern was the methodology of
“culture-historical integration.” The principal formal units that they
used for this purpose were components and phases, the Gladwins’
term for culture being preferred to McKern’s focus because they had
assigned it a stronger temporal implication. Phases were character-
ized as arbitrary divisions of space-time-cultural continua. Willey and
Phillips also defined three spatial units of different scales: localities,
regions, and areas, the first two of which might correspond to a com-
munity or local group and a tribe or society respectively. Temporal
series consisted of local (intrasite) and regional (multisite or phase)
sequences. The integrative units that were used to link cultures were
traditions and horizons, which were interpreted as evidence of any
kind of historical relations, not just phylogeny. In addition, Willey
and Phillips assigned all archaeological cultures to one of five devel-
opmental, but in their view not evolutionary, stages based on eco-
nomic and political criteria: Lithic, Archaic, Formative, Classic, and
Postclassic. The result was a programmatic statement that uninten-
tionally drew the attention of readers to the limitations of American
culture-historical archaeology. Willey (1966, 1971) went on to pro-
duce an attractive two-volume culture-historical synthesis of what
was known about the prehistory of the New World. In 1972, Irving
B. Rouse published what he had intended as the theoretical intro-
duction to a major culture-historical synthesis of world prehistory.
By the time it appeared, however, this introduction was no longer
framed entirely in relation to culture-history. These works repre-
sented the final, synthesizing output of American culture-historical
archaeology.
   American archaeologists did not simply adopt a ready made
culture-historical approach from Europe but reinvented much of it,
as increasing knowledge of chronological variations in the archae-
ological record supplemented an older awareness of geographical

                                   289
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

variations. The culture-historical approach had developed differently
in Europe, where a growing sense of geographical variation in the
archaeological record complemented a long-standing evolutionary
preoccupation with chronological variation (Trigger 1978a: 75–95).
Moreover, nationalist rivalries played no role in the evolution of the
concept of the archaeological culture in North American prehistoric
archaeology as they had done in Europe. Yet American archaeology
did not, as a result of this enhanced perception of change in prehis-
toric times, totally overcome the negative views about indigenous
peoples that had characterized the “colonial” phase of its develop-
ment. The minimal acceptance of change in prehistoric times was
primarily an adjustment of cherished beliefs to fit new archaeolog-
ical facts. American archaeology remained colonial in spirit at the
same time that it adopted a culture-historical methodology. The
same problems were later to characterize archaeology in other white-
settler countries, such as Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and South
Africa.


                      Technical Developments
The adoption of a culture-historical approach by prehistoric archaeol-
ogists encouraged a considerable elaboration of archaeological meth-
ods. This was especially evident in terms of stratigraphy, seriation, and
classification. As prehistoric archaeologists became increasingly inter-
ested in historical rather than evolutionary problems, they perceived
the need for tighter controls over chronological as well as cultural
variations. Temporal changes within sites over relatively short periods
of time became crucial for answering many questions of a historical
nature.
   Classical archaeologists with their strong historical orientation
were the first to perceive the need for more controlled excavations of
sites. In the second half of the nineteenth century, Fiorelli, Conze,
and Curtius devised new methods for the more detailed excavation
and recording of plans and sections in major classical sites. In south-
ern Europe and the Middle East, where text-based and prehistoric
archaeology were pursued in close proximity and stratified sites often
contained both historic and prehistoric components, these meth-
ods diffused rapidly. Wilhelm Dörpfeld (1853–1940), who had exca-
vated under Curtius’s direction at Olympia, worked for Heinrich

                                  290
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

Schliemann from 1882 to 1890. Schliemann, who had begun digging
at Hisarlik in Turkey in 1871, had pioneered the stratigraphic excava-
tion of a multilayered “tell” site in an effort to discover the remains of
Homer’s Troy. He identified seven superimposed settlements at the
site, most of them unaccompanied by any texts. Using more refined
excavation methods, in combination with a pottery sherd chronol-
ogy, Dörpfeld identified nine major levels and revised Schliemann’s
chronology. In 1890, Petrie recorded idealized profiles at Tell el-
Hesy, a stratified site in southern Palestine that he dug by arbi-
trary levels, using Egyptian objects to date his finds (Figure 6.8).
In 1897, Jacques de Morgan began his stratigraphic excavations at
Susa, in western Iran, at the bottom of which he encountered pre-
historic levels. Like Dörpfeld, he used different sherd types to estab-
lish a chronology. These stratigraphic excavations and the open-
ing up of large areas of sites by archaeologists such as Petrie and
Koldewey gradually spread improved methods for excavating and
recording archaeological data through the Middle East, where they
influenced both historical and prehistoric archaeology. Eve Gran-
Aymerich (1998: 473) has described these developments as repre-
senting the transformation of archaeology from being a science of
objects to being a science of buildings and sites.
   Although prehistoric monuments in Europe occasionally were
excavated with considerable attention to detail beginning in the sev-
enteenth century (Klindt-Jensen 1975: 30), detailed recording tech-
niques developed more slowly in this field than in classical archae-
ology. Until the 1870s, as a result of evolutionary preoccupations,
across much of Europe interest was focused on the recording, fre-
quently in an idealized fashion, of cross-sections of excavations, the
main exception being richly furnished graves, such as those found
in the early Iron Age cemetery at Hallstatt in Austria in the 1850s,
which often were recorded in considerable detail (Sklenář 1983: 71–
2, 77) (Figure 6.9). General Augustus Lane Fox (1827–1900), who
took the name Pitt Rivers in 1880, altered this situation with his
detailed excavations of sites on the extensive estates he had inher-
ited in southern England. In the 1850s, he had become interested in
anthropology as the result of a detailed study he made of the history
of firearms in order to help select a new rifle for use by the British
Army. Through the 1860s, he built up a large ethnographic collec-
tion and wrote about primitive warfare, navigation, and principles

                                   291
Figure 6.8 Petrie’s profile of Tell el-Hesy, 1890 (Tell el Hesy, 1891)
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology




Figure 6.9 Grave from Hallstatt cemetery, Austria, recorded by the painter
              Isidor Engel in the mid-nineteenth century


of classification (Pitt-Rivers 1906). To control the temporal dimen-
sion of change better, Pitt Rivers wanted to extend his studies to
include prehistoric archaeological data. He soon realized, however,
that many sites in England contained material from more than one
prehistoric time period and that these sites would have to be exca-
vated carefully to distinguish different periods if his findings were
to be of any value for investigating evolutionary processes. Hence,
the principal goal of the evolutionist Pitt Rivers as an archaeologist
came to be to understand the history of individual archaeological
sites. He did this by trenching ditches at right angles, leaving baulks
to record stratigraphy, and carefully relating individual finds to their
stratigraphic contexts. After he inherited the estates of his cousin,
Horace Pitt, at Cranborne Chase in 1880, he had the resources to
excavate, in an exemplary manner, numerous sites located on or near
them. In his lavish excavation reports, he stressed the need for archae-
ologists to publish a complete record of their work, rather than only
what was of immediate interest to them (M. Thompson 1977). Much

                                   293
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

of the fieldwork and analysis was done by a small group of assistants
whom he specially trained.
   After Pitt Rivers died, several of these assistants continued to do
archaeological work. Harold St. George Gray remained a prolific
fieldworker to the end of his life. He and Arthur H. Bulleid,
whose work had been mentored by Pitt Rivers before Gray joined
him, recorded their excavations at the Late Iron Age settlement at
Glastonbury between 1892 and 1911 in sufficient detail that their
findings concerning houses and building levels could be reanalyzed
in the 1970s (Bulleid and Gray 1911, 1917; Clarke 1972b; Coles et al.
1992). The general ebb in the quality of archaeological fieldwork
and excavation in Britain in the early decades of the twentieth cen-
tury had less to do with a lack of skilled excavators than with the lack
of adequate funding for such work (M. Thompson 1977; Bowden
1991).
   With the development of publicly funded excavations in Britain,
Mortimer Wheeler (1890–1976), one of the few young British archae-
ologists to survive World War I, sought to emulate and surpass
Pitt Rivers’s excavating and recording techniques. He perfected his
system in a series of excavations between 1921 and 1937. Excava-
tion was carried out using plotted grid squares separated by baulks
of soil which provided numerous sections for study. Sections were
drawn only after they were interpreted, and the context of each
find was carefully recorded. Wheeler’s system emphasized the ver-
tical sequence of a site rather than its horizontal features and hence
was admirably suited for the study of site histories. He taught his
method to British and foreign students from around the world and
to Indian archaeologists during his brief appointment as Director
General of the Archaeological Survey of India. His book Archaeol-
ogy from the Earth (1954) expounded the philosophy of this style of
excavation. By the 1930s, similar excavation techniques were being
followed in North America (Willey and Sabloff 1993: 143–6).
   Techniques of seriation also were refined in response to growing
historical interests. In the 1890s, Petrie, who normally dated Egyptian
sites by means of inscriptions, excavated a number of large cemeter-
ies in southern Egypt that contained material that was unfamiliar to
him and lacked any inscriptions. Eventually, it was established that
these cemeteries dated from the late prehistoric and very early histor-
ical periods. There was considerable stylistic variation in the artifacts

                                  294
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

found in different graves, suggesting that the cemeteries had been
used for a long time, but no stratigraphy or obvious general patterns
of expansion that could be used to arrange the graves even roughly
in a chronological sequence. In order to devise a chronology, Petrie
(1901) divided the pottery from the cemeteries at Diospolis Parva
into nine major groups or classes and these in turn into several hun-
dred types. He then recorded what types occurred in each of about
900 graves that contained more than five different types of pottery
and tried to seriate the graves to produce a maximum concentra-
tion of each type (Heizer 1959: 376–83). This task, which proved to
be a formidable one even when duplicated using modern computers
(Kendall 1969, 1971), was facilitated by Petrie’s having inferred, based
on his knowledge of early historical Egyptian pottery, certain trends
in major wares, in particular the tendency of Wavy-handled vessels to
become smaller, cylindrical rather than globular, and their handles
more vestigial as the historical period was approached. He was finally
able to order his graves into fifty divisions that were arranged to form
a series of “sequence dates” (Figure 6.10). The resulting chronolog-
ical sequence was then tested against trends in nonceramic artifacts
from the graves and overlaps resulting from later graves being cut
into earlier ones. Petrie’s chronology for Predynastic Egypt, which in
general terms has stood the test of time (Kaiser 1957), differed from
Montelius’s seriation by defining intervals that in some cases may
have lasted less than a decade rather than periods of several hundred
years. Curiously, although Petrie presented his many pottery types as
each increasing and then decreasing in relative popularity over time,
he attributed their introductions to incursions of new peoples. While
his seriation was an astonishing achievement by an intuitive mathe-
matical genius, its cumbersomeness ensured that it was an approach
that few archaeologists were ever likely to emulate.
   In 1915, A. L. Kroeber, who was doing ethnographic fieldwork
among the Zuñi Indians of western New Mexico, observed a num-
ber of archaeological sites and noted that the pot sherds visible on
the surface differed in color combinations from one site to another.
Almost certainly aware that Nelson had very recently demonstrated
variations in the frequency of pottery types from one level to another
at San Cristóbal Pueblo, Kroeber collected pot sherds from eigh-
teen of these sites, divided them into three general types, and by
comparing changes in the frequency of each type worked out a

                                  295
                  A History of Archaeological Thought




 Figure 6.10 Pottery of successive periods in Petrie’s predynastic sequence,
                        from Diospolis Parva, 1901



historical sequence of these sites (Kroeber 1916; Heizer 1959: 383–
93). This approach was adopted by Leslie Spier (1917), who applied
it to a larger number of Zuñi sites and then conducted stratigraphic
excavations that corroborated his findings (Lyman et al. 1997a:
55–62). Beginning in the 1930s, James Ford (1936) used this sort

                                    296
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

of frequency seriation of pottery types to supplement stratigraphic
sequences as a basis for working out the prehistoric cultural chronol-
ogy of the Mississippi Valley (Ford 1938; O’Brien and Lyman 1998).
Petrie’s “occurrence seriation” depended on the individual occur-
rence or nonoccurrence in specific closed finds of a large number of
different types, whereas Kroeber’s “frequency seriation” depended
on the changing frequencies of a much smaller number of types
(Dunnell 1970). The greater ease with which frequency seriation
could be implemented ensured its rapid spread and development.
It has become the basis of all modern seriation. In both cases, seri-
ation was being used to establish a detailed historical sequence of
villages or graves rather than a succession of periods, as evolution-
ary archaeologists from Thomsen to Montelius had done. Petrie
and Kroeber both chose to work with pottery because its stylistic
attributes provided more sensitive indices of change than did the
stone and metal tools that had been studied by the Scandinavian
archaeologists.
   Growing interest in defining cultures and working out more
detailed seriations encouraged more systematic and elaborate classi-
fications of artifacts in both Europe and North America. In Europe,
these classifications tended to build on ones originally established by
evolutionary archaeologists, usually by splitting or otherwise refin-
ing existing types. Types tended to be viewed pragmatically as a
means for achieving chronological objectives or for understanding
life in prehistoric times. Perhaps for these reasons, the discussion of
the nature and significance of types generally remained low-keyed in
Europe. Gorodtsov, however, continued to develop his typological
approach, in which categories were divided into groups and groups
into types on the basis of function, material, and form respectively.
His final description of this system was translated into English and
published in the American Anthropologist (Gorodzov 1933). After
World War II, François Bordes (1919–1981) and Maurice Bourgon
developed a new and more systematic approach to classifying Middle
and Lower Palaeolithic assemblages to replace a reliance on diag-
nostic types. Bordes distinguished the description of artifact assem-
blages from that of the artifacts they contained and the description
of artifact forms from the identification of the techniques that were
used to produce them (Bordes 1953). Still later, G. Laplace (1964)
produced an elaborate alternative classification of Palaeolithic stone

                                 297
                A History of Archaeological Thought

tools, and finally David Clarke (1968) provided a systematic treatment
of archaeological classifications at all levels that sought to improve
the procedures inherent in culture-historical archaeology as it was
practiced in Britain (Shennan 2002: 72).
   In the United States, artifact classification has been discussed from
a theoretical point of view since the 1920s. In 1930, Winifred and
Harry Gladwin argued that, because of processes such as trade, arti-
fact classification had to be done independently from cultural clas-
sification. Although they viewed pottery styles as sensitive indica-
tors of spatial and temporal variations in culture, they also believed
that it was necessary to define pottery types in terms that were free
from temporal implications, if subjectivity was to be avoided. They
therefore proposed a binomial nomenclature in which the first term
indicated a geographical location where the type was found and the
second its color or surface treatment: for example, Tularosa black-
on-white. Type descriptions were published in a set format involving
name, vessel shape, design, type site, geographical distribution, and
inferred chronological range. In 1932, Harold S. Colton proposed
an elaborate, Linnaean-style system for classifying pottery (which
was seen as equivalent to a Linnaean Class) on the basis of paste and
temper (Order), surface color (Family or Ware), surface treatment
(Genus or Series), and more specific features (types). In a system-
atic classification of southwestern pottery, based on the examination
of several million sherds, published by Harold Colton and Lyndon
Hargrave (1937), only wares, series, and types continued to be used.
William Adams (2001: 347) has noted that, although this hierarchical
approach did not find general acceptance, the individual wares that
Colton and Hargrave defined have nearly all withstood the test of
time.
   James Ford (1938), by contrast, stressed that types should be rec-
ognized only if they could be demonstrated to be useful for inter-
preting culture-history and that there should be no formal splitting
of types unless the results clearly correlated with spatial or temporal
differences. Ford in particular regarded types as heuristic constructs
to be used for historical analysis and therefore he sought empirically
to isolate traits that had chronological significance. Later discussions
centered on the reality of types to the people who had made and
used artifacts, on the relations between types and the attributes or
modes that are used to define them, and on the nature of attributes

                                  298
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

and their usefulness for artifact seriation. Rouse (1939) proposed
that an emic type could be recognized by the statistical clustering of
attributes around the high points of statistical curves, which represent
the norms or ideal mental templates shared by a group of artisans.
In the 1950s, it was maintained that types could be discovered as
regular clusterings of attributes and that these “natural” types would
reveal much more about human behavior and cultural change than
would Ford’s arbitrary creations (Spaulding 1953). This prolonged
discussion of artifact classification was the first substantial manifes-
tation of the concern of American archaeologists to articulate and
make explicit the analytical basis of their discipline.
   Although the concept of the archaeological culture had been devel-
oped separately and from different baselines in Europe and North
America, it came to be viewed on both sides of the Atlantic as a
recurrent set of components characterized by similar material cul-
ture, normally occupying a small geographical area and lasting for a
relatively brief interval of time. The spatial and temporal boundaries
of each culture had to be determined empirically. When the cultures
being compared represented successive stages of a single cultural
tradition, the boundaries separating them were recognized as being
arbitrary. Nevertheless, differences existed in how archaeological cul-
tures were perceived in Europe and America. In America, especially
under the influence of the Midwestern Taxonomic Method, cul-
tures (foci) were established on the basis of the number of differ-
ent kinds of traits components had in common, not the frequency
of individual traits, even though frequency was recognized as being
vital for seriation and neglecting it enhanced the classificatory impor-
tance of rare items that were traded or otherwise intrusive into sin-
gle sites. Archaeologists also rejected their former interest in the
functional roles that artifacts or traits had played. This new, for-
malistic approach was believed to be more objective and scientific
than earlier, more “impressionistic” concerns with the functions of
artifacts.
   In Europe, archaeologists adopted a more functional view of mate-
rial culture. It was widely recognized that cemeteries might contain a
narrower, or even a different, set of artifacts from those found in habi-
tation sites, and this difference was welcomed as providing a deeper
insight into prehistoric cultures. Childe argued that cultures were
best defined pragmatically on the basis of ethnically sensitive traits

                                  299
                A History of Archaeological Thought

that were resistant to change rather than by using utilitarian ones
that diffused quickly over broad areas. He also emphasized that the
boundaries of cultures were not the same as those of their constituent
artifact types, thus in effect adopting what David Clarke (1968) would
later call a polythetic concept of archaeological cultures. Childe also
acknowledged that all types of artifacts were significant for under-
standing how people had lived in the past. He stressed, however,
that their importance was not equivalent to their number: a single
bronze axe might provide as much information as did 500 potsherds.
This orientation probably reflected the greater interest in the “people
behind the artifact” among European than among American prehis-
toric archaeologists in the early twentieth century. Childe did not
suggest, however, that the relative frequencies of different types of
artifacts might be important for understanding cultures.
   A growing interest in how particular groups of Europeans had lived
in prehistoric times, that was encouraged by nationalism but had its
roots in the Scandinavian archaeology of the early nineteenth cen-
tury, led archaeologists to pay attention to classes of archaeological
data that previously had been ignored. A long-standing interest in
cemeteries was supplemented by increasing study of the remains of
settlements. This encouraged the development of large-scale, open-
plan, horizontal excavations at the expense of vertical stratigraphic
ones, as well as the recording of many new types of data. The first
post molds sealed below ground were noted by Pitt Rivers before
1872 (Bowden 1991: 77). In the 1890s, the Roman-German Bound-
ary Commission, studying sites along the northern frontier of the
Roman empire in central Europe, developed techniques for recog-
nizing post molds in all kinds of soils (Childe 1953: 13). German
archaeologists, such as Carl Schuchhardt and Gerhard Bersu (1889–
1964), were soon using postmold patterns to reconstruct decayed
wooden structures. Archaeologists also began to record more sys-
tematically where in sites artifacts were found, so that these could
be plotted in relation to features such as hearths and house walls.
Gradually, lithic debitage and floral and faunal remains that hitherto
had generally been dismissed as unimportant were saved and stud-
ied. This style of excavation was applied in the Netherlands by Albert
Egges van Giffen (1884–1973) and was transmitted from Germany
to England in the late 1930s, when Bersu arrived there as a refugee
from Nazi persecution (C. Evans 1989).

                                 300
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

   These developments encouraged a new precision in excavation
techniques. The principal goal of such research was not to recon-
struct details of social organization or what people had thought in
the past but rather to reconstruct a visual impression of life in the
past. That involved determining what houses looked like, what kind
of clothing people wore, what utensils they used, and in what activi-
ties they had engaged. These impressions could be reconstructed in
drawings (Figure 6.11) or three-dimensionally in the form of open-
air museums. One site that did not require much reconstruction was
Skara Brae, a Neolithic settlement in the Orkneys that was excavated
by Gordon Childe (1931). In this site not only houses but also furni-
ture, such as beds and cupboards, were preserved as a result of being
constructed from stone slabs. The most impressive developments in
this sort of archaeology occurred in continental Europe between 1920
and 1940. Houses and their surroundings were completely excavated
and post molds, hearths, pits, and artifact distributions interpreted
as evidence of patterns of daily life (De Laet 1957: 101–3; Sieveking
1976: xvi).
   In the United States, the development of a culture-historical
approach initially encouraged archaeologists to excavate sites to
recover artifact samples that could be used to elaborate trait lists,
define cultures, and work out cultural chronologies. It was assumed
that the sorts of artifacts found in any one part of a site were typical of
the whole and therefore excavations were frequently directed toward
middens, where artifacts were most abundant and could be recov-
ered most cheaply. In addition to artifacts, archaeologists sometimes
sought to obtain floral and faunal data as evidence of subsistence
patterns and skeletal remains that could identify the physical types
of the people who had occupied sites. During the economic depres-
sion of the 1930s, U.S. federal government relief agencies, working
through park services, museums, and universities, made large sums of
money available for archaeological research. Archaeological excava-
tion was supported because it could be learned easily by unemployed
manual laborers and did not produce anything that competed with
private industry. Much of the work was rescue archaeology. Large
sites were completely excavated in areas that were to be flooded by
the construction of hydroelectric dams (Fagette 1996; Lyon 1996).
The massive horizontal excavations carried out during the depres-
sion years resulted not only in the recovery of vast amounts of data

                                   301
      What must be examined? Dark places in the ground, animal bones, potsherds, stone pavings, receptacles, etc.




      What do the finds signify?           Our ancestors.

302                settlement,               house and farm,      and     burial place




      Figure 6.11 Illustration of horizontal excavation and reconstruction of a prehistoric German site, from a pamphlet issued by
                                Halle Museum, republished in Antiquity, June 1938 (captions translated)
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

relating to the culture-history of the eastern United States but also
in growing attention being paid to features such as hearths, house
patterns, and community plans, in relation to which distributions of
artifacts took on additional significance. These excavations expanded
knowledge about the construction of houses and ritual structures and
the plans of entire settlements (Willey and Sabloff 1993: 143–4). Yet
these findings were initially envisaged as a means to expand trait lists
and only slowly stimulated a renewed interest in how people had lived
in prehistoric times. Government-supported archaeological rescue
projects resumed in the 1950s, when the American government built
additional dams along the Missouri and Colorado Rivers.
   Convergences in European and American culture-historical
research programs did not produce equivalent convergences in atti-
tudes toward the past. Although Europeans were deeply involved
emotionally in what they regarded as the study of their own prehis-
tory, Euro-Americans continued to view the prehistoric archaeologi-
cal record as the product of an alien people. Yet, on both sides of the
Atlantic Ocean, the development of a culture-historical approach to
archaeology carried classification, chronology, and cultural recon-
struction far beyond the point they had reached previously. The
switch from “scientific” to “historical” objectives stimulated rather
than inhibited the development of archaeological methodology.


                                Theory
In recent decades archaeological theorists have looked to philosophy
to provide guidance in matters relating to epistemology, or theories
of knowledge. It is widely supposed, however, that culture-historical
archaeologists did not make significant use of philosophical concepts
(Spaulding 1968; M. Salmon 1982; Gibbon 1989; W. Salmon 1992).
Even Gordon Childe had largely abandoned the culture-historical
approach before he began in the 1940s and 1950s to employ philoso-
phy to help him understand what archaeologists were doing. In fact,
a profound encounter between culture-historical archaeology and
philosophy took place in Romano-British archaeology, a field that
traditionally has spanned the divide between classical and prehistoric
archaeology. This encounter occurred in the person of the Oxford
academic Robin Collingwood (1889–1943), who was simultaneously


                                  303
                A History of Archaeological Thought

a leading classical archaeologist and one of the most distinguished
British philosophers of his time. Collingwood was perhaps the first
philosopher who viewed efforts to understand the past as a testing
ground for investigating the nature of thought in general and hence
as a basis for philosophical enquiry. Beginning in 1911, he concen-
trated on archaeological studies that made him the leading authority
on Roman Britain. This work culminated in his definitive study of
this subject, The Archaeology of Roman Britain (1930). After that
time, he produced his most important philosophical work, The Idea
of History, which was published posthumously in 1946. A briefer and
more accessible exposition of his philosophical ideas is available in
An Autobiography, which appeared in 1939, at a time when, because
of illness, he feared he might not live long enough to complete his
major work.
   Collingwood was an advocate of idealist philosophy in the Kantian
tradition. He believed that even the simplest perceptions make sense
only as the result of concepts, or categories, that already exist in the
human mind. Individuals cannot perceive or make sense of the world
independently of their existing understanding of the nature of things.
Many of these concepts are learned, but others, such as basic notions
of time, space, and causality, appear to be innate. Whatever the ori-
gin of such concepts, without them the observations that consti-
tute the basis of a positivist epistemology would remain meaningless.
As an idealist, Collingwood had much in common with the Italian
philosopher Benedetto Croce (1866–1952), whose belief in history
as the history of ideas and hence as a branch of philosophy greatly
influenced the development of Italian archaeology (d’Agostino 1991:
53–4).
   For Collingwood, the past that the archaeologist studies is not a
dead past, but one that exists entirely in the present. He maintained
that all we know about the past comes from texts and artifacts that
exist in the modern world, together with knowledge that we believe
is relevant for understanding the past when applied to this material
(Collingwood 1939: 97–9). Collingwood’s idealism also led him to
deny that facts and theories are distinct from one another. Archae-
ologists, he argued, only perceive what they are conditioned to look
for and nothing acquires meaning except in relation to clearly formu-
lated questions that the archaeologist poses (pp. 24–5). As an idealist,
Collingwood maintained that, because what is real to people is only

                                  304
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

what exists in their minds, archaeologists must seek to understand
the past by determining the intentions, goals, and knowledge that
motivated the behavior of the people being studied. They there-
fore must attempt to replicate the intentions, purposes, and ideas
that caused people to make and do things in particular ways in the
past. Archaeological interpretation consists of the ideas that mod-
ern archaeologists have about the ideas that people once had, and
is an activity in which a scholar strives to relive the past in her or
his own mind. Only by seeking to reconstruct the mental activities
that shaped events, and by rethinking the past in terms of their own
experiences, can archaeologists hope to discern the significant pat-
terns and dynamics of ancient cultures. Collingwood also stressed
the importance of the convergence of multiple lines of independent
evidence for establishing a persuasive understanding (Collingwood
1946: 276).
   To study the past adequately, however, archaeologists also must try
to expand their own consciousness by seeking to learn as much as pos-
sible about variations in human behavior and about specific ancient
cultures from literary sources. There is no evidence that Collingwood
viewed social anthropology as a useful source of information about
variations in human behavior, although this would have been a pro-
ductive way for him to expand his awareness of diversity. Instead, his
classical bias led him to use the written records of ancient Greece and
Rome to become more aware of the thoughts and practices of those
civilizations that were distinct from modern ones and would help to
place the past on a different plane from the present by contradicting
the archaeologist’s conventional beliefs (Collingwood 1939: 120–46,
1946: 302–15). Collingwood did not believe that such understanding
would provide the basis for a definitive knowledge of the past. For
him, the most that was possible was an imagining of the past that the
archaeologist might hope approximated the understanding held by
the people who had lived in the past. Working within the confines
of the classical tradition, Collingwood seems to have been unaware
of the dangers of ethnocentrism involved in this process.
   Many British archaeologists of the 1940s and 1950s read
Collingwood, or at least became generally familiar with his ideas. Yet
most of them knew little about philosophy and were culturally pre-
disposed toward some form of naive positivism or empiricism. That
led archaeologists such as Glyn Daniel (1975), Stuart Piggott (1950,

                                 305
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

1959), and Christopher Hawkes (1954) to interpret Collingwood’s
ideas along lines that in some respects were very different from what
Collingwood had intended. Like Collingwood, they accorded ideas
a major role in shaping human behavior, but, unlike him, they drew
a clear distinction between facts and interpretations. They believed
that archaeological data constituted the real and cumulative core of
the discipline. Interpretations, by contrast, were matters of opinion
that had little lasting importance. They argued that all archaeological
interpretations are shaped by intellectual fashions and are invariably
undermined by new data and new understandings. This position,
which had much in common with the views of contemporary histori-
ans who followed the influential nineteenth-century German empir-
ical historian Leopold von Ranke (1795–1886), combined extreme
scepticism regarding the objectivity or lasting value of interpreta-
tions with unquestioning faith in the objectivity of archaeological
facts (Carr 1967: 5–6; Iggers and Powell 1990). These archaeologists
argued that, as the past no longer exists, there was no possibility
of comparing inferences about the past with the actual events to
establish if the inferences were correct. Because of the complexity of
human phenomena, varying interpretations were possible and these
were influenced to a considerable degree by the various standpoints
or beliefs of individual archaeologists.
   The idealist epistemology of these archaeologists influenced how
they evaluated archaeology’s potential and how they believed it
should be organized. In 1954, Christopher Hawkes (1905–1992)
maintained that, when totally unaided by written texts or oral tradi-
tions, it was easier for prehistoric archaeologists to learn something
about ancient technologies than about economies, considerably
more difficult to reconstruct sociopolitical institutions, and hardest of
all to address religious and spiritual beliefs. The logic underlying this
scale of increasing difficulty, which has come to be called “Hawkes’s
hierarchy” or “Hawkes’s ladder,” is that universal physical laws play
a major role in shaping technology, whereas idiosyncratic and highly
variable cultural factors influence human beliefs and behavior. Simi-
lar ideas had already structured the first edition of Grahame Clark’s
Archaeology and Society (1939), but as a materialist Clark believed
that even working under these limitations archaeologists could learn
much that was important about human behavior in prehistoric times.
Hawkes, as an idealist, deplored the idea that archaeology was limited

                                  306
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

to studying what was “generically animal” about human behav-
ior rather than what was “specifically human,” by which he meant
human cognitive behavior (C. Evans 1999). Hawkes’s argument evi-
dently struck a responsive chord and was endorsed by M. A. Smith
(1955), Childe (1956a: 129–31), Piggott (1959: 9–12), and André
Leroi-Gourhan (1964), and more recently by J. Friedman and M. J.
Rowlands (1978b: 203–4).
   During the 1950s, British culture-historical archaeologists also
tended to dichotomize the collection and interpretation of prehis-
toric archaeological data. The collection and primary analysis of data
were widely viewed as the tasks of “dirt archaeologists,” but the syn-
thesis of their findings was the domain of prehistorians. Ironically,
although data were believed to be the stable basis of archaeology and
interpretations were regarded as little more than opinions, prehistori-
ans were assigned much higher status than were archaeologists. This
assignment of tasks was based on the assumption that there was no
significant feedback between the synthesis and the collection of data.
British empiricism suggested that fieldwork was best done in a theo-
retical vacuum, which was the opposite of Collingwood’s belief that
it should be undertaken to answer questions. Although this division
of labor was noted by some American archaeologists (Rouse 1972:
6–11), it was not widely accepted in the United States. Yet Philip
Phillips (1955: 249–50) agreed that the “integration” and “interpre-
tation” of archaeological data were separate “operations.”
   Most prehistoric archaeologists, like palaeontologists, believed
that analogical reasoning provided a means for interpreting their
data. Within this general category, palaeontologists distinguished
between analogies in the strict sense and homologies. Analogies are
similar features that different species share as a result of natural selec-
tion having separately adapted them to a similar environment. An
example is the streamlining acquired by fish and whales as a result
of convergent evolution having adapted them to live in the water.
Homologies are features species share as the result of a genetic rela-
tionship, such as the similarities between elephants and mammoths.
Evolutionary archaeologists had believed that, as a result of psychic
unity, different groups of people at the same level of development
responded in similar ways to similar challenges and such resemblances
were explained from a rational, adaptive point of view. Yet they did
not rule out the possibility that two or more cultures shared features

                                   307
                A History of Archaeological Thought

because they were descended from a common ancestral culture or
as the result of diffusion (something that could not happen between
reproductively isolated species). Hence, they tended to explain sim-
ilarities among distant cultures analogically and among neighboring
cultures historically. Culture-historical archaeologists generally dis-
trusted evolutionary explanations and relied almost exclusively on
homologies to explain archaeological findings, very often by means of
the direct historical approach. This choice reflected both their strong
commitment to cultural particularism and their pessimism about
human creativity, which resulted in diffusion and migration being
almost the only mechanisms invoked to explain cultural change.
   Culture-historical archaeologists long assumed that an archaeo-
logical culture was produced by a group of people who shared a
common language and way of life and hence that ethnicity could
be inferred from archaeological data (Kossinna 1911; Childe 1925a).
By the 1950s, Eóin MacWhite (1956), Willey and Phillips (1958: 48–
9), and other archaeologists had concluded that no single type of
social unit corresponded with an archaeological culture. The distri-
bution of the Chellean and Acheulean “cultures” over large parts
of Africa, western Asia, and Europe and the great length of time
they had endured made nonsense of the idea they could be equated
with a single people. For this reason, these taxa often were called
“industries” rather than cultures. The late prehistoric Thule culture,
which spread over much of the Canadian Arctic, may have been asso-
ciated with a single ethnic group, but it too clearly did not correspond
with a single society. It was suggested that the archaeological remains
of the ways of life of the Maya peasantry and elite might be classi-
fied as two linked “subcultures” or ethnic groups, although both
groups almost certainly regarded themselves as members of a single
social and economic system (Rouse 1965: 9–10). It was also observed
that the geographical extent of the archaeological cultures of the
European Neolithic was much larger than that of analogous ethno-
graphic entities, an observation recently confirmed by H. P. Wotzka
(1997). With the development of modern settlement pattern studies,
new means for inferring prehistoric social and political units became
available. It was gradually accepted that social organization had to
be inferred from archaeological data on a case by case basis and that
patterns of material culture were only one source of information.
As a result, archaeologists in English as well as German-speaking

                                  308
                    Culture-Historical Archaeology

countries became increasingly aware that the social interpretation
of archaeological cultures was more problematic than had generally
been believed.
   The ethnic significance of the archaeological culture also was being
questioned on other grounds. Although Childe (1935a, 1940a) con-
tinued to produce detailed culture-historical syntheses, by the late
1920s he had begun to doubt that much could be learned about eth-
nicity from archaeological data alone or that ethnicity was a concept
that could be central to the study of prehistory (Childe 1930: 240–7).
The ethnographer Donald Thomson (1939) revealed that different
seasonal manifestations of hunter-gatherer cultures might be associ-
ated with radically different material remains. It also became apparent
that not all archaeological “cultures” had clearly defined boundaries.
When variation in material culture occurred along clines or gradients,
the delineations of archaeological cultures could be highly arbitrary
and subjective and therefore be manipulated in accordance with inter-
pretative agendas (Renfrew 1978b). This further called into question
the relation between archaeological cultures and ethnic groups. As
culture-historical archaeology declined in importance, the critiques
of ethnic interpretations of the archaeological culture grew sharper.
Processual archaeologists were inclined to construe variation in mate-
rial culture as an expression of ecological adaptation rather than
ethnicity.
   Archaeologists now recognize that variations in material cul-
ture have numerous causes. Some of them reflect temporal differ-
ences, others differences in environmental settings, the availability
of resources, local traditions of craft production and ornamentation,
trading patterns, status emulation, gender identities, intergroup mar-
riage patterns, and religious beliefs, as well as ethnic differences. It
also has been shown that some peoples derive more powerful and
enduring affiliations from clans or religious associations than they do
from membership in tribes and communities. In these cases, mate-
rial culture associated with clans and religious cults rather than with
archaeological cultures is proving to be ideally suited for tracing the
movement of groups of people in prehistoric times (T. Ferguson
2003: 141–2). Frederick Barth’s (1969) demonstration that ethnicity
is a subjective sense of identity that is manipulated by individuals
and groups within many different contexts, that often have little to
do with the material culture archaeologists study, makes ethnicity

                                  309
                A History of Archaeological Thought

unlikely to be the sole, or even the primary explanation either of
cultural variation in the archaeological record or of cultural change
(S. Jones 1997; Gosden 1999: 190–7; Shennan 2002: 84–5; Snow
2002; Chrisomalis and Trigger 2004).
   Today, many archaeologists ignore or reject the concept of the
archaeological culture (Shennan 1989b). Yet, where sharp breaks in
material culture occur between adjacent groups of archaeological
sites, the archaeological culture remains a useful concept for ana-
lyzing archaeological data. Archaeological cultures are increasingly
being viewed as summary descriptions of patterns of spatial and tem-
poral variation in material culture that were produced by many differ-
ent factors. Hence, they are not explanations but phenomena that it is
the duty of archaeologists to explain in specific instances. The search
for ethnicity, which shaped the development of culture-historical
archaeology for over a century, can now be understood as based
on a misunderstanding of to what degree various factors shaped the
archaeological record that persisted because of archaeologists’ pro-
longed and largely uncritical preoccupation with producing ethnic or
national prehistory. Although Kossinna and other German archaeol-
ogists pioneered this sort of archaeology, other German archaeolo-
gists were the first to discuss its shortcomings.
   By the 1950s, culture-historical archaeology was running out of
new ideas. In Britain, this era was characterized by the publication of
numerous books dealing with how to dig sites and analyze finds using
techniques derived from the physical and biological sciences. This
approach culminated in Don Brothwell and Eric S. Higgs’s Science
in Archaeology (1963). Nowhere were there sustained discussions of
how the interpretation of archaeological data might be grounded
in archaeological and social science theory. The closest to such a
body of theory was Eóin MacWhite’s (1956) scheme of levels of
archaeological interpretation, but this approach was not developed
any further.
   Although some culture-historical archaeologists traced the pre-
historic development of technology (Piggott 1983) and art styles
(Megaw and Megaw 1989), most continued to try to identify eth-
nic groups in the archaeological record and attributed changes in
material culture to diffusion and migration. Archaeological find-
ings were interpreted behaviorally or symbolically only when written
texts or the direct historical approach provided additional sources

                                 310
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

of information. The resulting narratives displayed little systematic
grounding in archaeological data, with the result that they were
increasingly criticized for being merely expressions of their authors’
opinions (Clarke 1968: 30–1). The most striking shortcoming of
culture-historical archaeologists was that change continued to be
attributed to external processes, lumped under the rubrics of diffu-
sion and migration, but little effort was made to discover why cultures
accepted or rejected new traits or how innovations transformed soci-
eties. What was missing, despite a growing interest in what archaeo-
logical sites had looked like and what activities had gone on in them,
was the will to learn how individual cultures had functioned and
changed as systems. Without such an understanding, diffusion and
migration were doomed to remain nonexplanations. These problems
had been recognized for a long time, but ultimately the solutions
would come from outside the culture-historical approach not from
within it.


                            Conclusions
An approach centered on defining archaeological cultures and try-
ing to account for their origins in terms of diffusion and migration
developed as European archaeologists became more aware of the
complexity of the archaeological record and ceased to view cultural
evolution as a natural or desirable process. European archaeology
became closely aligned with history and was seen as offering insights
into what had happened to particular peoples in prehistoric times.
Its findings became incorporated into struggles for national self-
determination, the assertion and defense of national identity, and
promoting national unity in opposition to class conflict. Archaeol-
ogy of this sort also had great appeal elsewhere in the world. Ethnic
and national groups continue to seek to learn about their early history
as a means of enhancing group pride and solidarity and helping to
promote economic and social development. Although the findings
of culture-historical archaeology are now frequently enriched by the
use of techniques for reconstructing prehistoric cultures and explain-
ing cultural change that developed in other branches of archaeology,
an approach that seeks to trace the histories of specific peoples con-
tinues to serve the needs of nation building in a postcolonial era. For
this reason, culture-historical archaeology remains socially attractive

                                 311
                A History of Archaeological Thought

in many countries. In the United States, efforts to explain increasing
evidence of complex patterning in the archaeological record slowly
resulted in the grudging and limited acceptance of a formerly denied
capacity of indigenous Americans to change.
   Over the years, research by supporters and opponents of culture-
historical archaeology has revealed the limitations of the archaeolog-
ical culture as a source of information about ethnicity. Ethnicity is
only one of many factors that shape the patterning of material culture;
hence, archaeological cultures are not a privileged source of informa-
tion about ethnicity but phenomena to be explained in many different
ways. There is also considerable ongoing disagreement concerning
to what extent archaeological cultures exist as bounded entities or
are subjectively extracted from continua of variability.
   Nevertheless, a more limited and formalist version of the culture-
historical approach remains important. In places where little archae-
ological research has been done, it is necessary to construct culture-
historical frameworks as a prerequisite for addressing other problems.
In Canada, early in the twentieth century, cultural anthropologists
asserted that ethnographic and linguistic data about indigenous peo-
ples should be recorded before their old ways disappeared, whereas
archaeological data could safely be left in the ground (Jenness 1932:
71). As a result, there was little government funding for archaeo-
logical research before the 1960s. Since then, Canadian archaeolo-
gists have been constructing cultural chronologies over half a conti-
nent. In this research, archaeological cultures have had to compete
with social units, such as villages and site clusters, and with clinal
variation for describing spatial and temporal variations in material
culture. At the same time, processual archaeology has stimulated a
strong focus on understanding how Canada’s indigenous hunter-
gatherer peoples adapted to diverse environments over many mil-
lennia. The resulting combination of culture-historical and proces-
sual archaeology continues to dominate Canadian archaeology. Even
in countries where detailed chronologies already exist, functional
and cognitive understandings of the past almost invariably require
a more detailed understanding of the temporal and geographical
variations of material culture in the archaeological record. Although
Lewis Binford has made important contributions to understand-
ing human behavior in Palaeolithic times, Palaeolithic archaeolo-
gists such as Olga Soffer and Clive Gamble continue to pursue a

                                 312
                   Culture-Historical Archaeology

more detailed culture-historical understanding of that era (Gamble
1999: 828–9).
   The enduring value of a culture-historical approach is not its
emphasis on ethnicity or on diffusionist and migrationist explanations
of culture change but its ability to trace real lineages of the devel-
opment of material culture in the archaeological record. Culture-
historical, not evolutionary, archaeology is the equivalent of palaeon-
tological research in biology. Like palaeontology, culture-historical
archaeology’s chief asset is its ability to trace historical relations
through time and space. Such historical findings are the necessary
prerequisites for evolutionary generalizations about the processes of
change. Long ago A. L. Kroeber (1952: 63–103) observed that this
relationship holds true in all historical sciences, whether they deal
with natural, biological, or human phenomena.




                                 313
                                  chapter 7
     Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

    Forms and types, that is, products, have been regarded as more
    real and alive than the society which created them and whose needs
    determined these manifestations of life.
       a. m. t a l l g r e n, “The method of prehistoric archaeology” (1937), p. 155



As the inadequacies of culture-historical archaeology for understand-
ing how prehistoric cultures operated and changed became obvious
to a growing number of archaeologists, they adopted new approaches
to the study of prehistory that were based on systematic anthro-
pological and sociological investigations of human behavior. These
approaches are generally designated as being functional and pro-
cessual in nature. Culture-historical studies traditionally explained
changes from the outside by attributing them to diffusion and migra-
tion. Functional and processual studies try to understand social
and cultural systems from the inside by determining how different
parts of these systems are interrelated and how these parts inter-
act with one another. Functionalism is a synchronous approach
that attempts to understand how systems operate routinely with-
out accounting for major changes. Processual approaches seek to
understand how and why such systems change irreversibly. Yet,
many self-styled functionalist anthropologists also were interested
in how systems changed (Malinowski 1945; Evans-Pritchard 1949,
1962). Although functionalist approaches are often presumed to
have preceded processual ones in anthropology, both have been
employed at least incipiently in prehistoric archaeology since the
mid-nineteenth century and they were often used together. The
two sorts of explanation are not only closely related but also are
complementary, in the sense that it is impossible fully to under-
stand either stasis or irreversible change without understanding the
other.


                                          314
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology


           Environmental Functional-Processualism
Already by the 1830s, Steenstrup was attempting to relate archae-
ological finds to the succession of forest types he was discovering
in Danish bog sites. Beginning in 1848, Worsaae, Steenstrup, and
Forchhammer, as members of what has come to be called the First
Kitchen-Midden Commission, pioneered the field study of archae-
ological finds in relation to their palaeoenvironmental settings and
combined their archaeological, biological, and geological skills to
investigate how people had lived in prehistoric Denmark. Around
the same time, Nilsson argued that pastoralism had given way to
farming in Sweden as population densities had increased, perhaps
the earliest example of a processual approach being used to explain
prehistoric change. These projects were the first manifestations of
an interest in ecological research that has persisted to the present
in Scandinavian archaeology. Although Scandinavian archaeologists
were mainly preoccupied with culture-historical questions in the late
nineteenth century and the Second Kitchen-Midden Commission
(1885–1900) largely addressed such issues, Georg Sarauw (1862–
1928) studied the plants and seeds that were recovered by that
project. Gradually, Scandinavian geologists learned more about how
the retreat of the glaciers and the combined results of changing sea
levels and isostatic rebound of land that accompanied this process
had altered distributions of land surfaces, lakes, and oceans in Scan-
dinavia. Other scientists investigated changes in climate, flora, and
fauna. These findings provided archaeologists with information that
allowed them better to understand human land use in prehistoric
times.
   Beginning in 1905, the geologist Gerard de Geer (1858–1943) used
successions of overlapping varve deposits, which formed annually in
lakes in front of glaciers, to date the retreating ice front in Scandi-
navia over the past 12,000 years. This varve sequence was tied in with
30 meters of annual silt deposits on the bed of former Lake Raganda,
which had been drained in 1796. As a result, this study provided
the first calendrically calibrated natural chronology anywhere in the
world in relation to which adjacent prehistoric finds could be dated.
This permitted cultural change to be considered in relation not only
to sequence but to the actual amount of time involved.


                                 315
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   Another Swede, E. J. Lennart von Post (1884–1951), utilized
Gustav Lagerheim’s observation that pollen grains could be pre-
served in soil for thousands of years to elaborate Steenstrup’s pioneer-
ing studies of postglacial floral changes. By 1916, he had produced
graphs that purported to show the percentages of various species
of trees at successive periods of Scandinavian prehistory. The old
sequence of birch, pine, oak, and beech-elm forest was vindicated
but, because pollen is preserved not only in bogs, it was now possi-
ble to examine prehistoric variation in plant communities over larger
areas and to provide evidence of tree cutting and the introduction
of domestic plants. It also became possible to trace fluctuations in
different plant species over much smaller intervals of time than had
been done previously. Forest contour lines were worked out show-
ing the northern limits of various trees at different periods and these
were correlated with De Geer’s geochronology of glacial margins to
achieve a high degree of calendrical precision (Bibby 1956: 183–94).
Between 1940 and 1960, the ecological approach dominated Scan-
dinavian Stone Age research (Kristiansen 2002). Pollen analysis was
introduced into England in the early 1930s and applied to archaeo-
logical problems by the biologist Harry Godwin (1901–1985) (1933).
   In 1898, the geologist Robert Gradmann (1865–1950) noted
a close correlation between wind-deposited loess soils and early
Neolithic settlement in central Europe and erroneously concluded
that, because early farmers were incapable of clearing forests, the
first agricultural settlements had been in areas that were naturally
either devoid of trees or lightly forested (Gradmann 1906). It is
now believed that early farmers preferred loess soils because they
were light and therefore easy to work with wooden tools. The rela-
tions between loess soils and Neolithic settlement continued to be
examined by Alfred Schliz (1906), Ernst Wahle (1915), and Max
Hellmich (1923). Attempts to reconstruct central European natural
palaeoenvironments and early cultural landscapes led to more inten-
sive archaeological studies concerning why certain terrains were or
were not settled at various times in prehistory. Wahle (1889–1981)
(1921) continued to play a major role in this research. Both before
and after World War II, German archaeologists paid much atten-
tion to studying the reciprocal relations between settlement systems
and their ecological contexts (Kossack 1992: 91–2, 101–2). In Russia,
during the late nineteenth century, Dimitri Anuchin, a geographer

                                  316
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

and ethnologist who was also interested in archaeology and had
embraced the culture-historical approach, urged the need to cre-
ate archaeological maps of Russia and interpret archaeological finds
in relation to geographical factors (Klejn 2001b: 1139).
   In the account of his excavations at the stratified site of Anau
in Russian Turkestan (now Turkmenistan) in 1904, the American
geologist and archaeologist Raphael Pumpelly (1837–1923) proposed
the desiccation or oasis theory of the origins of food-production
(1908, I: 65–6). He argued that, as the Middle East became much
drier following the last Ice Age, hunter-gatherers were compelled
to gather around surviving sources of water and to “conquer new
means of support” by domesticating wild animals and grasses. This
theory, which was to become extremely popular among Old World
archaeologists in succeeding decades, is another early example of a
processual explanation (G. Wright 1971: 451–6).
   In Origines Celticae (1883), the Oxford University historian Edwin
Guest (1800–1880) urged that the history of England had to be
understood against the background of British geography. Shortly
after, the Oxford geographer H. J. Mackinder (1861–1947) argued
that the geographical location of nations in relation to one another
played a major role in shaping their political and economic history.
In 1912, F. J. Haverfield (1860–1919) demonstrated a correlation
between the extent of Roman settlement in Britain and particular
types of geographical terrain and John Myres was inspired by Guest
and Mackinder to expound the value of a geographical approach
to archaeology. Also beginning in 1912, O. G. S. Crawford (1886–
1957), who had studied at Oxford and was to work for many years
for the British Ordnance Survey, concentrated on studying prehistory
in relation to the geographical environment. This involved detailed
mapping of the distribution of artifacts and sites associated with spe-
cific periods. It was not until later, however, that archaeologists, such
as Grahame Clark, would use palaeoenvironmental data, such as fossil
pollen, to reconstruct original patterns of vegetation. Among Craw-
ford’s many contributions, he encouraged the employment of aerial
photography to detect ancient ditches, banks, and crop marks that
were not visible from the ground. The importance of aerial recon-
naissance for archaeological research had first been recognized dur-
ing military operations in the course of World War I (Crawford 1923;
Crawford and Keiller 1928).

                                  317
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   W. G. Clark, J. P. Williams-Freeman, Herbert Fleure, W. E. White-
house, and Cyril Fox undertook studies of the relations between
prehistoric settlement and ecology in various parts of Britain. As early
as 1916, Fleure and Whitehouse noted, on the basis of their research
in Wales, that the introduction of bronze, and more especially of iron,
tools had resulted in a major shift of settlement from lighter, more
easily worked, but poorer highland soils to heavier, harder to work,
but more productive lowland ones. These important observations
were published in a paper that was mainly concerned with accounting
for modern “racial” distributions. Fox’s (1882–1967) The Archaeol-
ogy of the Cambridge Region (1923) confirmed that in the pre-Roman
Iron Age, and even more so in Anglo-Saxon times, agricultural set-
tlement had shifted to heavier soils, that were harder to work but
more drought resistant and productive. Still later, in The Person-
ality of Britain, Fox (1932) combined the ecological-distributional
approach of Gradmann and Crawford with the positional geography
of Mackinder to produce some broad generalizations about the rela-
tions between British landscapes and culture-history. He observed
that, because of differences in soil types and more effective agricul-
tural technology, the southern part of England, with its light soils,
had been the major center of population in the Bronze Age, whereas
the greatest concentration had shifted to central England, with its
heavier clay soils, during the Iron Age. His most widely cited con-
tribution was his distinction between the lowlands of southeastern
England, which he saw as always exposed to migrations and diffu-
sion of culture from continental Europe, and the highland areas of
western and northern Britain, which were more sheltered from such
disruptions and, hence, whose inhabitants were more selective in
adopting new items of culture. The approach Fox used in this book
was later applied to other parts of the world (Daniel 1963b; Trigger
1969).
   As early as 1915, Grafton Elliot Smith had championed the idea
that the invention of agriculture, which he believed had occurred as
a result of fortuitous circumstances in Egypt, rather than the produc-
tion of polished stone tools, was the primary criterion of the Neolithic
and marked one of the crucial turning-points in human history. Both
this idea and Pumpelly’s oasis hypothesis were popularized by Harold
Peake (1867–1946) and H. J. Fleure (1877–1969) in the third volume
of their The Corridors of Time (1927), a widely read, multivolume

                                  318
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

series dealing with prehistory. About the same time, W. J. Perry
(1924: 29–32) popularized the claim of the agronomist T. Cherry
that agriculture had been invented in Egypt when people began to
increase the amount of millet and barley that grew spontaneously
on the flood plain by irrigating dry land adjacent to wild stands and
scattering barley seeds in the wet mud left behind at the end of the
annual flood. These contributions raised the discussion of the origins
of agriculture to a new level of theoretical importance.
   Although not constituting analyses of whole cultures, growing
interest in the relations between human societies and their envi-
ronmental settings encouraged a functional-processual view of one
major aspect of human behavior. This approach stimulated the study
of palaeoenvironments and of the ecological adaptation of prehis-
toric cultures to them. Such an approach to analyzing these relations
accorded with the human geography of the period, which was dom-
inated by the possibilist approach advocated by the French geogra-
pher Paul Vidal de La Blache (1845–1918). Geographical possibilism
assumed that the natural environment set limits to the sorts of adap-
tations that were possible rather than determining the specific nature
of the response, which was significantly influenced by cultural tra-
ditions and personal choices (Vidal de La Blache 1952). Possibilism,
like diffusionism, emphasized indeterminacy and unpredictability as
the dominant features of cultural change.


                        Social Anthropology
In the 1920s, a sea-change occured in British anthropology. Ethnol-
ogists reacted against the sterile diffusionism of Grafton Elliot Smith
and his followers by adopting the structuralist-functionalist approach
of Bronislaw Malinowski (1884–1942) and E. R. Radcliffe-Brown
(1881–1955), whose first major works, Malinowski’s Argonauts of the
Western Pacific and Radcliffe-Brown’s The Andaman Islanders both
were published in 1922. Both of these anthropologists argued that
human behavior could be understood best in relation to social sys-
tems that were conceived as made up of functionally interdependent
elements. Malinowski stressed that the institutions that composed
social systems were grounded in biological needs, a view not shared
by Radcliffe-Brown, who sought only to define the social role played
by institutions. The common features of their approaches came to

                                 319
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

be called social anthropology to distinguish them from ethnology,
which was associated with unilinear evolutionism and diffusionism.
   Both Malinowksi and Radcliffe-Brown rejected historical accounts
and missionary records as sources of data on the grounds that they
were anecdotal and unreliable. They stressed the importance of doing
lengthy fieldwork and the need for the detailed analysis of per-
sonal observations by professional anthropologists. Fieldwork ide-
ally required individual anthropologists to live in a community for
a year or longer. The focus of Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown on
observation privileged the study of behavior rather than of people’s
ideas. The latter approach was associated with now outmoded ethno-
graphic efforts to investigate cultures by collecting norms of socially
sanctioned behavior from indigenous informants. This emphasis on
observing behavior was in keeping with the growing popularity of
behaviorism in psychology (J. Watson 1925). Social anthropology
also privileged synchronic analysis.
   British social anthropology was grounded on the work of the
French sociologist Emile Durkheim (1858–1917). Like Karl Marx,
Durkheim viewed societies as systems made up of interdependent
parts. Coming from a family of modest means whose status was
threatened by the rapid social and economic changes taking place in
late-nineteenth-century France, Durkheim interpreted these changes
as threatening the equilibrium of society and the well-being of the
lower-middle class. Although Marx had elaborated theories of inter-
nal conflict to explain social change, Durkheim directed his attention
toward factors that promoted social stability. Like Henri de Saint-
Simon (1760–1825) and Auguste Comte (1798–1857), he advocated
sociology as a practical means to counteract what he saw as social
disintegration in a capitalist society. At the same time, he avoided a
critique of the economic basis of such societies by viewing social rela-
tions as causal in their own right and therefore as capable of being reg-
ulated without significant reference to the economy (Wolf 1982: 9).
His interpretations were elaborated in a series of major publications:
De la division du travail social (1893), Les Règles de la méthode soci-
ologique (1895), Le Suicide (1897), and Les Formes élémentaires de la
vie religieuse (1912).
   Durkheim argued that the objective of social science studies was to
understand social relations and that the explanation of all social pro-
cesses should be sought in the internal constitution of human groups.

                                  320
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

He maintained that simpler societies exhibited in embryo many of
the basic features of more complex ones and therefore provided an
opportunity to study the basic facets of behavior in a setting unclut-
tered by the complexities of more evolved societies (Gosden 1999:
75). Individual aspects of culture, whether they were invented inter-
nally or externally, were said to acquire their significance in terms of
their functional relations to specific social systems. Durkheim rejected
the culture-historical view that social systems and the cultural norms
that were associated with them could be understood as a mechanical
collection of traits that diffusion had brought together largely as a
result of chance. Instead he argued that societies constituted inte-
grated systems, whose institutions were interrelated like the parts of
a living organism. The science of society was thus conceptualized as
a comparative study of social morphologies, similar in its objectives
to comparative anatomy.
   Durkheim also maintained that no change could occur in one part
of a social system without bringing about varying degrees of change
in other parts. Yet he believed that the normal state of society was one
of social solidarity and that rapid changes led to feelings of anomie
or alienation. Thus, he agreed with the diffusionists that change was
contrary to human nature and aligned himself with the conservative
antievolutionists of the late nineteenth century. Nevertheless, he was
interested to some degree in problems of social evolution, which he
studied using ethnographic data. He argued that as societies became
more complex they ceased to be held together by mechanical sol-
idarity, or shared beliefs, and were increasingly united by organic
solidarity, resulting from growing economic interdependence. This
new form of cohesion freed individuals from the tyranny of custom
and tradition (Durkheim 1893).
   Malinowski and, to a still greater extent, Radcliffe-Brown rejected
all evolutionary and historical interpretations of ethnographic data
as speculative and argued that the comparative study of the struc-
ture and functioning of societies currently available for detailed
examination was sufficient to produce generalizations that eventually
would explain the morphological variation among all societies. For
Radcliffe-Brown in particular, the study of change had no significance
apart from the investigation of this variation.
   Although such rejection of an interest in historical processes
might seem to have provided an unpromising basis for a relation

                                  321
                A History of Archaeological Thought

between social anthropology and archaeology, social anthropol-
ogy and Durkheimian sociology encouraged an interest among
archaeologists in how prehistoric cultures had functioned as systems.
That interest increased as archaeologists became disillusioned with
the limitations of a diffusionist or culture-historical approach. With
its conservative views of human behavior, social anthropology pro-
vided a respectable alternative to Marxism for those archaeologists
who were primarily interested in how societies had worked rather
than how change came about. Yet a functional view of archaeolog-
ical data had begun in archaeology long before the development of
social anthropology, in the form of a concern with relations between
prehistoric cultures and their environments.


                       Economic Approaches
As Childe in the late 1920s turned away from the culture-historical
approach, which he later stated he had come to view as merely an
archaeological version of old-fashioned political history in which cul-
tures replaced statesmen and migrations replaced battles (Childe
1958b: 70), he did not deny the importance of diffusion as a pro-
cess bringing about cultural change. He did, however, realize that
diffusion was of no more value for explaining such changes than uni-
linear evolutionary concepts had been, unless archaeologists could
determine what factors within prehistoric cultures favored the adop-
tion of new technologies and practices and influenced the roles that
these innovations came to play. Childe sought to emulate the work
of economic historians by searching for broad economic trends in
prehistory, in terms of which specific instances of diffusion might be
explained. He presented the results of this research in three books:
The Most Ancient East (1928), The Bronze Age (1930), and New Light
on the Most Ancient East (1934). Economic interpretations of prehis-
toric data also played a significant role in The Danube in Prehistory
(1929), which was written before The Most Ancient East.
   Although Childe’s concern with economic factors has been inter-
preted as an early reflection of his commitment to Marxism, he did
not publicly claim to be a Marxist at this time and nothing that
is specifically Marxist is evident in his archaeological work of this
period. British archaeologists such as Peake and Fleure had already
been offering economic interpretations of the archaeological record

                                 322
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

and Childe used many of their ideas to construct a more compre-
hensive model of economic development. It is also evident that his
thinking evolved only slowly from a primary interest in subsistence
patterns to a view that emphasized aspects of the economy that were
not primarily related to subsistence. The importance that he ascribed
to viewing prehistoric cultures as patterns of social relations reflects a
knowledge of Durkheimian sociology that he acquired primarily as a
result of translating into English From Tribe to Empire by Alexandre
Moret and Georges Davy (1926). Davy was a student of Durkheim
who had collaborated with Moret, an Egyptologist, to produce a
Durkheimian interpretation of the development of ancient Egyptian
civilization.
   The Most Ancient East was written as a textbook and a companion
volume to The Dawn of European Civilization. It sought to trace
the origins of the technological innovations that had later spread to
Europe. Childe followed Smith and Fleure in stressing the devel-
opment of agriculture as a crucial turning-point in human history.
He also agreed with Pumpelly that desiccation in the Middle East at
the end of the last Ice Age had caused people to domesticate plants
and animals in order to feed the growing densities of population
that clustered around surviving sources of water. In keeping with
the environmental possibilism that was fashionable at that time, he
stressed that individual hunter-gatherer bands could have perished
or moved north or south into areas where big game survived rather
than developing agriculture.
   According to Childe, only three regions in the vicinity of the
Middle East had enough fertile soil to support the development
of a major early civilization: the Nile, Tigris-Euphrates, and Indus
Valleys. In each of these areas surplus wealth increased even faster
than population, resulting in the concentration of political power, the
rise of city life, and the progress of the industrial arts. Yet, although
these civilizations evolved from a common Neolithic base and main-
tained contact with each other, Mesopotamia developed as a series
of city-states, whereas Egypt quickly was united as a divine monar-
chy. Technological knowledge spread from these early civilizations
to outlying regions, such as Europe, as a result of the civilizations’
trading surplus food and manufactured goods for raw materials, espe-
cially copper and tin. Although Childe based this model on relations
between modern industrial and third-world countries, he argued that

                                   323
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

it was necessary to give “trade” a precise definition whenever the
term was used by specifying the particular sociological, economic,
and environmental conditions that shaped such activities in a specific
area and at a given point in time (Childe 1928: 221; G. Wright 1971).
   In The Bronze Age, Childe studied the origins and spread of met-
allurgy, as documented in the archaeological record. He considered
the possibility that metallurgy might have been invented indepen-
dently in Egypt, the Middle East, Hungary, and Spain, but, like
most diffusionists, concluded that it was such a complex process that
it probably had been invented only once in human history. He also
interpreted specific similarities in the processes used to work bronze
and in the shapes of the earliest metal artifacts in Europe and the Mid-
dle East as proofs of a single origin. Childe was convinced, almost
certainly wrongly, on the basis of Homeric texts, that metal casting
required full-time, although initially itinerant, specialists, who, along
with prospectors and miners, became the first human beings to func-
tion independently of tribal affiliations. The adoption of a metal tool
technology therefore was thought to have produced a double loss
of Neolithic self-sufficiency, as it required communities to become
dependent on craftsmen who were often unrelated to them as well
as on the maintenance of extensive trade routes that were not closed
by periodic outbreaks of tribal warfare and could ensure the regular
delivery of supplies of copper and tin. Although he viewed bronze
working as an important prerequisite for the development of civi-
lizations in the Middle East, he argued that in Europe it was mainly
used to supply weapons to tribal societies, as an increasing popula-
tion and spreading forests (resulting from climatic changes) resulted
in greater competition for agricultural land.
   In New Light on the Most Ancient East, which was written after a
visit to major archaeological excavations in Iraq and the Indus Val-
ley, Childe synthesized and elaborated the arguments advanced in
his two previous books. He maintained that two revolutions had
occurred in prehistoric times in the Middle East that were equiv-
alent in their importance to the Industrial Revolution. These were
the transition from food-collecting to food-producing and from self-
sufficient food-producing villages to urban societies. He believed that
each of these revolutions had resulted in a more productive technol-
ogy and a massive increase in population. The population increase
was, however, assumed by Childe rather than demonstrated by him

                                  324
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

using archaeological evidence. He also overestimated the extent to
which the inhabitants of ancient Middle Eastern cities engaged in
industry, trade, and commerce rather than agricultural activities. He
believed that migrations of surplus population, the exchange of man-
ufactured goods for raw materials, and surplus craftsmen seeking
employment abroad had spread the technologies produced by these
revolutions to Europe. The result was the development in Europe
of a large number of small and fiercely competitive Neolithic and
Bronze Age societies that were structurally very different from those
that had evolved in the Middle East. In due course, conspicuous con-
sumption by the upper classes and the military conflicts of the Middle
Eastern civilizations began to waste more goods than they produced,
while the growth of secondary civilizations reduced the amount of
raw material that was reaching the Middle East. Childe believed that,
as a result of both processes, economic progress eventually ground to
a halt in that region. At the same time, European societies continued
to progress until they were able to outstrip and dominate those of
the Middle East. With this economic explanation, Childe was able
to exorcize the ethnic stereotypes and semiracist theories that he had
invoked to explain the ultimate dominance of European cultures in
The Aryans.
   Childe’s interest in economic development in prehistoric times
drew its inspiration from trends that were active in the European,
and more specifically the British, archaeology of the early twenti-
eth century. Yet he advanced beyond the interpretations of G. E.
Smith, Peake, and Fleure in the consistency with which he applied
an economic approach to the study of prehistory and in the scope
of his formulations. Also, instead of interpreting cultural change as
the result of technological innovation, he saw broader economic and
political contexts influencing the uses that were made of innovations.
This allowed him to explain how the same technological innovations
could produce very different types of societies in Europe and the
Middle East.
   A multilinear evolutionary perspective was inherent in such an
economic approach. Yet Childe was not primarily concerned with
cultural evolution at this time. He stated categorically that “archae-
ology’s revelations . . . disclose not abstract evolution but the interac-
tion of multiple concrete groups and the blending of contributions
from far-sundered regions” (Childe 1928: 11). Like other European

                                   325
                A History of Archaeological Thought

archaeologists, he accepted that increasingly complex technologies
had developed in the Middle East and later in Europe. Yet he
regarded human beings as inherently uninventive and relied heav-
ily on diffusion and migration to explain cultural change. Readers
were told at the end of New Light on the Most Ancient East that the
principal aim of the book was to justify “the general doctrine of cul-
tural diffusion” (Childe 1934: 301). Nor was his materialist perspec-
tive complete at this time. Although he interpreted some economic
change as a response to environmental challenges, much innova-
tion that actually occurred was attributed in a Montelian fashion to
the spontaneous exercise of human intelligence to achieve greater
control over nature and make human life easier and more secure.
Childe also was lax in using archaeological data to test his theories.
Most of his explanations purported to account for general rather
than specific observations concerning the archaeological record. As
a result, they did not provide clear direction for further archaeologi-
cal research. The same was true of most archaeological explanations
of this period. Nevertheless, by considering how economic activi-
ties might have brought about changes within cultures, Childe had
helped to narrow the gap between static reconstructions of prehis-
toric cultures and the appeal to external factors to explain change
that had characterized his earlier culture-historical studies.


                         Soviet Archaeology
It has been claimed that “no previous government in history was so
openly and energetically in favor of science” as was the Soviet regime
that came to power in the autumn of 1917 (L. Graham 1967: 32–3).
The revolutionary leaders of the new state looked to scientific knowl-
edge to modernize the Russian economy and to eliminate Russia’s
age-old religious mysticism, which was viewed as a hindrance to social
and economic progress. The social sciences, including archaeology,
had a crucial role to play in the ensuing ideological struggle. A decree
of the Council of People’s Commissars dated 18 April 1919 and
signed by V. I. Lenin established the Russian Academy for the His-
tory of Material Culture (RAIMK) in Petrograd (St. Petersburg). It
embraced all branches of archaeology. Following the creation of the
Soviet Union, the RAIMK became the State Academy for the History
of Material Culture (GAIMK) and was assigned ultimate jurisdiction

                                  326
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

over archaeological institutions not only in the Russian Republic
but throughout the Union (M. Miller 1956: 47). In 1922, separate
archaeology units were organized at the Universities of Petrograd
and Moscow. Talented students who completed their undergraduate
studies at these and other universities were admitted to the Institute
of Postgraduate Studies of the GAIMK. The best of these students
could hope to become research associates of the Academy or to find
employment in large museums across the Soviet Union. Thus, a pat-
tern of separating archaeological research and undergraduate teach-
ing was established (R. Davis 1983: 409). The encouragement by
the Communist Party of the popularization of scientific knowledge
and research also led to the establishment across the Soviet Union
of a network of museums and regional studies organizations that
were responsible for the investigation and protection of archaeolog-
ical sites. By 1928, there were five times as many museums as there
had been before World War I. Archaeology was a popular subject
in the regional studies societies, where professional archaeologists,
students, and interested amateurs united to carry out and publish
research.
   In 1921, in an effort to promote economic recovery and broaden
the basis of support for the revolution, Lenin inaugurated the New
Economic Policy, which until 1928 restored a limited market econ-
omy to the Soviet Union. As part of this policy, the Soviet govern-
ment adopted an accommodating policy toward the intelligentsia,
most of whom had not supported the Bolshevik Revolution. To
the disgust of hardline revolutionaries, established intellectuals were
entrusted with positions of power and influence, given well-paid jobs,
and allowed considerable scholarly freedom, so long as they did not
actively oppose the regime.
   During the period of the New Economic Policy, a large amount
of archaeological research was carried out and the culture-historical
approach that had begun to develop before 1917 was further elab-
orated. In Moscow and Petrograd, the followers of D. N. Anuchin
and F. K. Volkov pursued their own variants of the palaeoethnolog-
ical approach. They treated archaeology as a branch of ethnology
and maintained that, because of unpredictable idiosyncracies from
one cultural tradition to another, the direct historical approach was
essential to interpret archaeological data. Palaeoethnological archae-
ologists advocated the combined archaeological and ethnographic

                                 327
                A History of Archaeological Thought

study of individual regions. They also maintained that generaliza-
tions about change had to be arrived at empirically and without pre-
conceptions. The leader of the Moscow group was B. S. Zhukov,
whereas P. P. Efimenko, A. A. Miller, and S. I. Rudenko were
prominent members of the Petrograd (later Leningrad) group. In
Moscow, Gorodtsov and his followers continued to view archaeol-
ogy as an independent discipline with its own objectives and meth-
ods. Gorodtsov also continued to promote a diffusionist approach
resembling that of Montelius, although his analytical techniques were
modelled specifically on Sophus Müller’s, not Montelius’s, works.
Gorodtsov’s emphasis on the primary importance of tools and his
interest in formulating regularities that would explain changes in the
archaeological record were indulgently construed by old Marxists
as “progressive,” if not Marxist. Under the influence of the Marxist
sociologist V. M. Friche, some of Gorodtsov’s students, most notably
A. V. Artsikhovsky (1902–1978), developed a “Marxist” approach to
the interpretation of archaeological data. This approach was based
on the belief that technology directly determined the nature of soci-
ety and belief systems. None of the approaches being used at this
time was Marxist, in the sense that it treated socioeconomic factors
as the main driving force behind change, while palaeoethnological
archaeology, with its preference for ties with anthropology and for
inductivism, left itself vulnerable to charges of being anti-Marxist
(Klejn 2001b; Platonova, personal communication).
   Political struggles within the leadership of the Communist Party
following the death of Lenin in 1924 played a role in deciding cultural
policy at this juncture. Joseph Stalin’s program of intensive indus-
trialization and the collectivization of agriculture, which began with
the first Five Year Plan in 1928–1929, reversed the basic economic
principles of the New Economic Policy. As part of his campaign to
consolidate power, Stalin allied himself with cultural radicals who
demanded that intellectuals should be subjected to strict party disci-
pline (S. Fitzpatrick 1974; T. O’Connor 1983: 54, 89). The cultural
revolution, which was initiated by the arrest of engineers and techni-
cians on charges of sabotage and treason, lasted from 1928 to 1932. It
involved a massive campaign to bring Soviet intellectual life into line
with the tenets of Marxist philosophy as they were understood by the
Soviet Communist Party. Many non-Marxist intellectuals and insti-
tutions were purged as the Stalinist bureaucracy sought to suppress

                                 328
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology




    Figure 7.1 V. I. Ravdonikas (1894–1976) (Institute of Archaeology,
                             St. Petersburg)


all opposition to its control. Among the early victims of this cam-
paign were the regional studies societies. From 1930 on, contacts
between Soviet and foreign scholars were forbidden and for a time
current issues of foreign archaeological publications could be found
only in the GAIMK library (M. Miller 1956: 73, 93–4).
   In the late 1920s, a communist cell had been established in the
GAIMK. It was composed mainly of postgraduate students and
research associates. At the beginning of the cultural revolution,
this group began to criticize archaeologists of the old schools and
challenge them to reveal their attitude toward Marxism. In 1929,
Vladislav I. Ravdonikas (1894–1976), a young archaeologist, on
orders from the GAIMK party organization, read a report in the
Academy titled “For a Soviet history of material culture” (Figure 7.1).
This paper was published the following year and widely read by
archaeologists throughout the Soviet Union. It criticized the theo-
retical positions of prominent archaeologists and called for a “Marxist
history of material culture” to replace the old archaeology. The very
concept of archaeology was rejected as that of a bourgeois science

                                   329
                A History of Archaeological Thought

hostile to Marxism. At the Pan-Russian Conference for Archaeology
and Ethnography held at the GAIMK the following May, the party
organization of the academy mounted an exhibition of Soviet archae-
ological literature in which books and papers written since 1917
were denounced for their alleged adherence to formalism, bourgeois
nationalism, and other anticommunist tendencies. The Montelian
typological method was criticized for its idealism, for making fetishes
of artifacts (artifactology), and for improperly interpreting human
history in biological terms (M. Miller 1956: 71–8). This criticism was
followed by the dismissal, and in some cases the exiling, imprison-
ment, or execution of archaeologists who were unable or unwilling
to alter their views or who were regarded as politically dangerous by
the Communist Party. Adherents of the palaeoethnological schools
were suppressed with particular rigor. This suppression was docu-
mented and condemned by the Finnish archaeologist A. M. Tallgren
(1885–1945) (1936) after he was allowed to visit Leningrad in 1935.
In retaliation, he was deprived of his honorary membership in the
GAIMK and denied further entry to the Soviet Union.
   The younger generation of archaeologists, who under Ravdo-
nikas’s leadership came to occupy leading positions, had to elab-
orate a Marxist approach to archaeology. These scholars included
Yevgeni Krichevsky (1910–1942), who studied Neolithic cultures,
A. P. Kruglov (1904–1942) and G. P. Podgayetsky (1908–1941), who
studied the Bronze Age in southern Russia, and P. N. Tret’yakov
(1909–1976), who studied the Old Russian and Slavic cultures. Most
of them were enthusiastic, but not very experienced in Marxism or
in archaeology (Bulkin et al. 1982: 274). The leading theoretician in
these formative years was Ravdonikas, whom even his enemies cred-
ited with exceptional ability. The Communist Party, while supporting
the creation of a Marxist approach to archaeology and reserving the
right to pass judgment on its theory and practice, does not appear
to have provided archaeologists with explicit guidelines. Communist
officials generally knew little about archaeology and hence, while
mandating the creation of a Marxist archaeology, had no idea what
it should look like. Yet they reserved the right, within the terms of
their own dogmatic understanding of Marxism, to pass judgment
on the theories and methods that archaeologists proposed and to
hold archaeologists accountable for the ideological purity of their
proposals.

                                 330
                 Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

  Nor could any specific guidelines be found in the writings of Marx
and Engels. The most relevant statement that Marx had made about
archaeology was that:

     Relics of by-gone instruments of labor possess the same importance
     for the investigation of extinct economic forms of society, as do fossil
     bones for the determination of extinct species of animals. It is not the
     articles made, but how they are made, and by what instruments, that
     enables us to distinguish different economic epochs. Instruments of
     labor not only supply a standard of the degree of development to
     which human labor has attained, but they are also indicators of the
     social conditions under which labor is carried on. (Marx 1906: 200)

Marx had devoted most of his career to studying capitalist societies
and how they had developed from feudal ones. He had begun to
investigate preclass and early class societies late in life and to do so had
to depend on the highly defective and polemical anthropological lit-
erature that was available in the late nineteenth century (Bloch 1985:
21–94). Thus, he and Engels left many questions about the sorts of
societies that archaeologists study unanswered, including how these
societies had evolved. This meant that archaeologists had to rely,
not on the well-developed Marxist concepts that were available to
most other social scientists, but on the basic principles of Marxism,
as these were formulated in Marx’s and Engels’s own writings and in
later exegeses.
   Marx summarized the basic principles on which he based his analy-
zes of society in the preface to his Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy (1859):

     In the social production that human beings carry on, they enter
     into definite relations that are indispensable and independent of
     their will, relations of production which correspond to a definite
     stage of development of their material forces of production. . . .
     The mode of production in material life determines the general
     character of the social, political, and intellectual processes of life.
     It is not the consciousness of humans that determines their exis-
     tence; it is on the contrary their social existence that determines
     their consciousness. (Marx and Engels 1962, I: 362–3)

   Nineteenth-century Marxism was characterized by an unswerving
devotion to a materialist analysis of the human condition. The cru-
cial factor that Marx identified as shaping social systems was the eco-
nomic base, which consists of the forces and relations of production.

                                      331
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

Although Marxists disagree concerning the precise definitions of
these terms, the forces of production are widely interpreted as
embracing not only all forms of technology but also all utilized
resources, human and nonhuman, and all scientific knowledge (L.
Graham 1967: 34–5). The relations of production signify the ways in
which individual human beings relate with one another to utilize the
forces of production to produce and distribute goods. They there-
fore embrace not only what Western anthropologists would identify
as economic behavior but also various facets of social behavior. The
economic base is seen as playing a powerful role in shaping other
aspects of society, such as concepts of property, family life, political
organization, law, religious beliefs, aesthetics, and philosophical and
organizational aspects of scientific activities. All of these are collec-
tively referred to as society’s superstructure. Marx did not believe
that technological change came about as a result of human beings’
using their intellect to develop more effective ways to control their
environment, as Victorian evolutionists and Enlightenment philoso-
phers did. Instead, he argued that technological change must be
understood in a social context. Although new technologies bring
about social and political changes, they themselves are the products
of specific social contexts that influence what innovations are likely
or unlikely to occur. This is what Engels meant when he wrote that
“the determining element in the historical process in the final analysis
is production, and the reproduction of human life. . . . If somebody
distorts this principle into the belief that the economic element is the
only determining element, then [that person] has transformed [the
materialist understanding of history] into an empty, abstract phrase”
(Marx and Engels 1962, 2: 488).
   Marx and Engels stressed internal contradictions of interest and
conflicts between different classes as being prominent features of
complex human societies and the most important sources of social
change. They analyzed every society of this sort as containing
within itself tendencies that both promote and oppose change. They
believed that each such society contains the seeds of the destruction
of its present state and at the same time the embryo of a future con-
dition. The antagonism between these two tendencies generates the
energy that brings about change. Marx did not deny that superstruc-
tural factors, such as entrenched political hierarchies or powerful reli-
gious beliefs, can be of great historical importance but he maintained

                                  332
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

that this is so only insofar as they are capable of preventing change.
More positively he emphasized that all “human beings make their
own history . . . not under circumstances chosen by themselves . . . but
directly encountered, given, and transmitted from the past” (Marx
1852 in Marx and Engels 1962, I: 247). Although Marx attributed
great importance to beliefs, values, and patterns of behavior inherited
from the past, he also believed in the considerable power of individ-
uals to evaluate their material self-interest rationally and to unite in
collective action to modify existing conditions in their own interests
and those of their class. He did not rule out the possibility that cul-
tural traditions might be so strong or the ability of ruling groups to
manipulate beliefs to serve their own purposes so great as to stifle
opposition and prevent socioeconomic change. Yet he maintained
that changes that benefit an ever larger number of human beings
can occur only if progressive economic transformations are not over-
whelmed by such reactionary forces. For Marx, freedom was not just
freedom from toil and political constraint but the ability of individu-
als to participate in the creation of new social options for themselves
(Miller et al. 1989b: 4).
   In his own research, Marx endeavored both to explain concrete his-
torical events and to generalize about evolutionary trends in human
history. In The XVIIIth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte and The Class
Struggle in France, 1848–1850, he sought to account for historical
events not as collective responses to economic conditions but in terms
of the conflicting interests of various social and economic groups that
were seeking to preserve or enhance their power. These studies stress
intentionality and the social reproduction of reality rather than treat-
ing human behavior as the passive consequence of social forces. He
also observed that every society was the product of its own sepa-
rate history and therefore responded to economic changes in its own
distinctive fashion. Because of this, it was impossible to formulate
general laws that would explain all of the concrete reality of cultural
change in a predictive fashion. In some of his writings, there is a
suggestion that he believed in multilinear evolution, at least in the
short and middle range (Hobsbawm 1964). Yet he also believed in
an ideal course for human development that would run from prim-
itive egalitarian societies, through class societies, to the technolog-
ically advanced, egalitarian societies of the future. Over the years,
Marxists have varied in the degree to which they have emphasized

                                  333
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

the historical complexity or evolutionary regularity of human history.
Soviet scholarship, rooted in the writings of G. V. Plekhanov (1856–
1918) and reinforced by Stalin’s dogmatic views, tended to stress a
strongly evolutionary and deterministic view of social change (Bloch
1985: 95–123).
   Marx also maintained that, because of entrenched beliefs and class
loyalties, it was impossible to create a socially and politically neutral
social science in a class society, since such studies inevitably are influ-
enced by the class prejudices of the scholars who undertake them. Yet
Marx did not view the ancient Sumerian and modern capitalist world
views relativistically. Instead, he interpreted them as positions that
are qualitatively distinct in terms of their potential for human action.
He also claimed for Marxism a privileged position compared to all
other philosophical or scientific approaches to understanding human
behavior. Insofar as it discouraged self-criticism among Marxists, the
belief that in a future classless society knowledge would be free of
all class bias and therefore objective, and that Marxism was an antic-
ipation of such knowledge, constituted a dangerous flaw in Marxist
thinking.
   Ravdonikas and his colleagues attempted to render archaeologi-
cal data valuable to society by making them useful for the Marxist
study of history. They were committed to using their data to illus-
trate the laws and regularities of historical processes and by doing
so to demonstrate the accuracy and utility of Marxist concepts. The
specific task they set themselves was to explain in Marxist terms the
changes that had occurred in prehistoric times. The primary con-
text in which such changes were held to be comprehensible was no
longer technology but social organization. The concept of successive
ages of stone, bronze, and iron was abandoned on the ground that
it had its source in an understanding not of society but too narrowly
of the raw materials prevailing in the development of technology.
Archaeologists were called on not only to describe their finds but also
to reconstruct the societies that had produced them. This involved
defining the modes of production of these societies and determining
as much as possible about their technology, social organization, and
ideological concepts (M. Miller 1956: 79).
   This approach had many valuable consequences. By directing the
attention of archaeologists to how ordinary people had lived, it
encouraged them to undertake large-scale horizontal excavations of

                                   334
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology




    Figure 7.2 Plan of Palaeolithic hut found at Buryet, reproduced in
                        Antiquity by Childe, 1950


settlements, camp sites, and workshops (R. Davis 1983: 410). Greater
attention also was paid to evidence of dwellings and the relations of
different types of artifacts to these structures. This resulted in the
first identification of Palaeolithic dwellings anywhere in the world
(Childe 1950b) (Figure 7.2) and some of the first total excavations
of Neolithic villages. When cemeteries were excavated, it was mainly
to investigate religious beliefs and to ascertain the social structures
of the societies that had produced them.

                                   335
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   Some interpretations were unsound, such as P. I. Boriskovsky’s
suggestion that female statuettes and what appeared to be the remains
of longhouses were evidence of matriarchal clan societies in Upper
Palaeolithic times (R. Davis 1983: 413–4). By contrast, in 1934 P. N.
Tret’yakov, on the basis of examination by forensic experts, deter-
mined from fingerprints on the interiors of vessels that the pottery
associated with prehistoric hunter-fisher cultures of northern and
central Russia was manufactured by women. He went on to argue
that the uniformity of pottery styles within individual sites and the
considerable variation between sites indicated a matrilocal marriage
pattern, which resulted in the potters of each small community hand-
ing on their traditions from one generation to the next undisturbed
by external influences (Childe 1943: 6). Similar interpretations were
not attempted by American archaeologists before the 1960s and these
studies were less archaeological in that the identification of the sex
of the potters depended entirely on the direct historical approach
(Binford 1972: 61).
   This emphasis on how people had lived led to one of Soviet archae-
ology’s major contributions to world archaeology. S. A. Semenov
(1898–1978) had considerable success in determining the uses that
had been made of prehistoric stone and bone tools by experimentally
reproducing the processes that had caused the patterns of use-wear
found on them. Although this approach, which is closely aligned to a
Marxist interest in production, had been pioneered by Nilsson in the
first half of the nineteenth century, it was almost completely ignored
by Western archaeologists until an English translation of Semenov’s
Prehistoric Technology (1964) was published.
   Archaeologists also were encouraged to explain changes in the
archaeological record as the results of internal social develop-
ments. For example, in their Clan Societies of the Steppes of Eastern
Europe, Kruglov and Podgayetsky (1935) related changes in Cop-
per Age burial customs in southern Russia to developing concepts
of property. They suggested that collective tombs correlated with
the communal ownership of the means of production and indi-
vidual barrows with patriarchal pastoral societies. They also sug-
gested that, as property became more important in evolving soci-
eties, the greed of heirs gradually curtailed the burial of large
amounts of valuable possessions with the dead (Childe 1942d:
133, 1945a). Because of their concern with social change, Soviet

                                 336
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

archaeologists revived an interest in cultural evolution as well as
associated concepts of development and progress, at a time when
diffusionism was in the ascendant in North America and the rest of
Europe.
   Yet Marxist studies of archaeological data labored under severe
intellectual restrictions at this time. Social evolution was concep-
tualized in terms of a unilinear scheme of socioeconomic forma-
tions loosely derived from Engels’s The Origin of the Family, Private
Property, and the State, which in turn had been based largely on
Marx’s study of Morgan’s Ancient Society. Preclass societies were
divided into successive preclan, matriarchal clan, patriarchal clan,
and terminal clan stages followed by three forms of class society:
slave, feudal, and capitalist; and two more forms of advanced class-
less society: socialist and communist. The latter form, characterized
by economic as well as social and political equality, was regarded
as the final stage of human development and not subject to further
change (M. Miller 1956: 78–9; Yu. Semenov 1980). This formulation
was accorded canonical status during the Stalin period and scien-
tific criticism of it was not allowed. Archaeologists had to interpret
their findings in accordance with this scheme and also in agreement
with the classics of Marxism-Leninism. The only leeway permitted
was the recognition that many archaeological cultures might be in
a transitional rather than a pure state with respect to their stage of
development. There also was debate concerning the archaeological
criteria that might reveal to which stage of development an archae-
ological culture belonged. The dogmatism with which Soviet social
scientists adhered to this scheme contrasts sharply with the views
expressed by Marx and Engels, who were prepared to consider mul-
tilinear models of social evolution, especially with regard to earlier
and less well understood periods of human development.
   Still worse, within the GAIMK, Soviet archaeological research was
now subjected to the intellectual as well as the administrative control
of Nikolay Marr (1865–1934), a linguist with archaeological interests.
Marr rejected the universally held belief that new languages evolve
from ancestral forms as the result of a gradual process of phono-
logical, grammatical, and lexical differentiation. Instead, he believed
that linguistic change occurred as a response to alterations in the
socioeconomic organization of the societies with which languages
are associated. As a result, similarities among languages indicate the

                                 337
                A History of Archaeological Thought

stage of evolution that various societies have reached rather than their
historical affinities. In Marr’s view of human history, there was no
place for proto-languages, linguistic homelands, or language families.
On the basis of a superficial resemblance between this theory and the
Marxist scheme of unilinear sociopolitical evolution, Marr’s theory
of linguistic change enjoyed political favor. It enabled archaeologists
to ignore even the most blatant evidence of ethnic movements in the
archaeological record and to interpret the archaeological sequence
for each region from earliest times to the present as stages in the
history of a single people.
   Ravdonikas argued that in the Crimea an autochthonous popu-
lation had in turn manifested itself as Iranian-speaking Scythians,
German-speaking Goths (whose language was proclaimed to be his-
torically unrelated to German languages farther west), and, finally,
Slavs. Mikhail Artamonov maintained that the Khazars had not come
from farther east to the Don Valley and the northern Caucasus but
had evolved locally and hence were not Turks and M. Khudyakov
asserted that the Volga Tatars were likewise not Turks but had devel-
oped as a result of the amalgamation of local tribes (M. Miller 1956:
81–2). This view also tended to inhibit an interest in physical anthro-
pology, insofar as the latter was directed toward distinguishing eth-
nic groups in the archaeological record (Trigger 1980a: 104). Skele-
tal differences often were interpreted as physical changes that had
accompanied sociocultural evolution.
   Although Soviet archaeologists professed to be interested in the
prehistory of various ethnic groups, their unilinear evolutionary
approach discouraged the investigation of sorts of cultural variation
that might have had ethnic significance. Diffusion also was rejected
on the grounds that it denigrated human creativity. The only his-
torical process that was acknowledged was the gradual merging over
time of various small human groups to form larger and more complex
ones, each of which evolved its own distinctive ethnicity and culture.
Because each larger group could be the mixture of a heterogeneous
assortment of older ethnic groups, it was impossible to identify any
early prehistoric archaeological culture with any recent language and
no modern ethnic group could be regarded as having a deep history.
Some archaeologists abandoned the concept of the archaeological
culture as having any analytical utility. What emerged was a power-
ful emphasis on all human groups evolving independently through a

                                  338
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

uniform series of stages, which in turn was construed as evidence of
the ability of all humans to participate in human progress.
   V. A. Shnirelman (1995, 1996) correlates this formulation with
Stalin’s emphasis on uniform administrative structures and his repres-
sion of “local nationalism,” which replaced an earlier Leninist policy
of granting more autonomy to various ethnic groups. Yet, in the
1930s, Marr’s concept of the autonomous development of peoples
was represented as a rejection of what Soviet authorities viewed as
the antievolutionary and often racist theories of cultural development
prevailing in western Europe. After Marr died in 1934, his doctrines
continued to enjoy official patronage and dominated archaeological
interpretations until 1950. At that time, Stalin, in his essay “Concern-
ing Marxism in linguistics,” denounced Marr’s teachings as absurd,
pointing out that contrary to Marr’s prediction the same Russian
language continued to be spoken in the Soviet Union as had been
spoken in tsarist Russia.
   The heavy emphasis that was placed on the sociological inter-
pretation of archaeological data and the rejection of the Montelian
approach inhibited an interest in the systematic classification of arti-
facts, which was labeled goloye veshchevedeniye (naked artifactology).
The attention paid to classification in the past was condemned as
part of a bourgeois tendency to ignore the social and political sig-
nificance of archaeological data. Hence classification, like diffusion
and migration, acquired negative political connotations. The neglect
of classification had long-term adverse effects on Soviet archaeology,
which continued, in terms of typology, cultural chronology, and the
defining of cultural units to lag far behind research being done in
central and western Europe (Bulkin et al. 1982: 288–90).
   The cultural revolution was followed by an officially mandated
period of consolidation. Although the government accepted Soviet
archaeology as being adequately developed in a political sense,
greater technical expertise was now required to improve the gen-
eral practice of the discipline. In 1934 there was a call, in all
branches of Soviet historical scholarship, for greater professional-
ization, better techniques, and higher quality research. The polem-
ical and programmatic literature that had dominated the previous
period was abandoned in favor of more conventional empirical stud-
ies. The term archaeology had been revived, early in 1931, as the
name of a discipline, although to distinguish it from “bourgeois

                                  339
                A History of Archaeological Thought

archaeology” the form practiced in the Soviet Union was hence-
forth to be called “Soviet archaeology” (M. Miller 1956: 108–9). All
branches of archaeology continued to be studied in history depart-
ments and higher degrees in archaeology were always in history. It
was argued that this unity of history and archaeology and their shared
commitment to a Marxist historical approach helped archaeologists
to understand their findings from a holistic perspective that united
an interest in specific culture-historical processes with a more gen-
eral concern with the evolution of society and culture. It also was
once again possible to refer to the traditional technological stages
of development, although technology alone was no longer accorded
explanatory significance.
   During the 1930s, chairs and archaeology units were established
in a large number of universities, new monographs and mono-
graph series were published, and Sovetskaya Arkheologiya, which was
to become the leading Soviet archaeological journal, was begun.
Archaeological salvage work expanded rapidly in conjunction with
the massive industrial projects that started in 1928. Special archaeo-
logical expeditions were attached to each major construction project.
These investigated the affected terrain before and during construc-
tion, carried out excavations, and studied the findings. In the 1930s,
nearly 300 expeditions were at work annually (Bulkin et al. 1982: 276).
Tours of excavations, exhibitions, and popular publications served
as means of public instruction. Archaeologists also applied them-
selves to practical work, such as studying ancient irrigation systems
as guides to modern development and locating ancient mining sites
that might still be of commercial value. This practice was especially
common between 1935 and 1941 (M. Miller 1956: 112).
   The development of Slavic archaeology and its use to promote
Slavic patriotism beginning in the late 1930s, which already has been
discussed in Chapter 6, were accompanied by efforts to cultivate the
loyalty of other ethnic groups to the Soviet Union. Archaeologists
began to trace the ethnic particularities of such groups into antiq-
uity, to define their ethnic territories, and to glorify their ancestral
cultures. There was a dramatic increase in knowledge of the prehis-
toric archaeology of the Caucasus, Central Asia, and Siberia. Various
rich finds were made in these areas, such as remains of the ancient
states of Urartu and Parthia and the tumuli at Trialeti and Pazyryk
(Frumkin 1962). Researchers were now taking account of culturally

                                  340
              Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

specific characteristics of the archaeological record and of types of
prehistoric human behavior that they had previously ignored. The
archaeological record was becoming more diverse and colorful as it
was seen to be filled with ethnic groups whose cultural differences
were now acknowledged to be of considerable interest.
   The cultural diversity that was becoming increasingly evident in
the archaeological record in turn raised questions about how such
data were to be analyzed and related to the prevailing unilinear evo-
lutionary scheme. Leo Klejn (2001b: 1140) has observed that many
archaeologists who began to research and theorize about “ethnogen-
esis” in the late 1930s, such as M. Artamonov, P. N. Tret’yakov, and
S. P. Tolstov, had been students of palaeoethnologists, such as
Alexander Miller, Petr Efimenko, and B. S. Zhukov, in the 1920s.
These archaeologists sought to discover “ethnic indictors” and use
them to identify various ethnic groups in prehistory. Yet ethno-
graphic research weakened this approach by demonstrating the com-
plexity of the relations between material culture, language, and group
identity as revealed by a self-bestowed name (Dragadze 1980). It also
was discussed whether systematic variations in Mousterian assem-
blages in the Caucasus region reflected ethnic groups or functional
variations in site use, producing a debate that had much in common
with that between Bordes and Binford concerning the Mousterian of
western Europe (R. Davis 1983). By the 1940s, the discussion of diffu-
sion and migration was no longer prohibited, although the evidence
had to be very convincing and usually was confined to the territory of
the Soviet Union (Trigger 1980a: 104). These tendencies were rein-
forced after Marr’s theories were officially repudiated in 1950 and
with them the main underpinning for the concept of autochthonous
development. By the 1950s, some migrations of ethnic groups were
seen as covering great distances.
   Nevertheless, the evolutionary approach persisted, most notably
in the form of V. M. Masson’s “sociological archaeology.” This
approach was notably associated with research being done in the
Caucasus and Central Asia, where the earliest agricultural economies
and the first urban civilizations had evolved within the territory of
the Soviet Union. Sociological archaeology sought to reconstruct
the economic, social, and ideological structures of ancient societies
in order to establish the laws as well as the particular phenomena
and processes that brought about change (Bulkin et al. 1982: 281).

                                 341
                A History of Archaeological Thought

Systematic studies begun in 1937 by S. P. Tolstov in Turkmenia docu-
mented the development of ancient irrigation systems. Later research
in southern Turkmenia investigated the sequential development of a
food-producing economy and of Bronze Age class societies in that
region (Kohl 1981a). Although major efforts were made to recon-
struct tool use, the operation of irrigation systems, and the economy
and social composition of urban centers, at least one American com-
mentator noted the absence of detailed discussions of the relative
importance of population pressure, irrigation agriculture, settlement
patterns, warfare, economic exchanges, and religious integration as
factors bringing about change (Lamberg-Karlovsky 1981: 388). Soci-
ological archaeology reflected a continuing belief that Marxist stadial
theory provided a detailed explanation of cultural change rather than
a desire to use archaeological data to refine and elaborate an under-
standing that would take account of the distinctive features of the
archaeological record.
   Many of the more traditional Soviet archaeologists believed that
historical information could be extracted from archaeological data
using only common sense and the theoretical apparatus of conven-
tional historical analysis. These inferences could then be combined
with the findings from written historical sources, ethnography, his-
torical linguistics, art history, folklore, and any other information
that was deemed relevant for studying the past. Although not deny-
ing that they employed distinctive methods to recover and analyze
their data, these archaeologists did not believe that it was neces-
sary to elaborate any specifically archaeological concepts that would
distinguish archaeological interpretation from the general stream of
historical analysis.
   The period following Stalin’s death in 1953 witnessed less polit-
ical interference in Soviet scholarship and in Soviet life generally.
Although this era has been described as one of “problems” (Gening
1982) or even “crisis” (Soffer 1985: 11–13), it also was a time
when Soviet archaeologists attempted discretely to repair the dam-
age inflicted on their discipline during the cultural revolution. No
archaeologist publicly questioned archaeology’s status as a historical
discipline or the appropriateness of interpreting human behavior in
Marxist terms. Some archaeologists did suggest, however, that the
progress of archaeology was hampered by failure to pay adequate
attention to the specific characteristics of archaeological data. This

                                 342
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

trend was assisted as Western books and periodicals became more
available and more personal contacts were established between Soviet
and Western archaeologists. To give them political legitimacy, these
new ideas were implied to constitute a shift from the evolutionary
and polemical to the historical and more scientific poles of Marxist
explanations (Bulkin et al. 1982).
   Many Soviet archaeologists urged the necessity for strict indica-
tors and standardized procedures for the analysis of archaeological
data. Although central European archaeologists could refer to spe-
cific types of fibulae, such as Almgren 67 or 236, which have care-
fully defined formal characteristics and temporal associations, Soviet
archaeologists used general descriptive phrases, such as “fibula with
a high catch-guard” (Bulkin et al. 1982: 288; Klejn 1982). Some
work was done using attribute analyses and complex mathematical-
statistical procedures. These procedures made it possible to recognize
artifacts as multivariate phenomena rather than simply as products of
cultural norms. Opponents of this trend in archaeology accused it
of overestimating the potential of a typological approach to reveal
historical information (Bulkin et al. 1982: 282).
   In the Soviet Union, archaeological cultures had generally been
larger-scale taxonomic units than they were in central and western
Europe, perhaps partly as a result of the vast areas that had to be
studied. Beginning in the early 1970s, efforts were made to formulate
a uniform definition of the archaeological culture for use throughout
the Soviet Union. In 1972, V. M. Masson suggested a hierarchy
of units – local variant, archaeological culture, and culture group –
which was explicitly modeled on the scheme that David Clarke had
presented in his Analytical Archaeology (1968). Masson also proposed
that the levels of this hierarchy could be defined in terms of the extent
of the coincidence of artifact types. An even more elaborate scheme
was proposed by Klejn (1982). Yet it was no easier in the Soviet Union
than in the West for archaeologists to agree about how archaeological
cultures were to be defined or their precise sociological meaning. Nor
could it be agreed how they fitted into a Marxist analysis of social
change.
   Beginning in 1928, to avoid committing the sin of “artifactol-
ogy,” Soviet archaeologists not only had shunned creating artifact
typologies and defining cultures but also had avoided the system-
atic construction of relative chronologies using archaeological data.

                                  343
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

In 1957, Childe expressed to Glyn Daniel his opinion that the pre-
historic chronology of the Soviet Union was a series of hopelessly
vague guesses that did not attract, still less convince, him (Daniel
1958: 66–7). After the 1950s, neglect of this activity was reinforced
by a growing reliance on radiocarbon dates to date sites. Because of
their failure to construct a detailed prehistoric cultural-chronology,
Soviet archaeologists were unable to correlate changes in material cul-
tures in adjacent regions with desirable precision. Such an approach
had been alien to Soviet archaeology in its early stages as a result
of its preoccupation with unilinear evolution and its advocacy of
the autochthonous development of cultures. Only gradually was the
need for detailed cultural chronologies articulated and efforts made
to begin to rectify the damage inflicted on Soviet archaeology as a
whole by decades of politically enforced neglect of this subject.
   Archaeological activity continued to expand in the Soviet Union
from 1956 to 1991. In 1985, about 700 expeditions were active, and
toward the end of that decade 4000 archaeological books and papers
were being published annually. Yet Klejn (2001b: 1135) views the
continuing combination of relative scholarly independence in tech-
nical matters and overall political supervision as leading to intel-
lectual stagnation. Despite the suffocating political environment in
which it developed and continued to function, Soviet archaeology
is notable as the first form of functional-processual archaeology to
try to account for changes in the archaeological record not simply
in terms of environmental, ecological, or narrowly defined economic
relations but also in terms of social factors, in particular the relations
of production. Soviet archaeology’s greatest shortcoming was its fail-
ure to operationalize its theory by connecting it more systematically
to its data. Given the political circumstances, this was impossible even
to attempt.


                Childe as a Marxist Archaeologist
In 1935, Childe visited the Soviet Union for the first time. When
he was there, he met Russian archaeologists, toured museums, and
gathered information about recent archaeological discoveries relating
to the prehistory of eastern Europe (S. Green 1981: 76–7). He was
impressed by the lavish government support for archaeology, the
vast scale on which archaeological research was being conducted,

                                   344
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

and the use being made of archaeological finds for public education.
Above all, he was fascinated by the efforts of Soviet archaeologists
to explain history in terms of processes internal to societies and on
explicitly materialist principles. Their work revealed the narrowness of
his own economic interpretations, which he henceforth contrasted
unfavorably with the Marxist view that the forces and relations of
production played a major role in determining the general character
of societies.
   On the basis of his own experience, Childe did not accept the
entire program of Soviet archaeology. He rejected its detailed scheme
of socioeconomic formations and any other unilinear formulation
of social evolution. Later, he criticized the Soviet government for
compelling archaeologists to assume in advance that this scheme was
correct rather than encouraging them to use archaeological evidence
to test and refine it (Childe 1951: 28–9). Moreover, he did not see
how archaeologists might infer many of the specific details of social
organization that were required to relate this stadial scheme to their
work. He also refused to stop regarding diffusion as a major factor
promoting cultural development (Childe 1933a, 1933b, 1946a: 24)
and to abandon the major emphasis he had placed on typology, which
he saw as essential for constructing regional chronologies and tracing
cultural influences between one region and another. His experience
as a prehistoric archaeologist led him to incorporate what he believed
were the important innovations of Soviet archaeology into his own
work and to reject what he saw as its shortcomings. In the post-Stalin
era, Soviet archaeologists confirmed the wisdom of his choices by
working to modify precisely those features of early Soviet archaeology
that Childe had found objectionable.
   Following his visit to the Soviet Union, Childe sought to replace
his earlier emphasis on economic factors as the principal cause of
social change with analyses that were more in accord with Marxist
principles. He also paid attention for the first time to cultural evo-
lution, which was a topic of theoretical interest that had remained
important in Marxist scholarship but had not been significant in his
own writings or in cutting-edge western European archaeology since
the 1880s. In the course of a decade he published three books dealing
with cultural evolution: Man Makes Himself (1936), What Happened
in History (1942a), and Progress and Archaeology (1944a), as well as a
case study Scotland Before the Scots (1946a). The first two were written

                                  345
                A History of Archaeological Thought

for the general public as well as for professional archaeologists and
were widely read.
   In Man Makes Himself, Childe interpreted the archaeological
record as evidence of a general directional process whereby the sci-
entific knowledge accumulated by human beings gave progressive
societies ever greater control over nature and led to the formation
of new and more complex sociopolitical systems. He later regarded
these views as not being significantly different from the idealist Mon-
telian conception of cultural change (Childe 1958b: 72). In What
Happened in History, he attempted in a more explicitly Marxist fash-
ion to formulate explanations of cultural change that were focused
not on technological knowledge as a prime mover but on social, polit-
ical, and economic institutions and the role they played in bringing
about change.
   Childe did not embrace unilinear evolutionism in these studies any
more than he had done previously or was to do later, although he was
erroneously accused of doing so by Julian Steward (1953, 1955: 12),
who influenced many American archaeologists to regard Childe as a
typical nineteenth-century evolutionist. In Man Makes Himself and
What Happened in History, in which he concentrated on the develop-
ment of cultures in the Middle East, Childe presents a more unilinear
view of cultural change than he does in his works in which develop-
ments in Europe and the Middle East are examined alongside one
another (Childe 1930, 1951). Nevertheless, even in these two books
he continued to attribute the differences between the city-states that
developed in Mesopotamia and the divine monarchy that united Old
Kingdom Egypt to divergent social and political techniques for con-
trolling agricultural surpluses that had been created in the course of
the transformation of different tribal societies into class ones. Writ-
ing under the shadow of expanding Nazi power and World War II,
Childe also rejected the naive faith in the inevitability of progress
that characterized many vulgarized versions of Marxism no less than
it did the unilinear cultural evolutionism of the nineteenth century.
Childe’s pessimism led him to make a significant contribution to
Marxist studies of change by providing a detailed analysis of the
social conditions that impede progress.
   Childe argued that at any level of social development, but especially
in the early civilizations, entrenched political hierarchies and inflex-
ible systems of religious beliefs could slow or even halt social and

                                  346
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

economic change. He distinguished between progressive societies, in
which relations of production favor an expansion of productive forces
and there are harmonious relations among the means of production,
social institutions, and the dominant system of beliefs, and conser-
vative societies, in which social and political factors block change.
The ruling classes in early civilizations, according to Childe, sought
to prevent technological changes that might threaten their control
of society. They did this not only by the use of force but also by
monopolizing surplus wealth, exercising bureaucratic control over
craftsmen, inhibiting the pursuit of technical knowledge, and patron-
izing magic and superstition on a lavish scale. They only succeeded,
however, at the cost of making it more difficult for their own societies
to compete with more progressive ones. He offered this explanation
for what he saw as the eventual backwardness of Middle Eastern civi-
lizations by comparison with European ones as a replacement for the
older, more narrowly economic explanation he had provided in New
Light on the Most Ancient East. Childe now ascribed important roles
in shaping history to both the economic base and the superstruc-
ture of societies. Yet he was careful to specify that, where a dogmatic
ideology was dominant, its influence could only be negative.
   This position provides a definitive answer to those British Marx-
ists, such as George Thomson (1949), who accused him of ignoring
class conflict in the early civilizations. Childe argued that social evo-
lution occurred slowly, if at all, in those early civilizations because
such struggles were blunted by highly effective political and religious
techniques of social control. He did not ignore the concept of class
struggle in the early civilizations or reject it because he thought it
inapplicable for studies based on archaeological data; rather, he did
not find it useful for explaining ancient Middle Eastern civilizations,
which he believed remained static for long periods. In his analyses
of later classical civilizations, and in particular of the Roman Empire,
he placed greater emphasis on struggles among groups within soci-
eties to control wealth and power and on shifting patterns of political
control.
   Despite Childe’s growing interest in evolutionary processes, he
remained as sceptical as were most culture-historical archaeologists
about the value of ethnographic analogies, except where historical
continuities were apparent. He regarded modern hunter-gatherer
societies, such as those of Australia, as ones that had failed to develop

                                  347
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

technologically, and suspected that instead they had elaborated com-
plex forms of social organization and “painful” and “incoherent”
rituals that had blocked further technological development. Hence,
he believed that in crucial respects modern hunter-gatherer societies
were unlike the Palaeolithic ones from which more complex societies
had evolved. He also believed that the same dichotomy held at the
level of tribal cultivators. Childe thus proposed two general lines of
cultural evolution: a progressive one, characterized by continuous
technological development combined with a flexible social organiza-
tion and ideology, and a conservative one, characterized by a static
technology and the elaboration of convoluted social structures and
ideologies (1936: 46). Although based on Marxist ideas, this model
bore little relation to generally held Marxist evolutionary concepts.
His interpretation of cultural development, like his changing efforts
to explain what he saw as the eventual superiority of European cul-
ture, looks curiously like an attempt to reformulate Lubbock’s view
of human evolution in nonracist terms.
   In Scotland Before the Scots, Childe attempted to apply a Soviet-style
approach to the interpretation of a specific corpus of Western archae-
ological data. He sought to use archaeological information concern-
ing subsistence patterns, houses, handicrafts, trade, and burial cus-
toms to infer changing modes of production and the accompanying
development of larger and more hierarchical groups and new ide-
ologies. Inspired by Kruglov and Podgayetsky’s explanation of the
evolution of Bronze Age society in southern Russia, he saw Scot-
land gradually developing from a network of egalitarian tribal soci-
eties based on communal property into a state society. The key factor
bringing about change was the emergence of private property, which
he believed was mirrored archaeologically in the replacement of com-
munal tombs by various types of individual burials expressing status
differences. Childe concluded that this approach produced “a picture
of Scotland’s development which was far more realistic and far more
historical” than he had achieved by means of migrationist hypotheses
in his early studies of Scottish prehistory (1958b: 73). Yet he refused
categorically to subscribe to the dogmatic scheme of social evolution
used by Soviet archaeologists or to rule out diffusion and migration
as significant factors bringing about social and cultural change.
   During and after World War II, Childe continued to cultivate a
Marxist understanding of social change. Yet, as a result of his growing

                                  348
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

disillusionment with the low quality of archaeological research being
done in the Soviet Union, he turned away from Soviet archaeology
as a major source of creative inspiration and began to investigate the
philosophical basis of Marxism itself. He worked hard to acquire a
more profound and less dogmatic understanding of Marxism as an
analytical tool and to apply it to the interpretation of archaeological
data. He also read widely in philosophy and studied British social
anthropology and American cultural anthropology (Childe 1946b).
   Childe’s reading of Marx led him to pay increasing attention to
the cognitive aspects of human behavior. From Marx’s observation
that, although human beings shape their own history, their point
of departure is inevitably the social organization and traditions of
the societies into which they are born, Childe (1949: 6–8) concluded
that all human behavior was cognitively mediated. Like later post-
processual archaeologists, he maintained that humans do not adapt
to the world as it really is but to the world as people imagine it to be.
The landscape of central Australia as perceived by Aborigine hunter-
gatherers was not the same as that perceived by European mineral
prospectors. Yet, as a materialist, Childe, like later processual archae-
ologists, maintained that, although humans can only know the world
through their minds and brains, minds and brains exist in organisms
that must survive in the natural world. Hence, every socially shared
view of the world must accord to a significant degree with the world
as it really is in order to endure (1956b: 58–60). He argued that
both the beliefs of hunter-gatherers and those of modern industrial
nations must be judged effective according to how well they achieved
the goal of survival in a particular ecological setting. Thus, Childe,
as a Marxist, simultaneously subscribed to, and reconciled, two of
the key tenets that later were to distinguish processual and postpro-
cessual archaeology. Like Marx, he took cultural traditions seriously,
although he believed that under favorable circumstances these tra-
ditions could be transcended fairly easily in the pursuit of economic
interests that were cross-culturally meaningful.
   In Childe’s view, a Marxist analysis, although assigning a priv-
ileged role to the relations of production, ruled out any form of
narrow determinism. Functional constraints account for many sim-
ilar features of social organization and ideology possessed by his-
torically unrelated cultures that share a common mode of produc-
tion. Yet he believed that the specific content of cultures and of

                                  349
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

individual sequences of change is determined to so great a degree
by preexisting cultural patterns, fortuitous contacts with other cul-
tures, and interactions among neighboring societies that it cannot
be predicted in detail. Childe already had observed that the precise
form of the British constitution in the nineteenth century could never
be deduced from the capitalist mode of production alone. Although
the domination of political life by middle-class industrialists reflected
changing economic forces, the monarch, the House of Lords, and
the House of Commons were institutions surviving from the feudal
period minimally adapted to serve the political requirements of the
present (Childe 1936: 98). This analysis implied that there was no
easy way to predict the precise nature of one aspect of a society on
the basis of knowledge of some other aspect. Insofar as each feature
of a prehistoric culture was to be reconstructed, this would have to
be done inductively, using archaeological data.
   In Social Evolution (1951), Childe reaffirmed his belief in multilin-
ear evolution, but he argued in accordance with Marxist principles
that over time cultures sharing the same mode of production tend to
evolve increasingly similar social, political, and cultural institutions,
which are in ever greater harmony with the economic base. Yet these
institutions develop in varied ways and in different sequences even
in adjacent cultures because of environmental differences, historical
accidents, and the societies involved being initially dissimilar. Thus,
there are many more ways to move from one level of social organi-
zation to another than there are forms in which the superstructure
is in close accord with the base. Because of this and the rapid rate at
which traits diffuse from one culture to another, social reality rarely
corresponds with an ideal type. This view of cultures as less than
perfectly integrated systems was shared by a number of non-Marxist
American anthropologists, most notably G. P. Murdock (1949).
   Childe defined knowledge in Marxist terms as shared mental
approximations of the real world that permitted human beings to act
upon that world and insisted that archaeologists must treat artifacts
as concrete expressions of human thoughts and ideas. He also argued
that innovations and their applications to social needs require new
forms of thought that have ramifications extending through entire
societies. Advances in technology thus reflect not simply an increase
in scientific information but also the evolution of the total knowledge
at the disposal of a society, including its understanding of how human

                                  350
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

beings perceive themselves and their relations to nature. He main-
tained that notions of causality had remained anthropomorphic until
the growing use of inanimate power to work machines had engen-
dered the idea of mechanical causality embodied in the thinking of
Isaac Newton. Childe had no qualms about pronouncing modern
civilization to be superior to all preceding ones, insofar as it was
able to provide a reliable guide to a far greater number of actions
(Childe 1949). Yet Childe was pessimistic about the extent to which
archaeology could make use of such Marxist ideas.
   In Society and Knowledge (1956b), Childe elaborated his concept
of knowledge in terms of the Marxist dichotomy between “true”
and “false” consciousness. True consciousness is characterized by
the operational correspondence between views of reality and external
reality itself. In the form of basic technological knowledge, it exists
to varying degrees in all societies. False consciousness occurs in situ-
ations where there is no operational correspondence between what is
believed and external reality. It embraces the myths that all societies
create to mask and compensate for their technological ineffectual-
ness and that class societies use to disguise exploitation as altruism.
Childe observed that false consciousness, in the form of religious
beliefs, magic, and superstition, leaves its mark on the archaeologi-
cal record no less conspicuously than does technological knowledge.
Yet, because the possible variations in the details of magical and reli-
gious beliefs are infinite, the archaeologist has no hope of being able
to infer the specific content of these beliefs in the absence of writ-
ten records or oral traditions. By contrast, the number of practical
solutions to any technological problem is limited by material con-
straints that can be inferred with a high degree of accuracy, using the
laws of physics and chemistry. Childe therefore concluded that the
archaeological study of knowledge must be restricted largely to tech-
nological matters and framed in terms of practical results rather than
the subjective goals of those who possessed it.
   Childe also believed that the evolution and functioning of technol-
ogy could only be understood if archaeologists were able to recon-
struct the social context in which it had operated. Doing this was the
problem that he turned to in his last book, The Prehistory of European
Society (1958a). He identified social relations, which from a Marxist
perspective he viewed as including the relations of production, as
the principal aspect of human behavior that was capable of orderly

                                  351
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

cross-cultural explanation. He observed that variation in the essential
features of economic, social, and political organization was far more
limited than variation in most cultural traits and argued, as did social
anthropologists, that cultural traits acquired their functional signifi-
cance in terms of their relation to the social system. The main practical
problem that he confronted was how archaeological evidence could
be used more effectively to infer prehistoric sociopolitical systems
(Childe 1958a: 12–14).
   Yet, in this his last major work, Childe seemed more constrained
than ever before by the typological method that had been the basis of
his early culture-historical research, and less able to make effective use
of settlement-pattern or funerary data. Although he had done much
archaeological fieldwork in Scotland, most of it bore little relation to
his theorizing. His most innovative results had come from his early
use of ethnographic descriptions of rustic dwellings in eighteenth-
century highland Scotland to interpret the use of house-space at the
Neolithic village of Skara Brae (Childe 1931) and his later use of a
survey of megalithic tombs to estimate the size and distribution of the
population on the island of Rousay in the Neolithic period (Childe
1942f). It is perhaps indicative of failing creativity in the last years
of his life that his earlier pioneering of settlement-pattern research
did not suggest to him effective techniques for studying prehistoric
social and political organization.
   Although Childe devoted much of his career to trying to under-
stand the nature of sociocultural change from a critically viewed
Marxist perspective, he paid little attention to devising ways by which
fieldwork could be used to test and refine his theories. He also did
not train students to carry on his work and, because his contem-
poraries found his later theoretical writings difficult to understand,
these works were soon forgotten. Perhaps the archaeologist who in
the years following Childe’s death did the most to develop and oper-
ationalize some of Childe’s most innovative ideas was Robert McC.
Adams (b. 1926). A student of Linda and Robert Braidwood, who
were much influenced by Childe, Adams (1966) used archaeologi-
cal data to study the technology, demography, social organization,
and social evolution of early civilizations. He viewed ancient states
as seldom being fully integrated or stable polities. Elites sought to
be despotic, self-serving, and manipulative and, whenever possible,
ignored the interests of rural populations and the urban poor. Yet,

                                   352
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

especially in the early stages of the development of civilizations, they
had only limited success in overcoming the resistance of these groups
to their efforts at centralization (Yoffee 1999). Adams’s grounding
of his interpretations of his archaeological findings not simply in
ecological relations but also in economic and political contexts and
his analyses of technological innovations in their social settings have
much in common with Childe’s theorizing. In recent years, Childe’s
later writings have been rediscovered and are inspiring the work of a
growing number of archaeologists.


                          Grahame Clark
An alternative and in many ways complementary functionalist
approach was pioneered by Grahame (J. G. D.) Clark. Through his
training of numerous graduate students at Cambridge University,
this approach exerted a strong influence on the development of
archaeology in many parts of the world (Murray and White 1981;
Clark 1989a). Although Clark, too, was committed to a material-
ist perspective, he consistently criticized Childe’s attempts to apply
Marxist concepts to archaeology (Clark 1936, 1976). Clark’s views
were closer to those of Cyril Fox and other early British ecological
archaeologists than they were to Childe’s economic and sociopoliti-
cal ones. Unlike Childe, he also attempted to develop new methods
of fieldwork to complement his theoretical innovations.
   Clark studied at Cambridge University, where he became a lecturer
in 1935. His doctoral thesis was a conventional typological study of
Mesolithic material from Britain and a comparison of this material
with Mesolithic finds from continental Europe (Clark 1932). Yet,
during his early years at Cambridge, three different influences ori-
ented him toward a functionalist view of prehistoric cultures. The
first was his growing awareness of the manner in which Scandina-
vian archaeologists studied prehistoric cultures in their environmen-
tal settings. This awareness was encouraged by the close similarities
between Mesolithic finds in England and the Maglemosian culture
of Denmark and the eventual realization that the latter culture had
exploited marshlands extending across the present bed of the North
Sea before their being flooded by rising sea levels. He also worked
closely with Harry Godwin, the biologist who had introduced pollen
analysis from Scandinavia into Britain. Second, he was exposed to the

                                  353
                A History of Archaeological Thought

functionalist views of social anthropologists such as Malinowski and
Radcliffe-Brown. Finally, in his own words, he “responded eagerly”
to the call by the Finnish archaeologist A. M. Tallgren that archae-
ologists should stop regarding artifacts as more real and alive than
the societies that had created them and the people whose needs had
brought them into being (Tallgren 1937; Clark 1974). Ironically,
Tallgren’s views had been shaped in large part through his close
contacts with Soviet archaeologists.
   In 1939, Clark published the first edition of Archaeology and Soci-
ety, a theoretical study of archaeology that remains a milestone in
the history of the discipline. He maintained that archaeology should
be “the study of how [human beings] lived in the past” (p. 1) and
that to achieve that goal archaeological finds, which Clark believed
had meaning only in relation to society, had to be examined from
a functionalist point of view. He further argued that the primary
function of a culture, or way of life, was to ensure the survival of
a society; which implied that all aspects of cultures were influenced
at least to some degree by ecological constraints. He maintained
that archaeologists should aim to determine how human beings had
lived in prehistoric times by reconstructing as far as possible their
economies, their social and political organizations, and their systems
of beliefs and values and trying to understand how these different
aspects of culture related to one another as parts of functioning sys-
tems. This formulation reflected Clark’s conviction that, by influ-
encing individual human behavior, culturally transmitted patterns
facilitated the social interaction on which the survival of individu-
als and groups depended. In Archaeology and Society, Clark pub-
lished a flow chart linking various aspects of culture to food sup-
ply (Figure 7.3). To a more complex version of that chart that he
produced a few years later, he added habitat and biome as twin
foundations below subsistence (Clark 1953) (Figure 7.4). Rowley-
Conwy (1999: 511) believes that this chart, which Clark henceforth
regarded as being central to his work, was probably the first ever
published that linked cultural and environmental factors as parts of
a single system. Clark also maintained that someone with no exca-
vation experience was not equipped to interpret archaeological data,
thereby implicitly denying the distinction that some British culture-
historical archaeologists were drawing between archaeologists and
prehistorians.

                                 354
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology




        Figure 7.3 Grahame Clark’s original systems diagram from
                      Archaeology and Society, 1939


   Clark systematically assessed the strengths and limitations of
archaeological data for studying prehistoric social life. He noted
that some aspects of material culture are better preserved in the
archaeological record than are others: bronze survives better than
iron or silver and bone better than soft plant parts. By contrast,
because of its high value, gold is less likely to make its way into the
archaeological record than is a less expensive metal or to escape plun-
dering once it is there. He also observed that material culture gener-
ally survives better in desert or arctic environments than in tropical
forests. Because people living in tropical forests tend to use perishable
materials and because of the greater difficulties of preservation and
recovery, it is likely that archaeologists will always know less about
prehistoric cultural development in tropical forests than in deserts or
the high arctic. In temperate zones, wet sites, such as bogs, preserve
a wider range of evidence than do well-drained sites. Clark stressed
that it was essential to study settlements as well as burials in order
to understand how people had lived in the past. In a lengthy dis-
cussion of the interpretation of archaeological data, he made it clear
that, when working only with archaeological data, archaeologists are
likely to learn more about the economies of prehistoric societies than
about their social organization and religious beliefs.

                                  355
                 A History of Archaeological Thought




   Figure 7.4 Clark’s refined ecosystems diagram with habitat and biome
               added, first used in his Reckitt Lecture, 1953


   In Archaeology and Society, Clark asserted that the ultimate goal
of archaeologists should be to interpret their data in terms of social
history. They could do that, however, only after they had defined a
succession of cultures in the archaeological record and had a clear idea
of how the prehistoric communities associated with these cultures
had functioned. He regarded an archaeologist studying a prehistoric
habitation site as the equivalent of an ethnologist studying a living
community. He did not, however, critically examine the appropriate-
ness of this analogy or of the social anthropologists’ assumption that
a single community was necessarily representative of some larger cul-
tural unit, a belief that is now generally repudiated. He also accepted

                                   356
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

that ethnographic analogies had to be used to interpret archaeolog-
ical data. Yet his adoption of an ecological perspective and his belief
in the relatively loose articulation between the different parts of a
cultural system led him to reject the unilinear evolutionary view that
cultures at the same stage of development would be similar to one
another in any detailed fashion.
   Clark specified, as Nilsson had done, that ethnographic analogies
had to be drawn between individual types of artifacts rather than
between whole cultures, in the unilinear evolutionary fashion, and
that such analogies had to be treated as suggestive rather than defini-
tive. In general, he preferred to use analogies derived homologically
from folklore rather than from comparative ethnology for the inter-
pretation of European prehistory, because he believed that historical
continuity guaranteed the greater relevance of the former. He argued
that when archaeologists were seeking to interpret data about pre-
historic times “it was helpful to know how people occupying the
same territory managed to provide for themselves before the rise of
modern economies” (Clark 1974: 41). In this respect, his position was
similar to that of Childe and in line with earlier diffusionist doctrines.
   During the next decade, Clark sought to develop his ecological
approach by elaborating techniques for using archaeological evidence
to document social life and particularly the ways in which natural
resources had been utilized. In Prehistoric England (1940), his chap-
ters were organized not chronologically but functionally to provide
a review of what was known about subsistence patterns, dwellings,
handicrafts, mining, trade, communications, defense, burial, and
sacred sites in England from Palaeolithic times to the end of the Iron
Age. This was followed by a series of papers on the utilization of var-
ious resources in European prehistory and on basic subsistence activ-
ities such as seal hunting, whaling, fowling, fishing, forest clearance,
farming, and stock raising. In a paper on “Bees in Antiquity,” he out-
lined an ecological perspective that linked an increase in the number
of wild bees in Europe to the introduction of farming and demon-
strated how the resulting increase in the supply of beeswax facilitated
bronze casting (Clark 1942). Although these papers all addressed bio-
logical issues, Clark sought, by identifying the functions of artifacts
and the seasons when specific subsistence activities took place, to use
the archaeological record to document economic and social life. The
need to study seasonality was stressed by Donald Thomson (1939),

                                   357
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

who demonstrated ethnographically that a single group of Australian
Aborigines produced totally different material culture assemblages at
different times of the year, as they exploited the resources of different
areas. These remains could easily be mistaken for separate cultures
within a traditional culture-historical framework.
   Between 1949 and 1951, Clark excavated a waterlogged Mesolithic
site at Star Carr in East Yorkshire. The primary objectives of this exca-
vation were to recover organic materials as well as stone tools, to date
the site in relation to postglacial vegetation patterns, to recover food
remains that would reveal the subsistence pattern, and to determine
what sort of social group had used the site. With the help of palaeo-
botanists and zoologists, he was able to conclude that a small group
of hunters had visited Star Carr over a number of winters to hunt
deer (Figure 7.5). Although Clark’s recording of what was found was
inferior to Knud Andersen’s excavations of the Mesolithic lakeside
sites of Ulkestrup I and II, in Denmark, between 1947 and 1950, and
the area Clark dug is now interpreted as a waterlogged dump for a
much larger summer encampment, Clark’s innovative emphasis on
ecological and economic issues went far beyond the artifact orienta-
tion of the Danish excavations. Star Carr set a new standard for the
archaeological investigation of hunter-gatherer sites and called into
question the value of all previously excavated Mesolithic sites for the
economic study of prehistory in Britain (Clark 1954, 1972; Andresen
et al. 1981; Rowley-Conwy 1999: 515–16).
   At the same time Clark was excavating at Star Carr, he wrote
Prehistoric Europe: The Economic Basis (1952). In this book, which
was based on a series of lectures he delivered in 1949, he sought to
“mine and quarry” existing archaeological literature and museum
collections to see what could be learned from them about the eco-
nomic development of Europe from late glacial times to the historical
period. The main topics that he addressed were subsistence patterns,
shelter, technology, trade, travel, and transportation. He did not
examine data in terms of specific societies or archaeological cultures
but sought to trace economic changes as they related to three major
climatic and vegetation zones in Europe: Circumpolar, Temperate,
and Mediterranean. The relations between culture and environment
were viewed as reciprocal and the economy defined as “an adjustment
to specific physical and biological conditions of certain needs, capac-
ities, aspirations and values” (p. 7). A similar ecological approach

                                  358
Figure 7.5 Plan and section of Cutting II, Star Carr (Excavations at Star Carr, 1954)


                                      359
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

had been applied by the social anthropologist E. E. Evans-Pritchard
(1940) in his ethnographic study of the ecology of the Nuer people
of the southern Sudan.
   Prehistoric Europe was distinguished, however, by being the first
systematic application to archaeology of the botanist A. G. Tans-
ley’s (1871–1955) concept of the ecosystem, with its notion of a self-
correcting mechanism, or homeostat, which keeps the whole sys-
tem in balance (Tansley 1935; Odum 1953). Clark viewed cultural
change as a response to “temporary disequilibrium” brought about
by environmental changes, fluctuations in population, labor-saving
innovations, and cultural contact. He thus ascribed change to all the
major factors that evolutionary and diffusionist archaeologists had
invoked over the previous century, without reviewing the status of
these concepts. Nor did he attempt to interrelate them, apart from
his commonplace observation that the natural environment imposed
certain restrictions on economic exploitation at particular stages of
technological development. If Clark excelled Childe in the detailed
reconstruction of subsistence activities from archaeological data, his
work fell short of Childe’s as an attempt to explain cultural change.
Clark never developed an explicit model of cultural change to com-
plement his behavioral interpretations of archaeological data. Nev-
ertheless, Prehistoric Europe exemplifies what European archaeology
might have been like if archaeologists in the 1880s had chosen to
interpret spatial variations in the archaeological record in terms of
ecological factors rather than ethnicity. Clark (1957: 169–70), how-
ever, continued to recognize the usefulness of the archaeological
culture as a classificatory device.
   Later, Clark’s interests turned to the social and symbolic signifi-
cance of artifacts. He paid increasing attention to how the integrity
and cohesion of social groups was reinforced by distinctive sym-
bols and patterns of behavior in the same way, as he put it, that
individuals signal their identity by conforming to or violating social
norms. Clark combined this interest with a growing concern with
the use of the landscape by hunter-gatherer peoples. In The Earlier
Stone Age Settlement of Scandinavia (1975), he examined archaeo-
logical evidence relating to social territories, home bases, social hier-
archies, and redistribution networks to address questions of hunter-
gatherer seasonality, social organization, and mobility. He argued
that so long as form and style were studied in order to define the

                                  360
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

territories of social groups rather than as ends in themselves, they had
a significant role to play in scientific archaeology (Clark 1974: 53–4,
1975).
   Clark also continued to play a major role in moving British archae-
ologists away from a preoccupation with typology and encouraging
efforts to understand prehistoric economies and related forms of
social organization. Under Clark’s guidance, the laboratory study
of animal bones and plant remains recovered from archaeological
sites, and their interpretation in ecological and economic terms,
became major interdisciplinary specializations covered by labels such
as zooarchaeology, palaeobotany, and bioarchaeology. Under the
leadership of Clark’s student Eric Higgs (1908–1976) and the British
Academy’s Major Research Project in the Early History of Agricul-
ture, a school of palaeoeconomy developed that attempted to under-
stand such findings by comparing them with the results of site catch-
ment analysis, which sought to determine all the resources that would
have been available at specific times in the past within an exploitable
radius around an archaeological site (Vita-Finzi and Higgs 1970;
Higgs 1972, 1975; Sieveking 1976: xxii; Jarman et al. 1982). Both
Higgs and Jarman regarded “ecofacts” as more productive sources
of information about past human behavior than were “artifacts.”
They also viewed economic factors as being the only ones that were
of long-term explanatory importance or significantly detectable in
the archaeological record. Higgs objected to the idea that social,
cultural, or cognitive variables could be studied without reference to
the powerful selective forces of the economy, which he viewed as con-
straining free will. He also proclaimed that archaeological research
must begin with the search for natural laws governing human behav-
ior (Bailey 1999: 552–7). Much of David Clarke’s (1968) focus on
artifacts was a reaction against what he regarded as the narrowness,
determinism, and ecofactology of the Higgsian approach (Sherratt
1979: 199–200). Clark appears to have regarded both archaeologists
as carrying on his work.


            Early Functionalism in the United States
In the United States, a functionalist approach to archaeological anal-
ysis began in the nineteenth century. It took the form of an interest
in how artifacts were manufactured and what use had been made

                                  361
                A History of Archaeological Thought

of them. This approach was developed and systematized in Harlan
Smith’s (1872–1940) The Prehistoric Ethnology of a Kentucky Site
(1910), which was based on the analysis of artifacts that he had
recovered from the Fox Farm site in 1895. Smith sought to recon-
struct the lifeways of the inhabitants of that site, which was later
assigned to the prehistoric Fort Ancient aspect of the Midwestern
Taxonomic Method. Artifacts were described and analyzed in terms
of a series of functional categories: Resources in Animal and Plant
Materials; Securing Food; Preparation of Food; Habitations; Tools
used by Men; Tools used by Women; Processes of Manufacture; His-
tory of Manufactured Objects (stages in the manufacture of tools as
illustrated by unfinished artifacts); Games; Religious Objects; Pipes
and Amusements; Warfare; Dress and Ornament; Art; Injuries and
Diseases; and Methods of Burial. Individual artifacts were discussed
from different points of view under multiple headings. Although
ethnographic analogies were employed to determine the functions
of specific artifacts and artifacts that were incomplete or damaged
in use were studied to learn how they had been made and used,
guesswork played a major role in assigning artifacts to specific
classes.
   There was widespread interest in this sort of functional interpre-
tation in the early twentieth century. The Canadian archaeologist
William Wintemberg (1876–1941), whose professional career devel-
oped under Smith’s supervision closely followed Smith’s approach
in his analysis of material from the Iroquoian sites that he exca-
vated in southern Ontario (Trigger 1978c). A former craftsman,
he conducted many experiments to determine how artifacts were
made and used. He also acquired an extensive knowledge of tradi-
tional Indian material culture and ways of life (Swayze 1960: 178).
A. C. Parker’s (1881–1955) report on the Iroquoian Ripley site, in
northwestern New York State (1907), has been described as “an early
attempt to delineate the entire culture of a group from archaeological
remains interpreted in the light of ethnography” (Brose 1973: 92).
M. R. Harrington, who worked for the American Museum of Natu-
ral History when Harlan Smith was employed there, consulted local
Indians in order to understand better the material he had excavated
at the Shinnecock site on Long Island in 1902 (Harrington 1924).
Beginning with Ancient Life in Kentucky (Webb and Funkhouser
1928), William S. Webb (1882–1964) studied how prehistoric Indians

                                 362
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

had made and used artifacts and how these artifacts reflected less
tangible ancient customs. He was trained as a physicist and is said to
have approached archaeology with an amateur’s “interest in local
antiquities and the ancient life of the local Indians” (W. Taylor
1948: 75). Working in Kentucky, he had special reason to be influ-
enced by Smith’s report on the Fox Farm site. Similarly William
Ritchie’s early publications on the “pre-Iroquoian” sites of New York
State manifested a widely ranging, if unsystematic, interest in using
artifacts to reconstruct prehistoric human behavior. After they were
influenced by the Midwestern Taxonomic Method, both Webb and
Ritchie concentrated on the elaboration of trait lists and ceased (in
Ritchie’s case only until the 1950s) to study the behavior of prehis-
toric peoples (W. Taylor 1948: 70–80).
   The large, labor-intensive, horizontal excavations carried out dur-
ing the depression years of the 1930s helped to revive the interest of
American archaeologists in viewing archaeological data from a func-
tionalist perspective (Figure 7.6). In Rediscovering Illinois (1937),
a report on archaeological excavations carried out in and around
Fulton County, Illinois, Fay-Cooper Cole (1881–1961) and Thorne
Deuel listed all the artifact types from a single occupation level
within a site under a number of broad functional headings, which
they labeled complexes. These complexes included Architecture and
House Life, Costume and Dress, Ceremonial, Military and Hunting,
Economic and Artistic, Agricultural and Food-Getting, and Pottery.
A similar approach was adopted by Charles Fairbanks (1942) when
he listed artifact types from the Stallings Island midden in Georgia
according to whether they appeared to relate primarily to subsis-
tence, community plan, burial, or technological and artistic activities.
In Martin, Quimby, and Collier’s Indians Before Columbus (1947),
the major archaeological cultures so far defined for North America,
organized by regions and successive periods, were summarized under
the headings of location, people (physical type), village, livelihood,
pottery, tools, utensils, weapons, pipes, costumes, ornaments, and
burials.
   In each of these cases, despite a growing variety of data, the
emphasis was largely on listing traits in an ethnographic or pseudo-
ethnographic format rather than on trying to interpret material cul-
ture as evidence of human behavior. Although functional interpre-
tations before the 1930s have been rightly castigated for remaining

                                  363
                 A History of Archaeological Thought




Figure 7.6 Structures on mound platform, from Hiwasee Island, by T. Lewis
and M. Kneberg, 1946



“on a relatively superficial level” consisting “mainly of the obvious
inferences to be drawn from artifacts . . . by visualizing how they
might have been used” (Rouse 1972: 147), for the most part they con-
stituted a more serious effort to infer human behavior from archae-
ological remains than did the ethnographic trait lists of the 1930s
and 1940s. This indicates that the classificatory approach of the Mid-
western Taxonomic Method, and of chronological studies gener-
ally, stifled a professional interest in the behavioral interpretation of
archaeological data in North America for longer than Taylor (1948:
91) or Willey and Sabloff (1980: 134) believed.
   Nevertheless, a growing minority of American archaeologists
began to call for the functional interpretation of archaeological data
within the framework of more holistic views of culture than had
been adopted hitherto in American archaeology. They may have

                                   364
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

been responding to the more functionalist views of human behavior
that were being popularized in American anthropology by Radcliffe-
Brown, who taught at the University of Chicago between 1931 and
1937, and by Malinowski, who taught at Yale University from 1938
until his death in 1942. Exposure to social anthropology also seems
to have encouraged the development of a different sort of func-
tionalist trend in Boasian cultural anthropology. Originally, Boasian
anthropologists had viewed each culture as a random collection of
traits brought together by diffusion and migration. They believed
that, provided the basic functional requirements that were needed
to sustain individuals and groups were supplied in some minimally
adequate fashion, other cultural traits could be of any sort (Aberle et
al. 1950).
   In the 1930s, Boasian anthropologists began to argue that cul-
tures displayed patterns or configurations that made them psycho-
logically meaningful and reassuring to people. One culture might
emphasize social harmony, another violent competition among indi-
viduals. By providing guidance for human conduct, such configu-
rations, however psychologically demanding they might be on indi-
viduals, reduced the still greater psychological stress that would have
arisen in their absence as a result of people not knowing how they
should behave. The most widely read expression of this view was
Ruth Benedict’s Patterns of Culture (1934), which contrasted the
self-effacing cooperativeness of the Hopi way of life with the ruthless
competitiveness of the Kwakiutl. These ideas led to the develop-
ment within Boasian anthropology of what was called the “culture
and personality” school and later “psychological anthropology,” an
approach that persisted into the early 1960s. As a result of the devel-
opment of psychological anthropology, functionalism became as
important within idealist Boasian cultural anthropology as it already
was for behaviorist social anthropology.
   American archaeologists also were increasingly aware of the inter-
pretations of archaeological data offered by Childe, Clark, and other
European archaeologists. These archaeologists provided theoreti-
cal as well as practical evidence that leading American ethnologists,
such as Robert Lowie and Frank Speck, erred when they claimed
that, because archaeologists could study only material culture, they
were unable to say anything significant about nonmaterial aspects
of human behavior. To provide behavioral interpretations, however,

                                 365
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

American archaeologists had to view artifacts as parts of total cul-
tural systems and as having been integrated within social, political,
and economic frameworks, rather than simply as material objects that
had only typological significance.
   The desire to understand archaeological remains from a functional
point of view led some American archaeologists to renew their ties
with ethnology. These ties had become attenuated during the early
culture-historical period, when the main goal of archaeologists had
been to construct cultural chronologies. Many of these functionally
oriented archaeologists were directly or indirectly connected with the
Smithsonian Institution. In 1936, William D. Strong (1899–1962)
stressed the interdependence of archaeology, history, and ethnog-
raphy and argued that archaeologists should look to ethnologists
for theoretical leads as well as factual information. He had already
applied this principle in his direct-historical approach to Nebraskan
prehistory, which had revealed a far more complex and varied past
than had hitherto been envisaged (Strong 1935). In 1951, he divided
New World prehistory into seven epochs or stages with parallel
sequences in each of nine regions. Rather than depending on dis-
tinctive ceramic styles, he defined each epoch by economic features,
the artistic level achieved, and the political organization “in so far as
it can be envisaged.” In his study of native subsistence economies on
the Great Plains, Waldo R. Wedel (1908–1996) (1941) stressed the
importance of relations between culture and environment and argued
that factors other than historical accidents shaped archaeological cul-
tures. Paul Martin (1899–1974) attempted to use the ethnologist
Robert Redfield’s concept of “folk culture” to explain variations in
the size and contents of Pueblo ruins (Martin et al. 1938; Martin
and Rinaldo 1939). A. J. Waring, Jr. and Preston Holder (1945)
interpreted elaborately decorated copper and shell artifacts in widely
dispersed Mississippian sites as evidence of a widespread religious
cult.
   Similar functional explanations were used to account for stylistic
distributions in Peru, such as the Chavin and Tiahuanaco horizons,
which had hitherto been considered purely in diffusionist terms. In
these studies, efforts were made to identify sociopolitical or reli-
gious characteristics of the material by considering their intrasite
provenience or other features that typological studies had ignored
(W. Bennett 1945; Willey 1948). In a study of the contentious issue of

                                  366
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

Mesoamerican influences on the cultures of the southeastern United
States, John W. Bennett (1916–2005) (1944) stressed the need to
consider the functional implications of traits, the social context from
which they were derived, and, above all, the context into which they
would have been introduced. He hypothesized that some Mesoamer-
ican traits would readily have been accepted by the less complex cul-
tures of the United States, whereas others would have been rejected,
however many times they were transmitted. Hence, he maintained
that diffusionist explanations required a detailed functional under-
standing of the recipient cultures. Still other archaeologists sought
to interpret the interaction between neighboring cultures using the
concept of acculturation, which was popular at that time among eth-
nologists (Keur 1941; Lewis and Kneberg 1941). Although these and
other studies were highly disparate and provisional, enough of them
had appeared by 1943 to be recognized as constituting a trend in
American archaeology, which J. W. Bennett (1943) labeled a “func-
tional” or “sociological” approach to archaeological interpretation.


                    The Conjunctive Approach
These studies and the ethnologist Clyde Kluckhohn’s (1940) advo-
cacy of a “scientific” approach, which he defined as making a search
for generalizations about human behavior and cultural change the
ultimate goal of archaeology and ethnology, prepared the way for
Walter Taylor’s (1913–1997) A Study of Archeology (1948), a polem-
ical work that was written in the early 1940s as Taylor’s PhD thesis,
although its publication was delayed by World War II. Although
Taylor’s criticism of the work of some senior American archaeolo-
gists outraged many established members of the profession, he failed
to recruit support from archaeologists of his own generation. Tay-
lor later saw his work as anticipating processual archaeology and was
embittered because he felt he did not receive due recognition for his
contributions to this movement (Reyman 1999).
   Taylor observed in A Study of Archeology that the majority of
American archaeologists claimed that their goal was to reconstruct
prehistory, although some of them, like Kidder, went further and
expressed the hope that eventually archaeological data would pro-
vide a basis for generalizing about human behavior and cultural
change. Yet, Taylor claimed, few culture-historical archaeologists had

                                 367
                A History of Archaeological Thought

displayed any interest in systematically reconstructing prehistoric
ways of life or explaining what had occurred in prehistoric times.
Instead, they occupied themselves with “mere chronicle,” which he
defined as working out the geographical and temporal distributions
of different sorts of archaeological evidence and explaining them in
terms of diffusion and migration.
   Taylor proceeded to demonstrate that the limited goals of Amer-
ican culture-historical archaeologists had encouraged slackness in
archaeological fieldwork and analysis. Many classes of artifacts, espe-
cially those that were not regarded as important for defining cultures
or for working out cultural chronologies, were neither examined
nor described in more than a cursory manner. Pottery and lithic
material were studied much more carefully than was surviving evi-
dence of basketry. Floral and faunal remains often were inadequately
recovered and identified; hence, archaeologists did not know what
foods were eaten and why particular sites were used or at what sea-
son. Archaeologists also failed to record, and more often to report,
the intrasite provenience of artifacts in sufficient detail. Because of
this, it was impossible to identify activity areas within sites or to
determine how frequencies of artifacts might have varied from one
part of a site to another. Finally, although archaeologists sought to
elaborate lists of all the traits or types of artifacts associated with
particular sites and compared these lists to determine their cultural
affinity, they were normally content to consider merely the presence
or absence of traits. As a result, quantified data, that might have
been very important for understanding the functional roles played
by particular kinds of artifacts, were lacking. Taylor devoted much
of his study to providing a detailed critique of the shortcomings of
the work of leading American archaeologists in order to demonstrate
how their cultural-chronological objectives had limited their investi-
gations of the archaeological record.
   To remedy these defects, Taylor offered the conjunctive approach.
He proposed to add to the traditional investigation of chronologi-
cal problems and intersite relations intrasite studies in which careful
attention would be paid to all artifacts and features and how they
were interrelated. Special note would be taken of the quantitative
aspects and spatial distributions of archaeological finds, as well as of
their formal properties and evidence of how they were made and
used. In this way, archaeologists might hope to learn as much as

                                  368
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

possible about the nature of life in prehistoric times and about the
functional relations within a prehistoric culture. A distinctive aspect
of the conjunctive approach was the importance that Taylor, like
Clark, attached to sites as primary units of analysis. Taylor, how-
ever, was an adherent of Boasian anthropology; hence his approach,
unlike Clark’s, was primarily cultural and configurational rather than
social.
   Taylor sought to avoid the problems inherent for archaeologists
in the concept of material culture by following Kroeber and other
Boasian anthropologists in defining culture as mental constructs and
viewing material remains as products of culture rather than culture
itself (Osgood 1951). He believed that mental constructs, which were
partly a heritage from the past and could be either idiosyncratic or
shared by varying numbers of people, provided beliefs and values that
guided social activities as well as the technical knowledge required to
produce material culture. He concluded that, although culture was
ideational and hence did not survive in the archaeological record,
many aspects of culture other than the knowledge that went into
manufacturing artifacts were reflected archaeologically.
   Taylor maintained that archaeologists should strive to recover as
much information as possible from archaeological sites, including
seemingly trivial evidence. They also must collect information con-
cerning the palaeoenvironmental context of sites as well as any related
historical and ethnographic data. The first analytical task relating to a
site as a whole was to work out its internal chronology and thus deter-
mine what evidence was synchronous or successive. Archaeologists
should next turn to the major task of synthesizing the material from
the site, or from each period that it was occupied. Two sorts of
synthesis had to be done. The ethnographic synthesis consisted of
determining everything possible about how people had lived at the
site. The archaeologist, like an ethnographer, should try to fill out
the Outline of Cultural Materials (Murdock et al. 1938), a check-
list documenting all conceivable patterns of cultural behavior. The
ethnographic synthesis was to be followed by a historiographic one
that traced how ways of life at a site had changed during the course
of its occupation and tried to account for how these changes had
come about. Taylor did not provide any detailed instructions how
to interpret archaeological data. Like most culture-historical archae-
ologists, he recommended drawing analogies (homologies) among

                                  369
                A History of Archaeological Thought

historically related cultures and, hence, the application of the direct
historical approach. He appears to have viewed interpretation as a
commonsense operation, as American archaeologists had done for a
long time. His main point was that this should be done more sys-
tematically.
   Having synthesized the cultural significance of individual sites,
Taylor saw archaeologists ready to undertake what he called com-
parative studies. He believed that such studies should involve the
comparison of whole cultural contexts as manifested at individual
sites rather than of individual items of culture, and that the immedi-
ate aim of such a study should be to understand how a site related
to the broader pattern of life in a surrounding territory. In this way,
seasonally occupied hunter-gatherer sites could be linked to form
year-round patterns, or peasant hamlets associated with elite centers
to provide information about the hierarchical structures of ancient
civilizations. Thus, a functional understanding could be gained that
was equivalent to the ethnologists’ insights into the nature of liv-
ing cultures. Archaeologists could then proceed to work alongside
ethnologists to achieve the principal goal of anthropology: a general
understanding of the nature and working of culture.
   Under the influence of contemporary Boasian anthropologists,
including Kluckhohn, Taylor appears to have been trying to under-
stand archaeological data in terms of functionally integrated cultural
patterns. Like all Boasian anthropologists, his goal was to recover
the ideas that he believed accounted for human behavior. His con-
cept of integration was derived from the ideas of configuration and
psychological consistency advocated by Boasian anthropologists such
as Ruth Benedict rather than from the concepts of structural and
functional integration being promoted by social anthropologists. In
one of his more explicit demonstrations of the sort of work he was
proposing, he contrasted the lack of symmetry in basketry designs
recovered from Coyote Cave and site CM 79 in Coahuila, Mexico,
with the highly symmetrical patterns that dominated San Juan baskets
in the southwestern United States. He interpreted these variations,
which could not be attributed to differences in material or weav-
ing techniques, as reflecting a fundamental difference between two
ethnic groups concerning how things should be ordered. This, he
believed, was quite possibly a difference that would have expressed
itself in many other ways of doing things that were not necessarily

                                 370
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

reflected in the archaeological record. In 1950, the psychological
anthropologist Anthony Wallace published an analysis of the per-
sonality structure of prehispanic Maya upper-class males based on
a culture-and-personality study of artwork from their codices that
he compared with early Spanish descriptions of Maya behavior and
Rorschach studies of the personalities of modern Maya. Although
much hope was expressed at the time that techniques of this sort
might provide deep insights into the nature of prehistoric cultures,
such configurational studies were generally ignored by archaeolo-
gists. By the 1960s, psychological anthropology in general was being
abandoned, and Boasian anthropology along with it, as it became
increasingly clear that such approaches had no way of demonstrating
their far-reaching claims.
   There has been considerable discussion concerning to what extent
Taylor’s approach represented a break with the past or marked the
beginning of the New Archaeology of the 1960s (W. Taylor 1972;
Binford 1972: 8–9, 1983a: 229–33). Yet little attention has been
paid to connections between Taylor’s work and what was going on
in archaeology in the late 1930s. In A Study of Archeology, Taylor
ignored much of the innovative fieldwork of that time and the accom-
panying movement toward a functionalist interpretation of archaeo-
logical data. Instead of trying to position himself as the spokesperson
for younger and more innovative archaeologists, he alienated them
by ignoring their works. This failure, combined with his harsh criti-
cism of the work of senior American archaeologists, was a recipe for
academic disaster. He also failed to cite the recent works of innovative
British archaeologists, such as Childe and Clark. Yet Taylor’s empha-
sis on the first task of archaeologists being to use archaeological evi-
dence to reconstruct how people had lived at individual prehistoric
sites closely paralleled the approach that Clark had advocated in 1939.
So, too, did Taylor’s insistence on palaeoethnography as a vital goal of
archaeology and his view of cultures as functioning entities embrac-
ing social, political, and ideological as well as economic components
that the archaeologist must try to study holistically from the inside.
   Yet Taylor did not follow Clark or anticipate the New Archaeol-
ogy in viewing cultures as ecologically adaptive systems. Instead, he
adopted an idealist view of culture as a pattern of psychologically
integrated concepts, a position that closely resembled the configura-
tional Boasian anthropology of that period. Like the Boasians, he did

                                  371
                A History of Archaeological Thought

not presuppose that any one part of a culture plays a more important
role than any other in bringing about cultural change. Instead, he
regarded defining the relations between parts and explaining change
as problems that must be approached inductively. Taylor contributed
almost nothing to explaining how or why cultural change occurred.
Like the Boasians, he was amenable to the idea that different aspects
of culture might play a leading role in bringing about change in dif-
ferent societies and continued to believe that much change occurs
as a result of fortuitous contacts between human groups. His ideal-
ist and inductive approach prevented him from using a functionalist
view of prehistoric cultures to achieve a new understanding of cul-
tural change. His contribution was mainly important as a critique of
current standards of archaeological research and a call for archaeolo-
gists to recover and analyze archaeological data more intensively than
they had done in the past. He did not challenge the basic tenets of
Boasian historical particularism or introduce any major innovations
into archaeological interpretation. In all these ways, his ideas were
very different from those of the New Archaeology, and Binford was
justified in regarding him as being a Boasian archaeologist. Yet a sig-
nificant challenge to culture-historical archaeology in North America
did not have to await the New Archaeology.


             Ecological and Settlement Archaeology
Julian Steward (1902–1972), who was one of the first American eth-
nologists to adopt an explicitly materialist view of human behavior,
greatly enhanced an awareness of the role played by ecological fac-
tors in shaping prehistoric sociocultural systems. In 1938, he and
the archaeologist F. M. Setzler published a landmark paper in which
they argued that archaeologists as well as ethnologists should seek
to understand the nature of cultural change and that both disci-
plines could contribute to an ecological analysis of human behavior.
To play a significant role, however, archaeologists would have to
stop focusing on the stylistic analysis of artifacts and begin to use
their data to study changes in subsistence economies, population
size, and settlement patterns. Steward was convinced that, because
archaeologists could study changes in these three variables over time,
they could contribute significantly to understanding human behavior
and cultural change. Steward himself had carried out archaeological

                                 372
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

research on the Ancient Caves of the Great Salt Lake Region (1937a)
and written a paper in which he had drawn together archaeological
and ethnographic settlement-pattern data in a study of interaction
between culture and environment in the southwestern United States
(1937b). Of all the American ethnologists of this period, he had the
greatest respect for archaeological data and the greatest awareness of
their potential value for studying problems of human behavior over
long periods.
   After World War II, increasing awareness of the importance of
the ecological approach, resulting from the writings of Steward and
Clark, stimulated major American research programs involving inter-
disciplinary teams. One of the most important of these was the Iraq
Jarmo Project, directed by Robert Braidwood (1907–2003), which
between 1948 and 1955 examined a series of late Palaeolithic to
early Neolithic sites in the Kirkuk region of Iraq (Braidwood 1974).
Another was the Tehuacan Archaeological-Botanical Project, led by
Richard S. MacNeish (1918–2001), which between 1960 and 1968
revealed an unbroken cultural sequence in highland Mexico running
for 12,000 years from PalaeoIndian times to the Spanish conquest
(MacNeish 1974, 1978, 1992) (Figure 7.7). These projects, which
were funded in part by the United States National Science Founda-
tion, brought together archaeologists, botanists, zoologists, geolo-
gists, and other specialists to carry out research relating to the origin
of food production in the Middle East and Mesoamerica. They suc-
ceeded in delineating changes in the subsistence economies of their
respective regions and MacNeish, whose team located 456 sites, also
was able to infer changes over time in group composition and land
utilization. Using radiocarbon dates, they demonstrated that in both
the Old and the New Worlds food production had begun earlier
and increased in economic importance far more slowly than archae-
ologists, including Childe, had previously believed. In the politically
charged atmosphere of the Cold War prevailing in the United States,
these findings were welcomed as proof of the normalcy of gradual
evolutionary changes and a major setback for Childe’s much crit-
icized and apparently Marxist-inspired theory of a Neolithic “rev-
olution” (Redfield 1953: 24; Patterson 2003: 53–4). Braidwood’s
findings also ruled out the likelihood that desiccation had played
a significant role in initiating the development of food-producing
economies in the Middle East. These two studies pioneered the use

                                  373
                 A History of Archaeological Thought




 Figure 7.7 MacNeish’s interpretation of subsistence-settlement pattern of
     Ajuereado Phase (11,000–7,000 bc) in Tehuacan Valley, Mexico
                   (The Science of Archaeology? 1978)


of archaeological data to study in detail one of the major economic
and social transformations of human history. Like Clark’s excava-
tion at Star Carr, they also demonstrated the importance of a multi-
disciplinary approach in which archaeologists and natural science spe-
cialists worked together to analyze archaeological data.

                                   374
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

   In Trend and Tradition in the Prehistory of the Eastern United
States, Joseph Caldwell (1916–1973) adopted a more rounded eco-
logical approach to understanding cultural change (1958). He argued
that ecological adjustments to the disappearance of big game at the
end of the last Ice Age had resulted in more complex and inten-
sive patterns of food collection that increased the carrying capacity
of most areas and promoted denser populations and sedentarization
throughout eastern North America. Reduced mobility had encour-
aged the acquisition of heavier and more varied types of equipment
than had been useful or usable previously, including soapstone, and
later ceramic, cooking vessels. Caldwell stressed not only the capac-
ity for internally initiated change among the indigenous cultures
of the Eastern Woodlands but also the need for archaeologists to
understand artifacts such as pottery vessels with reference to the
roles they had played within adaptive systems. Such interpretations
had been foreshadowed in Ralph Linton’s (1944) study of devel-
opmental trends in the shapes of eastern North American ceramic
vessels.
   Steward also inspired the development of settlement archaeol-
ogy, which was initiated by Gordon Willey’s Prehistoric Settlement
Patterns in the Virú Valley, Peru (1953), the report of a study
that was carried out in 1946 as part of the combined archaeo-
logical and anthropological investigation of a small coastal valley
in Peru by American and Peruvian anthropologists. Before World
War II, regional archaeological surveys had been conducted mainly
to select sites for excavation (W. Sumner 1990: 87–8), although
some archaeologists had used archaeological survey data to infer
prehistoric distributions of population. In 1904, Sophus Müller had
employed some 60,000 barrows and several thousand megaliths to
determine the general distribution of settlement in Neolithic and
Bronze Age Denmark (Schnapp and Kristiansen 1999: 40). Later,
Crawford (1921) used artifact densities to plot population distribu-
tions in the United Kingdom. The site surveys by William Albright
(1891–1971) and Nelson Glueck (1901–1971) in Palestine and Jordan
between the early 1920s and 1949 also have been recognized as fore-
runners of settlement-pattern archaeology (Moorey 1991: 68–77). In
1940, the classical archaeologist Carl Blegen (1887–1971) stressed the
need for surveys to locate all sites in Greece in order to trace the dis-
tribution and movements of population from one historical period to

                                  375
                A History of Archaeological Thought

another. This appeal is credited with inspiring the Messenia Project
of the 1960s (W. McDonald 1966: 414–15). And, in 1942, Childe
(1942f) used the distribution of tombs on Rousay to estimate the
size and distribution of population on this Scottish island during the
Neolithic period. None of these studies, nor the study of settlements
by German archaeologists, gave rise to settlement archaeology as a
standard archaeological practice.
   It was Steward who persuaded Willey to conduct a settlement-
pattern survey as part of the Virú Valley project (Willey 1974b: 153).
Aerial photographs and ground surveys were used to locate sev-
eral hundred prehistoric settlements as well as traces of prehistoric
irrigation systems. Pottery was surface collected from each site to
determine during which periods it had been inhabited. The traces of
buildings that were visible on the surface of sites were also recorded
in order to determine what roles different sites might have played.
Then maps were produced showing which sites had been occupied
at successive phases in the history of the Virú Valley.
   Yet Willey’s interpretation of the data he collected marked a sig-
nificant departure from Steward’s ecological approach. Steward had
regarded archaeological settlement patterns as evidence of relations
between human groups and the natural environment. Willey, who
had been trained in culture-historical archaeology but was familiar
with more recent funtional-processual trends, chose instead to view
settlement patterns as a “strategic starting point for the functional
interpretation of archaeological cultures.” He went on to assert that
settlement patterns “reflect the natural environment, the level of
technology on which the builders operated, and various institutions
of social interaction and control which the culture maintained” (p. 1).
He did not deny that ecological factors played a significant role in
shaping settlement patterns but observed that many other factors of
a social and cultural nature also were reflected in the archaeological
record and was unprepared to view these factors as merely a reflection
of the general patterns of ecological adaptation. Instead, he treated
settlement patterns as a source of information about many aspects of
human behavior. The major advantage of settlement patterns over
artifacts was that, whereas artifacts frequently are found not where
they were used but where they had been disposed of, the remains of
structures, where they survive, do so in situ, and hence provide direct
evidence concerning the settings in which human activities were

                                 376
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

carried out. Willey recognized the full potential of settlement-pattern
data for the systematic study of the economic, social, and political
organization of ancient societies.
   Willey employed the concept of the archaeological culture mainly
to distinguish successive phases in the history of the Virú Valley and
to identify sites that had existed at approximately the same time.
Cemeteries, habitation sites, palaces, temples, forts, and irrigation
networks that appeared to be contemporary were used to try to
reconstruct the changing patterns of life in the Virú Valley over sev-
eral millennia (Figure 7.8). These studies revealed that population
growth had been associated with the development of more intensive
forms of food production, changing distributions of population, and
ever more complex forms of social and political organization. Instead
of viewing social and political phenomena as attributes of culture,
Willey interpreted them as an evolving system of social relations that
provided a behavioral context integrating other aspects of culture.
Thus, in addition to identifying social and political organization as
a legitimate object of archaeological study, Willey provided an ana-
lytical device for studying such organization in prehistoric contexts.
Recognizing long-term continuities in the occupation of the Virú
Valley also led Willey to try to explain changes in the archaeological
record in terms of internal transformations rather than attributing
them to diffusion and migration as had commonly been done in
the past. His study was therefore an important pioneering effort in
using archaeological data to interpret long-term social and political
change.
   Within the context of settlement archaeology, individual sites
ceased to be studied as ends in themselves or to be regarded as
representative of a particular culture or region. Instead, they were
seen as forming networks within which single sites often played very
different and complementary roles. Site surveys no longer sought
merely to locate the largest or most representative sites for excava-
tion but to recover information that was important in its own right
for archaeological analysis.
   Although ecological studies of settlement patterns continued and
are recognized as often, if not always, being a necessary preliminary
for social and political interpretations, a growing number of Ameri-
can archaeologists came to view settlement patterns as an important
source of information concerning demographic trends and the social,

                                 377
Figure 7.8 Willey’s interpretation of community patterns in the Virú Valley, Peru, in the Huancaco Period (ad 800–1000)
                               (Prehistoric Settlement Patterns in the Virú Valley, Peru, 1953)


                                                         378
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

political, and religious institutions of prehistoric societies. They also
came to think of settlement patterns in terms of a hierarchy of levels:
activity areas within structures, structures, associated activity areas
around structures, communities, and the distribution of communi-
ties across landscapes. Each of these levels was recognized as hav-
ing been shaped by factors that differ in kind or degree from those
that influence other levels. Individual houses reflect family organi-
zation, settlements community structure, and spatial distributions
the impact of trade, administration, and regional defense. Because
of this the combined study of two or more levels is likely to shed
more light on prehistoric societies than is the study of only one level
(Trigger 1968b; Flannery 1976; Clarke 1977b; Kent 1984). Of all the
functionalist approaches, settlement archaeology, with its focus on
inferring patterns of social behavior and its rejection of ecological
determinism, is the one that most closely relates to the interests of
Durkheimian social anthropology.
   For archaeologists interested in studying social and political organ-
ization, Willey’s research in the Virú Valley constituted the most
important methodological breakthrough in the history of archaeol-
ogy. Even from a broader archaeological perspective, it was perhaps
the most important innovation since Thomsen had succeeded in peri-
odizing prehistory. Willey’s findings inspired intensive regional sur-
veys of the origin and development of complex societies in various
parts of the world. These surveys addressed a variety of functional
and processual issues, some of them of considerable importance to
anthropologists as well as archaeologists. As the result of a detailed
study in southern Iraq, Robert McC. Adams was able to demonstrate
convincingly that in that region irrigation systems had expanded and
collapsed as a consequence of political change rather than being a
major cause of it (Adams 1965, 1981; Adams and Nissen 1972). K. C.
Chang (1963) used settlement data to demonstrate continuity in the
development of social and political systems in northern China from
the early Neolithic period through the Xia, Shang, and Zhou dynas-
ties and Makkhan Lal (1984) examined relations between technology
and environment in northern India during the period of development
of Gangetic civilization. Karl Butzer (1976) demonstrated that over-
all population pressure could not have played a major role in the rise
of ancient Egyptian civilization, which developed most rapidly in the
far south, where the exploitation of the smaller, natural agricultural

                                  379
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

basins required less effort than did that of the larger and more pro-
ductive basins farther north. Trigger (1965) used mainly cemetery
data to compare the relative importance of changes in technology,
the natural environment, trade, and warfare in determining shifts in
the size and distribution of population in Lower Nubia during the
four millennia that followed the introduction of agriculture. Richard
E. Blanton (1978) correlated changing settlement patterns in the
Oaxaca area of Mexico with altering configurations of political orga-
nization, while William T. Sanders’s detailed study of the Valley of
Mexico demonstrated that idiosyncratic factors played a major role in
shaping the size and distribution of settlements (Sanders et al. 1979)
(Figure 7.9).
   Archaeologists also recognized the value of settlement patterns for
studying social change within smaller-scale societies. Early work at
this level resulted in a unilinear scheme of types of community pat-
terning devised at a seminar on the functional and evolutionary impli-
cations of such patterning held under the chairmanship of Richard
Beardsley in 1955 (Beardsley et al. 1956). As a result of this semi-
nar, terms such as “free wandering,” “restricted wandering,” “cen-
tral based wandering,” and “semipermanent sedentary” came to be
used to describe the settlement and subsistence systems of aboriginal
American peoples. It was not long, however, before settlement pat-
tern studies utilizing Willey’s approach were revealing much about
the social and political organization of small-scale societies as well as
about their adaptive patterns (Willey 1956; Ritchie and Funk 1973;
B. Smith 1978).
   Systematic studies of the settlement patterns of particular regions
have increased awareness of regional diversity and the complexity of
adaptations. They also have revealed the rapidity with which these
adaptations sometimes changed, thereby demonstrating the erro-
neousness of the claim that cultural changes invariably occur in a
slow, gradual fashion. Finally they have challenged simplistic beliefs
that population increase or the development of irrigation agricul-
ture played a preponderant role in shaping the evolution of com-
plex societies. Settlement archaeology, like ecological approaches,
encouraged archaeologists to study human behavior rather than cul-
ture and ethnicity, which had been associated with culture-historical
archaeology. These changes in American archaeology, which corre-
sponded with a growing interest in behaviorist approaches in all the

                                  380
                                 SUPRA-REGIONAL CENTER
                                                           HAMLET
                                 PROVINCIAL CENTER
                                                           ETHNOHISTORIC SITE
                                                           NOT SERVEYED
                                 REGIONAL CENTER
                                                           LARGE CEREMONIAL
                                                           PRECINCT
                                 LARGE NUCLEATED VILLAGE
                                                           SMALL CEREMONIAL
                                                           PRECINCT
                                 SMALL NUCLEATED VILLAGE
                                                           SALT MAKING STATION
                                 LARGE DISPERSED VILLAGE
                                                           QUARRY SITE
                                 SMALL DISPERSED VILLAGE
                                                           ROYAL RETREAT
                             0   1 2   3   4 5       10
CONTOUR INTERVAL 50 METERS                                 CAUSEWAY
                                       KILOMETERS




                    Figure 7.9 The settlement pattern of the Basin of Mexico for the Late Horizon
                                       (Sanders et al. The Basin of Mexico, 1979)
                A History of Archaeological Thought

social sciences and with growing familiarity with the work of Childe
and Clark, constituted a major break with culture-historical archae-
ology.


                        World Archaeology
In the early 1950s, archaeology began to be transformed by a
major scientific innovation: radiocarbon dating (Marlowe 1999). This
method of dating was developed by Willard F. Libby (1908–1980)
in the late 1940s and almost immediately tested by using it to date
archaeological material of known age (Libby 1955). Ancient Egyptian
artifacts and the chronology already worked out by Egyptologists
played a major role in demonstrating that the original assumption
that the rate of carbon-14 formation was a constant was incorrect
and in the initial calibration of radiocarbon dates. Radiocarbon dat-
ing reduced, although it did not eliminate, the need for archae-
ologists to rely on seriation and cross-dating to construct cultural
chronologies.
   It also became possible for the first time to date prehistoric sites
around the world in relation to one another and assign calendrical
dates rather than only relative ones to them. Archaeologists were thus
able to study rates as well as sequences of change. It had been possi-
ble for several decades to date geological or archaeological phenom-
ena calendrically by means of varves and tree-rings, but these meth-
ods were applicable in only a few areas (Nash 1999, 2000a; Truncer
2003). Hitherto archaeologists had been able to create complex, rel-
atively dated prehistoric cultural sequences covering geographically
contiguous areas, but they could not correlate sequences in the Old
and New Worlds or even in East and West Asia. Because they were
unable to date most prehistoric sites calendrically, they also had no
certain idea of whether cultural changes had occurred quickly or
slowly.
   The first archaeologist to exploit systematically the potential of
radiocarbon dating for creating a global perspective in archaeol-
ogy was Grahame Clark in his book World Prehistory (1961), which
appeared in significantly revised editions in 1969 and 1977 as increas-
ing arrays of radiocarbon dates and archaeological discoveries became
available from around the world. In the second edition, lists of rele-
vant radiocarbon dates appeared at the end of each chapter. Already in

                                 382
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

1943, at a conference on the future of archaeology, Clark had urged
the need to create a common history and prehistory of humanity
as an antidote to nationalism (Clark 1945; C. Evans 1995: 313–15).
After World War II, Dorothy Garrod introduced a course on world
prehistory at Cambridge University that sought to present archae-
ology as a subject that spans the entire globe (Clark 1999: 407). In
the late 1950s, Clark used available radiocarbon dates to construct
a worldwide chronology covering the last 50,000 years and then
attempted to delineate the successive patterns of ecological adap-
tation in each region and to determine when each pattern appeared
in different places. In keeping with his functionalist interests, Clark’s
goal was not to explain change but to ascertain the degree of similar-
ity of developmental sequences on a worldwide basis. By the 1960s,
a growing number of Clark’s former students were working in many
parts of the world, which Clark visited to collect material for suc-
cessive editions of his book. Although 57 percent of the first edition
dealt with Europe and western Asia, by the third edition this cover-
age had dropped to 33 percent and more attention was being paid
to East Asia, Africa, the Americas, and Australia (Rowley-Conwy
1999: 517–18); although, like many British academics of that period,
Clark tended to undervalue the achievements of sub-Saharan Africa
(Trevor-Roper 1966: 9). Clark was not the only archaeologist to view
prehistory from a global perspective, but he took advantage of radio-
carbon dating to produce the first modern-style textbook of global
prehistory. His comparison of sequences of adaptive patterns around
the world encouraged the development of comparative ecology and
helped to renew an interest in evolutionary processes.
   Radiocarbon dating had an important impact on understanding
rates of cultural change. Preferring diffusionist and migrationary
explanations, culture-historical archaeologists had believed that
cultures could change quickly, which encouraged the creation of
short chronologies. Nineteenth-century evolutionists had preferred
longer chronologies, which provided more time for internal changes
to occur, but even they greatly overestimated the rate of change
for the Palaeolithic period. As early as 1966, Clark was questioning
migrationary explanations of changes in the archaeological record
of prehistoric Britain. Colin Renfrew’s (1973a, 1979) reinterpreta-
tion of European prehistory was based almost entirely on calibrated
radiocarbon dates that indicated that Neolithic and Bronze Age sites

                                  383
                A History of Archaeological Thought

north and west of the Aegean area were considerably older than
Montelius and Childe had estimated using Aegean sites that had
been cross-dated with historically dated Bronze Age sites in Egypt
and the Middle East. This revision suggested that in terms of tech-
nology and architecture early central and western Europe had been
more innovative than previously had been believed.
   Radiocarbon dating had a similar effect on the study of North
American prehistory. There, everywhere except in the Southwest,
where calendrical dates for sites back to the beginning of the Christian
era had been derived dendrochronologically since the 1920s, radio-
carbon chronologies revealed that cultural sequences had developed
over longer periods and far more slowly than had previously been
believed (cf. Ritchie 1944, 1965). By greatly slowing the rate of cul-
tural change in the eastern United States and western Europe, radio-
carbon dating made it far easier for archaeologists to credit the pos-
sibility that major changes had come about as a result of internal
processes rather than because of diffusion and migration. This in
turn made evolutionary explanations of change in the archaeologi-
cal record seem more plausible. The chronology of the Palaeolithic
period, especially that of the Lower Palaeolithic period, was greatly
lengthened in the 1960s as a result of the application of potassium-
argon dating to new archaeological discoveries that were being made
in east Africa. That, too, created new facts that were in need of
explanation.


                             Conclusions
Functional and processual interpretations of archaeological data had
long been associated with studies of the relations between cultures
and their environments and how artifacts were made and used.
Beginning in the late 1920s, Soviet archaeologists sought to pio-
neer ways to infer social, economic, and political behavior from the
archaeological record. What was completely new was their determi-
nation to understand how social and cultural systems changed in
terms of their own internal dynamics. This marked a sharp break
with earlier efforts by archaeologists to explain cultural change in
terms of external influences or human inventiveness considered with-
out reference to social and economic conditions. The new approach
also was characterized by an explicit rejection of the racism and

                                  384
               Early Functional-Processual Archaeology

pessimism about human creativity that characterized archaeology in
central and western Europe in the 1920s. Yet the development of
Soviet archaeology was blighted by extreme ideological regimenta-
tion, which restricted the range of analytical techniques that could
be employed to construct cultural chronologies and explain change
in the archaeological record.
   In the West, the proliferation and increasing sophistication of func-
tionalist views that represented a significant trend in British and
American anthropology, beginning in the 1920s, encouraged archae-
ologists to view prehistoric cultures as internally differentiated and to
some degree integrated ways of life. That development in turn pro-
moted a consideration of the internal as well as the external causes
of change. At first the examination of internal causes was directed
mainly toward ecological and economic factors. Yet, although Taylor
and Clark did much to encourage the use of archaeological data for
reconstructing prehistoric patterns of life, they made few contribu-
tions toward explaining changes in the archaeological record. In con-
trast, Childe, although developing some very interesting models of
social change, failed to address how these models could be applied in
any detail to the study of the archaeological evidence. Ecological and
settlement archaeology, by contrast, encouraged the study both of
prehistoric cultures at specific points in time and of how these cultures
changed. The development of functional and processual approaches
to archaeological data resulted in the gradual replacement of the
increasingly sterile preoccupation of culture-historical archaeology
with ethnicity by a vital new interest in how prehistoric cultures oper-
ated and changed. A declining interest in the study of culture and a
growing interest in behavior not only accorded with trends in other
social sciences but also foreshadowed continuing changes in prehis-
toric archaeology.




                                  385
                                    chapter 8
         Processualism and Postprocessualism

     I am unwilling to admit that the abundant literature published
     in the last fifteen years in praise of “archaeology as anthropol-
     ogy” . . . marks a turning point in the intellectual history of our
     discipline.
           j e a n - c l a u d e g a r d i n , Archaeological Constructs (1980), p. 29


     The proper analogy for human behaviour is not natural law – of
     a physical kind – but a game of chess.
                e d m u n d l e a c h , “Concluding Address” (1973), p. 764



In Europe and North America, culture-historical and functional-
processual archaeology might have continued to develop alongside
one another in a complementary fashion as they had done in the
1950s. Instead, in the early 1960s, a group of American processual
archaeologists launched an all-out attack on culture-historical archae-
ology, which they proposed to replace with an approach that was evo-
lutionist, behaviorist, ecological, and positivist in orientation. In the
late 1980s, archaeologists, mainly in Britain, offered an equally dog-
matic, culturally oriented postprocessual archaeology as a solution for
what they proclaimed were processual archaeology’s shortcomings.
Neither option has lived up to its promise to solve all of archaeology’s
problems, although together they offer productive ways to consider
many, but not all, of the questions archaeologists must address. In
retrospect, these two antagonistic positions can be seen to reflect
successive theoretical fashions in anthropology.


                                  Neoevolutionism
The two decades following World War II were an era of unrivaled
prosperity and unchallenged political power for the United States.
Despite the threat of nuclear war, this also was a time of great

                                             386
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

optimism and self-confidence for middle-class Americans. As had
happened in Britain and western Europe in the middle of the nine-
teenth century, this self-confidence encouraged a relatively material-
istic outlook and a greater readiness than in the past to believe that
there was a pattern to human history and that technological progress
was the key to human betterment. In American anthropology, these
trends were manifested in the revival of an interest in cultural evo-
lution. Although evolutionism never became the predominant trend
in American anthropology, it increased greatly in popularity in the
1950s and 1960s and exerted a significant influence throughout the
discipline.
   The resurgence of cultural evolutionism in American anthropology
also was encouraged by a growing consensus that Boasian anthropol-
ogy could not adequately explain cultural changes. Boasian anthro-
pology, with its emphasis on cultural relativism, had generally been
hostile to the study of cultural evolution as opposed to cultural his-
tory. Hence, it is not surprising that opposition to Boasian anthro-
pology took the form of a renewed interest in cultural evolution.
In addition, Boasian idealist epistemology did not accord with the
growing interest in positivism and behaviorism that spread through
the social sciences in the 1940s and 1950s, ironically at a time when
behaviorism was starting to fall out of favor in psychology, where it
had first been applied in the 1910s (J. Watson 1925).
   The two principal exponents of neoevolutionism in anthropology
in the 1950s were the ethnologists Leslie White (1900–1975) and
Julian Steward (1902–1972) (White 1949, 1959; Steward 1955). White
regarded himself as the intellectual heir of L. H. Morgan and the
nineteenth-century evolutionary tradition of American anthropol-
ogy. He rejected the historical particularism, psychological reduc-
tionism, and belief in free will inherent in Boasian anthropology.
In their place he offered the concept of “General Evolution,” which
treated progress as a characteristic of culture in general, although not
necessarily of every individual culture. White deliberately ignored
the influence of environments on culture and of one culture on
another and concentrated on explaining what he regarded as the
main line of cultural development, which was marked by the most
advanced culture of each successive period regardless of the his-
torical relations between these leading cultures. He argued that
this approach was justified because, in the long run, cultures that

                                  387
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

failed to keep ahead were superseded and absorbed by more
progressive ones. Hence, from an evolutionary point of view, they
were irrelevant.
   White defined cultures as elaborate thermodynamic systems. In his
early writings, he argued that they functioned to make human life
more secure and enduring, although later he rejected that view as
anthropocentric and claimed that cultures evolved to serve their own
needs (White 1975: 8–13). His perception of cultural change was
materialistic and narrowly deterministic. He maintained that cul-
tural systems were composed of technoeconomic, social, and ide-
ological subsystems and that “social systems are . . . determined by
technological systems, and philosophies and the arts express expe-
rience as it is defined by technology and refracted by social sys-
tems” (White 1949: 390–1). He formulated his concept of techno-
logical determinism in terms of a “basic law of evolution,” which
stated that, all things being equal, culture evolves as the amount of
energy harnessed per capita increases or the efficiency of putting
energy to work is increased. This law was summarized by the
formula:
           Culture = Energy × Technology (C = E × T).

Despite the sweeping claims that White sometimes made for his the-
ory, he emphasized that, although it accounted for the general out-
lines of cultural development, it could not be used to infer the specific
features of individual cultures (White 1945: 346).
   Because White was a radical socialist, his technological determin-
ism is often assumed to be of Marxist origin. Yet conceptually it had
in common with Marxism only a general materialist orientation. It
more closely reflected one of the principal themes of mid-twentieth-
century American social science scholarship, which privileged the
relation between technology and society at the expense of other
kinds of relations, such as that between self and society (Noble 1977;
Kroker 1984: 12). In the 1950s and 1960s, most Americans viewed
technological progress as the main cause of economic, political, and
intellectual progress and the main cure for all social problems. Either
White deliberately disguised the Marxist basis of his ideas to pro-
tect his academic appointment at the University of Michigan (Peace
1993) or he disagreed with Marxists on this matter. Marxists were
not technological determinists.

                                  388
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

   Julian Steward championed an alternative multilinear, ecological,
and more empirical approach to the study of cultural evolution. He
assumed that there were significant regularities in cultural devel-
opment and that ecological adaptation was crucial for determining
the limits of variation in cultural systems. He sought by means of
comparative studies to determine the different ways in which cultures
had developed in various types of natural environments, believing
that they would tend to acquire the same forms and follow similar
developmental trajectories in similar natural settings. These cross-
cultural similarities constituted a “cultural core,” which was consti-
tuted by those features of a culture that were functionally most closely
related to subsistence activities. The core embraced economic, polit-
ical, and religious patterns that could be empirically determined to
have major adaptive significance. Steward argued that the aim of evo-
lutionary anthropology should be to explain the shared features of
cultures at similar levels of development rather than “unique, exotic,
and non-recurrent particulars,” which can be attributed to historical
accidents (Steward 1955: 209).
   M. D. Sahlins and E. R. Service (1960) tried to reconcile White’s
and Steward’s approaches by differentiating between general and spe-
cific evolution. These were defined as being concerned with progress
and adaptation respectively. Although the concept of evolution was
thereby dissociated from automatically implying progress, in later
studies Sahlins (1968) and Service (1962, 1975) used ethnographic
data to construct speculative, highly generalized sequences of uni-
linear development, employing evolutionary concepts such as band,
tribe, chiefdom, and state. Implicit in their approaches, and in the
alternative scheme of political evolution developed by Morton Fried
(1967), was the assumption that the greater selective fitness of tech-
nologically advanced societies ensured that progress had character-
ized cultural change throughout human history.
   The most theoretically sophisticated approach of this sort was
Marvin Harris’s (1979) cultural materialism. He assigned a privi-
leged role in shaping cultural systems to an array of material condi-
tions, including technology, demography, and economic relations,
and sought to explain all sociocultural phenomena in terms of the rel-
ative costs and benefits of alternative strategies, as measured in terms
of those criteria. Much of his work was directed toward trying to
explain the origin of food taboos, religious beliefs, and other cultural

                                  389
                A History of Archaeological Thought

esoterica in terms of the functional relations these customs had to
basic economic considerations (Harris 1974, 1977, 1981). Although
overtly less concerned with delineating evolutionary sequences than
were Sahlins, Service, and Fried, Harris was no less an evolutionist
than they were.
   What distinguished the various materialist approaches that devel-
oped in American anthropology in the 1960s from the evolution-
ary schemes of the nineteenth century was their view of causality.
White adopted a very narrow form of technological determinism
that reflected his belief in technology as a source of social progress,
whereas Steward embraced a less restrictive ecological and Harris a
still broader economic determinism. Yet neoevolutionists continued
to argue, as diffusionists and social anthropologists had done, that
humans sought to preserve a familiar style of life unless they were
compelled to change by forces that were beyond their control. This
position was very different from the deliberate search by individuals
for better ways to control nature and improve the quality of human
life that Spencer and most nineteenth-century evolutionists had used
to explain cultural change.
   Already by the middle of the nineteenth century some North
American archaeologists were constructing sequences to describe
the development of indigenous cultures in the New World. Like
Acosta, Daniel Wilson (1862) believed that indigenous peoples had
originally come from the Old World but, because of hardships they
had encountered in the course of doing so, they had all declined
to a hunter-gatherer level of culture and had to reinvent more
complex forms of society in the Americas without further stimu-
lus from the Eastern Hemisphere. Evolutionary approaches, which
located the main centers of New World development in Mesoamer-
ica and Peru, did not disappear following the adoption of a culture-
historical approach. In Ancient Civilizations of Mexico and Central
America, H. J. Spinden (1879–1967) (1928) distinguished three lev-
els of development: Nomadic (hunting and gathering), Archaic (agri-
culture), and Civilization; while in Method and Theory in American
Archaeology, Willey and Phillips (1958) assigned all cultures to five
levels of increasing complexity: Lithic, Archaic, Formative, Classic,
and Postclassic. Yet, despite their evolutionary appearance, these for-
mulations sought to describe, rather than to account for, cultural
change in developmental terms. They relied heavily on diffusionist

                                 390
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

explanations, as did other culture-historical works. By the late 1940s
and 1950s, however, archaeologists living in Mexico, such as Pedro
Armillas, and anthropologists from the United States, such as René
Millon and Eric Wolf, were using their own understandings of Marx-
ism and of Childe’s evolutionary writings to explain cultural change
in prehistoric Mesoamerica in terms of the development of produc-
tive forces and the dialectic of class and state formation (Peace 1988;
Patterson 1994, 2003: 61–2).
   Although most archaeologists in the United States were hostile or
indifferent to Marxist ideas, as a consequence of their growing inter-
est in functionalist and processual explanations of the archaeological
record, many of them were predisposed to be receptive to neoevo-
lutionary concepts, which emphasized regularities in culture. They
noted that many of the key variables that neoevolutionists posited as
causes of cultural change, including changing subsistence and settle-
ment patterns and demography, were relatively accessible for archae-
ological study, unlike the idealist explanations of Boasian anthropol-
ogists. Because of their lack of direct information concerning human
behavior and beliefs, archaeologists also were less inclined to be crit-
ical of the shortcomings of neoevolutionary theory than were eth-
nologists. Only a few objected that neoevolutionism failed to take
account of the regional variation that was evident in the ethnographic
record (Lamberg-Karlovsky 1975: 342–3).
   One of the first applications of neoevolutionary theory to archaeol-
ogy was B. J. Meggers’s “The Law of Cultural Evolution as a Practical
Research Tool” (1960). She argued that, because of the absence of
nonhuman sources of energy in small-scale societies, White’s law, as
it applied to them, could be rewritten:
               Culture = Environment × Technology.
This formulation suggested that any archaeologist who was able to
reconstruct the technology and environment of a prehistoric culture
should be able on the basis of that information to infer what the
key features of the rest of the culture had been like. Furthermore,
any shortcomings in making such inferences were not the responsi-
bility of archaeologists but resulted from the failure of ethnologists
to elaborate adequate theories relating technology and environment
to the rest of culture. Meggers believed it to be advantageous that
archaeologists were “forced to deal with culture artificially separated

                                  391
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

from human beings” (Meggers 1955: 129) and that her formula-
tion placed so much emphasis on technoenvironmental determinism
that there was no need to use archaeological data to study nonma-
terial aspects of cultural systems. In that respect, her attitude toward
the employment of ethnographic analogy resembled that of many
nineteenth-century evolutionary anthropologists. Her position was,
however, too lacking in direct application to attract much support
among archaeologists. Finally, Meggers could not offer any inde-
pendent proof that her specific reconstructions were correct. Even
more than what had been done by nineteenth-century Palaeolithic
archaeologists, this procedure made archaeological interpretation so
dependent on ethnology as to question the need for archaeological
research.


                      Early New Archaeology
In 1959, Joseph Caldwell published an article in Science titled “The
New American Archaeology.” In it, he surveyed major trends that
he believed were transforming archaeology. He cited growing inter-
est in ecology and settlement patterns as evidence of a new con-
cern with cultural progress. Archaeological cultures were no longer
regarded merely as the sum total of their preserved artifact types or
traits, each of which could be treated in a stylistic fashion as indepen-
dent and equally significant. Instead, cultures had to be analyzed, as
Taylor had proposed, as configurations or even as functionally inte-
grated systems. Caldwell also supported the neoevolutionary belief
that behind the infinite variety of cultural facts and specific histor-
ical situations was a finite number of general historical processes.
Finally, he adopted the neoevolutionary position that not all cultural
facts are of equal importance in bringing about change. The primary
aim of archaeologists must be to explain changes in archaeological
cultures in terms of cultural processes. From this perspective, the
study of cultural idiosyncracies was stigmatized as old-fashioned and
unscientific.
   Caldwell’s paper reveals that during the decade following the pub-
lication of Taylor’s A Study of Archeology the concept of processual
change within cultural systems had achieved a new level of impor-
tance in American archaeology. Although this transformation was
encouraged by developments within archaeology, in particular the

                                  392
                Processualism and Postprocessualism

growing study of ecology and settlement patterns, it also was pro-
moted by the growing popularity of neoevolutionary anthropology,
with its emphasis on cultural regularities. Hence, the essential and
enduring elements of the New Archaeology were the collective cre-
ation of a considerable number of American archaeologists during
the 1950s.
   The ideas that Caldwell noted were popularized among the
younger generation of American archaeologists by Lewis Binford
(b. 1929), who added some new elements to create what since the
1960s has been recognized around the world as the beginnings of
American New or processual archaeology. Binford engaged in a
series of vigorous polemics in which he sought to demonstrate the
advantages of New Archaeology over traditional approaches, which
he identified primarily with the modified form of the Midwest-
ern Taxonomic Method that had been practiced at the University
of Michigan when he was a graduate student there in the 1950s.
Binford attracted much support among young American archae-
ologists, including J. A. Brown, Geoff Clark, James Deetz, Kent
Flannery, James Hill, Frank Hole, Stephen LeBlanc, Mark Leone,
William Longacre, Fred Plog, William Rathje, Charles Redman, Sally
Schanfield (later Sally Binford), Michael Schiffer, Stuart Struever,
Patty Jo Watson, Fred Wendorf, Robert Whallon, and Howard
Winters. Many of these archaeologists had connections with the
University of Chicago, where Binford taught from 1961 to 1965,
and some had initiated substantial research projects before being
drawn into the New Archaeology movement. At least one senior
archaeologist, Paul Martin (1899–1974) (1971), rallied publicly to
Binford’s support. Binford also significantly influenced the young
British archaeologist Colin Renfrew (1979, 1984). New Archaeology
marked its formal debut with a symposium organized by Lewis and
Sally Binford at the American Anthropological Association meeting
held at Denver in 1965 (S. and L. Binford 1968).
   Binford and his supporters represented New Archaeology as a
radical break with the past and a new and clearly better way of
doing archaeology. The ensuing polarization made New Archae-
ology appear to be the antithesis of culture-historical archaeol-
ogy, while ignoring the extent to which it was grounded in the
functionalist and processual trends that had been developing for a
long time in American and European archaeology. Although there

                                393
                A History of Archaeological Thought

was considerable passive support for old-fashioned culture-historical
archaeology, many who were stigmatized as being “traditional”
archaeologists were adherents of functional-processual trends who
merely objected to particular facets of Binford’s program. The rapid
adoption of New Archaeology was in part a result of predispos-
ing tendencies already at work in the 1950s, although Binford’s
polemics diverted attention from the considerable consensus that
already existed concerning the general direction in which American
archaeology should evolve. It also was widely accepted that culture-
historical archaeologists had substantially accomplished their goal of
creating a prehistoric cultural chronology for the United States and
it was now time to begin explaining the archaeological record.
   Binford outlined the program of New Archaeology in two
papers: “Archaeology as Anthropology” (1962) and “Archaeologi-
cal Systematics and the Study of Culture Process” (1965). He for-
mally identified the goal of archaeology as being the same as that of
traditional American anthropology: to explain the full range of sim-
ilarities and differences in cultural behavior. He proposed to achieve
that goal by relating human behavior to functionally integrated cul-
tural systems; a position that accorded with the reductionist equating
of culture and behavior prevalent in American anthropology at that
time. Binford also maintained that archaeological data were particu-
larly useful for studying changes that occurred over long periods of
time. Explanations were seen as taking the form of generalizations
about systemic change and cultural evolution. As a student of Leslie
White, Binford was predisposed to believe that there were strong
regularities in human behavior and that because of this there was
little difference between explaining a single instance of social change
and a whole class of similar changes. Hence, his main concern was to
account for cross-cultural similarities rather than differences. Binford
has devoted much of his career to explaining general processes such as
those accounting for patterns of variability in hunter-gatherer adap-
tation, the development of agriculture, and to a much more limited
extent the evolution of civilizations (Binford 1968a, 1983b).
   Binford viewed culture as humanity’s extrasomatic means of adap-
tation. Changes in all aspects of cultural systems were therefore inter-
preted as adaptive responses to alterations in the natural environment,
changes in population pressure, and competition with adjacent cul-
tural systems. Binford described evolution as “a process operative

                                  394
                Processualism and Postprocessualism

at the interface of a living system and its field” (1972: 106). He
believed that cultural changes came about as a result of human
groups’ responding rationally to the stresses produced by natural
ecological changes. Because all aspects of culture could be under-
stood in terms of their adaptive significance, it was not necessary
to ascertain what specific groups of people had actually known or
believed in order to understand change. Thus, culturally specific
beliefs, cultural traditions, and idiosyncratic behavior need be of no
interest to archaeologists. Binford assumed that prehistoric groups
had possessed a nearly perfect knowledge of their environment and
therefore were able to calculate the most rational ecological response
to any problem. That meant that human beings could be analyzed
in the same manner as any other part of the ecosystem. All changes
were ultimately caused by ecological factors rather than by diffusion
and migration, contrary to what culture-historical archaeologists had
believed. This ruled out the need for an interest in cultural norms
and traditions, which were construed merely as epiphenomenal facil-
itating devices that were reshaped by adaptational forces but did
not themselves play a significant role in influencing change. Within
the context of neoevolutionism, there was a growing tendency to
believe in the capacity of human rationality to invent and reinvent
new forms of technology, social behavior, beliefs, and values as these
were required by evolving social systems. Steward (1955: 182) had
already argued that every cultural borrowing might be treated as
an “independent recurrence of cause and effect” and Marvin Harris
(1968a: 377–8) had dismissed diffusion as a “nonprinciple.”
   The belief that Binford and other New Archaeologists held con-
cerning the power of individual rationality to solve problems meant
that they paid little attention to the cultural transmission of knowl-
edge. Although they recognized that knowledge of adaptive innova-
tions was transmitted intergenerationally, they believed that, if such
transmissions failed, behavioral patterns could easily be reinvented.
The study of interaction between societies also was never ruled out
in principle. For example, Binford (1972: 204) strongly approved
of Caldwell’s (1964) concept of an “interaction sphere,” which had
been developed to explain how the Hopewellian burial cult, which
involved the interment of goods manufactured from exotic materi-
als with individuals of high status, came to be shared by many pre-
historic societies in the American Midwest. Yet growing interest in

                                 395
                A History of Archaeological Thought

the development of specific sociocultural systems and the neoevo-
lutionary emphasis on independent invention led many followers of
settlement archaeology and the New Archaeology to minimize the
importance of intersocietal contact and competition. There also was
no awareness that adaptive strategies might become better adapted
as a result of long-term selective cultural transmission (Boyd and
Richerson 1985). Binford likewise showed little interest in traditional
archaeological cultures and cultural traditions, which he assumed
were either arbitrary creations by culture-historical archaeologists or
of no use for understanding adaptive behavior. Any phenomenon
that could not be accounted for adaptationally was labeled stylistic
and dismissed as inconsequential (Shennan 2002: 72). For Binford,
the concept of culture signified primarily the different ways in which
groups of human beings adapted to their environmental settings.
   Neoevolutionary archaeology thus combined the unilinear per-
spective of nineteenth-century cultural evolutionists with Julian
Steward’s hypothesis that cultural change represented a response to
altering ecological conditions. This hypothesis represented a major
departure from the ideas of nineteenth-century unilinear evolution-
ary anthropologists. They had assumed, as Enlightenment philoso-
phers had done in the previous century, that cultural change occurred
as a result of human efforts to control nature more effectively. That
view had already been challenged by Marxist evolutionists, who
ascribed sociocultural change to different social classes struggling for
control of political power and resources. Loss of faith in evolution-
ism in the late nineteenth century had been coupled with declining
faith by intellectuals in human creativity. Neoevolutionary anthro-
pologists, by believing that cultures changed only when ecologi-
cal conditions compelled them to do so, continued to support the
idea that humans were inherently conservative. That position pro-
tected them against charges that neoevolutionary anthropology was
a form of Marxism during the period of Senator Joseph McCarthy’s
anticommunist witchhunts and their aftermath (Price 1993). Neo-
evolutionary archaeologists propagated the idea that changes in
all parts of a cultural system were brought about by ecological,
not social, factors. They continued to believe that evolution from
hunting-gathering to modern industrial societies was a progressive
and liberating process, even if they now thought that it shaped human
behavior rather than came about as a result of human agency. The

                                  396
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

development of capitalism from an early entrepreneurial stage, when
individual initiative was highly valued, into a corporate phase, dom-
inated by large, bureaucratically managed companies within which
the individual was no longer idealized as responsible for bringing
about economic growth, may have made the concept of ecological
determinism more acceptable.
   Like Caldwell, Binford stressed the internal differentiation and sys-
temic integration of cultures. He objected to the established norma-
tive view of archaeologists who regarded cultures as collections of
ideas held in common by the members of particular social groups.
Like Caldwell, Binford also objected to each item of culture being
regarded as equal in significance to all others and to the percentage
of similarities and differences in artifact traits being treated as a mea-
surement of the amount of effective communication between groups.
He maintained that traditionally archaeologists had interpreted dif-
ferences between cultures as resulting from geographical barriers or
resistant value systems, which prevented ideas being spread from one
culture to another by diffusion and migration. Although this descrip-
tion may have represented accurately the views about cultures held by
culture-historical archaeologists working in the midwestern United
States or even those of Walter Taylor, it did not take account of
the views of a growing number of functionally oriented archaeolo-
gists in the United States or of Grahame Clark and Gordon Childe
in Britain. As early as 1925, Childe had employed a functional view
of culture to facilitate his culture-historical analyses when he dis-
tinguished between ethnic traits, which did not diffuse readily, and
technological ones, which did.
   Binford argued that cultures were not internally homogeneous.
All were differentiated at least according to age and sex roles, and
the degree to which they were internally shared by individuals varied
inversely with their overall complexity. Individuals always partici-
pated in cultures differentially, making a total cultural system a set
of functionally interrelated roles. Because of this, it was wrong for
archaeologists to treat artifact types as equal and comparable traits.
Instead, they must try to determine the roles that artifacts had played
within living cultural systems. This necessitated an effort to achieve
a relatively holistic view of these systems.
   At this point, Binford could have opted, as Willey (1953), Childe
(1958a), and various settlement archaeologists had done, largely to

                                   397
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

ignore the concept of culture and focus on reconstructing social sys-
tems. Such an approach would have concentrated on delineating pat-
terns of human interaction and determining the functional relations
of cultural traits to social systems. Instead, Binford followed White in
viewing cultures as adaptive systems composed of three interrelated
subsystems: technology, social organization, and ideology. Thus, he
supported the view that human behavior was determined by forces
of which human beings are largely unaware and that frequently are
located in the natural realm. Because Binford believed that changes
occurred mainly as a result of interactions between cultures and their
natural environments, he also focused almost exclusively on what was
happening in single communities or sociocultural systems. In that
respect, his outlook was similar to that of many American settlement
pattern archeologists who did not identify with New Archaeology.
   Binford argued that material items do not interact within a sin-
gle subsystem of culture but reflect all three subsystems. Technomic
aspects of artifacts reflect how they were used to cope with the
environment; sociotechnic ones had their primary context in the
social system; and ideotechnic ones related to the ideological realm.
In 1962, he suggested that each type of artifact might be interpreted
as relating primarily to one of these subsystems, but by 1965 he
noted that individual artifacts frequently encoded information about
all three. A knife might be used for cutting, but its gold handle
could denote the upper-class social status of its owner and a symbol
engraved on the blade might invoke divine protection for him.
   Binford went further than either Clark or Taylor had done in argu-
ing that, because artifacts have primary contexts in all subsystems of
culture, formal artifact assemblages and their contexts can yield a
systematic and understandable picture of total extinct cultures. He
maintained that the first task of archaeologists was to determine what
roles artifacts had played in cultural systems. The second task was to
reconstruct cultures as functionally operational systems. He repu-
diated the idea that it was inherently more difficult to reconstruct
social organization or religious activities than it was to infer economic
behavior. The idea that archaeologists could study any problem that
ethnologists could, and over much longer periods of time, attracted
support from many young archaeologists who were frustrated by the
artifact-centered culture-historical approach that continued to per-
vade American archaeology in the early 1960s. They were anxious to

                                  398
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

demonstrate that ethnologists were wrong when they smugly pro-
claimed that archaeology was “doomed always to be the lesser part
of anthropology” (Hoebel 1949: 436).
   Binford observed that archaeologists had already made significant
progress in using knowledge derived from the physical and biolog-
ical sciences to interpret those aspects of the archaeological record
relating to technomic behavior, especially subsistence patterns and
technological practices. By contrast, anthropologists did not know
enough about correlations between social behavior or beliefs and
material culture to infer much sociotechnic or ideotechnic informa-
tion from archaeological finds. Only after such correlations had been
established and archaeologists had acquired a holistic knowledge of
the structural and functional characteristics of cultural systems could
they begin to investigate problems of evolutionary changes in social
systems and ideology.
   Binford argued that in order to establish such correlations archae-
ologists must be trained as ethnologists. Only by studying living
situations in which behavior and ideas could be observed in conjunc-
tion with material culture was it possible to establish correlations that
could be used to infer social behavior and ideology reliably from the
archaeological record. Binford saw ethnoarchaeology, or the study
by archaeologists of regularities in living cultures, as a promising
approach to understanding the past because, as a neoevolutionist, he
believed that there was a high degree of regularity in human behavior
which comparative ethnographic studies could reveal. These regular-
ities could then be used to infer many behavioral aspects of prehistoric
cultures. If human behavior were less regular than he assumed, such
correlations would be fewer in number and less useful for recon-
structing prehistoric cultures and understanding change.
   Among Binford’s principal original contributions was his insistence
that the correlations used to infer human behavior from archaeolog-
ical data had to be based on the demonstration of a constant articu-
lation of specific variables in a system. He argued that all analogies
were inconclusive, whether they were based on worldwide evidence
or were homologies drawn from the same cultural tradition as the
archaeological data being interpreted. Instead, all behavioral expla-
nations of archaeological material had to be based on a lawful demon-
stration that in the living (actual) world there was a constant corre-
lation between a particular form of human behavior and a specific

                                  399
                A History of Archaeological Thought

type of material culture. Only if a particular behavioral trait could
be shown always to correlate with a specific item of material culture,
wherever both could be observed, could such behavior be inferred
from the occurrence of that item in the archaeological record. This
positivist epistemology in turn necessitated a deductive approach in
which relations between variables that are archaeologically observ-
able and ones that are not were formulated and tested in a statis-
tically significant number of ethnographic situations in which both
variables could be observed. Only by means of such measurement
of concomitant variation could regularities be established that were
useful for understanding prehistoric cultural systems. Binford (1972:
33–51) insisted that analogies were not explanations but merely a
source of hypotheses to be tested in this manner.
   Thus, an implicit test of Binford’s most fundamental assumption
about the nature of culture was built into New Archaeology. If, as
Binford assumed, there was a high degree of regularity in human
behavior and this was reflected in material culture, ethnoarchaeol-
ogy should quickly provide the generalizations needed to infer a
broad range of human behavior from archaeological evidence. Under
these conditions, further ethnoarchaeological evidence would soon
become unnecessary and archaeologists could proceed with the still
more challenging and rewarding task of explaining human behavior.
If human behavior was less cross-culturally uniform than Binford
and other neoevolutionists assumed, ethnoarchaeology would not
produce the broad range of generalizations that Binford expected.
   Binford championed the already challenged positivist view that
explanation and prediction are equivalent and that both rest upon the
demonstration of a constant articulation of variables. The rigorous
application of a positivist approach was seen as eliminating subjective
elements and establishing a basis for the objective, scientific inter-
pretation of archaeological data. To achieve this level of rigor, how-
ever, archaeologists had to adhere to deductive canons which utilized
well-established correlations, as outlined by the philosopher Carl
Hempel (1942, 1962, 1965, 1966; Hempel and Oppenheim 1948)
in his covering-law model of explanation. Binford also maintained
that a single way of doing science, exemplified in its most rigorous
form by the work of physicists, constituted the model for carrying out
all archaeological enquiries. From that perspective, the only useful
correlations are those that hold true whenever specific conditions are

                                 400
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

present. The application of the covering-law method to the expla-
nation of cultural change tended to exclude consideration of all but
situations of notable regularity.
   This epistemology required Binford and his followers to repudiate
historical studies, which they equated with an unscientific preoc-
cupation with chronology, description, and accidental occurrences
(Binford 1967b: 235, 1968b). This viewpoint had been introduced
to American archaeologists by the ethnologist Clyde Kluckhohn
(1905–1960) (1940), when he argued that Mesoamerican archaeol-
ogists had to abandon an exclusive commitment to historical stud-
ies, which sought to recreate unique events in all their idiosyncratic
detail; instead, they should embrace scientific research by seeking to
identify and explain significant cross-cultural uniformities in cultural
change. A dichotomy between history and science, which paralleled
the distinction that American anthropologists drew between history
and evolution, was reinforced by Walter Taylor (1948: 156–7) and
Willey and Phillips (1958: 5–6), who regarded culture-historical inte-
gration as an objective that was inferior to formulating general rules
of cultural behavior. Binford viewed archaeologists’ efforts to explain
particular historical events as an inductive practice that would doom
archaeology to remain a particularistic, nongeneralizing, and hence
unscientific field. He argued that instead archaeologists must seek to
formulate laws of cultural dynamics. Although in historical retrospect
this position can be seen as reflecting the belief that human history
is governed by strong regularities, it deflected archaeological interest
from significant aspects of cultural change that do not display such
regularities. Today, most philosophers of science do not support such
a distinction between history and science (Bunge 2003).
   Binford also denied the relevance of psychological factors for
understanding prehistory. He identified their use with Boasian epis-
temological idealism and the culture-historical approach and argued
that they had no explanatory value for ecological interpretations of
culture and cultural change. On the contrary, within an ecologi-
cal framework specific psychological factors could be viewed as an
epiphenomenal aspect of human behavior that was shaped by ecologi-
cal adaptation. He also argued that archaeologists were poorly trained
to function as palaeopsychologists (Binford 1972: 198). This view
corresponded with a more general repudiation of Boasian psycho-
logical anthropology in the United States and the growing influence

                                  401
                A History of Archaeological Thought

of behaviorism, which rejected beliefs and feelings as objects of sci-
entific enquiry.
   New archaeologists also advocated the use of sampling strategies
to guide both surveys and excavations and economize on the time
and labor needed to carry out research. Underlying this advocacy
was their belief that, because strong regularities were inherent in
cultural systems, a small part of a system could be representative of
the whole. Now, however, it was no longer a single site, but some
portion of a site network that was thought to be typical of the entire
system. Various forms of sampling also were used to try to recover
a more representative selection of the material to be found in large
heterogeneous sites. Yet random intrasite sampling came to be seen
as an initial excavation strategy that had to be supplemented in the
later stages of research by an increasing number of informed decisions
about what areas should be excavated (Redman 1986).
   Studies of early civilizations based on total regional surveys pro-
vided the data to allow examination of the representativeness of var-
ious sampling strategies. Sanders, Parsons, and Santley’s (1979: 491–
532) survey of the Valley of Mexico revealed marked diversity in local
patterns of development and therefore the need to study the entire
region in order to understand what was happening in its various
parts. For example, the massive increase in population and growth of
urbanism in the Teotihuacán Valley early in the Christian era could
only be understood properly once it was realized that similar popu-
lation growth was not occurring elsewhere in the Valley of Mexico,
but on the contrary the population of those areas was declining at
that time. Robert Adams (1981) has shown similar local diversity
in his studies of Mesopotamian settlement patterns. These findings
have severely challenged the belief that patterns from one area are
necessarily representative of a whole region (Fish and Kowalewski
1990). Similar diversity also was demonstrated within communities
(Bellhouse and Finlayson 1979). As a result, it was gradually rec-
ognized that much larger samples than had hitherto been thought
necessary were required before they became representative of a whole
and that the study of changes over long periods required something
approaching total samples.
   The earliest publications of New Archaeology sought to apply
Binford’s ideas concerning the adaptive nature of culture and to
demonstrate the value of a deductive covering-law approach. In 1966,

                                 402
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

Lewis and Sally Binford published “A Preliminary Analysis of Func-
tional Variability in the Mousterian of the Levallois Facies.” Before
that time, Sally Binford had demonstrated that the four assemblages
into which Bordes had divided the Mousterian material from France
were intermingled over a vast area of Europe and the Middle East
and, hence, were unlikely to be cultures as Bordes had suggested.
Lewis and Sally Binford divided each assemblage into groups of tool
types that they assumed had been used to perform different tasks.
They concluded that the varying percentages of these toolkits at dif-
ferent sites and in different layers within sites suggested that Bordes’s
assemblages were associated with the performance of different tasks
rather than with different groups of Neanderthals. Although the
ensuing controversy with Bordes (1972) attracted widespread inter-
est and epitomized the confrontation between culture-historical and
New Archaeology, critics complained that the Binfords’ propositions
about toolkits had not been tested by use-wear analysis nor by the
examination of accompanying plant and animal residues.
   Other important early applications of New Archaeology involved
attempts to use ceramics to infer the residence patterns of prehistoric
communities. “Ceramic sociologists” assumed that, if women man-
ufactured the pottery used by their families, specific design elements
would tend to cluster where knowledge of pottery making was trans-
mitted from mothers to daughters in matrilocal societies but would
become randomized in patrilocal societies, in which female potters
from different lineages would have lived and worked adjacent to
one another and hence copied aspects of each other’s work. Evi-
dence of matrilineages would emerge in the form of different design
combinations showing up in different parts of sites (Hill 1968, 1970)
(Figure 8.1) or, where pottery from the different parts of a site became
mixed in the course of disposal, in nonrandom associations of design
elements on the pottery from the whole site (Longacre 1968, 1970).
J. N. Hill, W. A. Longacre, and James Deetz (1965) had begun their
research separately from Binford, the first two grounding their stud-
ies on still earlier work by Constance Cronin (1962), while Whallon’s
(1968) work was inspired by that of Deetz (O’Brien et al. 2005: 67–
75). The sex of potters was determined by applying the direct his-
torical approach rather than by means of forensic evidence, such as
Tret’yakov had used in the 1930s. The same patterns also could have
been produced had men made pottery and the residence pattern been

                                  403
Legend
      Datum                           A     Ashpit
      Wall                            B     Bench
                                      C     Pit
     Wall abutment                    D     Deflector
     Wall bond                        F     Firepit
     Doorway                          G     Burial
     Sealed Doorway                   H     Bin
     Ventilator                       L     Kiva
     Sealed Ventilator                L     Loom holes
     Collapsed Wall                   M     Mealing Bin
     Early Wall      (Removed by      N     Niche
     Earth Wall      inhabitants)     P     Pit house
     Postulated Earth Wall            S     Slab
     Not Visible From Surface         T     Trench
     Unexcavated                      V     Ventilator
     Post Hole                              (or Ventilator Tunnel)
     Post                             W     Step


                     0   1   2   3 Meters




Figure 8.1 Sampling at Broken K Pueblo, J. N. Hill, 1968; shaded rooms were not excavated (J. N. Hill in S. R. and
                              L. R. Binford, New Perspectives in Archeology, 1968)

                                                                     404
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

patrilocal. In these early studies of ceramic sociology, the alternative
possibilities that pottery was made by a smaller number of profes-
sional potters or that it might have been traded over long distances
were not examined, nor were the conditions under which broken
pottery had been discarded (S. Plog 1980). These pioneering efforts
by American archaeologists to infer social organization from archae-
ological evidence therefore did not reach the high standards Binford
had set for such work.
   Somewhat later, efforts were made to infer social stratification from
variations in the burials associated with different cultures. It was pos-
tulated that patterned segregation of bodies or variations in the size
of tombs, the quantity and elaborateness of grave goods, and the
treatment of dead children might provide information about the
nature and extent of status differentiation in prehistoric societies.
Underlying these studies was the more general assumption that vari-
ations in burials would directly reflect social organization (Saxe 1970;
Binford 1971; J. Brown 1971; O’Shea 1984). The analysis of burials
gradually became as important a focus of theoretical discourse among
archaeologists as the study of kinship had once been for sociocultural
anthropologists (Parker Pearson 1999).
   New Archaeology encouraged the proliferation of ethnoarchae-
ological research, which sought to establish correlations between
human behavior and material culture by studying living cultures.
Important examples of such research were W. A. Longacre’s stud-
ies of pottery making and use among the Kalinga of the Philippines
(Longacre and Skibo 1994) and Patty Jo Watson’s (1979) examina-
tion of community organization in western Iran. The most celebrated
project was Lewis Binford’s (1977, 1978) study of settlement and
subsistence among the Nunamiut Eskimos of Alaska between 1969
and 1973, which he says he initiated in order to gain deeper insights
into the behavioral significance of the Mousterian assemblages of
western Europe (Binford 1983b: 100–4). Although the Nunamiut
hunted with guns and participated in the international fur trade,
they were investigated as an example of a traditional hunter-gatherer
culture. Binford recorded how hunting practices and camp life pat-
terned the entry of material remains into the archaeological record
(Figure 8.2). He sought to establish what the remains of kill sites
and main residential camps looked like, what archaeological evidence
household groups left behind, and what sleeping areas looked like.

                                  405
                A History of Archaeological Thought




 Figure 8.2 Binford’s plan of a modern Nunamiut butchery area at Anavik
   Springs, Alaska, showing where caribou were dismembered and waste
           products were disposed (In Pursuit of the Past, 1983)



Binford (1983b) later applied what he had learned about the econ-
omy and spatial behavior of the Nunamiut and other modern hunter-
gatherer societies to a series of problems relating to Old World Palae-
olithic sites.
   In addition to gathering data ethnoarchaeologically, Binford pro-
duced a number of cross-cultural studies using ethnographic data
collected from many living societies in an effort to establish uni-
versal generalizations about the behavioral implications of hunter-
gatherer site distributions (1980, 2001) and burial practices (1971).
These studies demonstrate that, although ethnoarchaeologists col-
lect data that are useful for generalizing about human behavior, sys-
tematic cross-cultural studies are necessary to generalize about the
relations between material culture and human behavior. Contrary

                                  406
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

to expectations, when correlations could be established, they more
often took the form of trends, tendencies, and tilts than of absolute
correspondences.
    Some critics argued that New Archaeology represented a revo-
lution in the technical and methodological spheres rather than in
archaeological theory (Meltzer 1979). Yet the stand that Binford took
against the still influential culture-historical approach in the United
States was no less a break with that past in terms of high-level the-
ory than it was methodologically. Historical questions that must be
answered are why did his approach appeal so powerfully to a rising
generation of American archaeologists and why was Binford able so
quickly to popularize views that until then had been spreading only
slowly through American archaeology.
    The nomothetic or generalizing orientation of New Archaeol-
ogy strongly appealed to the deeply engrained tendency of Amer-
icans to value what was useful. Their contempt for what was not
practical manifested itself in the low respect they accorded to his-
torical studies generally (Bronowski 1971: 195), an opinion epit-
omized by the industrialist Henry Ford’s remark that “History
is . . . bunk” (Lowenthal 1985: 244). The low value accorded to his-
tory also reflected the “present-mindedness” of American society,
which romantically viewed itself as having prospered by throwing off
the shackles of the past, as represented by claims of class, tradition,
and hereditary descent, and creating a new society rationally designed
to serve the interests of enterprising people (Kroker 1984: 8). The
culture-historical approach reduced prehistoric archaeology’s pres-
tige and led to its being regarded by the American public and by
cultural anthropologists as a dilettantish pursuit.
    New Archaeology followed the lead of the generalizing social sci-
ences, such as economics, political science, sociology, and ethnology
by claiming to be able to produce objective, ethically neutral gener-
alizations that were useful for the management of modern societies.
This desire to conform to a more prestigious model of scholarly
behavior was reinforced as the National Science Foundation emerged
as a major source of funding for archaeological research and the era
of major dam building and government-funded salvage archaeology
along the Missouri, Colorado, and other rivers came to an end in the
1950s (Braidwood 1981: 24–5; Kehoe 1998: 126). Such funding had
freed archaeologists from dependence on museums and having to

                                 407
                A History of Archaeological Thought

discover exhibitable material and allowed them to dig sites in order
to learn about how people had behaved in the past. New archae-
ologists argued that archaeology could provide information about
the nature of long-term interactions between human groups and the
environment that would be of value for modern economic and social
planning (Fritz 1973), a view shared by some archaeologists who
rejected the general philosophy and methodology of New Archaeol-
ogy (Dymond 1974). It was believed that the detailed study of pre-
historic irrigation systems in Arizona might reveal unsuspected long-
term problems associated with modern irrigation systems in the same
area and stratified archaeological sites in California were looked to
for information about the frequency of major earthquakes that could
help to decide whether or not it was safe to install atomic-energy
generators nearby (F. Plog 1982). These suggestions are reminiscent
of the practical applications that were used to justify Soviet archae-
ology in the 1930s and later by Childe (1944b) as a practical reason
for public support of archaeological research. On a more ambitious
scale, in The Archaeology of Arizona Paul Martin and Fred Plog (1973:
364–8) argued that generalizations about human reactions to stress
derived from ecological studies of prehistoric Arizona might help to
explain the behavior of underprivileged black and hispanic groups
living in the ghettos of modern American cities.
   An emphasis on the possible practical applications of their research
encouraged social scientists to abandon holistic attempts to under-
stand human behavior and instead to seek solutions to problems con-
ceived of in narrow technical terms (Wolf 1982: ix). Such research was
endowed with further scientific credentials by positivist claims of eth-
ical neutrality. To produce “relevant” findings that would justify an
honored place for archaeology in a society in which “technocratic effi-
ciency is considered as the supreme value” (Kolakowski 1976: 229),
many American archaeologists saw themselves having to turn away
from seeking a historical understanding of the past to create the
generalizations about human behavior that were now the hallmark
of successful social scientists. It is within this context that we must
understand Binford’s (1967b: 235) assertion that historical interpreta-
tion was unsuited to play more than a “role in the general education
of the public.” He was not the first archaeologist to promote the
idea that behavioral generalizations were to be regarded as archaeol-
ogy’s supreme achievement. Kidder (1935: 14) had maintained that

                                  408
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

the ultimate goal of archaeological research should be to establish
generalizations about human behavior, while Taylor (1948: 151) and
Willey and Phillips (1958: 5–6) also had seen such generalizations as
constituting a common anthropological focus for both archaeologi-
cal and ethnological research.
   The antihistorical bias of the New Archaeology can also be viewed
as an ideological reflection of the increasing economic and political
intervention of the United States on a global scale after World War
II. Its preoccupation with nomothetic generalizations implied that
the study of any national tradition as an end in itself was of trivial
importance. Richard Ford (1973) questioned the legitimacy of “polit-
ical archaeology” and of any connection between archaeology and
nationalism, urging archaeologists instead to embrace a “universal
humanism.” This was different from Grahame Clark’s advocacy of a
world prehistory to balance the impact of studying the past from a
national point of view. By denying that local or regional studies were
worthwhile for their own sakes, New Archaeologists both wittingly
and unwittingly cast doubt on the importance of national traditions
and anything else that stood in the way of American economic activ-
ity and political influence in foreign countries. The corrosive effects
of similar arguments in other fields on the national cultures of neigh-
boring Western countries have been well documented for this period
(G. Grant 1965; Lord 1974: 198–215; Fuller 1980: 114–15). Although
most New Archaeologists may not have been conscious agents in the
promotion of the economic and cultural hegemony of the United
States, their antihistorical program accorded with that policy.
   The most striking impact of this antihistorical viewpoint was exhib-
ited in relation to indigenous North American history. It uninten-
tionally cut in two opposed directions. By making the explanation
of internal changes central to its interpretation of archaeological
data, New Archaeology stressed the creativity of indigenous North
Americans to a much greater extent than diffusionist explanations had
done and for the first time placed these people on an equal footing in
this respect with Europeans and other ethnic groups. Only amateur
or ideologically driven archaeologists who continued to work purely
in the culture-historical tradition, such as Barry Fell (1976, 1982),
R. A. Jairazbhoy (1974, 1976), and Irvan Van Sertima (1977), con-
tinued to belittle indigenous peoples by attributing major elements
of their cultural heritage to prehistoric visitors from the Old World.

                                 409
                A History of Archaeological Thought

New Archaeology thus implicitly ended over a century of conde-
scending and often overtly racist interpretations of indigenous pre-
history by white archaeologists. Yet, from the beginning processual
archaeologists ignored the significance of their own achievements
as a result of their insistence that generalizations, not history, were
the principal goal of their discipline and their focusing on ecological
adaptation at the expense of historically specific aspects of indige-
nous cultures, such as their artistic traditions and religious beliefs.
As Kent Flannery (1967: 120) observed, the processual theorist was
not “ultimately concerned with ‘the Indian behind the artifact,’ but
rather with the system behind both the Indian and the artifact.”
   The theories of change that were first associated with neoevolu-
tionary archaeology were rudimentary and contradictory. Steward
and Binford interpreted cultural change as adaptation to ecologi-
cal change. This approach assumed that human groups were able
to devise nearly optimal adjustments to ecological change and that
they gained increasing control over nature as technologies and social
organization grew more complex. Hence, even if human groups were
seen as changing in response to outside factors, the long-term results
still were believed to benefit humanity. In the 1970s, neoevolutionary
theories of change underwent a major transformation that challenged
this optimistic view.
   Since the late 1950s, the optimism and security of the middle classes
in the United States had been seriously eroded by a succession of
deepening economic crises that were exacerbated by repeated fail-
ures of foreign policy, especially in Vietnam. These events produced
a marked decline of faith in the benefits to be derived from technolog-
ical development. This uncertainty in turn spawned a proliferation of
middle-class protest movements. Although these movements consis-
tently avoided addressing directly the crucial economic and political
problems of American society, they profoundly altered social values
and influenced the social sciences.
   The first of these was the ecology movement, which viewed
unrestrained technological development as poisoning and gradually
destroying the world’s ecosystem. Its beginnings were signaled by the
publication of Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring (1962). This movement
went on to promote awareness of an immediate danger to public
health from a broad array of technological processes and warned that
in the long term even greater catastrophes might result from the

                                  410
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

continuing pollution of the environment. The second movement, to
promote a conserver society, stressed that certain resources essen-
tial for industrial processes are available only in finite quantities in
nature and hence the world was rapidly reaching a point where fur-
ther industrial expansion might become impossible. It was predicted
that the exhaustion of key resources would result in declining liv-
ing standards, or even the collapse of civilization. Hitherto, it had
generally been assumed that new raw materials or sources of energy
would be found before old ones became depleted. Paul Ehrlich’s The
Population Bomb (1968) drew attention to yet another cause for anx-
iety. He argued that, if unprecedented population growth were not
checked, the results would be disastrous in the near future.
   As a result of these movements, social scientists and the general
public became increasingly sceptical about the benefits of techno-
logical progress. As their political and economic insecurity increased,
they, like the late-nineteenth-century European middle classes, came
to view cultural evolution as a source of danger and perhaps ulti-
mately of disaster. Even rapid cultural change was condemned for
producing dysfunctional “future shock” (Toffler 1970). These shift-
ing attitudes laid the groundwork for a conceptual reorientation of
archaeology that marked yet another retreat from the optimistic view
of change formulated during the Enlightenment. They also intensi-
fied neoevolutionists’ rejection of the belief that technological inno-
vation was the result of a process of rational self-improvement and
the driving force promoting cultural change. Two specific develop-
ments, one in economics and the other in social anthropology, served
as a catalyst for this shift.
   The economist Ester Boserup (1965) had argued that, although
increasingly intensive modes of agriculture yielded more food per
unit of land, they required more labor for each unit of food produced.
Therefore, only the necessity to support slowly but inevitably increas-
ing population densities would have led groups to adopt such sys-
tems. Her thesis was construed as evidence that developments which
previous generations of archaeologists had interpreted as desirable
results of humanity’s ability to solve problems and make life easier
and more fulfilling were in fact responses to forces beyond human
control. Throughout history these forces had compelled most peo-
ple to work harder, suffer increasing exploitation, and degrade their
environments (M. Cohen 1977).

                                  411
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   The demonstration by Richard Lee and Irven DeVore (1968) that
hunter-gatherer economies could support a low population den-
sity with less effort than was required by even the least demand-
ing forms of food production not only was interpreted as support
for Boserup’s position but also led archaeologists to adopt radi-
cally new interpretations of prehistoric big-game hunting societies.
Instead of being viewed as living on the brink of starvation, they were
portrayed as leisured groups with plenty of spare time to devote
to religious and intellectual pursuits. Even relatively conservative
archaeologists began to idealize the more egalitarian prehistoric cul-
tures as examples of “conserving societies” that provided models
of how we ourselves should behave in relation to the environment
(Cunliffe 1974: 27). Some archaeologists questioned the evidence on
which these formulations were based and their general applicability
(Bronson 1972; Cowgill 1975; M. Harris 1968a: 87–8; Kelly 1995).
Yet the rapid and relatively unchallenged way in which these stud-
ies came to influence the interpretation of archaeological data, often
in the absence of reliable measures of prehistoric population size or
even of relative population change, suggests the degree to which they
accorded with the spirit of the time.
   These new ideas about the nature of cultural change promoted
the development of a pessimistic and even tragic version of cultural
evolution that interpreted demographic, ecological, and economic
factors as constraining change to occur along lines that most human
beings did not regard as desirable but that they were unable to con-
trol. This eschatological materialism implied that the future was likely
to be worse than the present and that humanity was journeying from
a primitive Eden filled with happy hunter-gatherers to a hell of eco-
logical collapse or nuclear annihilation. Instead of denying that there
was any necessary order to human history, as diffusionists had done
in the late nineteenth century, cataclysmic evolutionists stressed a
fixed trajectory of change that at best human beings might hope to
slow or halt, but which otherwise would result in their certain ruin
(Trigger 1981a). Only a few evolutionary archaeologists continued
to argue that it was possible to learn from the past how to “adjust
and cope” (J. Bradley 1987: 7).
   In response to these new ideas, archaeologists also began to express
reservations about conventional neoevolutionary theories that ana-
lyzed change as if it occurred in slow, gradual trajectories of the sort

                                  412
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

that Braidwood and MacNeish had documented in their studies of
the development of agriculture in the Middle East and Mesoamerica.
Robert Adams (1974: 248–9) pointed out that there had been abrupt
shifts in the development of early civilizations, sometimes sepa-
rated by long periods when relatively few changes occurred. Other
archaeologists sought to imbue the concept of discontinuous cul-
tural change with additional scientific prestige by drawing parallels
between it and the punctuated equilibrium being promoted by some
evolutionary biologists (S. Gould 1980; Eldredge 1982). Soon after,
Colin Renfrew (1978a; Renfrew and Cooke 1979) attempted to use
catastrophe theory, which had been invented by the French mathe-
matician René Thom, to explain changes in the archaeological record.
Catastrophe theory demonstrated how, as the result of particular con-
junctions of internal states, a set of up to four fluctuating variables
could produce discontinuous effects (Saunders 1980). Although both
Thom and Renfrew were interested in a “catastrophe theory” that
permitted the understanding of the development of more complex
as well as simpler societies, the popular view of catastrophe theory
as an analysis of social disintegration reflected widespread fears that
Western societies might be sliding toward catastrophe in the conven-
tional sense. Archaeologists began to examine specific examples of
the collapse of complex societies (Culbert 1973; Yoffee and Cowgill
1988), while Joseph Tainter (1988) in a generalizing study attributed
the collapse of such societies to the unchecked growth of increasingly
expensive bureaucratic structures.
   These views of cultural change made archaeologists more aware of
the need to identify varying rates of change as well as gaps produced
by sociopolitical collapse in the archaeological record. It became
obvious that, despite the large numbers of “vanished societies” that
had been identified in the archaeological record, archaeologists had
failed to recognize the need to explain their collapse as a general prob-
lem. Even the collapse of individual societies had rarely been studied
in any detail by nineteenth-century evolutionists or early-twentieth-
century culture-historians. Gaps also were recognized in the archae-
ological record that in the past would have been filled by project-
ing known cultures backward and forward in time to close them or
by hypothesizing the existence of as yet undiscovered intermediary
forms. These discoveries challenged archaeologists to acquire tighter
control over cultural chronologies. A growing concern with collapse

                                  413
                A History of Archaeological Thought

also reinforced the belief that cultural systems are more fragile and
cultural change more fraught with danger than archaeologists had
hitherto believed.
   Cataclysmic evolutionism, whatever its intrinsic merits as a theory
of change, encouraged archaeologists to look for evidence of popula-
tion pressure, environmental degradation, and the collapse of social
systems in the archaeological record. This stimulated the study of
ecological degradation and ecological catastrophes in the past as well
as of societal collapse brought about by political and economic mis-
management. The investigation of such processes resulted in a more
rounded understanding of the archaeological record.
   As the ethnoarchaeological search for correlations between human
behavior and material culture, especially at the social and ideologi-
cal level, proved less productive than had been anticipated, Binford
(1977, 1978) sought to clarify the relations between archaeology and
ethnology by reconceptualizing the frames of reference for offering
behavioral interpretations of archaeological data. This resulted in the
development of middle-range theory, which, unlike Binford’s ear-
lier, more narrowly focused searches for correlations between specific
types of artifacts and human behavior, involved seeking to establish
the spatial, temporal, and formal correlates of specific forms of human
behavior and their material expressions in the ethnographic record
and to identify similar residues in archaeological contexts (Binford
and Sabloff 1982; Binford 1987b; O’Brien et al. 2005: 209–10). To use
ethnographic findings for such purposes, Binford believed that it was
necessary to establish constant and unique causal relations between
processes and their results.
   Although multiple case studies are necessary to establish such con-
texts, this approach lessened the need for broad cross-cultural stud-
ies. Formulating middle-range theory utilized not only the results
of ethnoarchaeological research and of cross-cultural studies using
ethnographic data but also the findings of other forms of actualis-
tic studies, such as use-wear analysis, experimental archaeology, and
taphonomy (Tringham 1978). Middle-range theory embraced acts of
identification, such as distinguishing different classes of habitations
or base camps, as well as diagnosing the economic, social, and ide-
ological functions of artifacts. It also involved identifying patterns
of human behavior as these might relate to subsistence activities,
family organization, community structure, and political relations.

                                 414
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

In addition, middle-range theory also subsumed the investigation
of cultural and natural site-formation processes, thereby embracing
the study of regularities in physical processes as well as in cultural
behavior.
   Subsequently, some of Binford’s (1984) most important archae-
ological research involved using a combination of taphonomic evi-
dence and arguments about natural site-formation processes to chal-
lenge the hominid origin of many of the patterns observed in the
archaeological record for Lower Palaeolithic times. He showed that
data that often had been interpreted as evidence of big-game hunting
or even scavenging at that time could be merely natural distributions
of animal bones coincidentally associated with traces of human activ-
ity. Binford also questioned the evidence for cannibalism and possi-
bly the use of fire in the Lower Palaeolithic levels at Zhoukoudian.
His research thus cast doubt on some long-standing interpretations
of early hominid behavior (Binford 1981, 1984; Binford and Stone
1986). Binford demonstrated that, because of their support for par-
ticular theories about hominid behavior, archaeologists frequently
failed to consider possible alternatives or to analyze data sufficiently
thoroughly.
   Growing emphasis on middle-range research as well as better
understanding of the contexts of finds encouraged a greater aware-
ness of the differences between the data base of ethnology, which
includes direct observation of human behavior as well as of material
culture, and of prehistoric archaeology, which is limited to the obser-
vation of material culture. Archaeologists also distinguished more
clearly between general theory, which seeks to explain human behav-
ior, and middle-range theory, which is concerned with inferring such
behavior from archaeological data. Middle-range theory was of inter-
est only to archaeologists, whereas general theory was of concern to
all social scientists. A growing awareness of the difference between
archaeology and the other social sciences led many archaeologists to
question whether the ultimate goal of archaeology really should be
to become anthropology and to what extent that goal, even if desir-
able, was possible. The distinguishing of middle-range and high-level
theory had its roots in Irving Rouse’s (1972) differentiation of ana-
lytical and synthetic interpretations of archaeological data, Carl-Axel
Moberg’s (1976) distinction between archaeography and archaeol-
ogy proper, and Leo Klejn’s (1977) argument that archaeological

                                  415
                A History of Archaeological Thought

data must be understood in their own right before they can be used
to address historical problems.
   Binford noted that employing present regularities to explain the
past involved uniformitarian assumptions and argued that these
claims must be warranted by supporting arguments. He suggested,
for example, that the behavioral and anatomical characteristics of
still extant animal species that ancient human beings exploited are
“enduring objects for which uniformitarian assumptions might be
securely warranted” (Binford 1981: 28) and expressed the hope that
other domains could be elaborated as research progressed. Other
archaeologists saw these uniformitarian assumptions as involving a
great leap of faith (P. J. Watson 1986: 447–8).
   Uniformitarian assumptions have their problems. One of the most
insidious and uncontrollable of these is ignorance of what is hap-
pening at the present time. Scientists may misunderstand the past
because they fail to take account of slow, long-term processes, as
was the case with geology before the recognition of plate tecton-
ics and continental drift (Marvin 1973). Social scientists also may
consider to be universal, characteristics of human behavior that are
specific to a particular stage of cultural development. Marxists, who
believe that human nature is substantially altered by social evolu-
tionary change, are less willing to invoke universal features of human
behavior than are most archaeologists who assume, along with the
philosophers of the Enlightenment, that human nature remains unal-
tered by social change. Binford does not take account of possible
effects of the modern world system on ethnographic analogies. This
has suggested to other archaeologists that the degree of similarity
between modern hunter-gatherer societies and Palaeolithic ones is a
question for archaeologists to investigate, not something for which
an answer can be assumed.
   Problems also can arise in applying analogies because archaeol-
ogists have great difficulty differentiating between what is charac-
teristic of humanity in general (or of societies sharing a particular
mode of production) and what is specific only to historically related
cultures. Anthropologists remain unable to distinguish on theoreti-
cal grounds between analogies and homologies. Instead, they must
do so empirically, using historical and archaeological evidence. The
sheer variety of forces bringing about social change also complicates
the question of what modern societies can provide in the way of

                                 416
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

useful analogies of prehistoric ones. Although Binford (1980, 2001)
established that the settlement patterns of hunter-gatherers in high
latitudes shared many features that distinguished them from hunter-
gatherer patterns in warmer climates, all these northern societies were
engaged in trapping and selling furs to Europeans long before they
were studied by anthropologists. We still do not know whether the
common features Binford described represent an ecological adapta-
tion extending back thousands of years or had developed in recent
centuries as a consequence of new economic relations. In this case,
archaeological data about prehistoric settlement patterns are essential
to provide insights into the developmental significance of modern
hunter-gatherer behavioral patterns and produce convincing war-
ranting arguments. Yet, despite such cautionary tales, the total rejec-
tion of uniformitarianism would have far worse consequences for the
development of archaeology than its continuing cautious and self-
questioning use.
   An even more important limitation appears to be that human
behavior in general is considerably less uniform than Binford, as a
neoevolutionist, continues to believe. Although Binford has been
highly critical of assumptions that the behavioral patterns of early
hominids resembled those of modern hunter-gatherers, in work deal-
ing with more recent times his neoevolutionary faith in strong regu-
larities governing human behavior leads him to minimize the difficul-
ties involved in interpreting archaeological data. This is evident in his
studies of hunter-gatherer use of camp space and hunting territories.
Much more empirical ethnographic documentation is needed before
archaeologists can agree with his assertion that all hunter-gatherers
use their camp space in much the same way, producing easily recog-
nizable features such as bedding areas, drop zones, toss zones, and
aggregate dumping areas, and proceed to interpret all upper Palae-
olithic archaeological sites in terms of models derived from the San, or
Bushmen, and the Nunamiut (Binford 1983b: 144–92) (Figure 8.3).
Generally speaking, human behavior is not so regular that convinc-
ing generalizations about spatial behavior can be based on only two
or three ethnographic case studies, even if these are very detailed
ones and plausible causal relations can be established that account
for what is observed. Although the use of camp space may eventu-
ally be proved to be relatively uniform, there are many aspects of
human behavior that cannot be accounted for in terms of universal

                                  417
                 A History of Archaeological Thought




  Figure 8.3 Model of drop and toss zones, as developed by L. R. Binford
       from his ethnoarchaeological study of the Nunamiut of Alaska
                      (In Pursuit of the Past, 1983b)


generalizations, whether these concern behavior in general or soci-
eties at specific levels of development (Watson et al. 1984: 264).


         The Diversification of Processual Archaeology
Despite Binford’s key role in systematizing New Archaeology, almost
from the beginning his followers disagreed about the causes of cul-
tural change and the degree to which human behavior was shaped
by these factors. They also disagreed about the key tenets of proces-
sual archaeology, as New Archaeology gradually came to be called
(Kushner 1970). At first, these differences were regarded as disputes

                                   418
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

about the way processual archaeology should develop but, as differ-
ing opinions multiplied and became more entrenched, competing
approaches emerged. Despite early efforts to maintain a common
front, processual archaeology was never a frozen creed but a diverse
and dynamic movement.
   Ecological studies of change continued to be very important,
although unicausal theories, such as those that attributed the ori-
gins of civilization to the development of complex irrigation sys-
tems (Wittfogel 1957), were soon abandoned. So, too, was Stuart
Struever’s (1968) contention that the means by which a population
derived its subsistence from the environment played such an impor-
tant role in shaping the entire cultural system that the nature of set-
tlement patterns could be predicted and hence explained in terms of
technology and the natural environment. Struever viewed settlement
patterns as “an essential corollary of subsistence” and interpreted
“variations between cultures [as] responses to differing adaptive
requirements of specific environments” (pp. 133–5). He therefore
believed that the study of archaeological settlement patterns only
served to confirm that relation. Out of early ecological research
developed a concern with optimal foraging theory that continues
to play an important role in processual archaeology (Mithen 1990;
Janetski 1997a; Shennan 2002: 142–53). Studies such as Binford’s
(2001) investigation of relations among hunting-gathering, social
organization, and resource availability also continue the ecological
research interests of early processual archaeology.
   In his programmatic statements concerning New Archaeology,
Binford frequently called for cultural change to be studied in terms of
systems analysis. Kent Flannery (1965, 1966, 1967, 1968, 1973), the
most distinguished advocate of systems theory in prehistoric archae-
ology, stressed the importance of General Systems Theory as a way
to study ecologically driven cultural change from a processual rather
than a historical point of view. This concept was popularized by
P. J. Watson et al. in Explanation in Archeology (1971), the first
textbook expounding the ideas of processual archaeology. General
Systems Theory was a body of concepts that the biologist Ludwig
von Bertalanffy had begun to develop in the 1940s, which sought to
establish the underlying rules that govern the behavior of entities as
diverse as thermostats, digital computers, glaciers, living organisms,
and sociocultural systems. He assumed that all of these could be

                                 419
                A History of Archaeological Thought

conceptualized as systems made up of interacting parts and that
rules could be formulated that described how significant aspects of
any system functioned, regardless of that system’s specific nature
(Bertalanffy 1969; Laszlo 1972a, 1972b, 1972c). Systems theory
allowed archaeologists to transcend the limitations of traditional
social anthropological analyses of static structures by studying not
only structure-maintaining but also structure-elaborating (or mor-
phogenetic) processes. Many of the most important of these studies
were based on cybernetics, which sought to account for how sys-
tems functioned by mapping feedback between their various parts.
Negative feedback maintains a system in an essentially steady state
in the face of fluctuating external inputs, whereas positive feedback
brings about irreversible changes in the structure of the system. The
concept of feedback appeared to offer archaeologists a more precise,
and potentially quantifiable, mechanism for interrelating the vari-
ous components of a changing cultural system than did the essen-
tially static social anthropological concept of functional integration
(Watson et al. 1971: 61–87).
   Feedback was measured in various ways, most notably by tracing
the transfer of goods, information, or energy or all three combined.
Although the transfer of goods and information both require the
expenditure of energy, this did not deprive the study of the transfer
of goods and information of special explanatory value; nevertheless,
the concept of energy flows was regarded as especially appropriate
by those who were committed to an ecological approach. If cultures
were adaptive systems, the most rigorous way to understand prehis-
toric ones was empirically to trace energy flows from the natural world
into and through the interrelated parts of a cultural system and then
back into the natural realm. The remarkable system flow chart that
David Thomas (1972) constructed as part of his inductive simulation
model of historical Shoshonean subsistence and settlement patterns
demonstrated the complex interrelations that were associated with
the economic activities of this indigenous American hunter-gatherer
people (Figure 8.4).
   Flannery’s early work was closely aligned with Binford’s. In an
influential pioneering study, Flannery (1968) argued that favor-
able genetic changes in maize and beans might have encouraged
Mesoamerican hunter-gatherers to reschedule their food procure-
ment patterns in order to increase their dependence on these two

                                 420
Figure 8.4 System flow chart for Shoshonean Indian subsistence cycle, by D. H.
Thomas (D. H. Thomas in D. L. Clarke, ed., Models in Archaeology, 1972)
                A History of Archaeological Thought

plants, thus setting in motion systemic changes that did not stop until
maize and beans had become the principal foci of intensive agricul-
ture. Flannery played a key role, however, in expanding the concept
of systems analysis beyond a concern with ecology and adapting it for
studying broader issues of social and cultural change. The concept
of information processing became central to discussing the develop-
ment of social hierarchies and complex societies. In these studies, the
main emphasis was on administration rather than adaptation and on
functional approaches rather than ecological ones. This theorizing
drew upon and helped to elaborate a body of propositions derived
from General Systems Theory concerning disproportional growth.
These propositions attempted to explain the effects of increasing
social scale on the development of institutions for collecting informa-
tion and making decisions (Flannery 1972; Rathje 1975; G. Johnson
1978, 1981) (Figure 8.5). Although archaeologists rarely were able to
apply systems theory in a rigorously quantitative fashion, their work
gave substance to Binford’s call to study cultural change systemically.
   Although systems theory produced many explanations of the inter-
relations between a small number of key variables that were believed
to be useful for accounting for change cross-culturally (Watson
et al. 1971), they also encouraged archaeologists to investigate whole
cultural systems. That perspective stimulated identification of the
numerous interlinked variables that brought about cultural change
in specific situations. These observations caused archaeologists to
recognize that even key variables might have played a less impor-
tant role in shaping cultural systems than they had hitherto believed.
This observation in turn led many archaeologists to adopt a more
inductive approach to explaining causality. It also was recognized
that, because of the complexity of cultural systems, the same factors
might in different circumstances produce different effects or different
ones the same effects.
   Flannery continued to pursue a systemic approach but recog-
nized an increasing number of general causes for change. In his
study of “The Cultural Evolution of Civilizations” (1972), he moved
beyond explaining changes in the archaeological record as outcomes
of specific adaptive processes, by suggesting that explanations of
cultural development should concentrate less on the multiple fac-
tors that bring about change than on ascertaining the types of sys-
temic changes that can be observed in the archaeological record.

                                 422
Figure 8.5 Flow diagram of presumed food/monument allocation in the Classic Maya civilization (J. A. Hosler, J.
              Sabloff, and D. Runge in N. Hammond, ed., Social Process in Maya Prehistory, 1977)
                                                     423
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

He offered, as examples of evolutionary mechanisms, “promotion”
and “linearization.” Promotion involved established institutions ris-
ing in a developing hierarchy of control to assume transformed and
more far-reaching roles. Linearization occurred when higher-order
controls cut past and eliminated traditional lower-order ones after
the latter had failed to function in a more complex setting. Such a
systemic approach was extremely valuable for producing an under-
standing of change from a social-structural point of view. It also
drew attention to a source of constraint on human behavior that
was different from, and seemingly independent of, the ecological
constraints that American archaeologists previously had been con-
sidering. If social and political systems could assume only a limited
number of general forms (a point Childe had already made in Social
Evolution [1951]), these forms restricted the variation that was pos-
sible in human behavior and the routes that cultural change could
follow.
   Inspired by the work of the ecologist Roy Rappaport (1968),
Flannery came to view cultural traditions and belief systems as play-
ing active roles in regulating ecological adaptation. As a result, he
paid increasing attention to beliefs and cognition as factors shap-
ing cultural development (Flannery and Marcus 1993). Compar-
ing the cultural development of the adjacent Mixtec and Zapotec
peoples of Mexico, Flannery (1983) observed that unilinear evolu-
tion was by itself inadequate to realize the general anthropological
goal of explaining sociocultural differences as well as similarities. His
collaborator in this study, Joyce Marcus (1983a: 360), commented
that “the familiar variables of agricultural intensification, population
growth, warfare, and interregional trade are by themselves insuffi-
cient to explain the diversity of Mesoamerican cultures.” Although
Flannery and Binford agreed that the ultimate goal of archaeologists
was to explain similarities as well as differences in cultures, evidence
led Flannery and many other systems analysts to believe that differ-
ences were more ubiquitous and, hence, understanding them was
more important and demanding than Binford had assumed.
   Another disagreement that arose early on was whether the primary
object of archaeological research should be to study cultural systems
or social behavior. Although Binford, following White, claimed to
study cultural systems, like White, he denied ideas more than epiphe-
nomenal status; they facilitated human action but did not play any

                                  424
                Processualism and Postprocessualism

role in determining it. This suggested that the real system consisted
of social relations. These considerations, together with the grow-
ing popularity of behaviorism, led some processual archaeologists
to embrace the study of prehistoric societies rather than cultures,
as Grahame Clark, Gordon Childe, and many settlement archaeolo-
gists (Willey 1953; Trigger 1967a, 1968c) had already done. Latterly,
Julian Steward (1968: 337) had also displayed a growing tendency
to talk about society rather than culture. Among the first proces-
sual archaeologists to advocate a social or societal archaeological
approach were Colin Renfrew (1973c) and Charles Redman (Redman
et al. 1978), although O. G. S. Crawford had coined the term “social
archaeology” as early as 1921 (p. 100) and, in the late 1960s, I had
suggested that societal and cultural interpretations of archaeologi-
cal evidence should be pursued independently (Trigger 1968c). One
of the factors that encouraged the development of social archaeol-
ogy was the belief, already cited, propagated by many social anthro-
pologists and accepted by most processual archaeologists, that ideas
facilitated human behavior but played no significant role in chang-
ing it. There also was considerable, and growing, uncertainty about
how integrated cultures were. Many archaeologists were disposed to
believe that ideas acquired their significance according to how they
were deployed in contexts of social interaction rather than in their
own right.
   There was also much disagreement about the nature of cultural
subsystems. Although Binford followed Leslie White in distinguish-
ing a technoeconomic, social, and ideological subsystem, David
Clarke (1968: 102–3) added a psychological and a material culture
subsystem and Colin Renfrew (1972: 22–3) divided cultural systems
into subsistence, technological, social, projective or symbolic, and
trade or communication subsystems. Binford had described material
culture as relating to all subsystems rather than constituting a sub-
system in its own right and had denied that psychological states were
significant factors producing change or that they could be studied
using archaeological data alone. Yet, to some other archaeologists,
social systems seemed more real than did cultural ones. Social inter-
action provided the means by which each society sustained its mem-
bers and biologically reproduced itself as a minimal condition for its
survival. “Cultural systems,” by contrast, consisted of concepts that
might or might not be functionally related to one another.

                                 425
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

   Another specialization was behavioral archaeology. It grew out of
an increasing realization, shared by Binford, that the systemic or liv-
ing context that produced the archaeological record was radically
different from the archaeological record (Schiffer 1972, 1976; Reid
et al. 1974). From the beginning, behavioral archaeologists, as David
Clarke (1968) had already done, focused on the need to create a
science of material culture. This approach included research such
as William Rathje’s (1974) Garbage Project, which employed tech-
niques of archaeological analysis to study changing patterns in the
use and disposal of goods by residents of the modern city of Tucson,
Arizona. Behavioral archaeologists maintained that cultural variabil-
ity in the archaeological record was best explained by determining the
interactions involving people and artifacts. In pursuing this course,
they were carrying on Binford’s search for universally-valid correla-
tions between material culture and human behavior. Michael Schiffer
(1995: 24) maintained that this could best be accomplished by creat-
ing a science of material culture based on a corpus of regularities that
could account for archaeological findings. These regularities included
generalizations that explained why people behaved as they did in
specific living contexts as well as what happened to artifacts after
they entered an archaeological context. Such theories of behavior
related to artifact design, manufacture, use, and alteration over time.
Not only was the primary emphasis of behavioral archaeology on
behavior rather than culture but, as with the systemic approach, eco-
logical adaptation provided only one source of explanation among
many. This openness led Binford (1983a: 237) to describe Schiffer’s
approach as being primarily inductive.
   In his book Behavioral Archeology, Schiffer (1976), in the tradi-
tion of Grahame Clark (1939), described the archaeological record
as “a distorted reflection of a past behavioral system” (p. 12). Schiffer
believed that the challenge for archaeologists was to eliminate this
distortion in order to gain a more accurate understanding of past
human behavior. He was optimistic this could be done provided
that three sets of factors were controlled. The first were “correlates,”
which related material objects or spatial relations in archaeological
contexts to specific types of human behavior. Correlates provided
reliable indicators permitting archaeologists to infer how artifacts
were made, distributed, used, and recycled in living societies. If a
material cultural system were frozen at a specific moment in time,

                                  426
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

as to some extent happened to the Roman city of Pompeii as a
result of being quickly buried and perfectly preserved under the ash
of Mount Vesuvius in ad 79, no distortions of the archaeological
record would have to be taken into account in order to study what
had been going on at that moment. The interpretation of archaeo-
logical sites normally, however, required archaeologists to consider
various sorts of site formation processes, the most important of which
involved determining how material was transferred from a systemic
to an archaeological context and what happened to that material after
it was deposited in the archaeological record. The first of these were
“cultural formation processes,” or C-transforms, which attempted to
account for how items were discarded in the normal operation of a
cultural system; the second were “non-cultural formation processes,”
or N-transforms. Through the detailed study of discard rates, discard
locations, loss probabilities, and burial practices, C-transforms could
predict the materials that would or would not be deposited by a social
system in the archaeological record and thus establish a set of relations
that would permit the cultural system to be inferred more accurately
from what remained for the archaeologist to study. Ethnographic
research on problems of this sort suggested that artifacts and artifact
debris were more likely to be abandoned in the localities where they
had been used in temporary hunter-gatherer sites than in larger and
more sedentary ones, where the disposal of waste material was much
more highly organized (P. Murray 1980).
   The realization that larger numbers of artifacts usually are found
in contexts of disposal rather than in those of manufacture or use
stimulated much ethnoarchaeological research that aimed to discover
regularities in patterns of refuse disposal. It also prompted observa-
tions that archaeology might necessarily be doomed to being pri-
marily a science of garbage. J. A. Moore and A. S. Keene (1983: 17)
pronounced studies of site formation processes to be “the archae-
ological agenda for the 1980s.” Other studies sought to determine
the transformations that artifacts underwent in the course of usage.
Stone tools are likely to be curated and reused much more inten-
sively at sites lacking easy access to sources of raw material than
in ones located close to such sources (Binford 1983a: 269–86). C-
transforms also included postdepositional human activities, such as
plowing and looting, that might distort the archaeological record.
Some of these distortions can happen in predictable ways, such as

                                  427
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

the greater likelihood that robbers will remove gold objects rather
than less precious ones from graves. Finally, noncultural formation
processes, or N-transforms, permitted archaeologists to determine
the interactions between cultural materials and the noncultural envi-
ronment from which they were recovered. Schiffer argued that by
accounting for the ways in which archaeological data functioned in
systemic contexts, entered the archaeological record, and were trans-
formed by it, archaeologists should be able to eliminate the “distor-
tions” caused by formation processes and infer the original systemic
context in which the artifacts had functioned.
   Schiffer’s approach helped to stimulate much research that has
resulted in a more sophisticated understanding of the behavioral sig-
nificance of archaeological data. Previously, factors such as discard
rates had barely been considered by archaeologists, except in assess-
ing the significance of animal bones. It was increasingly recognized,
however, that many cultural processes were so complex and varied
and the chances of equifinality so great that the neutralization of dis-
torting influences could not produce a complete interpretation of the
archaeological record from a behavioral point of view (von Gernet
1985; P. J. Watson 1986: 450). As belief in neoevolutionism waned
and the diversity of human behavior increasingly was accepted, this
limitation tended to be acknowledged as being inherent in the data
rather than a methodological weakness. Hence, although behavioral
archaeologists continued to apply Schiffer’s approach profitably, few
of them, including Schiffer himself, expected his original program to
be fully realized.
   The early period of processual archaeology in the United States also
witnessed the beginning of selectionist ideas that were to become the
core of Darwinian or evolutionary archaeology. Selectionism was not
an entirely new concept in archaeology. Childe (1942a: 10) had main-
tained that, if a conservative ideology effectively blocks change, a soci-
ety might eventually succumb to more aggressive neighbors, whereas
Higgs (1968: 617) had argued that human preferences should be
regarded “as selective factors determining survival.” In 1972, the
American archaeologist Mark Leone described cultural systems as
self-regulating, exhibiting variation, and adjusting to environmen-
tal settings by selecting the most appropriate strategies from among
the variants that are available (p. 18). In Leone’s view, innovation,
although rational, did not occur from nothing but was based on

                                   428
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

existing knowledge. This position implied that culture was not so
much an adaptive system as a reservoir of information from which
different ideas could be deployed as needed (Shennan 2002: 80).
In The Archaeology of Arizona, Paul Martin and Fred Plog (1973)
viewed cultures as adaptive systems and argued that those possess-
ing the greatest amount of random variation were the best equipped
to survive when confronted by environmental or demographic chal-
lenges or competition from neighboring groups. Linda Cordell and
Fred Plog (1979) and Robert Dunnell (1980a) also assumed that
there was present in every society a broad spectrum of alternative
behavioral patterns on which the cultural equivalent of natural selec-
tion could operate. This position was far removed from that of many
social anthropologists, ecologists, or even Boasian configurational-
ists, who viewed cultures as being reasonably well integrated sys-
tems, although advocates for these approaches did not deny that cul-
tural systems conserved information about alternative ways of dealing
with problems, including ones that arose only occasionally (Salzman
2000). The selectionist view of cultures more closely resembled that
of early Boasian cultural anthropologists.
   Robert Dunnell (1980a), David Braun (1983), and David Rindos
(1984, 1989) opted for a systemic approach that used biological (“sci-
entific”) evolutionary theory to explain cultural as well as biologi-
cal variability. Darwinian, or evolutionary, archaeology was further
developed by Dunnell and his students (Wenke 1981). They argued
that traditional cultural evolutionism had failed to internalize such
key tenets of scientific evolutionism as random variation and nat-
ural selection. Although generally acknowledging that mechanisms
of trait transmission are more varied and that the units on which
selection operates are less stable in the cultural than in the biological
realm (issues that Kroeber [1952] and other anthropologists had dis-
cussed in detail long before), they maintained that an approach based
on general principles of scientific evolutionism could offer explana-
tions of human behavior that were superior to those provided by
cultural evolutionary theory. Doing so often involved the radical
reformulation of traditional questions. For example, David Rindos
(1984: 143) defined domestication as a mutualistic relation of varying
degrees between different species. He did not view the adaptation of
plants and animals to human needs as being inherently different from
the adaptation of human beings to the needs of plants and animals.

                                  429
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

Thus, Rindos carried to a new extreme the denial that consciousness
and intentionality play a significant role in shaping human behavior
(Peregrine 2000).
   The revolt against culture-historical archaeology occurred more
slowly in Britain than in the United States and did not manifest the
extreme antihistorical posturing of processual archaeology found in
America. David Clarke (1938–1976), who studied and then taught
at Cambridge University, developed his key ideas independently of
American processual archaeologists and identified himself as a New
Archaeologist only in the sense that he was rebelling against the stric-
tures of culture-historical archaeology. Although many American
processual archaeologists, who often knew little about his work,
chose to regard Clarke as an overseas adherent of their movement,
Binford (1972: 248–9, 330–1) was not convinced.
   Clarke (1968: 12–14) was scornful of the intuitive manner in which
many British culture historians sought to compose historical narra-
tives without first analyzing archaeological data in a rigorous manner
in order to extract as much behavioral data from them as possible. He
denounced such premature narratives as “an irresponsible art form”
(1973: 16). In Analytical Archaeology (1968), almost a decade before
Schiffer, Clarke had treated archaeology as the potential nucleus of
a new science of material culture that he believed would comple-
ment social and cognitive anthropology. Clarke modeled his analysis
on the systems theory approach of the New Geography that was
being expounded in the 1960s at Cambridge University by the phys-
ical geographer Richard Chorley and the human geographer Peter
Haggett (Chorley and Haggett 1967).
   Clarke focused mainly on the study of artifacts, which he sought to
interpret from morphological, ecological, geographical, and anthro-
pological perspectives, often employing elaborate statistical analyses.
For Clarke, detailed analyses of this sort were indispensable prelim-
inaries for the production of any sort of historical interpretation or
narrative, a view that he shared with Eric Higgs, despite their dis-
agreement about whether the best way forward was the study of
artifacts or ecofacts (Bailey 1999: 547, 553). Morphologically, Clarke
sought to define and interrelate a series of nested concepts: trait,
type, culture, and technocomplex. Although he stressed the internal
variability of types and cultures, he was more interested in assigning
artifacts to classes than in explaining variability (Clarke 1968). Binford

                                   430
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

(1972: 248–9) criticized Clarke for adopting an inductive approach
to taxonomy that failed to consider adequately the specific goals of
any particular classification. In many respects, Clarke’s treatment of
taxonomy represents a continuation of European culture-historical
methodology rather than a break with it. That is precisely why Soviet
archaeologists valued it so highly in the 1980s.
   In Analytical Archaeology (1968), Clarke’s chief interest in
American anthropology was not processual archaeology but the
wealth of detailed information about the cultural and linguistic vari-
ation among indigenous North American societies that Boasian eth-
nologists had recorded. Clarke valued these data, which he regarded
as superior to any collected by European ethnologists, as a factual
basis for developing a general understanding of material culture from
an anthropological (or behavioral) perspective (Herzfeld 1992: 78).
   Clarke pursued his efforts to relate archaeological finds to human
behavior in a rigorous and systematic fashion that took him into
new theoretical domains. As a result of the work of Robert Ascher
(1961: 324), archaeologists had become increasingly aware that arti-
facts were made, used, and frequently discarded in different con-
texts, not all of which were equally represented in the archaeological
record. Recognition that archaeologists possessed only an attenuated
sample of what they proposed to study was encapsulated in Clarke’s
(1973: 17) memorable comment that archaeology was “the disci-
pline with the theory and practice for the recovery of unobservable
hominid behaviour patterns from indirect traces in bad samples.”
Clarke maintained that the scientific interpretation of archaeological
data depended on recognizing that, of the full range of hominid activ-
ity patterns and social and environmental processes that had occurred
in the past, archaeologists had access only to the sample of associated
material remains that in turn were deposited in the archaeological
record, survived to be recovered, and actually had been recovered.
   Inspired by the earlier work of S. G. H. Daniels (1972) and pos-
sibly also by B. K. Swartz’s (1967) delineation of a logical sequence
of archaeological objectives, Clarke (1973) identified five bodies of
theory that archaeologists intuitively employed in their interpretive
leaps from excavated data to final report. The first of these was
predepositional and depositional theory, covering the relations of
human activities, social patterns, and environmental factors with
each other and with the samples and traces that are deposited in

                                 431
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

the archaeological record. Postdepositional theory treated the nat-
ural and human processes that affected the archaeological record,
such as erosion, decay, ground movement, plundering, plowing, and
the reuse of land. Retrieval theory dealt with the relations between
what survives in the archaeological record and what is recovered.
It is largely a theory of sampling, excavation procedures, and flex-
ible response strategies. Analytical theory, which Clarke studied in
the greatest detail, dealt with the operational treatment of recovered
data, including classification, modeling, testing, and experimental
studies. Finally, interpretive theory governed relations between the
archaeological patterns established at the analytical level and directly
unobservable ancient behavioral and environmental patterns. Thus
interpretive theory infers the processes that predepositional theory
explains. Clarke believed that a major challenge for archaeologists
was to develop a corpus of theory appropriate for each of these stages
of analysis. Only a small portion of such theories, mainly relating to
the predepositional and interpretive levels, could be derived from the
social sciences; the rest had to come from the biological and physical
sciences. Clarke believed that the totality of this theory, together with
metaphysical, epistemological, and logical theory relating to archae-
ological operations, was necessary to create a scientific discipline of
archaeology.
   Yet Clarke’s emphasis on analytical procedures did not lessen his
regard for the historical analysis of archaeological data or his inter-
est in specific cultures. Nor was his ultimate goal the creation of
generalizations about human behavior as contributions to social sci-
ence theory. From his early analysis of Beaker pottery (Clarke 1970),
he was concerned with better understanding European prehistory.
His later papers addressed the ecological basis of European cultural
development, understanding the social milieus in which economic
transactions occurred, and a balanced interest in local development
and regional networks of interaction. In “The Economic Context of
Trade and Industry in Barbarian Europe till Roman Times” (Clarke
1979: 263–331), which he wrote for The Cambridge Economic His-
tory, he attempted to summarize the relevant archaeological data
guided by Karl Polanyi’s theories concerning the social embedded-
ness of primitive economies. This paper has been described as “a great
advance on previous work in its discussion of the social functions of
artefact-types and its inference of the circulation-systems of which

                                  432
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

they are the fossilized remains” (Sherratt 1979: 197). Other studies
addressing central issues of European prehistory included a reinter-
pretation of the social organization and economy of the late Iron Age
settlement at Glastonbury (Clarke 1972b) (Figure 8.6) and a survey,
utilizing ecological, ethnographic, demographic, and economic, as
well as archaeological data to counteract the traditional faunally ori-
ented interpretations of the Mesolithic economies of Europe (Clarke
1979: 206–62).
   Unlike Clarke, Colin Renfrew (b. 1937) acquired firsthand expe-
rience of New Archaeology when he taught briefly in the United
States. Perhaps because of his undergraduate training in the physical
sciences, Renfrew regarded the most important defining character-
istic of processual archaeology as being its positivist orientation. Yet
he remained wary of the search for general laws of human behavior
as an end in itself, even though he embraced neoevolutionism and
systems theory (Renfrew 1982a; Champion 1991: 132–4). His early
research focused on social archaeology (Renfrew 1973d). In a monu-
mental study of the development of complex societies in the Aegean
region, he emphasized the role played by positive feedback relations
involving the natural environment, population size, subsistence, craft
production, exchange, communication, sociopolitical organization,
settlement patterns, and religion, arguing that a synergistic “multi-
plier effect” among these variables resulted in increasing sociocultural
complexity (Renfrew 1972). This book strongly reflects the theoret-
ical influence of Kent Flannery. Renfrew also made significant con-
tributions to studying the evolution of social and political organi-
zation from a unilinear, neoevolutionary point of view, including
his distinction between simpler group-oriented and more complex
individualizing chiefdoms (Renfrew 1973c). Like Clarke, Renfrew
emphasized the quantitative and geographical analysis of archaeo-
logical data, which in some cases he combined with trace-element
sourcing of the origin of raw materials in studies of prehistoric trade
(Renfrew et al. 1968; Renfrew 1975).
   In the 1980s, Renfrew (1982b) became increasingly interested in
studying cognitive aspects of human behavior. He sought to employ
scientific methods to do this, as a result of which his approach has
come to be known as cognitive-processual archaeology. Like Childe
(1958c: 5), who saw archaeology as offering a history of effective
technological knowledge, Renfrew called for a cognitive approach

                                  433
Figure 8.6 Modular housing unit at Glastonbury Iron Age site, as identified
             by D. L. Clarke (Models in Archaeology, 1972a)




                                   434
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

that addressed the mind behind the artifact in the practical terms of
its usage rather than the more abstract terms of its symbolic mean-
ing. This approach functions well when attempting to infer how a
prehistoric system of weights and measures worked (Renfrew 1982b:
16–18; J. Bell 1994: 17–19), as the goal is to determine the logic that
governed the original system. Yet, without textual sources, it is very
difficult to reconstruct culturally specific beliefs from archaeological
data (Renfrew and Zubrow 1994). In recent years, Renfrew’s cog-
nitive interests have focused more on the study of the evolution of
human symbolic and cognitive abilities than on trying to determine
specifically what humans thought in the past (Renfrew and Scarre
1998). He does not appear to have evolved a clear theoretical posi-
tion about how cognitive abilities relate to other forms of human
behavior, leaving it uncertain to what extent he is a materialist or an
idealist. Cognitive-processual archaeology is important for its insis-
tence on methodological rigor in studying mental processes, but it
has made little progress in determining on the basis of archaeological
data alone what people actually may have thought.
   Like Clarke, but unlike American processual archaeologists,
Renfrew has never embraced the idea that historical interpreta-
tion and evolutionary generalization are antithetical. Instead, he has
remained deeply interested in the study of prehistoric Europe and its
peoples (Renfrew 1973a, 1979). In the 1970s, he used radiocarbon
dates to emphasize the creativity and originality of early European
food-producing cultures (Renfrew 1973a). More recently, he equated
the arrival of the Indo-Europeans with the introduction of agricul-
tural economies to Europe (Renfrew 1988). He has since attributed
the geographical expansion of other language families to assumed
population increases brought about by the invention of agriculture
elsewhere in the world (Bellwood and Renfrew 2003). That in turn
has led him to seek to correlate linguistic, physical anthropolog-
ical, and archaeological data in an effort to trace human groups
into remote antiquity (Renfrew 1992). Renfrew thus has duplicated,
using modern scientific methods, a methodology that incorporates
some of the key features of a multidisciplinary approach to study-
ing prehistory that had been elaborated by Boasian anthropologists
(Sapir 1916), but many assumptions of which were critiqued and
repudiated by Boas (1940) himself. Renfrew provides an interesting


                                  435
                A History of Archaeological Thought

example of an archaeologist shifting from processual archaeology to
what might be regarded as an upgraded version of culture-historical
archaeology.
   At the same time that different approaches were developing within
processual archaeology, archaeologists as a whole were becoming
increasingly concerned about issues that processual archaeology was
ignoring rather than solving. During the 1970s, a growing number
of American archaeologists became convinced that more diversity
was being found in prehistoric cultures than could be accounted for
by general evolutionary schemes, such as those of Sahlins and Ser-
vice, or even by Steward’s multilinear evolutionism. There also was a
slowly but continuously growing recognition that neoevolutionism
had unduly restricted the questions about the past that archaeologists
were prepared to consider important.
   Critiques made by anthropologists who were not fundamentally
hostile to evolutionary studies also undermined the credibility of uni-
linear evolution. It was pointed out that Sahlins and Service had char-
acterized the tribal stage of development mainly on the basis of New
Guinea big-men societies, which have very different social and polit-
ical structures from indigenous societies at the same level of devel-
opment in North America, Africa, or Southeast Asia (Whallon 1982:
156). It also was evident that the chiefdom stage of development had
been based primarily on the Polynesian societies with which these
anthropologists were most familiar. Yet, rather than representing an
evolutionary sequence, as Sahlins and Service had assumed, both of
these groupings embraced societies of varying degrees of complexity.
The ethnographic evidence also suggested that in Polynesia heredi-
tary chiefships might have antedated the development of complexity.
Growing awareness of problems such as these led some archaeol-
ogists to replace discrete evolutionary categories with quantifiable
dimensions of social variability (R. McGuire 1983). Morton Fried’s
(1975) claim that many of the more complex features associated with
tribal societies were products of acculturation resulting from con-
tacts with Western peoples, rather than spontaneous internal devel-
opments, also led some archaeologists to view the evolutionary status
of such societies with increasing suspicion. It was similarly demon-
strated that key features of at least some chiefdoms had developed
as a result of their contact with more complex societies (Wolf 1982:
96–100).

                                 436
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

   Such observations caused archaeologists to become increasingly
interested in trying to explain the cultural diversity that used to
intrigue historical particularists (Renfrew 1982b). There also was
growing willingness to admit that human behavior was shaped by
diverse factors. Although most archaeologists continued to interpret
their data from a materialistic, and often more specifically an eco-
logical, perspective (P. J. Watson 1986: 441), there was increased
questioning of the extent to which ecological and economic factors
played a determining role with respect to human behavior. These
developments brought about many changes in archaeological analy-
sis. Alison Wylie (1985a: 90) went so far as to observe that “there is a
strong case to be made that [idiosyncratic variability at a societal or
individual level] is the distinctively human and cultural feature of the
archaeological subject; hence, it should be the special interest of an
anthropological archaeology.” At least some of these trends involved
a revival of interest in topics associated with culture-historical archae-
ology that long had been ignored as a result of the development of
processual archaeology. These developments were strengthened by a
growing awareness that in evolutionary biology ideas of punctuated
equilibrium, indeterminacy, and historical contingency were replac-
ing views that emphasized more gradual, progressive, predictable,
and narrowly deterministic change (Gould and Eldredge 1977, 1993).
   Another development was a tendency to abandon the view that
societies or cultures were closed or tightly bounded units that could
be studied independently of one another, and once again to pay more
attention to the role played by external stimuli in bringing about cul-
tural change. Wolf (1982: ix) argued that anthropologists, especially
under the influence of neoevolutionism, “seem to have forgotten that
human populations construct their cultures in interaction with one
another and not in isolation.” He went on to state that the cultural
connections that an older generation of anthropologists studied as
diffusion could only be rendered intelligible in systemic terms when
they were set into a broader political and economic context. Such
views encouraged archaeologists to pay increasing attention to inter-
societal relations.
   Those working in the Middle East argued the need to view
Mesopotamian civilization as part of a much larger zone within which
from early times many cultures had influenced one another’s devel-
opment through various forms of political and economic interaction

                                   437
                A History of Archaeological Thought

(Lamberg-Karlovsky 1975; Kohl 1978; Alden 1982). There also
was discussion of “peer polity” interaction in prehistoric Europe
(Renfrew and Shennan 1982) and elsewhere (Renfrew and Cherry
1986) and of “cluster interaction” in Mesoamerica (B. Price 1977).
Blanton and his coauthors (1981) argued that, because of the inten-
sity of economic, political, and ritual interaction among the ruling
classes throughout Mesoamerica in prehispanic times, the develop-
ment of any one region, even a clearly demarcated one such as the
Valley of Mexico, could not be understood independently of that
of neighboring regions. They therefore proposed to treat the whole
of Mesoamerica as a single “macroregional unit” bound together by
the interaction of local elites; an approach that placed prodigious
demands on the information-gathering capacity of archaeologists.
This approach also raised major questions about how the bound-
aries of macroregions were to be defined. Blanton and his associates
argued that what is recognized as Mesoamerica was a network of
states and chiefdoms united by intensive reciprocal interaction of a
political and ritual nature, that could be recognized in the archaeo-
logical record. It had long been surmised that economic and ritual
influences of Mesoamerican origin also marked the cultural develop-
ment of the southwestern United States and eastern North America,
although it has rarely been possible to define the social contexts in
which those presumed contacts occurred (Griffin 1980).
   Other archaeologists were attracted by Immanuel Wallerstein’s
(1974) world-system theory (Kohl 1978, 1979, 1987; Ekholm and
Friedman 1979; Blanton et al. 1981; Renfrew and Shennan 1982:
58). This approach involved the study of large-scale spatial systems,
assuming an interregional division of labor in which peripheral areas
supplied core areas with raw materials, the core areas were politically
and economically dominant, and the economic and social develop-
ment of all regions was constrained by their changing roles in the
system. Philip Kohl suggested that the world systems of antiquity
probably only superficially resembled those of modern times. In par-
ticular, he argued that the rankings of cores and peripheries may
have been less stable than they are now and that political force might
have played a more overt role in regulating such rankings. Migra-
tions of individuals and peoples were also once again being discussed
(Anthony 1990). What was of greatest importance was the grow-
ing realization that societies were not closed systems with respect

                                 438
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

to neighboring societies any more than in relation to their natural
environments and that the development of a society or culture might
have been constrained or influenced by the broader social network
of which it was a part. There also was increasing recognition that the
rules governing these processes were themselves worthy of scientific
investigation.
   These observations raised additional and even now unresolved
questions relating to the nature of sociocultural systems. Social
boundaries are defined by reduced levels of interaction. Yet archaeol-
ogists began to wonder if a hierarchy of levels could be distinguished,
in which individuals were grouped as members of families, families
as parts of communities, communities as components of larger soci-
eties or polities, and neighboring societies or polities to form larger
interaction spheres. Or do individuals simultaneously participate dif-
ferentially in patterned interactions at many levels and as members
of many different kinds of social groupings (R. McGuire 1983)? One
must not arbitrarily minimize the importance of brokers and deci-
sion makers, such as chiefs, government officials, and kings, who
mediate between different levels of society and thereby reflect and
make possible varying degrees of social closure between these levels.
Yet a detailed analysis of social, political, and economic interaction
has called into question the idea that so-called societies or cultures
are necessarily more significant units of analysis than are larger and
smaller categories (Clarke 1968). More recently, it has been proposed
that the concept of society should be replaced by that of social net-
works (Shanks 1996: 168). The social entity to be studied appears
to be something that must be determined in relation to the spe-
cific problem being investigated and the evidence available from the
archaeological record.
   Binford had maintained that cultures were tightly integrated sys-
tems in which changes in technology and relations with the envi-
ronment brought about alterations in social organization and belief
systems. Because of this, he and other processual archaeologists, such
as Stuart Struever, believed that little variation existed from one cul-
ture to another at the same level of development. Systems analysis, by
encouraging the detailed study of individual cases, promoted grow-
ing awareness of the cross-cultural diversity cultures exhibited. It also
became apparent that cultures and societies were not as tightly inte-
grated or as narrowly determined as neoevolutionary archaeologists

                                  439
                A History of Archaeological Thought

had imagined. Systems analysts discovered a wide range of ecological,
social, and cultural factors bringing about changes in various ways
and to different degrees within more loosely integrated entities. Even
when subjected to a variety of similar ecological and other functional
constraints, societies at the same level of development displayed con-
siderable cross-cultural variation (Trigger 1982a). This gradually led
to the abandonment of ecological determinism and of the idea that
universal generalizations alone could explain the past.
   It was further realized by many archaeologists that, because of the
complexity and diversity of human behavior, archaeologists cannot
use evolutionary generalizations to explain specific historical situ-
ations but must understand specific historical situations as a basis
for trying to formulate evolutionary generalizations. George Odell
(2001: 681) has asserted that the search for cultural laws has been fin-
ished in the United States since the publications of M. Salmon and
W. Salmon (1979) and Flannery (1986). Salmon and Salmon argued
that, because of the causal complexity of much human behavior,
explaining it requires a statistical relevance model, whereby an event
is explained when all factors statistically relevant to its occurrence
are assembled and the appropriate probability values for its occur-
rence are determined in the light of these factors (W. Salmon et al.
1971; M. Salmon 1982: 109; W. Salmon 1967, 1984). This approach
is similar to the traditional method of historical explanations (Dray
1957). Since then, most archaeologists have realized that correlations
relating to human behavior are generally statistical rather than abso-
lute in nature and that most statistical correlations are of a lower
rather than a higher degree of magnitude, a problem with which
anthropologists engaged in cross-cultural studies have long had to
contend (Textor 1967). Under these circumstances, the problem of
equifinality, or different causes producing the same effect, becomes
increasingly troublesome, as archaeologists engaged in early simula-
tion studies soon realized (Hodder 1978b; Sabloff 1981). Although
Binford continued to champion something resembling an ecolog-
ical determinist view of human history, he became increasingly an
exception.
   Renewed interest in interaction among cultures also reopened the
often-debated question of the significance of ethnographic analogies
for archaeological interpretation. Evolutionary anthropologists had
assumed that the earliest recorded descriptions of indigenous cultures

                                  440
                Processualism and Postprocessualism

revealed what these cultures had been like before European contact
and that such information could be used without serious question for
cross-cultural studies of behavioral variation. The Australian Aborig-
ines and the San of southern Africa were regarded as paradigmatic
hunter-gatherer societies. Yet archaeology was revealing that many
indigenous cultures had been vastly altered as a result of European
contact before the earliest descriptions of them were recorded by
Europeans (Ramsden 1977; Cordell and Plog 1979; Wilcox and Masse
1981; J. Bradley 1987). It seemed possible that every hunter-gatherer
and tribal society in the world was influenced to some degree by
contact with technologically more advanced societies prior to ethno-
graphic study (Brasser 1971; Fried 1975; Wobst 1978; Monks 1981:
228; Trigger 1981b; Alexander and Mohammed 1982).
   There was growing archaeological and historical evidence that the
San way of life had been modified significantly in recent centuries by
contacts with European settlers and over a longer period by inter-
action with their pastoral Bantu and Hottentot neighbors (Schrire
1980, 1984). The impact that these other groups had on the south-
ern African environment also may have altered San life in many ways.
It was further proposed that San groups might have moved out of
and back into hunter-gathering many times (Denbow 1984; Wilmsen
and Denbow 1990; Gordon 1992). Under such circumstances, it
was dangerous for anthropologists to assume that the San, or any
other modern hunter-gatherer societies, were necessarily equivalent
to Palaeolithic ones. These studies, although revolutionary after a
long period dominated by neoevolutionism, resumed a pattern estab-
lished by Strong (1935) and Wedel (1938), with their archaeological
demonstrations that the highly mobile equestrian hunting popula-
tions found on the Great Plains of North America in the historical
period were a relatively recent phenomenon and that in some areas
sedentary agriculturalists had preceded them. In Stone Age Economics,
Sahlins (1972: 38–9) suggested that social anthropology was nothing
but the record of cultures destroyed by colonialism.
   The various economic ties that link modern hunter-gatherers to
their non-hunter-gatherer neighbors also call into question whether
modern and ancient hunter-gatherers (or tribal societies) shared the
same mode of production and can therefore be treated as societies at
the same stage of development. Binford (1980) used northern indige-
nous groups that had been engaged for generations in trapping and

                                 441
                A History of Archaeological Thought

exchanging furs with Europeans as a basis for offering certain gener-
alizations about the nature of hunter-gatherer adaptations to high-
latitude environments. Some anthropologists believe that, because of
the flexibility of their adaptation to the boreal forest, the economies
of at least some of these groups have not been radically altered by
the fur trade (Francis and Morantz 1983: 14–15); others strongly
disagree. Only detailed archaeological studies can determine objec-
tively to what extent ethnographic descriptions of hunter-gatherer or
tribal agricultural societies provide a representative picture of what
these societies were like in prehistoric times (D. Thomas 1974). Until
more such investigations are made, the significance of major cross-
cultural studies based on ethnographic data must remain doubtful.
It has clearly been demonstrated that comparing societies that have
been influenced by European colonization can give an exaggerated
impression of the degree of variation occurring in cultural phenom-
ena such as kinship terminologies (Eggan 1966: 15–44).
   Archaeology therefore came to be viewed as having an important
role to play not only in unraveling the complex history of the past but
also in providing a historical perspective for understanding the signif-
icance of ethnographic data. A growing number of anthropologists
began to accept that ethnologists and social anthropologists, whether
studying social structure or change, were investigating the results of
acculturation because their data were derived from small-scale soci-
eties that were being either destroyed or integrated ever more com-
pletely into the modern world system. History and archaeology alone
could study the evolution of cultures in the past. It was also becoming
clear that no society could be properly understood or even classified
from a structural point of view without taking account of its rela-
tions with other societies (Wolf 1982; Flannery 1983). The persistent
Enlightenment belief that ethnologists by themselves could study all
facets of cultural development was finally coming to an end.
   In the 1960s, Binford had inspired young American archaeol-
ogists by arguing that all aspects of sociocultural systems were
reflected in the archaeological record. Yet, over the next twenty-five
years, processual archaeologists had continued to study mainly the
lower echelons of Hawkes’s ladder. With the notable exceptions of
Flannery, Marcus, and Renfrew, leading processual archaeologists
concentrated on subsistence patterns, trade, and to a lesser extent
social organization. Of the papers dealing with the interpretation

                                  442
                Processualism and Postprocessualism

of archaeological evidence in the first eight volumes of Schiffer’s
Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory (1978–1985), 39 per-
cent dealt with data recovery and chronology, 47 percent with ecol-
ogy, demography, and economic behavior, 8 percent with social
behavior, and only 6 percent with ideology, religion, and scien-
tific knowledge. Binford’s own research remained focused on tech-
nology and settlement-subsistence patterns as they related to eco-
logical adaptation. Processual archaeologists paid little attention
to studying the specific religious beliefs, cosmology, iconography,
aesthetics, scientific knowledge, or values of prehistoric cultures.
Studies of archaeoastronomy (Aveni 1981) and prehistoric iconog-
raphy (Donnan 1976; Nicholson 1976; Gimbutas 1982) generally
were carried out by archaeologists who were not associated with
processual archaeology. It also was observed that ecological and
evolutionary approaches were not designed to explain motivation
and symbolic meaning (Leach 1973: 768–9; Dunnell 1982a: 521).
Gradually, however, a growing number of archaeologists began to
regard this situation as anomalous because, from at least Upper
Palaeolithic times onward, abundant evidence of religious and sym-
bolic behavior occurs in the archaeological record in the form of
art, temples, burials, and other remains of ritual behavior (Mithen
1996). By the late 1970s, it appeared as if a Kuhnian paradigm shift
might be in the making. Few remembered that Childe (1956b)
had argued that the incorporation of cognitive aspects was essen-
tial for a persuasive and reasonably complete explanation of human
behavior.
   Thus, although processual archaeologists generally continued to
be materialists and to adhere to positivistic canons of scientific
method, they soon diverged from each other in a number of differ-
ent theoretical directions. In the course of doing so, they embraced
numerous conflicting tendencies, often without adequately assessing
the scientific credentials of theories or seeking to determine whether
they were appropriate for what was being studied. Although pro-
cessual archaeologists became more familiar with social science, and
especially anthropological, theory than archaeologists had ever been
before, they remained for the most part consumers of theory. In
due course, the questions they refused to discuss began to be inter-
preted as evidence of theoretical inadequacy rather than of profes-
sional sophistication.

                                 443
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   At the same time that its adequacy was being called into ques-
tion, processual archaeology was playing an increasingly important
role in shaping archaeological practice as a result of its leading ideas
being incorporated into the research-design protocols that govern-
ment agencies, especially in the United States, used to mandate and
evaluate the rapidly expanding roster of archaeological projects that
they funded. Because rescue archaeology and cultural resource man-
agement soon were providing employment for most professional
archaeologists, this was a development that was of great importance
for determining how archaeology would be practiced in the United
States over the next few decades.


                    Postprocessual Archaeology
A conscious alternative to processual archaeology began to develop
in the 1970s and by 1985 Ian Hodder had labeled this new trend post-
processual archaeology. The beginnings of this movement had been
predicted by the social anthropologist Edmund Leach (1973: 763)
as early as 1971, when he warned a meeting on “The Explanation
of Culture Change,” held at the University of Sheffield and largely
attended by processual archaeologists, that although the concept of
cultural structuralism, currently popular among social anthropolo-
gists, had not yet caught up with them, eventually it would. Post-
processual archaeology can be regarded as the inevitable rediscovery
of the concept of culture as a source of cross-culturally idiosyncratic
variation in human beliefs and behavior (Robb 1998). But this dis-
covery was accompanied by archaeologists being exposed to several
interrelated intellectual movements, at least two of which were keen
on challenging authority in the political as well as the intellectual
arena.
   The first influence was the Marxist-inspired social anthropology
that had developed in France in the 1960s and already had influ-
enced British social anthropology. This movement had its roots not
in orthodox Marxism but in efforts to combine Marxism and struc-
turalism by anthropologists such as Maurice Godelier, Emmanuel
Terray, and Pierre-Philippe Rey, as well as by the philosopher Louis
Althusser. Although structuralists traditionally practiced an ahis-
torical form of analysis and Marxism was historical in orientation,
the protagonists of French anthropology believed that these two

                                  444
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

approaches could be made to complement one another. French
Marxist anthropologists also were influenced by the idealism of the
Frankfurt School, especially as the ideas of that school were repre-
sented in the writings of Jürgen Habermas (1971, 1975) and Herbert
Marcuse (1964). The Frankfurt School was a rethinking of Marx-
ism dating from the 1920s by Theodore Adorno, Max Horkheimer,
Herbert Marcuse, and others who stressed the important role played
by beliefs in controlling human behavior. They attributed the failure
of the working class to seize power in central and western Europe
during World War I to the influence of nationalist propaganda, which
had led them to act contrary to their economic and political interests.
The economic studies by Claude Meillassoux (1981) constituted yet
another influence on French Marxist anthropology.
   Despite individual differences, these neo-Marxist anthropologists
emphasized the considerable variations among simple modes of
production, the important role played by human consciousness in
bringing about change, the major significance of clashes of interest
between men and women or people of different ages in promoting
conflict and hence change in classless societies, and the inescapable
impregnation of all human activities, including scientific research, by
ideology. They also shared the conviction that Marx and Engels had
failed to produce a detailed analysis of preclass societies and that it
was their duty to remedy this defect not by returning to the flawed
works of the founders of Marxism but by constructing new Marxist
theories of precapitalist societies on the basis of current knowledge of
such groups (Bloch 1985: 150; R. McGuire 1992a, 1993). They also
rejected neoevolutionism, traditional structuralism, cultural materi-
alism, and cultural ecology because these approaches unduly reified
stability, treated the causes of cultural change as being external to
social relations, and regarded human beings as passive objects that
were molded by external factors. Ecology was viewed as constraining
rather than directing change and new technologies were interpreted
both as responses to social and economic change and as a major
force bringing such change about. Social conflicts arising from con-
tradictory interests were identified as vital and pervasive features of
all human societies and a major source of change. In preclass societies
conflict centered on control of food and labor, gender roles, personal
and family status, exotic goods, possession of knowledge, and ritual
prerogatives. This view was contrasted with the integrative concerns

                                  445
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

of functionalism, classical structuralism, and phenomenology, to the
disadvantage of these three established positions.
   Marxist anthropologists also championed a human-centered view
of history. They refused to explain meaning, symbolism, and social
phenomena in terms of nonsocial determinants. Instead of treating
social behavior as passively shaped by external (ecological) forces,
as Binford and many other processual archaeologists did, Marxist
anthropologists stressed intentionality and the social production of
reality. They also insisted on a holistic approach; in a Marxist and
Hegelian fashion, parts of society always had to be studied in rela-
tion to the whole and individual social systems in terms of broader
networks of intersocietal relations. Marxist anthropologists sought
to explain not only cross-cultural regularities but also the particular-
ities, individual differences, and specific contexts that distinguished
one concrete instance of social change from another. They clearly
identified with the historical orientation that was part, but not all,
of Marx’s approach. They also insisted on the social basis of knowl-
edge, viewing information and self-consciousness as the products
and intellectual capital of specific societies. Finally, the social context
of social science research was seen as influencing interpretations of
human behavior. This suggested that certainty of the sort envisioned
by positivistically oriented researchers could not be achieved (Trigger
1993).
   During this period a more broadly based reaction against posi-
tivism and behaviorism was developing in the humanities and social
sciences. Postmodernism, as archaeologists experienced it, originated
in comparative literature, literary criticism, and cultural studies. Fol-
lowing the decline of Boasian anthropology, cultural studies success-
fully challenged anthropology’s claim to be the primary discipline
studying culture. Postmodernists emphasized the subjective nature
of knowledge and embraced extreme relativism and idealism. Many
denied that such a thing as objective knowledge existed. All estab-
lished approaches, with the possible exception of postmodernism
itself, were represented as serving special interests (Lyotard 1984;
Jencks 1986; Harvey 1989; Hunt 1989; Laudan 1990; Rose 1991;
Rosenau 1992). Postmodernists also violently rejected the hege-
monic implications of cultural evolutionary theory and the notion
of progress, which they denounced as a morally bankrupt set of
concepts that served to rationalize colonialism, the repression of

                                   446
                Processualism and Postprocessualism

minorities, and the abuse of nature. Postmodernists romantically
celebrated random, idiosyncratic cultural variation. They construed
the rationalism of the Enlightenment as an effort to impose hege-
monic values and political control on the world and believed that by
asserting the integrity of local cultures they were defending freedom
and helping weaker peoples to oppose their oppressors. In architec-
ture, the austerity and universalism of functionalist modernism was
countered by adding local and historical references to it. As ideal-
ists, postmodernists also rejected proposals that human behavior was
shaped to any significant degree by physical constraints (Goffman
1963; Latour and Woolgar 1979; Knorr-Cetina 1981; L. Shepherd
1993).
   Postmodernists agreed that there could never be a single, objec-
tive version of human affairs; instead there were multiple versions
or truths seen from different standpoints, such as those of poor and
rich, winners and losers, females and males, different professions,
and various ethnic groups. Postmodernists embraced not only rela-
tivism, which emphasizes the varied ways in which different groups
of people understand the world and what is happening to it, but
also a subjectivist viewpoint, which maintains that every person sees
the world differently. Postmodernists emphasized that no two peo-
ple attending a performance of Shakespeare’s play Hamlet would
perceive that performance in exactly the same way because no two
people bring precisely the same experiences and understandings to
it. They also maintained that in transmitting information from one
person to another every decoding of a message by the recipient is
another encoding. This process was identified as a major source of
essentially random cultural change.
   Radical postmodernists sought to decenter and disempower what
they characterized as hegemonic knowledge, which they maintained
had been created to serve the interests of the most powerful, con-
servative, and usually the male members of society. They did this
by encouraging weaker members of society to express their own
viewpoints and by themselves exposing the self-interest, misrepre-
sentations, and self-deception that permeate the pronouncements of
the rich and powerful. Such people, it was maintained, habitually
claim that the social arrangements that serve their interests are good
for everyone, in order to persuade the weak to acquiesce in being
exploited and to resent their bad treatment less.

                                 447
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   Although many postmodern ideas were of Marxist origin, post-
modernism flourished after the failure of the radical student
upheavals in Europe and North America in 1968, at a time when
“truth” was no longer seen as necessarily liberating (Hegmon 2003:
232). The extreme subjectivism and opposition to grand narratives
of postmodernists made it impossible for them to gain much clear
or useful insight into the origins, structure, and transformations of
social systems at the very time when worldwide political and eco-
nomic changes were affecting everyone’s life, often for the worse
(Sherratt 1993: 125). Such inability to understand and critique what
is actually happening in the world may explain why postmodernism
has flourished symbiotically as the cultural accompaniment of the
emergence of a highly exploitative transnational economy that con-
tinues to be driven by a self-assured and very unpostmodern neocon-
servative ideology (Marchak 1991). This symbiosis also may explain
why postmodernists rarely draw attention to the Marxist origins of
many of their ideas.
   The Polish philosopher Lezek Kolakowski (1978c: 524–5) has
observed that, although some Marxist concepts have permeated the
historical sciences and humanities in the West, by the late 1970s Marx-
ism as a system had largely ceased to be an intellectual force there
and what was left of it seemed to duplicate most of the material-
ist and idealist viewpoints found in non-Marxist social science. This
may help to explain why, when Marxism and Marxist institutions
collapsed around the world in the early 1990s and French Marxist
anthropology ceased to be regarded as being on the cutting edge of
theory production, postmodernism, lacking the historical liability of
a Marxist identity, flourished in archaeology.
   Finally, the distinction between modernism and postmodernism is
far from complete (Hegmon 2003: 232). Critical theory and clas-
sical Marxism in general, which have played important roles in
shaping postmodern thought, are modernist, not postmodernist,
movements. Moreover, postprocessual archaeology, with its inter-
ests in other modernist approaches, such as structuralism, cannot be
equated with postmodernism. Yet postprocessual archaeologists have
given both Marxism and structuralism a postmodern gloss.
   The third and politically the most conservative source of inspi-
ration for postprocessual archaeology was the new cultural anthro-
pology that developed in the United States following the collapse

                                 448
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

of Boasian anthropology. Neoevolutionary anthropology never suc-
ceeded in becoming the dominant approach in sociocultural anthro-
pology even during the 1960s, as processualism did in anthropologi-
cal archaeology. Clifford Geertz (1965: 101) countered an ecological
emphasis on functional aspects of behavior by proclaiming cross-
cultural regularities to be meaningless intellectual constructions and
stressing the need to try to understand every culture on its own terms.
He also emphasized the great effort that was needed for anthropolo-
gists to acquire even a limited understanding of a single culture other
than their own.
   New cultural anthropologists denounced studies of cultural evo-
lution as being ethnocentric and intellectually and morally untenable
in a multicultural, postcolonial environment (S. Diamond 1974). All
cultures were viewed as unique and all sequences of change as his-
torically contingent. This encouraged the revival of a pervasive con-
cern with documenting cultural diversity, idiosyncracy, and unique-
ness, while at the same time ignoring cross-cultural regularities (V.
Turner 1967, 1975; Geertz 1973; Clifford 1988). The most dramatic
event in anthropology was Marshall Sahlins’s (1976a) abandonment
of neoevolutionism and his embracing of new cultural anthropol-
ogy. Although this revival of cultural anthropology was formulated
largely in a politically neutral idiom, many new cultural anthropolo-
gists embraced postmodernism or ideas derived from it. Thus, new
cultural anthropology became a force encouraging postprocessual
archaeology in the United States and elsewhere.
   By the mid-1970s, the discussion of Marxist ideas by social scien-
tists was no longer tabooed in the United States and Marxism began
to penetrate prehistoric archaeology in the United States as well as
Britain. In 1975 Philip Kohl and Antonio Gilman organized the first
symposium on relations between Marxist ideas and archaeology at
that year’s annual meeting of the American Anthropological Associa-
tion. Their work and Carole Crumley’s tended to be based on classical
Marxist theory (Kohl 1975, 1978; Gilman 1976, 1981; Crumley 1976),
whereas that of Thomas Patterson (1983), stimulated by his contact
with Marxist archaeologists in Latin America, combined elements of
both classical Marxism and neo-Marxism. All these archaeologists
disagreed with major aspects of processual archaeology. In 1977,
Matthew Spriggs (1984a) organized another major conference on
Marxist archaeology at Cambridge University. He noted that at that

                                 449
                A History of Archaeological Thought

time French Marxist anthropology seemed to offer young archaeol-
ogists “a potentially unifying perspective” (Spriggs 1984b: 5).
   Postprocessual archaeology, as an explicit movement, began to
develop in Britain as a result of the work of Ian Hodder and his stu-
dents, who attempted to apply insights gained from French Marxist
anthropology to the study of material culture. The first public mani-
festation of this tendency was a conference on “Symbolism and Struc-
turalism in Archaeology” held at Cambridge University in 1980. This
conference resulted in Symbolic and Structural Archaeology, edited by
Hodder (1982c), a postprocessual showcase and counterpart to New
Perspectives in Archeology (S. and L. Binford 1968). Hodder had been
a student of David Clarke and as a processual archaeologist had made
significant contributions to the economic analysis of spatial patterns
and the early development of simulation studies (Hodder and Hassall
1971; Hodder 1978a, 1978b; Hodder and Orton 1976). Nevertheless,
he grew increasingly dissatisfied with the limitations of processual
archaeology and interested in the role played by culture in shap-
ing human behavior. The development of processual archaeology in
Britain had already stirred an interest in anthropology and Hodder
and his students, like Spriggs, found in French Marxist anthropol-
ogy concepts that seemed relevant for their own work. As was the
case with early processual archaeology, the initial contributions to
postprocessual archaeology were in the form of papers. These papers
reflected an interest in symbolic, structural, and critical approaches
to the study of archaeological data. They also revealed a consider-
able degree of uncertainty and disagreement about what constituted
Marxist theory and how it might be applied to archaeology.
   A preoccupation with noneconomic phenomena was evident in
the unprecedented attention that early postprocessual archaeologists
accorded to religion and other beliefs (Miller and Tilley 1984a). Ide-
ology was described by Kristian Kristiansen (1984) as an active factor
in social relations and Michael Parker Pearson (1984: 61) asserted,
without even referring to their economic functions, that tools were
as much the products of ideology as was a crown or a law code. A.
B. Knapp (1988) analyzed how elites manipulated ideology to main-
tain or enhance their power. Some archaeologists discussed ideology
within an explicitly materialist context. Thus, Kristiansen described
the megalithic religion of western Europe as an extension of produc-
tion and Miller and Tilley (1984b: 148) stated that ideology was not

                                 450
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

an autonomous comment but a part of efforts to produce, maintain,
and resist social changes that related to the clash of interests between
groups. By contrast, Parker Pearson’s (1984: 63) suggestion that ide-
ology can direct economic activity, Mary Braithwaite’s (1984: 107)
claim that understanding the role of material culture in ritual and
prestige practices was a necessary first step in reconstructing other
aspects of changes and patterns represented in the archaeological
record, and Christopher Tilley’s (1984: 143) approval of Habermas’s
efforts to elevate the ideological sphere to “an important explana-
tory role” must be interpreted as support for an idealist interpre-
tation of human behavior. Susan Kus (1984) and Peter Gathercole
(1984) questioned the traditional Marxist distinction between eco-
nomic base and superstructure; a distinction that Gathercole sug-
gested reflected Western society’s cultural preoccupation with eco-
nomics. John Gledhill (1984) claimed that Western Marxists generally
viewed noneconomic factors as dominant in precapitalist societies.
Ritual was described as a “discourse” that served to reaffirm exist-
ing social relations by making them appear to be part of the natural
order and hence enhanced the power of privileged groups or indi-
viduals. Tilley (1984: 143), however, following Marx and Engels and
the Italian Marxist philosopher Antonio Gramsci (1992) closely on
this point, reminded readers that such views underrate the ability of
oppressed individuals to analyze their situations and that ideology is
never all-embracing in its control.
   Postprocessual archaeologists disagreed about how much needed
to be known about prehistoric ideologies to establish what role they
had played. Some argued that specific symbolic meanings and social
processes are “recursively related” and therefore the meanings must
be known in some detail if cultural change is to be explained (Hodder
1984a). Braithwaite (1984: 94) suggested that the exact content of
belief systems might be irretrievable archaeologically, although their
operation was not. Her concept of “operation” seems little different
from a functionalist approach to ritual and ideology.
   M. Parker Pearson (1984) maintained that in preclass societies
“interest groups” consisting of young and old, men and women, and
members of different clans or lineages, struggled in much the same
manner as classes do in more advanced societies. He also asserted as
an essential premise of Marxism that all human beings are motivated
by self-interest and seek power to pursue such interests. Tilley (1984)

                                  451
                A History of Archaeological Thought

followed Meillassoux and Terray in claiming that exploitative social
relations existed in all social formations. Such uniformitarian views
of society ran contrary to the traditional Marxist claim that human
nature is transformed in substantial ways by social change (Fuller
1980: 230–64; Geras 1983).
   Postprocessual archaeologists generally disapproved of positivist
approaches to the analysis of archaeological data. Daniel Miller (1984:
38) asserted that positivism, which he defined as accepting only what
can be sensed, tested, and predicted as knowable, seeks to produce
technical knowledge that will facilitate the exploitation of common-
ers by oppressive elites, whereas Miller and Tilley (1984: 2) claimed
that it encouraged the acceptance of social injustice by persuading
people that human societies were irresistibly shaped by external pres-
sures. Hodder (1984b) maintained that archaeologists had no moral
right to interpret the prehistory of other peoples and that their main
duty should be to provide individuals with the means to construct
their own views of the past, although it was not explained how
this information could be supplied without introducing inherent
biases into it. Gathercole (1984) and others stressed the subjectiv-
ity of archaeology by portraying it as primarily an ideological disci-
pline. Miller and Tilley followed scholars of the Frankfurt School in
interpreting Marxism as simply another subjective perspective on the
human condition. Marx’s claim for a special status for his approach
was rejected as a vain attempt to give his work a “veneer” of posi-
tivist science. M. J. Rowlands (1984a), by contrast, viewed extreme
relativism as a danger threatening archaeology. Relativist ideas and
opposition to professional elitism as well as to hegemonic preten-
sions by archaeologists associated with politically, economically, and
culturally dominant countries or institutions became further radi-
calized as a result of the controversy leading to the establishment
of the World Archaeological Congress in 1986 (Ucko 1987). This
worldwide organization of like-minded archaeologists is opposed to
racism, colonialism, and professional elitism.
   The importance of postprocessual archaeology was irrevocably
established by a series of brief ethnoarchaeological surveys that
Ian Hodder and his students carried out in various parts of sub-
Saharan Africa (Hodder 1982b). These studies definitively refuted
the key assumption by processual archaeologists that archaeological
finds must necessarily reflect social organization. Hodder provided

                                 452
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

overwhelming documentation that material culture was not merely
a reflection of sociopolitical organization but also an active element
that could be used to disguise, invert, and distort social relations.
Overtly competing groups may use material culture to emphasize
their dissimilarities, whereas one ethnic group wishing to have easy
access to another’s resources may attempt to minimize the material
manifestations of such differences. High-status groups actively use
material culture to legitimize their authority (Hodder 1982b: 119–
22), while in some African countries calabash and age-graded spear
styles, which cut across ethnic boundaries that are clearly marked by
other aspects of material culture, signal the tacit resistance of women
and young men to the authority of dominant elders (Ibid.: 58–74)
(Figure 8.7). Even tensions within an extended family were found
to be expressed and reinforced by variations in pottery decoration
(Ibid.: 122–4).
   Hodder’s demonstration that material culture is used as an active
element in social interaction contradicted the carefully developed
arguments of processual archaeologists that the relative elabora-
tion of individual graves within a society accurately mirrors the
degree of social differentiation. Further research by Hodder and
his students has demonstrated that complex ideas relating to reli-
gion, hygiene, and status rivalry also have played significant roles
in influencing burial customs (M. Parker Pearson 1982). In some
societies, simple burials reflect a social ideal of egalitarianism that is
not put into practice in everyday life. For example, in Saudi Arabia,
kings and commoners are buried in the same simple manner as a
material expression of Islamic belief in the equality of all believers
before the transcendence of God and in the ideal social equality of
all Moslems (Huntington and Metcalf 1979: 122). Aubrey Cannon
(1989) demonstrated that during the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries changing strategies of status emulation altered the social
significance of burial practices in England. The geographical and
social dislocations brought about by industrialization induced newly
wealthy families to affirm their social status with elaborate burials and
funeral monuments. Then, less wealthy families copied these prac-
tices with the result that wealthy ones placed less emphasis on this
form of display. Thus, without taking account of its specific historical
context, the social and symbolic significance of any particular burial
cannot be established.

                                   453
Figure 8.7 Hodder’s recording of ethnographic distribution of
shield types (above) and calabash motifs (right) among different
ethnic groups in the Baringo area of Kenya (Symbols in Action,
1982)

                                                            454
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

   Ironically, Hodder was able to use ethnoarchaeology – the means
by which Binford had hoped to demonstrate detailed regularities in
the relations between material culture on the one hand and all forms
of social organization on the other – to refute the crucial assumption
of processual archaeologists that material culture invariably directly
reflects social organization. Hodder’s discovery was as significant a
contribution to the development of archaeological interpretation as
was Willey’s demonstration of the importance of settlement pattern
studies for investigating prehistoric social and political organization
or Thomsen’s discovery of occurrence sorting and seriation as effec-
tive means for establishing prehistoric chronologies.
   Hodder (1987b) went on to apply this discovery to the interpre-
tation of archaeological data by developing what he called contex-
tual archaeology. This approach accords with the general Hegelian-
Marxist conviction, transmitted through French anthropology, that
social researchers need to examine all possible aspects of a problem
in order to understand the significance of any one part of it. Thus,
to determine the social significance of burial customs archaeologists
have to examine not only cemeteries but other aspects of the archae-
ological record, such as settlement patterns. It might be assumed that
in a situation resembling the Saudi one already mentioned the dis-
crepancy between uniformly simple burials and the vast differences in
size and elaboration of dwellings would reveal the ideological charac-
ter of the burials, once it could be established that burials represent-
ing all social classes had been recovered. Even so, without relevant
texts or oral traditions, it would be impossible for archaeologists to
infer the specific content of the beliefs that had produced this behav-
ior. By drawing attention to properties of material culture that had
hitherto been ignored, Hodder revealed the dangers inherent in all
interpretations of archaeological evidence analyzed in isolation from
its broader cultural context. Even animal bones cannot convincingly
be used to reconstruct diet until it has been demonstrated that the
animals involved had been slaughtered for eating rather than as sac-
rifices to the gods or for the use of their hides only. By demon-
strating that an archaeological culture cannot be interpreted ade-
quately in a piecemeal fashion, Hodder placed heavy new demands
on archaeologists to undertake a comprehensive internal study of
archaeological finds that in principle resembled Walter Taylor’s


                                  455
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

conjunctive approach, but in its conceptualization went far beyond
it. The contextual approach differed radically from the belief of pro-
cessual archaeologists that a few selected variables can be studied at
a single site to answer a specific archaeological question (Brown and
Struever 1973).
   Contextual archaeology also rejected the validity of the neoevo-
lutionary distinction between what is culturally specific and what
is cross-culturally general that constituted the basis of Steward’s
dichotomy between science and history (Hodder 1987a). This vali-
dated an interest in culturally specific cosmologies, astronomical lore,
art styles, religious beliefs, and other topics that had lingered on the
fringes of processual archaeology in the 1960s and 1970s. Hodder
encouraged archaeologists once again to take account of the com-
plexities of human phenomena and to realize that universal gener-
alizations do not exhaust the regularities that characterize human
behavior. He urged them to look for order within individual cul-
tures or historically related cultures both in terms of specific cultural
categories, such as the canons governing artistic productions, and in
the way different cultural categories related to one another (Bradley
1984). Although contextual archaeology suggested how the detailed
study of patterning in the prehistoric archaeological record might dis-
tinguish when material culture was being used symbolically to distort
or invert rather than to reflect social relations, hard work lay ahead in
determining how far and in what ways more specific meanings might
be attached to such patterns.
   In the United States, postprocessual archaeology developed largely
independently and along different lines from what was happening in
Britain, with much of the theoretical rationalization for what was
being done coming from critical theory. Initiatives involved a more
diverse array of archaeologists and there was also less formal organiza-
tion of what was happening than was the case in Britain. By the early
1980s, as a result of growing doubts about the adequacy of positivism
and an increasing awareness of relativism, many American archaeol-
ogists recognized for the first time that more than purely objec-
tive “scientific” considerations played a role in archaeological inter-
pretation (Gibbon 1984; Leone 1984; Wilk 1985; Patterson 1986a).
This in turn promoted a growing interest in the history of archaeol-
ogy (Trigger 1985a, 1989a, 1994a). Many archaeologists now were
prepared to admit that not only the questions they asked but also the

                                  456
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

answers they were willing to accept as persuasive were influenced by
the presuppositions that guided their research (Saitta 1983).
   The testing of propositions used to interpret archaeological data
was no longer viewed as objective and clearcut, but as a procedure
in which significant subjective elements were involved (M. Salmon
1982; Wylie 1982, 1985b). Many now suspected that archaeologists
and other scientists accepted lower standards of proof for proposi-
tions they held to be reasonable or self-evident than they did for
hypotheses of which they disapproved. Even the most strongly sup-
ported hypothetico-deductive proposition required faith that what
had applied in cases already studied would apply to all similar cases
encountered in the future. Many now maintained that archaeologists,
both individually and collectively, were influenced in their interpreta-
tions, largely unconsciously, by their social milieu (Patterson 1986a).
This was not a simple belief that all archaeologists reacted in the
same way to a particular set of social conditions (Shanks and Tilley
1987a: 31). Yet it was widely believed that shared class membership
or political loyalties encouraged large numbers of archaeologists, but
not necessarily all of them, to interpret archaeological data from a
similar perspective.
   The first major bias to be recognized by American archae-
ologists was ethnic prejudice. This is scarcely surprising since
not only had racial prejudice historically played a major role in
American society but it had long influenced the study of Amer-
ican prehistoric archaeology. Robert Silverberg’s Mound Builders
of Ancient America (1968) documented how ideas about the
Moundbuilders reflected nineteenth-century Euro-American preju-
dices against North American Indians and how in a circular fashion
interpretations of archaeological finds that had accorded with those
beliefs had reinforced such prejudices. In 1980, I argued that assump-
tions that North American indigenous peoples were primitive and
incapable of change had encouraged misreadings of the archaeolog-
ical record, especially in the nineteenth century when little archaeo-
logical work had yet been done (Trigger 1980b). Evidence of cultural
change over time was either ignored or attributed to migrations of
people rather than to internal transformations. As the archaeological
record became better known, archaeologists were slowly, and usually
reluctantly, compelled to acknowledge that changes had occurred
within cultures, but for a long time these changes were attributed

                                  457
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

to diffusion from Mesoamerica and Siberia. Only in the second half
of the twentieth century did a growing realization of the complexity
of the archaeological record compel most archaeologists to consider
the possibility that significant internal development had taken place
among indigenous groups in prehistoric times.
   Archaeologists came to perceive that similar ethnic prejudices had
influenced the interpretation of archaeological evidence in other parts
of the world, especially in colonial situations and where archaeol-
ogy was subservient to various nationalist political agendas (Trigger
1984a). Unfortunately, in the United States a growing appreciation
of the creativity of indigenous peoples was not accompanied by closer
relations between prehistoric archaeologists and the peoples whose
pasts they studied. Processual archaeologists, in keeping with their
programmatic goals, treated the archaeological record as a basis for
generalizing about human behavior and hence their interests had
little in common with those of indigenous peoples. Even most post-
processual archaeologists looked to the abundant ethnographic data
recorded in earlier times rather than to living Indians as sources of
the cultural information that was needed to interpret archaeologi-
cal finds. It was not until Indian activists began to acquire increasing
legal control over licensing the study of archaeological material relat-
ing to their cultural heritage that, out of political necessity, a dialogue
began – a dialogue that continues to be dominated by political
issues and is often confrontational (Bray and Killion 1994; Lynott
and Wylie 1995; Nicholas and Andrews 1997; Swidler et al. 1997;
Dongoske et al. 2000; D. Thomas 2000; Watkins 2000; R. McGuire
2004).
   Although feminism and gender studies had become a signifi-
cant component of Norwegian archaeology already in the 1970s
(Dommasnes 1992), it was not until the early 1980s, when Joan Gero
(1983) and Margaret Conkey and Janet Spector (1984) published
their pioneering studies, that North American archaeologists began
to discuss gender bias in both the interpretation of archaeological
data and the practice of American archaeology. Historical and socio-
logical studies quickly established that women were seriously under-
represented among the ranks of professional archaeologists and that
in the past most of them had worked as technicians and laboratory
analysts rather than as directors of field projects, which was regarded
as a more prestigious activity. It also was demonstrated that the

                                   458
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

marginalization of women had resulted in biased and androcentric
interpretations of archaeological evidence. The dramatic exposure
of the limitations of the “man the hunter” view of cultural evolu-
tion was an opening salvo in critiquing the intellectual consequences
of the male domination of archaeology (N. Tanner 1981; Fedigan
1986). Accompanying that critique was a demand that more women
should be recruited into the discipline and empowered within it in
order to enhance archaeology’s intellectual credibility as well as to
promote social justice (Gero and Conkey 1991; Walde and Willows
1991; Hanen and Kelley 1992; Claassen 1994; Nelson et al. 1994;
Conkey and Tringham 1995; R. Wright 1996; S. Nelson 1997).
   There was little overt resistance to this movement, no doubt
because it began so much later in archaeology than it had in socio-
cultural anthropology and the other social sciences that male archae-
ologists despaired of winning such a battle. They quickly conceded
that the lack of adequate female representation had resulted in many
relevant questions going unasked and in many unduly partial or erro-
neous interpretations of the past. Because they addressed the orga-
nization as well as the practice of archaeology, critiques from the
perspective of feminism and gender studies played a major role in
revealing the generic nature of bias to many archaeologists. This fur-
ther undermined the authority of a positivist epistemology and led
a growing number of archaeologists to consider seriously the claims
that relativists and postprocessual archaeologists were making about
other issues.
   Alison Wylie (1996, 1997) has described how gender archaeology
evolved from critiques of androcentrism to a search for women in the
archaeological record and then to a rethinking of issues of difference
and relatedness as these concern gender. More recently, third-wave
feminism has sought to treat gender issues not as an isolated focus
of study but as an aspect of life that inevitably intersects with other
aspects, such as age, class, ethnicity, personal appearance, wealth, and
occupation (Meskell 1999, 2002). This development bears witness to
the success of the feminist critique of archaeology, which has resulted
in the acceptance of gender not simply as another standpoint but as a
significant consideration in all forms of archaeological interpretation
and practice. Excellent gender archaeology has been done in Britain
(Gilchrist 1994, 1999), but gender issues have not been discussed as
widely there as in the United States. Feminist archaeologists have

                                  459
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

called on British male postprocessual archaeologists to explain this
failure (Engelstad 1991; Preucel and Chesson 1994: 70–1).
   Gender archaeologists, like gender specialists in other disciplines,
continue to debate to what extent gender is wholly a culturally con-
structed category or it is also grounded in human biology. Either
from conviction or as a default position, most gender archaeologists
maintain that archaeologists should never seek to generalize cross-
culturally about relations between men and women. Some more rad-
ical relativists affirm that even sex, as opposed to gender, consists not
of biology but of the changing ideas that specific groups of people
have about biological differences (Gosden 1999: 132–51).
   It is perhaps symptomatic of the limited interest in the formal
study of class in the United States that archaeologists have paid less
attention to class biases than to ethnic and gender ones. Most of
this work has been done by historical archaeologists, its early advo-
cates including Russell Handsman (1981) and Mark Leone (1981),
whose studies, inspired by the pioneering research of Henry Glassie
(1975) and James Deetz (1977), challenged Stanley South’s (1977a,
1977b) processual approach. Much of Leone’s work has sought to
counter efforts by those who manage colonial heritage sites to use
them to project modern power relations and social values back into
earlier times in order to make such relations and values appear natural,
changeless, and unproblematical (Figure 8.8). Historical archaeolo-
gists also devote much attention to researching the everyday life of
slaves and industrial workers, as those groups usually are poorly doc-
umented in written records and therefore archaeologists can hope
to contribute significantly to knowledge concerning them. Increas-
ing efforts also are being made to involve the descendants of peo-
ple being studied in helping to formulate the questions that direct
such research (Leone and Potter 1988; McGuire and Paynter 1991;
M. Johnson 1996; Shackel 1996). These developments have greatly
enriched the scope and quality of research in historical archaeology.
   Critical theory, which is concerned with deconstructing explana-
tions and revealing the biases that are intentionally and unintention-
ally built into them according to the different standpoints of their
creators (Held 1980), has been used to structure and rationalize dis-
cussions of bias in archaeology. The most important impact of the
research outlined earlier has been the empirical evidence it has pro-
vided of the extent to which biases have permeated archaeological

                                  460
Figure 8.8 Eighteenth-century William Paca Garden, Annapolis, Maryland; the outlines of the garden are archaeologically
                   determined (D. Miller and C. Tilley, eds., Ideology, Power and Prehistory, 1984a)

                                                              461
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

research in the past. This insight has led many archaeologists to
believe that similar biases may be influencing their own work. The
possibility that this is so has further sensitized American archaeolo-
gists to the significance of a relativist epistemology and made them
more willing to accept at least some of the claims of postprocessual
archaeologists.
   Most American prehistoric archaeologists remained convinced of
the utility of studying the archaeological record from an ecological
point of view, but many of these were prepared to consider cultural
explanations for those aspects of the archaeological record to which
ecological explanations did not seem to apply. Strictly speaking, this
position was not anathema to Binford, although he continued to
believe that everything important about human behavior could be
explained ecologically. Richard Gould (1978b) argued that archae-
ologists should explain ecologically all they could and interpret only
residual observations symbolically. According to this procedure, pref-
erences for different types of chert should be studied initially in terms
of the relative utility of these types for manufacturing specific sorts
of tools. Only if the preferred type turned out to perform less well
or to be more difficult to work should a cultural explanation be con-
sidered. This approach unfortunately made the current limitations of
an archaeologist’s knowledge or analytical skills the determining fac-
tor differentiating between ecological and symbolic explanations. As
time went on, a growing number of American archaeologists relied
on common sense or current consensus as the basis for deciding what
kind of explanation was appropriate. Although American archaeol-
ogists were increasingly open to theoretical diversity, most of them
lacked the ambition to try to determine in an operational manner
under what circumstances specific sorts of theories were and were
not applicable.
   In Britain, postprocessual archaeology has generally been pre-
sented as a self-sufficient alternative to processual archaeology. Par-
tisans assume that one or the other position is correct and that the
main goal of postprocessual archaeologists should be to discredit
and replace processual archaeology. Beginning in the early 1980s,
postprocessual archaeologists sought to explain artifact variation and
change in terms of the creation and manipulation of social meanings,
especially in the context of asserting, maintaining, or resisting social
power.

                                  462
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

   In the early years, a favorite explanatory device was cultural (as dis-
tinguished from social) structuralism. The creator of this approach
was the French anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss (b. 1908), whose
ideas were based on the observation by the distinguished Swiss lin-
guist Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913) that all speech is made pos-
sible by rules of grammar of which speakers are normally unaware and
knowledge of which can be uncovered only by formal linguistic analy-
sis. This observation prompted Lévi-Strauss to conclude analogically
that cultural patterns need not be caused by anything outside them-
selves. He assumed that underlying every culture was a deep struc-
ture, or essence, governed by its own laws, that people were unaware
of but which ensured regularities in the cultural productions that
emanated from it. More specifically, Lévi-Strauss assumed that all
human thought was governed by conceptual dichotomies, or bilateral
oppositions, such as culture/nature, male/female, day/night, and
life/death. He believed that the principle of oppositions was a univer-
sal characteristic inherent in the human brain, but that each culture
was based on a unique selection of oppositions that could experience
significant permutations in their mutual relations, while at the same
time the system which they constituted remained unchanged. A care-
ful analysis of written or spoken texts would reveal what oppositions
were important in each culture and how they were related to each
other (Leach 1970). Although Lévi-Strauss’s structuralism has much
in common with Boasian configurationalism, the underlying pattern
is a cognitive rather than a psychological one. While bilateral opposi-
tions are a widespread feature of human thought, since Lévi-Strauss
first presented his theory in the 1950s neuroscience has provided no
evidence that the human brain is biologically programmed to think
exclusively or even primarily in terms of such oppositions.
   The first substantial application of the structuralist approach to pre-
historic archaeology was made by the French archaeologist André
Leroi-Gourhan (1911–1986), the most anthropologically sophisti-
cated of all European archaeologists. He assumed that a careful struc-
tural analysis of material culture might reveal the conceptual oppo-
sitions underlying it and how these oppositions were related to each
other. Beginning in the 1940s, before becoming a structuralist, Leroi-
Gourhan had developed a complex ethnography of artifacts, which
embraced a mixture of ideas of a sort that later would be associated
with both processual and culture-historical archaeology. He sought

                                   463
                A History of Archaeological Thought

to classify artifacts in ways that simultaneously took account of their
convergent functional constraints (tendances) and their divergent
cultural (or ethnic) variations (faits). He also developed the concept
of the chaı̂ne opératoire, or sequence of morphological changes that
occur in the production and life history of artifacts. He saw cultural
evolution as beginning with the tool, a joint product of mind and
body, followed by the diversification of ethnic groups, and finally
by the elaboration of technologies that expanded human memory
([1964, 1965] 1993). In this early work, Leroi-Gourhan was invent-
ing an anthropology suited for the needs of archaeologists (Coudart
1999; Audouze and Schlanger 2004). This did not, however, prevent
him from adopting a structuralist approach to study the meaning of
symbols.
   In the 1950s, Leroi-Gourhan (1964) began an analysis of statistical
regularities in the distribution of images of animals and human beings
and accompanying abstract signs in the Upper Palaeolithic cave art
of western Europe. He and Annette Laming-Emperaire (1962) pro-
ceeded to interpret in structural terms not individual images but what
they believed were planned compositions filling entire caves. They
proposed that these compositions referred to myths dealing with rela-
tions between male and female principles, which they agreed were
symbolized by the numerically dominant paintings of horses and
bison. Leroi-Gourhan associated horses with the male principle and
bovids with the female principle, whereas Laming-Emperaire sup-
ported the opposite association. It proved impossible to persuade
other archaeologists that either of these interpretations was correct
and by the late 1970s Leroi-Gourhan had completely abandoned this
approach (R. White 1993: xiv; Ucko and Rosenfeld 1967).
   Ian Hodder became the leading exponent of a structuralist
approach in postprocessual archaeology. In 1982, he examined sim-
ilarities in the layouts of Neolithic tombs and houses in Europe and
attempted to infer their symbolic meaning (Hodder 1984a). About
the same time, Tilley (1984) examined the orientation of Neolithic
tombs in Sweden and the distribution of human bones and pottery
in relation to them in an effort to infer prehistoric rituals and their
associated meanings. His generalized linking of death and destruc-
tion with the promotion of fertility, life, and the social order was
not substantially different from the speculative generalizations of the
Victorian anthropologist James Frazer (1854–1941).

                                 464
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

   The most ambitious application of a structuralist approach to inter-
preting prehistoric archaeological data was Hodder’s The Domestica-
tion of Europe (1990). This book remains the most substantial struc-
turalist work in prehistoric archaeology and hence constitutes the
best case study for evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of this
approach. Hodder examined changing plans and locations of Euro-
pean houses, settlements, enclosures, and tombs, as well as changes
in associated iconographic elements, from Neolithic times to the Iron
Age, with still earlier evidence from the Middle East also being con-
sidered since it was judged historically relevant for understanding the
beginning of this sequence. Hodder sought to relate changes in these
patterns to structural adjustments in relations among a set of binary
oppositions that he believed included nature and culture, male and
female, wild and domestic, outer and inner, front and back, light and
dark, and life and death. His most important opposition was between
field (agrios) and house (domus), which often was mediated by the
concept of boundary (foris). Hodder maintained that the archaeo-
logical evidence indicated that from the Neolithic period into the
Iron Age the primary symbolic emphasis had shifted from domus to
agrios, as prehistoric European society became more male-centered.
   It is not always clear how Hodder went about assigning meanings
to the patterns he observed in the archaeological record. Sometimes
he appears to have assumed universal meanings, a procedure that runs
contrary to his insistence on the mutual incomprehensibility of cul-
tures, but which he employed elsewhere, as for example in his argu-
ment that trash disposal is deployed by many small-scale societies as a
strategy for marking social boundaries (Hodder 1982a: 60–5, 1982b:
125–84, 1990: 127, 1991d: 4, 6). It seems unlikely, however, that
the distinction between nature and culture that is central not only
to Hodder’s analyses but also to much of the work of Lévi-Strauss
meant anything to Europeans or anyone else before about 500 bc.
Historical and ethnographic evidence suggests that before that time
people would have conceptualized what we view as the natural world
as being animated by spiritual powers that possessed minds and wills
similar to those of humans. This understanding made no use of the
distinctions that Europeans and others later would draw between
nature, society, and the supernatural. It was only after the desacral-
ization of nature that took place in Greece, parts of the Middle East,
India, and China around the middle of the first millennium bc that a

                                 465
                A History of Archaeological Thought

distinction between nature and culture probably existed anywhere
in the world (Childe 1949, 1956b; Frankfort 1948; Jaspers 1953;
Hallpike 1979; MacCormack and Strathern 1980; Eisenstadt 1986).
Similarly, ethnographic evidence suggests that many peoples, espe-
cially hunter-gatherers, do not view the wild as being dangerous
and the home as being protective, however obvious that dichotomy
appears to Westerners and perhaps to most other sedentary peo-
ples. Instead, the wild is perceived as a nurturing sphere controlled
by powers on whose friendship and benevolence humans must rely
(Bird-David 1990; Ingold 1996).
   More generally, Hodder appears to have assumed that because of
continuities in the deep structure of European culture, an archaeol-
ogist who has grown up in a modern European society would have
privileged insights into the thought patterns that had shaped the
archaeological record of Europe in prehistoric times (Hodder 1990:
2–3, 282–300). Those insights presumably would not be shared to
the same extent by an archaeologist who had grown up in China but
had specialized in the study of European prehistory, whereas anal-
ogous insights concerning China would be less accessible to Euro-
pean archaeologists trained as Sinologists. This attempt to exploit
what structuralists believe to be the long-term persistence in under-
lying patterns of thought in individual cultural traditions so far has
not been demonstrated to have carried the symbolic interpretation
of patterning of material culture in the archaeological record beyond
the intuitive level.
   The structuralist approach encouraged the detailed study of intri-
cate forms of patterning of material culture in the archaeological
records of specific cultures that hitherto both culture-historical and
processual archaeologists had tended to ignore. Yet neither Leroi-
Gourhan nor Hodder discovered how to advance beyond speculation
in interpreting the meaning of such regularities in the absence of asso-
ciated nonarchaeological information. By the 1990s, structuralism
itself was in deep trouble. Despite its skillful deployment to analyze
many sorts of data, it had exhibited no significant theoretical devel-
opment since Lévi-Strauss had introduced it, nor had its ontological
validity been demonstrated. In recent years, the more general concept
of metaphors has come to be viewed as providing more productive
insights into the nature of human thought (Lakoff and Johnson 1980;
Lakoff 1987), an idea that Tilley (1999) has accepted. The failure of

                                  466
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

archaeologists to discover ways to use a structural approach to gain
insights into the specific meanings of prehistoric data and growing
doubts about the ontological validity of Lévi-Strauss’s claims have
resulted in archaeologists slowly losing interest in structuralism.
   A second, poststructural wave of postprocessual archaeology in
Britain was primarily concerned with political action, encouraging
opposition to authority, and emphasizing the transformative power
of human agency. This wave was represented during the 1980s and
1990s in the works of Michael Shanks, Christopher Tilley, and Peter
Ucko, a senior culture-historical archaeologist who had become rad-
icalized while serving during the 1970s as director of the Institute
of Aboriginal Studies located in Canberra, Australia (Moser 1995b).
Shanks and Tilley both explored structuralism but appear to have
decided that its ahistorical character did not make it useful for under-
standing change. After that they focused on ideas derived largely from
French Marxist anthropology, as well as from the works of Louis
Althusser and Anthony Giddens. They replaced a processual empha-
sis on behavior with an emphasis on symbolically mediated social
and political action that required paying close attention to the spe-
cific cultural milieus, beliefs, and goals of the actors involved. They
also sought, by undermining archaeology’s claims to be an author-
itative source of knowledge about the past, to encourage people to
question and resist all sorts of authority. In doing this, they were fol-
lowing the Frankfurt School’s teaching that authoritative knowledge
is an instrument of ideological subjection from which it was nec-
essary for radical intellectuals to try to free ordinary people. It also
was assumed that such power was a feature of all societies, not just
ones divided by social classes, although the nature of inequality was
believed to vary from one society to another (Ucko 1989a: xii). By
making domination appear to be an inherent feature of the human
condition, this position promoted a belief about the universality of
inequality that Marx and Engels had strongly opposed.
   Sometimes Shanks and Tilley (1987a: 114–15; 1989; Lampeter
Archaeological Workshop 1997) acknowledged that archaeological
findings had at least some limited power to resist erroneous interpre-
tations being imposed on them. For the most part, however, Shanks,
Tilley, and Ucko, like strong relativists in other disciplines, main-
tained that there was no empirical basis on which archaeologists could
demonstrate that one interpretation was right and another wrong.

                                  467
                A History of Archaeological Thought

They argued that scholars were so blinded by their beliefs that archae-
ological findings could exert little, if any, influence over how they
interpreted such evidence. The only way to refute an archaeological
theory was to demonstrate that it was illogical (Miller and Tilley
1984b: 151; Shanks and Tilley 1987b: 195; Tilley 1990b: 338–40;
Ucko 1989b: xix–xx). The goal of strong relativism was to demystify
the knowledge claims of specialists by showing them to be merely
expressions of opinion similar in nature to those of nonspecialists
or, better still, by exposing them as deliberate lies or myth-making.
Such critiques drew heavily on the efforts of the philosopher Paul
Feyerabend (1975) and the sociologist of science Barry Barnes (1974,
1977) to demolish the distinction between scientific and nonscientific
knowledge. Archaeologists’ claims to possess special qualifications to
explain their findings were branded as attempts to control the past
in the interests of dominant groups. It was asserted, as Hodder had
already done, that any individuals or groups had the right to use
archaeological data to create the pasts they wanted and for good mea-
sure it often was added that there was no factual basis for challenging
the validity of any logically coherent interpretation. This position was
hailed by its supporters as democratizing archaeology and purging
it both of elitist pretensions and of the “grip of all closed systems of
thought” (Held 1980: 150; Hodder 1984b; Shanks and Tilley 1987b:
195; Tilley 1990b: 338; Ucko 1989b: xix–xxi).
   It also was argued that material objects are symbolically “irre-
ducibly polysemous,” which means they signify different things to
different people and perhaps even to the same person at different
times (Shanks and Tilley 1987b: 115–17; B. Olsen 1990: 195; Shanks
1996: 121). That position denies that there ever was an “original
meaning to be textually recreated in an analysis of a set of objects”
(Tilley 1990b: 338). Under these conditions, the only meanings that
artifacts can have today are ones that archaeologists and others assign
to them. There is no way to determine whether these messages are
similar to or different from the ones that were assigned to them in
the past or, if they could be shown to be different, which meaning is
more legitimate. On these grounds, Shanks and Tilley (1987b: 195)
asserted that “there is no way of choosing between alternative pasts
except on essentially political grounds.”
   Shanks and Tilley attributed great importance to the concept of
agency as a means of countering the deterministic claims of processual

                                  468
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

archaeologists that there was no possibility of individuals’ signifi-
cantly altering the conditions in which they found themselves. They
argued that more attention should be paid to decisions by individuals
when trying to account for stability and change in societies. Instead
of viewing human actions as controlled by adaptive forces and social
systems, they should be viewed as directed by purposeful action.
   This approach led postprocessual archaeologists into encounters
with a wide variety of disparate and conflicting theories about what
was clearly a contentious issue. Some archaeologists attempted to
extend and adapt Marx’s assumption that class conflict and rational
self-interest were the main factors bringing about change so that it
also might explain changes in small-scale societies. Sahlins (1976a:
12) argued against this that concepts of utility and self-interest were
socially constructed. Others embraced Anthony Giddens’s (1984)
theory of structuration, which, like Marxism, posited a recursive rela-
tion between social structure and agency but viewed self-interest as
more deeply embedded in culture than Marx had done and agency
as invested in the individual, rather than in classes or in interest
groups. Matthew Johnson (1989) and others have complained that,
while agency has received much lip service, few archaeologists have
attempted seriously to deal with it. More recently, Martin Byers
(1999, 2004) has proposed that a cognitive understanding of archaeo-
logical data may be advanced by focusing on intentionality, which he
views as the causal interface governing interactions between human
beings and the world. In keeping with the ideas of the psychologist
John Searle (1983), Byers argues that intentionality must be analyzed
in terms of four mutually irreducible states of consciousness: beliefs,
wants and desires, intentions, and perceptions.
   The development of poststructuralism countered an interest in
agency with a renewed concern with the structures and forces that
might limit and shape human behavior, although the individual
was now seen as buffeted by a multiplicity of fragmented structures
rather than by a single underlying one (Bapty and Yates 1990). Louis
Althusser had long regarded preexisting social conditions as the main
factor limiting human freedom. The practice theory of Pierre Bour-
dieu (1977) likewise analyzed how individuals reshaped their soci-
eties by using existing behavioral patterns, beliefs, and institutional
resources to achieve their objectives. His concept of habitus stressed
the extent to which learned, but unconscious, forms of behavior

                                 469
                A History of Archaeological Thought

limited the ability of individuals to act as free agents, much as did
Michel Foucault’s (1970, 1972) concept of epistemes. Some postpro-
cessual archaeologists, such as Julian Thomas (2000: 149–50), flatly
deny that the agency of individuals is a useful concept, thereby seem-
ingly embracing a cultural determinist position. The role played by
individuals has been further called into question by those who main-
tain that the concept of the individual is present only in some soci-
eties, most notably modern capitalist ones (Shennan 2002: 212); oth-
ers deny that individualism and the individual are related concepts
(Meskell 2002). It is also debated to what extent individuals are con-
trolled by dominant ideologies or oppressed groups create count-
erideologies that facilitate resistance (Gramsci 1992). For the most
part, postprocessual archaeologists who are concerned with study-
ing social action have functioned as consumers and advocates for a
wide variety of conflicting theories advocated by other social scien-
tists. There is little evidence that they have systematically attempted
to use archaeological data to evaluate, improve, and integrate these
theories.
   The effort by Shanks and Tilley to reduce archaeological interpre-
tations to political practice provoked a strong response from archae-
ologists who were moderate relativists, mainly in North America.
These moderate relativists agreed that major problems of objectiv-
ity existed in all archaeological interpretation and that no one can
be certain that any interpretation is free of bias. Yet they agreed
with the philosopher Alison Wylie that archaeological evidence was
produced independently of any archaeologist and therefore such evi-
dence offers resistance to the totally free exercise of archaeologists’
imaginations and to erroneous interpretations. Archaeologists’ pre-
suppositions and expectations influence what archaeological sites are
recognized and chosen for excavation, which artifacts are identified
and how they are classified, and how archaeological data are inter-
preted. Yet, in the long run, erroneous interpretations tend to be
challenged and often are falsified as a result of the discovery of con-
trary new data. This process is aided by disputes among archaeolo-
gists who support differing interpretations of the same data and by
shifts in interpretative fashions (Trigger 1980b, 1989a: 407–11; Leone
1982; Wylie 1982, 1992, 1996, 2000). It also was observed that there
was no guarantee that subjective political interpretations of archae-
ological data would be used for benevolent and socially responsible

                                 470
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

purposes. On the contrary, the history of archaeology documents
poorly supported interpretations often being employed to support
unwholesome political projects (Kohl and Fawcett 1995). Today,
most postprocessual archaeologists acknowledge that archaeologi-
cal evidence can impose constraints on the interpretation of data
(M. Johnson 1999). Yet many of these same archaeologists still seek
to undermine and relativize the arguments of archaeologists who
are not postprocessualists and who pursue research programs that
attempt systematically to test the claims they make about beliefs that
were held in prehistoric times (S. Jones 1997: 139–44; Gosden 1999;
M. Johnson 1999; Hodder 2001b; A. Jones 2002; Hodder and
Hutson 2003).
   The rejection by postprocessual archaeologists of grand narratives,
their advocacy of multivocality and the empowerment of minority
interpretations, and their decreasing support for the idea that objec-
tivity is an ideal worth striving for encouraged a new emphasis on pro-
ducing multiple, small-scale narratives about the past (Joyce 2002).
Examples of this genre include Janet Spector’s (1993) informed spec-
ulation about how a decorated bone-hafted awl came to be lost in
a nineteenth-century Wahpeton Dakota village, Ruth Tringham’s
(1991) imagining of one woman’s participation in the deliberate
burning of a house at the Neolithic Opovo site in Yugoslavia,
and Ian Hodder’s (1999: 137–45) arguments about the events sur-
rounding the death of the 5000-year-old Austrian Ice Man. Hodder
(1991c) designated this sort of approach “interpretive archaeology”
and described it as characterized by a hermeneutic method that was
welcoming to multivocality and aimed mainly at satisfying inter-
nal criteria of plausibility (Hodder et al. 1995). Even when signif-
icant amounts of historical or ethnographic information are available
for such an interpretation, it is regarded as desirable to interpolate
invented details to enhance the narrative qualities of the story.
   The narrative approach closely resembles the story-telling that
David Clarke (1968) found so objectionable in the irresponsible form
that British prehistorians practiced it in the 1950s and against which
he launched his campaign to discover rigorous ways to infer human
behavior from archaeological data. Such an approach often ignores
the basic rules of historiography that require that, when different
interpretations can be derived from the same body of data, historians
should seek to determine whether these versions are complementary

                                 471
                A History of Archaeological Thought

and can be synthesized into a more comprehensive, persuasive, and
theoretically interesting whole, or they are contradictory, in which
case new data should be sought and further analyses carried out
to discover whether and to what extent each interpretation is cor-
rect. Philip Kohl (1993: 15) maintains that when the information
needed to answer a specific question is lacking, instead of inventing a
tale archaeologists should admit the problem and seek to answer
other questions. Even as a means of popularizing archaeological
finds, deliberately introducing unsubstantiated and often ideologi-
cally driven speculation into narratives raises serious ethical issues.
Finally, it is debatable whether fanciful stories are what the pub-
lic expects from archaeologists. Brit Solli (1996: 225) suggests that
instead they desire informed opinions based on professional research.
   The third wave of postprocessual interpretation, introduced by
Christopher Tilley (1994), has been variously labeled intuitive, con-
structivist, or humanist archaeology. Humanist archaeology has been
defined as an approach that sees biologically grounded humans over-
laid by experience, although Julian Thomas rejects its concern with
the individual (J. Thomas 2000: 147–8). Among the leaders of this
movement are John Barrett (1994), Christopher Gosden (1994),
Julian Thomas (1996), and Cornelius Holtorf (2002). The humanist
approach has influenced the work of a large number of archaeologists
in Britain, the United States, and elsewhere (Tilley 1994; Ashmore
and Knapp 1999). Humanist archaeology is based on phenomenol-
ogy, a branch of philosophy developed by the German academics
Edmund Husserl (1859–1938) and Martin Heidegger (1889–1976).
Phenomenology is distinguished from most other forms of Western
idealist philosophy by its repudiation of the separation between the
observer and the observed. Its proponents view human beings not as
subjects manipulating objects in the real world but as creatures living
in and reciprocally engaged with that world. Both Husserl and Hei-
degger believed that philosophy alone was sufficient to understand
human behavior; hence, they avoided contact with psychology and
the social sciences and were poorly informed about developments
in these fields. Heidegger also wrote in a style that was very diffi-
cult, and some would say impossible, to understand (Bunge 1996:
295). Humanist archaeologists understand phenomenology as indi-
cating that human thought and behavior, whether intuitive or con-
scious, always relate to things, whether they are part of the natural

                                 472
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

world or human creations. According to Gosden (1999: 120), this
makes objects social agents. Human behavior is learned through
socially prescribed comportment which involves engagement with
artifacts, buildings, and a natural environment that has been trans-
formed through human use. By understanding how that environ-
ment was perceived and used by humans in the past, it should be
possible to learn something about the general beliefs, feelings, and
attitudes that motivated these people.
   Much early humanist archaeology was concerned with studying the
meanings that prehistoric landscapes had for the people who inhab-
ited or used them and how these understandings channeled human
activity. This approach is often referred to as landscape archaeol-
ogy and regarded as a postprocessual, culturally oriented counterpart
of settlement archaeology (Bender 1993; Bradley 1993, 1998, 2000;
Tilley 1994; Sherratt 1996; Ashmore and Knapp 1999; J. Thomas
2001; Ashmore 2002, 2004). Many of the concerns of landscape
archaeology seem to have grown out of Hodder’s (1984a) study of
the symbolism of prehistoric European houses and tombs in relation
to their geographical settings. A major weakness of many of these
studies is their failure adequately to use the detailed information
about ecological and sociopolitical behavior that archaeologists have
already inferred for the specific societies being studied. Two major
exceptions, as far as sociopolitical behavior is concerned, are Bradley’s
recent studies of the socially organized relations between people and
place and Adam Smith’s (2003) non-Heideggerean examinations of
the constitution of political authority in space and time through the
creation and remodeling of landscapes in early complex societies. In
recent years, it has been recognized increasingly that in most loca-
tions still older monuments and human modifications to the natural
terrain have been part of landscapes for many thousands of years.
Memory archaeology has developed as a new branch of archaeology
concerned with studying how people have understood the surviv-
ing remains of earlier ages throughout human history (Alcock 2002;
Bradley 2002; Van Dyke and Alcock 2003; H. Williams 2003).
   An archaeological interest in how the human body was under-
stood and manipulated in prehistoric cultures was initially stimu-
lated by Foucault’s concern with the cultural disciplining of human
actions and behavior (Shanks and Tilley 1982). With the development
of landscape archaeology, increasing attention was paid to the role

                                  473
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

played by architecture and other spatial controls in imposing such dis-
cipline. The goal of the archaeology of the body is to ask questions
about how in the past humans may have experienced their world both
discursively and nondiscursively through their bodies and in relation
to specific cultural settings (Kus 1992; Treherne 1995; Meskell 1996,
1999; Rautman 2000; Hamilakis et al. 2002; Fraser 2004; Joyce 2004).
Hodder and Hutson (2003: 169) suggest that what archaeologists
may hope to learn most about is the “semi-conscious, bodily har-
monising” by which humans relate to such settings. Elsewhere they
identify this understanding with habitus (pp. 94–5).
   The most ambitious humanist archaeology study to date is Katsuo
Mizoguchi’s (2002) examination of how evolving concepts of self-
identity related to changing social organization and built environ-
ments in Japan from the Jomon into the Kofun periods. Although
Mizoguchi specifically seeks to refute essentialist ideas of a mono-
lithic and unchanging Japanese identity beginning in Jomon times,
the main source of his insights appears to be the direct historical
approach controlled by very detailed studies of short-term changes
in material culture at specific sites. Producing data of this sort is a
specialty of Japanese culture-historical archaeology.
   Heideggerian philosophy has encouraged postprocessual archaeol-
ogists to imagine that through an act of contemplation they can sense
what landscapes would have meant, symbolically and aesthetically, to
the people who inhabited them long ago (Fraser 1998). The idea that
a modern, highly educated Western archaeologist can understand
the past contemplatively or intuitively reflects the phenomenological
belief that underlying cultural diversity are a common human nature
and common human bodily needs that make such an operation pos-
sible. This idea seems to have been implicit in much German ideal-
ist philosophizing for at least two centuries. Anthropologists have
empirically demonstrated that cultural differences are sufficiently
great as to make it highly unlikely that such a procedure could con-
trol for ethnocentrism and produce reliable results. This is especially
so given the great amount of cognitive polyvalence that postproces-
sual archaeologists have demonstrated is inherent in material culture.
Many postprocessual archaeologists concur that it is impossible to
demonstrate that such interpretations are likely to be valid, but main-
tain that this impossibility justifies a speculative approach, since it is
the best that is possible and without it prehistoric archaeology would

                                   474
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

be irrelevant to the present (Bender et al. 1997). Other archaeolo-
gists view such behavior as irresponsible. Stephen Shennan (2002:
210) also objects that such interpretations tend to ignore ecologi-
cal realities, and even social relations are left extremely vague, often
amounting to no more than an acceptance of highly schematic social
evolutionary generalizations, despite a general repudiation of evolu-
tionary approaches by postprocessual archaeologists.
   Postprocessual archaeologists have long sought to minimize the
differences between the study of purely prehistoric societies and stud-
ies where archaeological findings are supplemented by ethnographic
or historical data referring to the same period, location, and ethnic
group. It was maintained in the 1980s that material culture could
be regarded as the equivalent of a text that archaeologists might
eventually learn to read (Hodder 1988, 1991d: 126–8; Shanks and
Tilley 1987b: 95–117, 1989: 4–5; Tilley 1990b). Yet growing aware-
ness that material culture tends to be conceptually less specific and
more polysemous than are written texts eventually revealed the inap-
propriateness of that expectation (Hodder and Hutson 2003: 167–9).
Alain Gallay (1986: 198–200, 281) has argued that there is no purely
archaeological way to demonstrate an isometric relation between our
inferences about ideas in the past and what was actually believed.
   When contemporaneous textual data are not available, unlike the
situation with historical archaeology, archaeologists have attempted
to use ethnographic data and the direct historical approach to infer
symbolic meaning. George Hamell (1983) employed regularities in
religious beliefs found in myths recorded since earliest European con-
tact among diverse Iroquoian-, Algonquian-, and Siouan-speaking
peoples to explain the inclusion of natural crystals, mica, marine shell,
and native copper, as well as artifacts manufactured from these mate-
rials, as life-giving objects in indigenous eastern North American
burial contexts for over 6,000 years, from the late Archaic into the
historical period. In a study of pottery designs from the Mesa Verde
area of the southwestern United States, Scott Ortman (2000) pro-
vided convincing evidence that, during the Great Pueblo period
(ad 1060–1280), pottery designs reproduced weaving patterns asso-
ciated with cloth and basketry. Similar designs were used to deco-
rate kiva ritual structures that in some modern Pueblo groups are
believed to represent a cosmos made up of an earth bowl and a sky
basket. Ortman speculated that in prehistoric times the transmission

                                  475
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

of particular designs from one generation to another may have been
reinforced by cultural pressure to behave in conformity with cosmo-
logical beliefs that were held sacred by local communities. Alexander
von Gernet and Peter Timmins (1987) have demonstrated that the
material expression of a belief may fluctuate repeatedly over time in
the frequency of its occurrence in the archaeological record.
   Although these studies provide evidence that the direct historical
approach permits interesting and plausible conclusions to be drawn
about symbolic matters for some prehistoric cultures, the results
have not been as detailed or as certain as they are with historical
archaeology. Contextual analyses of European Palaeolithic art have
been attempted, but, as Leroi-Gourhan’s work demonstrates, in the
absence of compelling homologies or analogies, convincing interpre-
tations of the original meaning of this art have not been forthcoming.
As a result of these differences, historical archaeology has emerged
as the preeminent testing ground for theories seeking to establish
relations between meanings and material culture. Some prehistoric
archaeologists regard such historical research as a means to an end,
arguing that it is merely a way for cross-cultural regularities to be dis-
covered that will allow specific meanings to be attributed to material
culture in prehistoric societies. So far, this approach has not suc-
ceeded and evidence of the great pervasiveness of cultural idiosyn-
cracies suggests that such cross-cultural generalizations will remain
limited in number and at a high level of generality. Even J. D. Lewis-
Williams and T. A. Dowson’s (1988) theories about the influence
of drug-induced trances on the production of cave images has lit-
tle that is convincing to say about the specific meanings that were
originally assigned to these representations. Rigorous attributions
of meaning to material culture in societies inaccessible to the direct
historical approach, if they are to be achieved, will have to depend
on the development of cross-cultural generalizations and hence on a
cognitive-processual rather than a postprocessual methodology. This
suggests that historical archaeology is likely to remain the most pro-
ductive focus of postprocessual archaeology.
   Postprocessual archaeologists, like processual ones, are consumers
of anthropological theory. They, however, draw theories from the
cultural and idealist side of the anthropological spectrum rather
than from the materialist, adaptational, and functional side. Like
processual archaeologists, they also have embraced many mutually

                                   476
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

contradictory theories. Unlike processual archaeologists, however,
they tend to be highly conscious of their theoretical diversity and to
celebrate it.
   Postprocessual archaeologists generally embrace relativism and
subjectivism. They reject cultural evolution and grand narratives, pos-
itivist scientific methodology, ecological determinism, the idea that
culture is primarily an adaptive system, and the value of compara-
tive analysis. They also accept Hodder’s demonstration that material
culture can distort or invert as well as simply reflect social reality.
Yet, although postprocessualists generally deny that human behav-
ior is determined primarily by economic factors, they disagree about
the extent to which it is determined by objective self-interest, as con-
ceptualized by classical Marxists, or by cultural considerations. While
postprocessual archaeologists are greatly interested in culture as a fac-
tor mediating human behavior, they also disagree whether culture is
more effectively studied at the level of regions, individual societies,
gender, class and occupational divisions, or individual human beings;
the individual being the unit where the greatest variety of cultural
categories intersect. Although they agree that all artifacts had mean-
ings in the past and that in the symbolic realm the relation between
the signifier and the signified is often arbitrary, they disagree about
how meaning can be ascribed to archaeological finds. They also dis-
agree about whether archaeologists’ interpretations are independent
of the meanings artifacts had in the past or bear some unknown
relation to those meanings. Finally, they subscribe to many different
and competing social anthropological theories about how cultures
operate and change.
   There is also continuing geographical variation in how processual
and postprocessual archaeology are seen as related to one another. In
Britain, many archaeologists continue to treat the two approaches as
mutually exclusive and to assume that the success of one will eventu-
ally result in the disappearance of the other. Most American archae-
ologists regard them as complementary. They view the processual
approach as useful for explaining subsistence patterns and economic
behavior and the postprocessual approach as better suited to account
for religious beliefs. Yet this eclecticism has remained naive, because
little effort has been made to specify the conditions under which one
or the other approach applies. Because most American prehistoric
archaeologists were trained as anthropologists, they also recognize

                                  477
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

that postprocessual archaeology has revived the interest that ideal-
ist culture-historical archaeologists once had in culture. This interest
was sidelined by New Archaeology, even if Binford recognized style
as a default explanation for aspects of the archaeological record that
could not be explained ecologically. Now, however, culture is treated
as a cognitive process mediating all human behavior.


               Continental European Alternatives
Processual and postprocessual archaeology spread far beyond Britain
and the United States. In Scandinavia and the Netherlands they are
understood as coherent systems and local archaeologists have played
significant roles in the debates concerning their respective merits.
Carl-Axel Moberg’s (1915–1987) theoretical position was signifi-
cantly influenced by the ideas of Lewis Binford and Stig Welinder’s
by those of David Clarke (Hegardt 2001: 1234–5). Throughout most
of Europe, processual archaeology has encouraged a greater interest
in the study of ecological adaptation and the scientific analysis of data
among archaeologists who remain broadly committed to a culture-
historical approach. It also temporarily increased interest in Palae-
olithic archaeology (Zvelebil 1996: 151). The influence of postpro-
cessual archaeology has been more sporadic. Among some groups
of European archaeologists it has stimulated the study of material
culture from the point of view of its symbolic meaning (Chapman
2003: 15–17). By contrast, Leroi-Gourhan’s distinctive theoretical
contributions, although largely ignored by English-speaking archae-
ologists, have in various ways influenced the development of both
processual and postprocessual archaeology, especially his concept of
the chaı̂ne opératoire and his application of a structural approach to
archaeological data.
   Across continental Europe, the strong historical orientation of
archaeology encouraged awareness of theoretical developments in
economic, social, and intellectual history, as well as in the philoso-
phy of history and human geography, as these closely related disci-
plines co-evolved in the course of the twentieth century. This con-
tact has resulted in the application to archaeology of many ideas
used by historians that were derived from various rival schools of
Marxist thought, the Annales School, and the writings of Georg


                                  478
                Processualism and Postprocessualism

Hegel, Antonio Gramsci, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Benedetto Croce,
Claude Lévi-Strauss, Georges Dumézil, Mircea Eliade, and many
others. Although some of these ideas have made their way through
European archaeology into mainstream processual and postproces-
sual archaeology (Bintliff 1991; Knapp 1992), nowhere in Europe
have theoretical ideas derived from the humanities and social sciences
been cultivated by archaeologists with the same intensity that they
have been as a result of the fierce competition between processual
and postprocessual archaeologists, especially in the United Kingdom,
and the desire of adherents of these rival positions to establish new
theoretical niches for themselves. Although the highly innovative the-
oretical work of the Swedish archaeologist Mats Malmer (b. 1921)
influenced how processual archaeology was accepted in Scandinavia,
it failed to attract the dedicated followers needed to develop into a
school in its own right (Myhre 1991: 166–7; Sørensen 1999).
   While European culture-historical archaeology has grown more
social-science oriented, subjectivist, and theoretically pluralist, it
also has remained particularist, historical, qualitative, and artifact
oriented. Its main interests also have continued to focus on pro-
ducing European and national histories and prehistories (Hodder
1991a). Although archaeologists in German-speaking countries have
remained conspicuously loyal to the traditions of culture-historical
archaeology, adherents of this approach have independently repli-
cated at least some of the theoretical findings of processual and
postprocessual archaeologists (Härke 2000c). These findings have
not, however, come to be viewed within the broader theoretical
contexts provided by processual or postprocessual archaeology and
hence they have had less systemic impact on the practice of German
archaeology.
   The most coherent and influential theoretical development in con-
tinental European archaeology after World War II, apart from the
work of Leroi-Gourhan, was Jean-Claude Gardin’s logicism (Gardin
1980, 2004). Since the 1950s, Gardin’s interests have been focused on
documentation techniques and the study of archaeological reasoning.
Gardin (1980: 5) defines archaeology as the sum of studies bearing
on material objects that shed light on the history and ways of life
of ancient peoples. Most of his theoretical work has been devoted
to determining which analytical operations must be performed to


                                 479
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

assess the scientific status of the work done at each stage of a chain of
logical operations that includes defining objectives, data collection,
description of data, ordering of data, interpretation of data, and
validation of interpretations. Gardin has argued that, by using expert
systems to study the mechanisms of archaeological reasoning at each
of these stages, logicism can establish a central position for itself as
the means by which the merits and practical advantages of all other
archaeological approaches may be appraised.
   Logical coherence is clearly an essential characteristic of sound
archaeological reasoning, which before Gardin’s work had not
received as much explicit attention as it deserved. Between the late
1960s and 1980s, his research attracted considerable attention among
English-speaking archaeologists (Gardin 1965, 1967, 1980, 1992).
Yet, in the long run, logicism failed to secure a central role for itself
outside of France. Epistemologically, even before the development
of postprocessual archaeology, Gardin had equated his rationalist
orientation with positivism. He also embraced the idea of unified
science and rejected humanistic and hermeneutic approaches (Gallay
1989). The main reason for logicism’s lack of enduring appeal is,
however, its lack of ontological content. Although formalizing the
procedures of archaeological reasoning is useful, by itself this can-
not lead to an understanding of archaeological data. Doing that
requires considering what forces have shaped the archaeological
record and demonstrating how they have done so. Despite Gardin’s
aspirations, logicism was destined by its very nature to remain of
operational rather than theoretical significance. It also finds its pri-
mary reference points within the context of European historical
archaeology.


                              Discussion
At least into the 1990s, both processual and postprocessual archaeol-
ogists were doing the same thing: learning more about anthropolog-
ical theory. Processual archaeology grew out of the neoevolutionary
anthropology that was fashionable in the United States in the 1960s;
postprocessual archaeology developed several decades later largely as
the result of a growing interest in cultural phenomena in anthro-
pology. Processual and postprocessual archaeologists shared a desire


                                  480
                 Processualism and Postprocessualism

to apply their knowledge of anthropological theory to explain how
societies or cultures had functioned and changed in the past. Both
also were continuations of early functional-processual archaeology.
Although processual and postprocessual archaeology claimed to rep-
resent the opposite poles of a theoretical spectrum, each came
to embrace numerous incompatible theories, while the boundary
between them grew less distinct. Within each approach archaeolo-
gists continuously adopted new theories, mainly from anthropology,
but discarded most of them before fully exploring their potential and
limitations (Chippindale 1993).
   The most important accomplishment of this process was the effort
some archaeologists made to adapt these anthropological theories to
the study of material culture, a process that resulted in a slowly grow-
ing awareness of what specifically high-level archaeological theories
might be like and what they might be used for. This work underlined
the importance of Marvin Harris’s (1968b: 359–60) early warning that
many anthropological concepts were unsuitable for archaeological
research. Such discoveries in turn made archaeologists increasingly
aware of how different archaeology was as a discipline from sociocul-
tural anthropology.
   Schiffer (1976: 193) maintained that archaeologists should seek
systematically to assemble theories that they found useful for inter-
preting archaeological data. Yet, growing awareness by archaeolo-
gists of the complexity of the factors that influence human behavior
gradually made endeavors of this sort seem less useful than proces-
sual archaeologists had originally anticipated. Ironically, the most
successful example of a “law” that was useful for archaeologists was
Hodder’s demonstration that material culture plays an active role in
social strategies and hence can invert and distort as well as reflect
social reality.
   Anthropological theory was adapted for inferring human behav-
ior from archaeological data in many different ways. Binford’s
(1977, 1978) middle-range theory had very different theoretical
underpinnings from Hodder’s (1987b) structural and contextual
analysis, the direct historical approach (Trigger 1995), the hermeneu-
tical approach (Y. Sherratt 2006), or Wylie’s (1989a, 1993) con-
cept of “tacking.” Yet no sustained effort was made to deter-
mine in what ways these approaches were mutually contradictory or


                                  481
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

complementary. It also was generally assumed that explaining most
forms of belief, behavior, and cultural change did not require special
archaeological theories.
   Regardless of what they employed them for, most archaeolo-
gists tended to accept anthropological theories as givens, even when
it was obvious that many of them were mutually contradictory.
Archaeologists generally did not attempt to use archaeological data to
evaluate these theories. Instead, they stubbornly defended ideas that
appealed to them and ignored those that did not. Although many
archaeologists recognized that there were numerous issues relating to
long-term change that only archaeologists could study and that only
archaeology could provide the developmental context within which
the findings of all the other social sciences acquired meaning, they
remained consumers of anthropological theory. It also has become
clear that much of what passed for theoretical debate was focused on
rhetoric, political issues, and self-justification. Most of this literature
now seems dated and largely irrelevant.
   It can appropriately be asked how far by the 1990s archaeolo-
gists had advanced in their understanding of anthropological the-
ory beyond Childe’s two key propositions: (1) that the world people
adapt to is not the world as it really is but the world as people imagine
it to be and (2) that every understanding of the world must accord
to a significant degree with the world as it really is, if people and
their ideas are to survive. It is tempting to conclude that archaeolog-
ical theory might have developed more quickly and many tedious and
unproductive debates between processual and postprocessual archae-
ologists might have been avoided, had more attention been paid to
Childe’s later theoretical writings. Yet I do not believe that such fast
track development would have been possible. Closely argued, pas-
sionate, and dramatic debates seem essential for theoretical devel-
opment to occur in the social sciences (Trigger 2003d). Moreover,
despite the extraordinary lucidity of Childe’s later theoretical writ-
ings, most facets of his ideas remained undeveloped and this made his
basic concepts very difficult for most archaeologists to understand.
An oppositional approach encouraged archaeologists to assimilate
and learn to use anthropological concepts in a far more detailed and
comprehending manner than was likely to have occurred in a less
competitive, laissez-faire intellectual environment. As a result of this


                                   482
                Processualism and Postprocessualism

process, archaeologists in the United States and Britain collectively
acquired a far more thorough working understanding of anthropo-
logical theory than they had possessed at any time in the past. Yet,
with the exception of Hodder’s one truly outstanding theoretical dis-
covery, they had yet to prove that they could assess anthropological
theory critically or create major new theories to serve the needs of
their discipline.




                                483
                                   chapter 9
                         Pragmatic Synthesis

     Niels Bohr said that the most fundamental truths were so profound
     that quite the opposite ones were also true!
                      l e o k l e j n , Metaarchaeology (2001a), pp. 55


     Papers that end with the depressingly banal conclusion . . . that “we
     should look for a middle ground” should be banned.
              m a t t h e w j o h n s o n , Archaeological Theory (1999), p. 187



There is no evidence that in their interpretation of archaeologi-
cal data archaeologists today are less influenced by the milieu in
which they live than they were formerly. Archaeological interpreta-
tions consciously and unconsciously (it is often impossible to deter-
mine which) echo current concerns. These relate to a vast array of
issues, including globalization, American hegemony, international
terrorism, pandemics, rising debt loads, environmental pollution, the
changing role of government, and the disintegration of the family.
Current understandings of ideologies, such as Marxism, neoconser-
vatism, and nationalism, also color interpretations of the past. Like
everything else in modern society, these biased understandings are
growing more varied, complex, and individualized and are changing
more rapidly than ever before. By contrast, the history of archaeol-
ogy suggests that a growing body of archaeological data offers ever
stronger resistance to the misapplication of such ideas and the spe-
cific misinterpretation of archaeological evidence. Although there
can be no certainty about the “objectivity” of any specific inter-
pretation of archaeological findings, the chances of archaeologists
construing such findings in whatever way they wish appear to be
lessening.
   Since 1990, there also has been a continuing diversification of the-
oretical viewpoints in both prehistoric and historical archaeology.
As a result, archaeological theory resembles more closely than ever

                                            484
                         Pragmatic Synthesis

before that of sociocultural anthropology and the other social sci-
ences, even if it is being anchored ever more specifically to under-
standing the past through the medium of material culture. Theo-
retical debates are often described as being increasingly factional,
divisive, and exclusionary and concern is expressed that archaeo-
logical theorists are trapping themselves in separate, noncommu-
nicating discourses (Hodder 1999: 12, 2001b: 10–11; R. Chapman
2003: 14).
   Complaints also have been leveled against the trivial and self-
serving aspects of many theoretical confrontations. Susan Kus (2000:
169) has observed that “Too often the way to attention in our dis-
cipline . . . is to wrest agenda setting by producing the next theo-
retical ‘heresy-aspiring-to-dogma.’ Given the ‘nature of the game,’
we have all been pushed into stronger stances of critique and argu-
mentation than we might feel stylistically comfortable with.” Robert
Kelly (2000: 78) has complained more trenchantly that archaeolo-
gists “reward polemic, bombast, and showmanship rather than the
serious testing of ideas.” Some fear that archaeology as a discipline
may be fragmenting, as sociocultural anthropology to some extent is
doing (G. A. Clark 2003), although this concern seems exaggerated.
There are also contrary signs of enhanced toleration and new efforts
at synthesis. What seems increasingly to be dismissed is the idea that
particular topics can be rejected as research subjects simply because
a particular theory is unable to deal with them.


                      Competing Approaches
The battle between processual and postprocessual archaeologists
continues (A. Smith 2003; Yoffee 2005), with the adherents of these
two clusters of theories frequently talking past or ignoring one
another rather than engaging in productive discourse. Belief that
ecological explanations can account for all or most of the archae-
ological record has declined sharply in recent years, encouraging
the resurgence of ecological possibilism. This development also has
resulted in behavioral archaeology becoming an increasingly impor-
tant expression of processual archaeology. At the same time, a grow-
ing number of postprocessual archaeologists are explicitly embracing
idealist explanations of change. Jacques Cauvin (2000) in his work
on the origins of agriculture, Gregory Possehl (2002) in his study of

                                 485
                A History of Archaeological Thought

the Indus Valley civilization, and Martin Byers (2004) in his reinter-
pretation of Hopewell ritual structures identify ideas as the primary
forces shaping culture and cultural change. Yet there is understand-
ably widespread reluctance among both processual archaeologists
and postprocessual archaeologists who stress the idea of agency to
embrace cultural determinism. There is also a growing sense among
archaeologists that the debate between processual and postproces-
sual archaeologists has run its course and interest is turning to other
options (Hegmon 2003; Kristiansen 2004a).
   Since the early 1990s, Robert Dunnell and two generations of his
students have been promoting Darwinian, or evolutionary, archaeol-
ogy as a substitute for processual archaeology on the materialist side
of the theoretical spectrum. This approach views selection, which
synergistically combines the properties of function and adaptation,
as being the main factor producing changes in adaptive aspects of
human behavior. Selectionism clearly transcends a functionalist con-
cern with what works. It seeks to explain the material culture observ-
able in the archaeological record using the concepts of biological
evolutionary theory (Teltser 1995; O’Brien 1996b; Barton and Clark
1997; O’Brien and Lyman 2000; T. Hunt et al. 2001; Hurt and Rakita
2001; Hart and Terrell 2002; G. A. Clark 2003). Darwinian archae-
ology’s main accomplishment so far has been its freeing of evolu-
tionary concepts in archaeology from the Spencerian assumptions of
unilinearity and teleological development that were associated with
neoevolutionism.
   Darwinian archaeology, no less than processual and postprocessual
archaeology, has become a cluster of related positions. Purists argue
that selection operates on material culture by determining the repro-
ductive success of individual human beings (Dunnell 1970, 1980a).
Less biologically oriented Darwinian archaeologists view selection
as acting mainly on ideas or artifacts and allow that choices made
by individual human beings play a significant role in this form of
selection (Leonard and Jones 1987: 214; O’Brien and Holland 1990;
Leonard 2001). The latter position also recognizes that innovation
and cultural selection are not wholly separate processes, as muta-
tion and selection are understood to be in biological evolution
(Boone and Smith 1998: S148–S149; Cowgill 2000: 52). In addition,
cultural selection brings about change much faster than does natural
selection (Neff 2000; Roscoe 2002). Supporters of cultural selection

                                 486
                          Pragmatic Synthesis

argue that the selection of culturally transmitted traits (memes) is no
less Darwinian in nature than is that of genes; instead, each form of
selection is a specific instance, with its own properties, of information
transfer being affected by various processes that lead to the modifi-
cation of heritable characteristics over time (Shennan 2002: 264).
   There is no doubt that human beings have the cognitive ability
to make choices based on their beliefs about what is likely to be the
outcome of different options. Yet humans are not omniscient and
frequently their actions, even when well informed, do not have the
expected consequences. Sometimes bad choices result in the deaths
of individuals or whole groups. Long ago Gordon Childe (1928:
46) speculated that hunter-gatherer groups who refused to relocate
or change their subsistence habits would perish if the region where
they lived was transformed into desert. Tragedies also can befall peo-
ple who, perhaps as a result of poverty or population pressure, are
forced to settle in areas that are prone to natural disasters. Millions
of Germans who supported Nazism because they were persuaded
that its aggressive policies would bring wealth and prosperity to their
homeland soon paid for that decision with their lives. It also has been
argued that conservative attitudes are increasing in the United States
because those who subscribe to these views produce more children
than do liberals and a significant number of these children adopt the
beliefs and values of their parents. This increase is probably an unin-
tended consequence of religious beliefs relating to morally appropri-
ate sexual behavior. Finally, many people die as a result of smoking
tobacco, even though they are aware that doing so involves major
health risks.
   Although these are all examples of natural selection operating on
human behavior, the concept of natural selection has major limi-
tations when one is trying to account for cultural change. Natural
selection alone does not determine the number of people who smoke
any more than it has determined the large number of Inuit who in
recent years have decided to start using snowmobiles. The desire to
have large families is not biologically inherent in people who hap-
pen to be conservatives nor do young people necessarily adhere to,
rather than rebel against, the customs of older generations. Nazi poli-
cies also resulted in the deaths of millions of people who opposed
their views, suggesting that in that case in its totality selection was
random.

                                  487
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

   Even more important, biological death is not the most common
outcome of significant human miscalculations. A more likely possi-
bility is for humans to recognize from experience that what they are
doing is not a good idea and alter their behavior. Many dysfunctional
behavior patterns are recognized as such and abandoned before they
harm many people (Boyd and Richerson 1985). The appropriation
of land and resources belonging to small-scale hunter-gatherer soci-
eties by powerful neighboring states may terminate the existence of
these smaller societies, but it does not invariably impose a similar
fate on their individual members. The fact that all human behav-
ior is culturally mediated may explain why selection in the form of
conscious choice plays a far more important role in altering such
behavior than does biological selection, even though both processes
are at work simultaneously. Darwinian archaeology in both its bio-
logical and cultural variants is a significant addition to the corpus
of theory that accounts for human behavior. Yet, despite the claims
that have been made for it, it does not provide a complete explana-
tion for such behavior or the ideas and material culture associated
with it; hence it is not the only scientific approach that is required
to explain the archaeological record (G. A. Clark 2003: 53; O’Brien
2005).
   Nor does it make for clarity to treat the material remains of human
behavior as an “external phenotype” as Darwinian archaeologists fre-
quently do. The capacity to create material culture is almost certainly
biologically grounded in human beings (Mithen 1996) but, unlike
the situation with bees or beavers, the specific repertoire is not. The
unparalleled cognitive flexibility of human beings is complemented
by their ability to learn not only from experience and observation but
also by means of verbal inculcation. In Darwinian terms, this com-
bination of features constitutes an adaptive pattern, but it is a highly
unusual and unpredictably open-ended one.
   Evolutionary ecology is another approach, with close ties to
Darwinian archaeology and processual archaeology, that seeks to use
the concepts of evolutionary biologists to assess the role that specific
behaviors play in the survival and reproductive success of individual
members of social groups. Work of this sort has focused on the evo-
lutionary fitness of the breadth of diet and of various aspects of social
behavior such as sharing and status roles. Archaeologists, for exam-
ple, have sought to establish links between the way artifacts were

                                  488
                         Pragmatic Synthesis

made and used and the exploitation of specific items contributing to
the diet. Cost-benefit analyses assume that, all things being equal,
natural selection will lead to an optimal solution for any particular
adaptive problem. An explanation is then sought for the differences
between what is expected and the actual strategy that was employed.
Evolutionary ecology so far has generally been applied to studies of
hunter-gatherer or small-scale horticultural societies (Broughton and
O’Connell 1999; Bamforth 2002; Shennan 2002).
   Culture-historical archaeology, contrary to what might have been
expected, has been developing in several independent directions.
In the 1990s, a widespread revival of traditional culture-historical
archaeology followed the collapse of Soviet control first in Eastern
Europe and then in the Soviet Union (Dolukhanov 1995: 337–9).
Marxist archaeology seems generally to have vanished with the col-
lapse of communist control, except in East Germany and Poland,
where some archaeologists sought to sustain what they regarded
as worthwhile Marxist approaches. This initiative by East German
archaeologists was suppressed by West German academic authorities
following the reunification of Germany (Härke 2000b: 12; Jacobs
2000; Barford 2004). Efforts were made by American archaeologists
to interest former Soviet archaeologists in processual archaeology,
but this effort was unsuccessful because Soviet archaeologists decided
that processual archaeology too closely resembled Soviet archaeology
(Kohl 1993: 18). Almost everywhere in the former Soviet sphere of
influence culture-historical archaeology reemerged as the preferred
approach.
   In eastern Europe, culture-historical archaeology had predomi-
nated until after World War II, whereas in the Soviet Union it had
been practiced commonly prior to 1928. In the late 1930s, signifi-
cant aspects of culture-historical archaeology were reintroduced to
Soviet archaeology in an effort to counter the Nazi use of archae-
ological data to denigrate Slavic peoples and their cultural achieve-
ments (Klejn 1974). Because this approach isolated archaeology from
the other social sciences and made practicing it relatively safe polit-
ically, after World War II many Soviet archaeologists preferred to
continue to focus on culture-historical forms of analysis to which
appropriate Marxist glosses referring to matters of current interest
to the Soviet authorities were added when politically required. After
the collapse of the Soviet Union, Leo Klejn (2001a: 6) announced

                                 489
                A History of Archaeological Thought

that, although he had briefly embraced Marxism as a student, he had
never been a Marxist archaeologist. Culture-historical archaeology
also was an approach that was relatively easy to understand, and its
revival was further encouraged beginning in the 1990s by German
research funding and by cooperative projects that involved German
and East European or Russian archaeologists working together.
   Archaeologists became involved with the nationalist ferments that
accompanied and helped to bring about the collapse of Soviet
power. Following the collapse, some became associated with renewed
ethnic and racist speculations of the sort that had been banished
from German archaeology after 1945 (Klejn 1991, 1994a; Ligi 1993;
Chernykh 1995; Kohl and Tsetskhladze 1995; Shnirelman 1995, 1999;
T. Kaiser 1995). Archaeologists who behaved in this manner were
either unaware of, or chose to ignore, the critiques concerning the
concept of ethnicity that had been published since 1945 by German
culture-historical and Western postprocessual archaeologists. The
result has been the revival or reinvention of a number of crudely
nationalistic and competing archaeologies. This situation has not for
the most part characterized archaeology in countries such as Poland
and the Czech Republic, where archaeologists had more contacts
with the West and were already familiar with alternative ways of doing
archaeology. In Russia, the resurgence of culture-historical archaeol-
ogy has resulted in the achievements of Soviet archaeologists in infer-
ring behavior from archaeological data being largely ignored. The
outstanding exception to this retrograde trend is Leo Klejn (2001a),
who continues to construct a comprehensive theoretical framework
for transforming archaeological evidence into an understanding of
human behavior and human history. This was a task that he began,
of necessity, under the disguise of being a Marxist.
   Darwinian archaeologists have, meanwhile, been reviving and
developing selected aspects of culture-historical archaeology in order
to explain stylistic as opposed to functional aspects of material cul-
ture. Dunnell (1978) argued that style and function could only be dis-
tinguished by the patterns of change they display over time, with style
changing gradually in the form of unimodal curves. Yet some selec-
tionists now acknowledge that both stylistic and functional change
can display this form (O’Brien and Leonard 2001), whereas Stephen
Shennan and J. R. Wilkinson (2001) have concluded that the idea of
style as being neutral with respect to selection does not account for

                                 490
                         Pragmatic Synthesis

actual frequency distributions. Yet, despite these problems, analytical
concepts of culture-historical archaeology that processual archaeol-
ogists rejected in a peremptory manner are now being refurbished
by Darwinian archaeologists. There can be no doubt that a more
detailed understanding of formal changes in material culture is essen-
tial for dealing more effectively with many problems raised by pro-
cessual and postprocessual archaeologists.
   Finally, the widespread rejection of the unilinear evolutionism that
was associated with processual archaeology has created a renewed
role for culture-historical accounts of the human past at both the
regional and the world levels. The techniques of culture-historical
archaeology are essential for tracing phylogenetic changes in specific
cultures and societies in prehistoric times. Such studies are required
to ascertain actual patterns of change and stability and provide the
evidence needed to address questions relating to possible evolution-
ary patterning in the development of human societies (Kehoe 1998;
Trigger 1998a). In this new form of culture-historical archaeology,
internal explanations of change are regarded as no less important
than those involving diffusion and migration.
   Another focus of increasing interest to archaeologists is how
human biology, including the working of the brain and the endocrine
system, influences human behavior. This interest is sometimes
referred to as “cognitive archaeology” and it clearly overlaps to some
extent with Renfrew’s cognitive-processual approach. Yet, because it
considers noncognitive factors that influence human behavior, such
as moods and drives, in addition to cognitive ones, it is perhaps bet-
ter to label this field of enquiry biological archaeology. At the cog-
nitive level, it addresses the sorts of cross-cultural uniformities that
nineteenth-century evolutionary archaeologists attributed to “psy-
chic unity,” a term that they misleadingly treated as if it were an
explanation rather than something to be explained. It is curious that
the existence of cross-cultural similarities in beliefs and values was
not more apparent to neoevolutionary anthropologists and proces-
sual archaeologists who could have used them to extend the range
of the cross-cultural similarities they studied. This failure can per-
haps be attributed to their overwhelming preoccupation with eco-
logical explanations, as well as to the general rejection by anthro-
pologists of biological explanations of human behavior after 1945.
Edmund Leach (1973: 763–4) drew to the attention of processual

                                  491
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

archaeologists the importance of such an approach when he spoke of
human consciousness and intentionality creating a “unique human
capacity to engage in ‘work’ (praxis).” Leroi-Gourhan (1993) in Le
geste et la parole explored such capabilities in considerable detail and
Merilee Salmon (1982: 132) cited, as a simple example of a causal
account of the regularities connecting small population size and egal-
itarian social structure, the social anthropologist Anthony Forge’s
(1972) claim that, as societies grew larger, the cognitive inability of
individual human beings to handle more than about eighty close per-
sonal relations would compel the development of forms of segmen-
tary social organization and more clearly defined patterns of decision
making. For a long time, Roland Fletcher (1977, 1995) has argued
that the human mind possesses proxemic abilities that result in sig-
nificant uniformities in the built environment. Structuralism also has
been based on complex, but in that case totally inconclusive, specu-
lation about how the human mind works.
   Today, a growing number of archaeologists agree that the human
capacity to reason, combined with basic human biological needs
and culturally transmitted knowledge and beliefs, are not enough
to explain human behavior. The universal tendency of human beings
to produce or appreciate art and hold religious beliefs (Boyer 1994,
1996; Mithen 1996) suggests that over millions of years hominids
have evolved capacities for complex forms of cognition and sym-
bolically mediated analysis, as well as hormonally based drives that,
along with organic needs, constitute an internal environment to
which individuals must adjust both behaviorally and conceptually.
Recent research has revealed that certain specific grammatical capac-
ities, such as the ability to form plurals and alter tenses, are linked to
a single gene (Gopnik 1997). This suggests that philosophers such as
Immanuel Kant may have been correct in assuming that some con-
cepts, such as space and time, are hardwired into the human brain,
probably it now seems to adapt early lemur-like primates to a life
that involved jumping from one tree branch to another. Stephen
Mithen (1996) has hypothesized that cognitive abilities relating to
social skills, technology, and the observation of nature developed
independently of one another and at different times during the course
of hominid history and only became linked together in modern Homo
sapiens. This may have given rise among other things to the capac-
ity to anthropomorphize, which may lie at the root of much or all

                                   492
                          Pragmatic Synthesis

religious thought. Likewise, the hierarchical behavior that is perva-
sive in all complex societies seems to exceed what is functionally
required to process information and for authorities to administer
such societies (Trigger 2003a). This behavior may reflect competi-
tive tendencies that, along with sociability, are common to African
higher primates (Conroy 1990). Although overtly hierarchical behav-
ior was largely suppressed by gossip, ridicule, and fear of witchcraft in
small-scale hunter-gatherer societies, in which generalized reciprocity
made ecological sense, these cultural mechanisms for controlling a
natural tendency ceased to be effective as societies grew larger and
more complex (Lee 1990; Trigger 1990). No substitute has ever been
evolved that curbs such behavior equally effectively in larger societies.
   There is also evidence that significant cross-cultural regularities
underlay the specific idiosyncratic religious beliefs of early civiliza-
tions. In many widely separated early civilizations that had no contact
with one another, it was believed not only that deities who animated,
or were, the universe nourished and sustained humanity but also that,
if humans in turn did not nourish these deities with sacrifices, the
deities would die and the universe lapse into chaos. Although farm-
ers produced most of the food that fed the deities, the upper classes,
and especially kings, claimed a unique role in channeling this nour-
ishment back into the supernatural realm and thus in sustaining the
cosmic order. These views of deities differed greatly from those asso-
ciated with ethnographic examples of less complex societies, where
supernatural powers were approached, sometimes by ritual special-
ists such as shamans and sometimes by anyone, either as hopefully
benevolent parents or as powerful ancestors who had to be placated
(Bird-David 1990; Ingold 1996). I have suggested that the beliefs
that evolved independently multiple times in early civilizations were
probably metaphorical projections of tributary relations that existed
on the human plane into the cosmic realm. By grounding the sur-
vival of the cosmic order on both the productivity of farmers and
the administrative and ritual skills of the upper classes, this view also
may have enlisted supernatural concepts to help maintain a politi-
cal balance between rulers and ruled that was necessary for emerging
early civilizations, with their still rudimentary mechanisms of political
control, to survive (Trigger 2003a: 472–94). Even so, it is remarkable
that the same basic metaphor should have been elaborated in so sim-
ilar a manner in many historically unrelated early civilizations. This

                                  493
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

evidence of human groups’ symbolically interpreting social relations
in the same way accords with Marshall Sahlins’s (1976a: 211–12) more
general proposal that, when societies grew too complex for kinship
to supply the metaphors used to understand all social relations, new
metaphors were drawn first of all from the religious sphere.
   By contrast, I see little direct evidence to support claims by sociobi-
ologists, evolutionary ecologists, and Darwinian archaeologists that
human beings are biologically programmed to try to maximize the
number of their biological descendants. A large number of cultural
factors have been documented as influencing reproductive behavior,
and restricting the number of children produced is a feature of many
societies (Trigger 2003a: 310–11). This suggests that, if maximizing
progeny ever constituted a biological predisposition of our primate
ancestors, it may have been eliminated in the course of hominid
evolution.
   Very little is yet known for certain about the biological basis of
almost any aspect of human behavior. Much of what is being pub-
lished about this subject by ecologists, psychologists, and neuro-
scientists is speculative and supported only by anecdotal evidence.
It is also produced by researchers who know little about anthro-
pology (Donald 1991; Gazzaniga 1992, 1998; Butterworth 1999;
Low 2000; Pinker 2002; Dennett 2003). The social sciences, espe-
cially economics, are not without their own unsubstantiated specula-
tions about innate aspects of human behavior. Yet in recent decades
anthropologists have generally avoided this topic because of their
revulsion against the racism that pervaded the social sciences before
1945 and also because of the radical relativism promoted by the new
cultural anthropologists since the 1970s (Sahlins 1976b). Extreme
postprocessual archaeologists are opposed in principle to recognizing
cross-cultural generalizations or anything that encourages the search
for cross-cultural generalizations. Anthropologists also have feared
rightly that countenancing biological interpretations will be used to
essentialize whatever researchers want to believe about human behav-
ior (S. Jones 1997: 65–7). Historically, the biologization of human
behavior has been favored by conservatively minded social scientists.
Liberals and radicals, by contrast, seek to minimize the importance
of biological constraints in the hope that their absence allows social
and political change to occur more quickly and easily. Yet, failure to
develop closer relations exposes neuroscientists, psychologists, and

                                   494
                          Pragmatic Synthesis

social scientists alike to being misled by the unsubstantiated claims
of sociobiologists and racists. The sooner social scientists, psychol-
ogists, biologists, and neuroscientists learn to work together, the
sooner archaeologists will be able to apply their findings to under-
standing the past. The greatest promise of such an approach from
an archaeological point of view is that it offers hope of more cross-
cultural generalizations that can be used to interpret archaeological
findings as evidence of human behavior and beliefs.
   Despite the claims of neoracialists such as J. P. Rushton (1995),
there is no evidence that, as a result of natural selection, acquired
behavior quickly becomes embedded in the genetic constitution of
human beings as sociobiologists have assumed (E. Wilson 1975).
Human behavioral predispositions generally appear to be shared by
the entire species (Carrithers 1992). This suggests that natural selec-
tion genetically embeds human behavioral patterns only very slowly.
It also indicates that natural selection has provided very little specific
biological adaptation for dealing with problems related to managing
large-scale social and political entities, long-term planning, and rapid
change, all of which have come to characterize human life in recent
millennia (Boyd and Richerson 1985).
   In recent decades there has been little direct follow-up in the
United States and Britain to the social approaches for understanding
prehistoric societies that were initiated by Gordon Childe, Robert
McC. Adams, Colin Renfrew, Kent Flannery, and Henry Wright in
the 1950s and 1960s. Much of what is called “social archaeology”
has become a form of cultural archaeology closely identified with
postprocessualism (Meskell and Preucel 2004). Obvious exceptions
include recent works in Monica L. Smith (2003) and by Norman
Yoffee (2003). Yet, the most important efforts to maintain social
archaeology are found in the writings of Marxist archaeologists, such
as Robert Chapman, Philip Kohl, Randall McGuire, and Thomas
Patterson. The important functional role played by social and politi-
cal organization in shaping economic life and other aspects of human
behavior (Trigger 2003a: 264–75) ensures that there is no way that
archaeology can in the long run dispense with a societal approach.
That in turn suggests that before long social archaeology will again
be playing a significant role within the discipline.
   The desire to study how human groups interact with material
factors to reshape social life has remained an important objective

                                   495
                A History of Archaeological Thought

of Marxist Latin American social archaeology, which also seeks to
make the practice of archaeology socially relevant and politically
active (Lorenzo et al. 1976; Baté 1998: 98–9; R. Chapman 2003).
Latin American social archaeologists drew inspiration from the writ-
ings of Gordon Childe, the Peruvian archaeologists Emilio Choy
(1960) and José Mariátegui (1952), and the Cuban archaeologists
Ernesto Tabı́o and Estrella Rey (1966). They associate the begin-
nings of this movement with the eminent Peruvian archaeologist
Luis Lumbreras (1974), the Venezuelan archaeologists Mario Sanoja
and Iraida Vargas (1978), and the Chilean archaeologist Luis Baté
(1977, 1978). Yet this approach has not produced a unified body of
theory. In general, Marxism is engaged as high-level theory, with lit-
tle effort being directed toward creating an appropriate methodology
for conducting archaeological research. Even the work of Lumbreras
has been described as “essentially a sophisticated culture-historical
interpretation” (Politis 2003: 251). Marxist archaeology does not pre-
dominate in any Latin American country; wherever it is present, it is
subordinate to culture-historical, processual, or eclectic approaches
(Politis and Alberti 1999; Funari 1999b, 2001; Politis 2003; Politis
and Perez Gollán 2004).
   In Spain, a Barcelona-based group of archaeologists working from
a materialist Marxist perspective has been developing archaeologi-
cal techniques for studying local (site-based) systems of production
and consumption and tracing the development of social inequal-
ity and classes in prehistoric times. They argue that this sort of
research is necessary to produce a controlled understanding of pre-
historic political systems on a geographically larger scale (González
Marcén and Risch 1990; Ruiz and Nocete 1990; Vásquez Varela
and Risch 1991). They also stress the need to study aspects of pre-
historic behavior that leave clear signatures in the archaeological
record, such as the presence of producers and non-producers in
a society, in order to infer the existence or non-existence of class
divisions. Basic information of this sort is regarded as necessary to
understand other aspects of the archaeological record, such as for-
tifications, monumental architecture, and cult centers (R. Chapman
2003: 23–6). Many of these ideas are similar to those of the ortho-
dox Marxist Italian archaeologist Maurizio Tosi (1984), who devoted
much time to studying manufacturing processes in the archaeological
record.

                                 496
                          Pragmatic Synthesis


                      Theoretical Convergence
Although some archaeologists have opposed the theoretical diversifi-
cation of archaeology on the grounds that this diversification threat-
ens its credibility as a discipline (P. J. Watson 1986), especially in the
United States attempts are being made to promote dialogue between
various theoretical approaches in an effort to determine to what
extent they are complementary and might serve as the basis for con-
structing more comprehensive and useful hybrid theories. For over a
decade, many American archaeologists have argued that, rather than
being rival theories, processual and postprocessual archaeology are
complementary approaches, addressing behavior and culture respec-
tively (Duke 1991, 1995; Preucel 1991; Wylie 1993, 2000; VanPool
and VanPool 1999, 2003). Behavioral archaeologists are particularly
active in seeking to “build bridges” with other approaches (Skibo
et al. 1995; Schiffer 1996, 2000b: Skibo and Feinman 1999). In addi-
tion, Michelle Hegmon (2003) documents the various positions that
are being linked to form what she calls “processual-plus” archaeology
and Timothy Pauketat (2003) expounds a theoretical amalgam that
he has named “historical-processual archaeology.” The chief resis-
tance to such outreach has come from Darwinian archaeologists,
many of whom have seemed intent on establishing a hegemonic
status for their own position (Lyman and O’Brien 1998; O’Brien,
Lyman, and Leonard 1998). Even they, however, have sought to
incorporate what they regard as the most valid and enduring con-
cepts of culture-historical archaeology into their own theoretical
formulations (Lyman, O’Brien, and Dunnell 1997a; O’Brien and
Lyman 2000), and more recently some of them have demonstrated
greater willingness to cooperate with and consider the claims made by
archaeologists of other persuasions (O’Brien 2005; O’Brien, Lyman,
and Schiffer 2005). Sometimes what are alleged to be efforts to
reconcile very different approaches appear to be undertaken in the
hope that by this means one theoretical position may destabilize and
destroy another. Yet many archaeologists clearly are seeking to derive
mutual benefits by trying to reconcile existing positions (Preucel
1991; VanPool and VanPool 1999, 2003; Schiffer 2000a; Kristiansen
2004a). Work of this sort helps to advance archaeology beyond the
naive eclecticism that characterized it in the recent past. This devel-
opment, combined with growing interest in the biological aspects of

                                   497
                A History of Archaeological Thought

explaining human behavior and the archaeological record, suggests
a theoretical sophistication that transcends the sectarianism of earlier
decades.
   Although parsimony is often stated to be desirable when con-
structing scientific theories, theoretical economy is self-defeating if
it ignores the diversity and complexity of what is being explained.
Understanding the material products of human behavior requires
considering emergent and systemically related properties of a cul-
tural, social, psychological, and biological nature (Bunge 2003).
Recent studies indicate that, while the postprocessual claim that
every culture is unique is true, some properties of human behav-
ior and belief tend to be culturally idiosyncratic, whereas others dis-
play cross-cultural uniformity. In addition to culture-historical and
ecological explanations, which account for both cross-cultural dif-
ferences and regularities, there is room for biological, functional,
and selectionist explanations that account for various sorts of cross-
cultural regularities (D. Brown 1988; Trigger 2003a). The ultimate
goal of archaeologists must be to account for both similarities and dif-
ferences in the archaeological record by means of a scientific method
that addresses idiographic as well as nomothetic explanations and
is rooted in the concepts of materiality, systemicity, lawfulness, and
belief in the knowability of the universe (Bunge 2003: 282).
   By far the most striking development in archaeology during the late
twentieth century was the gradual diminution of the long-standing
estrangement between prehistoric archaeology and various forms of
historical or text-aided archaeology. Since the eighteenth century,
classical and prehistoric archaeology had developed separately from
one another, pursuing different goals, employing different methods,
and usually being institutionalized in different university departments
or faculties. Classical archaeologists remained deeply interested in
texts and elite culture, whereas by the 1960s prehistoric archaeolo-
gists had become increasingly committed to an ecological approach.
Moreover, the traditional role that archaeologists played in humanis-
tic disciplines, such as classics, Egyptology, and Assyriology, was not
particularly creative or satisfying. The specialized studies of literary
texts and works of fine art were believed to be what brought schol-
ars into intimate contact with the most important ideas of ancient
civilizations. Archaeology was viewed as a lesser pursuit devoted to
the recovery of texts and works of fine art that would be studied by

                                  498
                         Pragmatic Synthesis

epigraphers and art historians, as well as incidentally shedding light
on mundane and little regarded matters, such as how ordinary people
had lived in those societies. In the early twentieth century, new his-
torical archaeologies developed, including medieval, colonial, and
industrial archaeology (J. Harrington 1955; Barley 1977; Schuyler
1978, 2001; Gerrard 2003; Orser 1996, 2004: 28–55; Linebaugh 2005).
In general, those specializations had closer relations with prehistoric
archaeology than did the older historical archaeologies, as a result of
which many archaeologists working in these fields strove to create a
broader interpretive role for themselves.
   In recent decades, it has been recognized that all forms of his-
torical archaeology can address many important aspects of life not
adequately documented in written texts (Andrén 1998). Growing
use has been made of archaeological data to complement and cor-
rect what is known about human behavior and cultural change from
historical sources, to set information derived from written records
into a broader social context, and even to understand better the role
played by literacy in early societies. These developments are help-
ing to broaden the role and enhance the prestige of archaeologists
in classical studies, Egyptology, and Assyriology, while reducing the
barriers that prehistoric archaeologists and archaeologists working in
these disciplines had erected against one another.
   Many British culture-historical archaeologists, such as Gordon
Childe, Christopher Hawkes, and Stuart Piggott, were interested
in both prehistoric and historical archaeology, which they viewed as
equally important components of European history. A similar view
was shared by archaeologists elsewhere in Europe and around the
world who studied the past from national perspectives. Archaeol-
ogists such as James Deetz (1968: 121) concluded that historical
archaeology was suitable for testing theories about relations between
human behavior and material culture, which they hoped eventually
would improve the interpretation of prehistoric data. By contrast,
processual archaeologists who sought to interpret archaeological data
using generalizations based on cross-cultural correlations between
material culture and ethnographic data viewed the use of informa-
tion derived exclusively from historical sources as compromising the
scientific status of archaeology.
   Recently, many historical archaeologists, especially those study-
ing colonial and industrial archaeology, have reacted against the

                                 499
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

limited and subordinate role still being assigned to their work by
both prehistoric archaeologists and historians. They argue that his-
torical archaeologists should use their findings to study the historical
processes that underlie Eurocentrism, capitalism, global coloniza-
tion, and modernization and that, through the study of material
culture, historical archaeologists have much to contribute to under-
standing processes that lie beyond the purview of ordinary historians
(Little 1994; Orser 1996; Funari et al. 1999; Funari 1999b; Majewski
2003; T. Murray 2004a). Recently, Christopher Gosden (2004) has
extended the archaeological study of colonialism back to the earli-
est civilizations (see also Trigger 1976). These works, which involve
comparison and address general problems that are avoided by most
postprocessual archaeologists, seem once again to be investigating
issues that formerly were associated with evolutionary archaeology,
although they approach them realistically from a contingent histori-
cal perspective rather than a unilinear one.
   Although some classical archaeologists attempted to break out of
their traditional mold of doing archaeology in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries, these efforts had little impact. Dur-
ing the twentieth century, classical archaeology remained a tech-
nique for recovering data, whereas prehistoric archaeology, although
often institutionally a branch of anthropology, became de facto a
self-contained discipline. Michael Shanks (1996: 98–9) observed that
the 1985 annual meeting of the Archaeological Institute of America
addressed essentially the same range of topics that had been addressed
at its meeting fifty years earlier. After World War II, a decline in fund-
ing for long-term excavations undermined the authoritarian struc-
tures that controlled the practice of classical archaeology. At the
same time, classical studies lost its traditional cultural importance
as the ancient Greek and Roman cultures ceased to be viewed as the
supreme early creations of humanity and came to be regarded as only
two interesting cultures among many (Renfrew 1980; Gibbon 1985;
Dyson 1993; Snodgrass 1985; Wiseman 1980a, 1980b, 1983).
   This encouraged some classical archaeologists to consider new
ways of doing things and more particularly to compare their work
with what prehistoric archaeologists were accomplishing. As a result,
there was growing awareness of the narrow cultural focus of clas-
sical archaeology and how far behind prehistoric archaeology clas-
sical archaeologists were in studying issues relating to everyday life

                                   500
                          Pragmatic Synthesis

in ancient Greece and Italy. This produced a growing number of
settlement pattern surveys, small-scale excavations in rural locations,
and greater emphasis on the study of trade and technology, which
supplemented classical archaeology’s traditional preoccupation with
art and architecture. The earliest substantial field surveys were carried
out in the late 1950s and early 1960s in Messenia by classical archae-
ologists from the University of Minnesota led by William McDonald
(b. 1913). Although partly inspired by work done by Carl Blegen
(1887–1971) (McDonald 1966), the Minnesota surveys and later ones
carried out by John Fossey (1988) and other archaeologists elsewhere
in Greece were significantly influenced by the prehistoric settlement
pattern studies pioneered by Gordon Willey.
   These new developments were encouraged and legitimated by
Anthony Snodgrass (1987), whose doctoral dissertation on weapons
and armor of the preclassical period in Greece had extended the rig-
orous analysis of fine works of art by classical archaeologists to a more
functional category of artifacts (Snodgrass 1964). Inspired by Colin
Renfrew (1972), Snodgrass attributed the rise of Greek city-states
to demographic increase, which he considered to be a prime mover
that resulted in more intensive agriculture and increasing agglom-
erations of population (Snodgrass 1980). Snodgrass urged classical
archaeologists to supplement their existing archaeological investi-
gations of a historical and art-historical nature with ecological and
settlement pattern studies that he associated with New Archaeology.
He also reminded classical archaeologists that the kind of history
they could investigate was not the sort dealing with events and per-
sonalities that traditionally had been associated with the study of
texts. Shanks (1996: 132–5) described Snodgrass’s efforts to com-
bine the traditional strengths of classical archaeology with elements
borrowed from prehistoric archaeology as a form of soft processual
archaeology, whereas Ian Morris (1994b: 39) labelled it the “new
classical archaeology.” James Wiseman and Stephen Dyson strongly
supported Snodgrass’s efforts, Wiseman in part by playing a leading
role in the establishment of a flourishing Department of Archaeology
at Boston University in which classical and prehistoric archaeologists
work together.
   Postprocessual archaeology was introduced to classical archaeolo-
gists by Ian Morris (b. 1960) (1987), who interpreted classical burials
as reflecting a symbolic denial of status differences that was intended

                                  501
                A History of Archaeological Thought

to unite aristocrats and enfranchised commoners against a growing
number of slaves and other resident noncitizens. Morris (2000) views
his work as a form of culture-history that studies the lives of ancient
peoples through material culture by treating objects as analogues of
the societies that produced them. Morris argued that, because the
textual evidence for Greek social and economic history was limited,
the study of material culture had to be integrated into the writing
of ancient Greek history. Thus, over several decades some classi-
cal archaeologists have been narrowing the divide between classical
and prehistoric archaeology in the Mediterranean region, as well as
the gap between archaeology and history (Sauer 2004). Neverthe-
less, most classical archaeologists probably continue to ignore these
innovations and analyze material as they did in the past.
   Perhaps because of their fewer numbers and greater academic
isolation, Egyptological archaeologists have been even slower than
classical ones to bridge the gap between themselves and prehistoric
archaeologists. In the 1960s, they were content to let the geographer
Karl Butzer (1976) carry out field studies relevant to understanding
the nature of ancient Egyptian hydraulic agriculture, while confin-
ing their own research on the subject to epigraphic sources. Over the
years, there has been an increasing number of studies of ancient Egyp-
tian settlements, most notably those led by Michael Hoffman and
Barbara Adams at Hierakonpolis, David O’Connor at Abydos, Barry
Kemp at Amarna, and Manfred Bietak at Tell el Daba’a. Yet, these
projects, which partly reflect a long-standing interest by some Egyp-
tologists in how ancient Egyptians lived, have proceeded in a slow
and piecemeal fashion and until recently few systematic regional set-
tlement pattern surveys were carried out. Only O’Connor and some
of his students have exhibited a sustained interest in what anthro-
pologically trained archaeologists are doing. Hence, the impact of
processual archaeology has tended to be indirect and limited (Weeks
1979). Postprocessual archaeology has attracted much more interest
among Egyptologists, as Egyptological archaeologists and art histori-
ans try to read more cultural meaning into Egyptian art and architec-
ture. In this case, the postprocessual approach has been encouraging
Egyptologists to pursue old interests in new and more systematic
ways (Lustig 1997). Despite these developments, relations between
archaeologists and epigraphers have not altered as much in Egyptol-
ogy as they have in classical studies.

                                 502
                         Pragmatic Synthesis

   Although the Maya civilization had created a writing system,
before the 1980s the script could not be read to any significant degree
and hence Maya culture had to be studied as if it were a prehistoric
one. Archaeologists applied a culture-historical and then a proces-
sual approach, in the course of which they learned much about Maya
art and later about Maya domestic architecture, subsistence, settle-
ment patterns, trade, and social inequality (Sabloff 1990). Following
the more complete translation of the Maya script, epigraphers began
to claim intellectual primacy, as did epigraphers in classical stud-
ies, Egyptology, and Assyriology (Coe 1992). They maintained that
knowledge of a relatively small number of surviving texts gave them
a privileged insight into the beliefs that had shaped the development
of Maya culture. Some suggested that these beliefs had been derived
from a still earlier substratum of peasant beliefs that had survived the
collapse of Maya civilization and continued to flourish among the
Maya populations of present-day Mexico and Guatemala (Wilk 1985;
Freidel et al. 1993). Dirt archaeologists countered that the written
records of a literate elite, who would have constituted a tiny fraction
of the total Maya population, were of little significance compared
to the broader picture of Maya society created using other sorts of
archaeological evidence that related to the everyday life of ordinary
people. Thus, Maya archaeologists became embroiled in an acrimo-
nious dispute about the relative importance of their two approaches.
Joyce Marcus (1992) cogently pointed out that royal texts in other
early civilizations often deliberately misrepresented events and there-
fore understanding such texts requires carefully comparing them with
each other and with other forms of evidence. As a result of such
arguments, confrontation has gradually given way to cooperation
(Marcus 2003). Because Maya archaeology had developed within the
context of American prehistoric archaeology, these disputes about
the priority of different approaches tended to be viewed more as a
turf war between processual and postprocessual archaeologists than
as a battle between prehistoric and historical archaeologists.
   Nowhere else in archaeology has the role of texts been more domi-
nant or problematical than in the study of ancient Israel, about which
the Hebrew Bible, despite its numerous glaring internal historical
contradictions and cultural anachronisms, was long accepted, and
continues to be accepted by many conservative Jews and Christians,
as an infallible historical source. For a long time, the primary task

                                  503
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

of archaeology was assumed to be to confirm and illustrate biblical
accounts. This led to enormous problems of interpreting the archae-
ological record. Only in recent years has a growing number of archae-
ologists ventured to claim that the archaeological record must on the
contrary be used to evaluate the usefulness of the Bible as a historical
source and to contextualize its origins. These critiques have increas-
ingly called into question the historicity of the Bible before the ninth
century bc, when its accounts begin to be confirmed by written texts
from neighboring regions (Finkelstein and Silberman 2001; T. Davis
2004).
   One of the chronic problems with historical archaeology has been
a tendency to use written records only to supply information that
cannot be extracted from archaeological data and archaeological data
only to fill gaps in what can be learned from written texts. Still worse,
archaeologists often use texts to relieve themselves of having to per-
form the detailed analyses that are necessary to infer specific sorts
of information from the archaeological record. It is assumed on the
basis of written documents that a particular society was matrilocal
without checking to what extent this claim can be confirmed from
the archaeological record. This approach has prevented historical and
archaeological data from being studied independently, using meth-
ods appropriate to each, before the findings from either source are
compared with one another (Graves and Erkelens 1991; Alisson 2001,
2003). There is even considerable disagreement about how and by
whom these operations ought to be carried out (Sauer 2004). One
archaeologist has complained that more might be known about the
prehistoric Wendat, a North American Indian people, had such abun-
dant ethnographic data not been recorded about this group in the
early seventeenth century (Ramsden 1996). Although no archaeolo-
gist should deliberately ignore any sort of relevant data, Ramsden’s
exasperation bears witness to the underutilization of archaeological
data that has often characterized historical, and all text-aided, archae-
ology. Ian Morris (1994b: 45) points out that, far from archaeologi-
cal data becoming less important as texts grow more abundant, they
become more crucial, as a basis for making more complex and subtle
comparisons that utilize both archaeological and historical data to
create a more detailed historical understanding.
   In recent years, progress has been made in remedying this prob-
lem. Postprocessual archaeologists have recognized that information

                                  504
                         Pragmatic Synthesis

in verbal (historical, ethnographic) form can play a vital role in help-
ing to shed significant light on the specific symbolic meanings that
once were attached to material culture, especially when both the
archaeological and textual data relate to the same group. That is
why historical archaeology has been proving so useful for studying
relations between symbolism and beliefs on the one hand and mate-
rial culture on the other (Leone and Potter 1988; Cannon 1989;
McGuire and Paynter 1991; Gilchrist 1994; Shackel 1996). Archae-
ologists have had much success in relating the changing layouts
of houses and gardens and the styles of household furnishings in
colonial North America to shifting class and gender values, tastes,
and personal values that are documented in the voluminous writ-
ten records of that period (Glassie 1975; Deetz 1977; Isaac 1982;
Leone 1984; Yentsch 1991). Matthew Johnson (1996) has likewise
documented how changes in domestic architecture in early modern
England were related recursively to changing ideas about individu-
ality and household life. François Lissarrague (1990) has combined
the study of Greek texts and images on drinking vessels in order to
understand better the meaning of the ancient Greek symposion, or
aristocratic drinking party. Stuart T. Smith (2003) has likewise used
both archaeological and textual sources to study ethnic interaction
in Nubia during periods of ancient Egyptian occupation. In all these
cases, archaeological and textual data interact synergistically, with
each data set revealing more about the significance of the other than
could be learned from studying only one type of source. It is antici-
pated that increasing numbers of studies of this sort will shed light on
general relations between material culture and beliefs. Nevertheless,
historical archaeology still has a long way to go to develop method-
ologies that are optimally suited to exploit the available data (Graves
and Erkelens 1991; Kirch and Sahlins 1992).
   Despite these convergences, there has been continuing disagree-
ment among archaeologists about whether the ultimate objective of
archaeological research should be to understand the material culture
that constitutes its database or to use material culture to investigate
past human behavior and human history. The emergence of archaeol-
ogy out of antiquarianism involved the development of an interest in
artifacts as sources of information about human behavior rather than
as objects to be studied for their own sake. Yet objects, rather than
people, remained central to culture-historical archaeology, which

                                  505
                A History of Archaeological Thought

focused heavily on classifying artifacts and tracing their distributions
in time and space, even though culture-historical archaeologists were
interested in identifying ethnic groups and sought to explain cultural
change in terms of diffusion and migration (Shennan 2002: 266). Ian
Morris (1994b: 45) has argued that classical archaeology, as a vari-
ant of culture-historical archaeology, has far too long continued to
study material culture as an end in itself. He maintains that creating
a truly historical classical archaeology requires that material culture
be regarded as a means to an end. Only by doing this is there any
hope of archaeologists achieving an actor-based perspective on the
past. Ecological archaeologists, whether or not they were processual
archaeologists, generally adopted a behavioral approach, while ide-
alists such as R. G. Collingwood and later most postprocessualists
maintained that understanding beliefs, ideas, and habits must be the
ultimate goal of archaeological research.
   By contrast, some processual archaeologists, such as David Clarke
(1968) and Michael Schiffer (1976: 4), who were less committed
to an ecological approach, maintained that, if the goal of a science
was to understand its specific subject matter, that of archaeologists
must be to understand material culture. Both Clarke and Schiffer
viewed archaeology as constituting the potential core of a new sci-
ence of material culture that would complement both social and cog-
nitive anthropology. Schiffer and other behavioral archaeologists also
viewed the discipline as a methodology that facilitated the study of
material culture ethnographically as well as archaeologically (Rathje
1974; Reid et al. 1974). Starting out as ethnoarchaeologists, some of
Clarke’s students have developed the study of material culture into a
flourishing branch of anthropology (D. Miller 1985; Chilton 1999).
Lewis Binford (1981: 28) has continued, however, to affirm that the
ultimate goal of archaeology cannot be to study relations between
human behavior and material culture “since the archaeological record
contains no direct information on this subject whatsoever!” Robert
Dunnell (1980a) has argued more radically that archaeologists can-
not and need not infer human behavior from archaeological data in
order to understand how selection works on the “extended pheno-
type” of material culture. This position, which is accepted by many
Darwinian archaeologists, has been viewed as evidence of Dunnell’s
continuing adherence to many of the core ideas of culture-historical
archaeology (Peregrine 2000).

                                  506
                         Pragmatic Synthesis

   Although these opposed views of the goals of archaeology have
implications concerning priorities in archaeological research, they
are not in fact mutually exclusive. Contrary to Dunnell’s assertions,
there is no way in which either the archaeological record or modern
material culture can be understood without taking account of human
beliefs or behavior. Conversely, if archaeologists are to learn more
about human behavior and beliefs and about cultural change in the
past, they must seek for ways to infer such behavior from material
culture. Archaeological research, whatever its ultimate goal, must
embrace a social science component and it is only through the study
of human activities that archaeology can be linked theoretically to the
social sciences. Finally, to argue, as Gardin (1980: 27) has done, that
the need to refer to “laws of behavior” to explain the archaeological
record as a product of past ways of life does not make those laws part
of archaeology, is to lose sight of the important role that material
culture has come to play within the context of the social sciences.
   There is general agreement that studying the archaeological
remains of subsistence patterns, settlement patterns, and artifacts
is the only way that it is possible to learn what has happened to
humans over the entire course of human history. It is also the only
way to investigate long-term sociocultural processes, many of which
are not apparent to living people and become discernable to archae-
ologists only in retrospect. Hence, archaeology provides the general
framework within which the findings of sociocultural anthropology
and the other social sciences can be understood and related to one
another. Thus, for all its evidential limitations, archaeology, after a
long period of underachievement, has begun to realize its capacity to
make important contributions to the social sciences. To sustain this
momentum, archaeologists must continue to develop their ability to
study past human behavior.
   Archaeologists around the world and starting from many differ-
ent theoretical positions have increasingly realized the importance of
developing a corpus of theory that will permit them to infer human
behavior and ideas in as rigorous and convincing a manner as possible
from the material remains that have survived from the past (Malmer
1963; Binford 1977; Klejn 2001a). Although inferring and explain-
ing human behavior may not be as separate as many archaeologists
believe, because both operations depend on many of the same theo-
retical assumptions concerning human behavior, archaeologists have

                                 507
                A History of Archaeological Thought

become increasingly aware that only by developing rigorous tech-
niques for inferring human behavior and beliefs from the archaeo-
logical record will it be possible for them to address problems of
explaining human behavior, history, and cultural change that are of
interest to themselves and to other social scientists. Growing aware-
ness of the complexity of factors that influence human behavior has
also convinced many archaeologists that developing the knowledge
required to infer human behavior will not be the quick and easy
operation that in the 1960s processual archaeologists optimistically
anticipated it would be. The creation of such theory is now viewed as
the primary task of archaeologists and one that will require attention
indefinitely.


                     Middle-Ranging Theory
Today, it is generally understood that past human behavior and
beliefs are not “discovered” or “reconstructed” by archaeologists
but, rather, “constructed,” “inferred,” or “conjectured” with vary-
ing degrees of probability. Such inferences are clearly recognized as
being archaeologists’ ideas about the past. From the point of view of
nomenclature, it would be convenient to refer to all approaches used
to infer behavior or beliefs from archaeological data as middle-range
theory. Yet Binford has already employed that term to designate a
specific technique of inference. I therefore propose to refer gener-
ically to all approaches of this sort as middle-ranging theory. The
major types of middle-ranging theory are:

1. Middle-range theory. Originally, Binford (1962) proposed that, if
   a specific type of artifact or attribute could be demonstrated to
   be correlated with a particular form of behavior or belief in every
   instance in those ethnographic cultures where its presence was
   recorded, it could be assumed that such a behavior or belief had
   been associated with every archaeological culture in which the
   same sort of artifact or attribute was found. Later, Binford (1978)
   proposed that, if a distinctive combination of material traits could
   be demonstrated to correlate with a specific pattern of behavior in
   living societies, the discovery of the same combination of material
   traits in the archaeological record would permit similar behav-
   ior to be associated with an archaeological culture. Contrary to

                                 508
                          Pragmatic Synthesis

   Binford’s original expectation, this technique works best when
   relations between material culture and human behavior are medi-
   ated by invariant physical and biological laws, as is the case with
   flint-knapping or bronze casting, or when material constraints in
   the form of energy or labor consumption play a dominant role, as
   often happens with ecological or economic behavior. Even Dean
   Saitta (1992), a self-styled radical archaeologist who believes that
   social context is fundamental to archaeological interpretations,
   advocates the use of middle-range theory within such a context.
2. Behavioral correlations. These interpretations depend on estab-
   lishing, on the basis of ethnographic evidence, a cross-cultural
   correlation between two forms of behavior or between a behavior
   and a belief. In many cases, this is the same as basing an interpre-
   tation on a general law relating to human behavior. For example,
   if the argument could be sustained that in all early civilizations for
   which relevant textual evidence is available material goods were
   sacrificed to deities because it was believed that such a sacrifice
   would sustain these deities and the cosmic order (Trigger 2003a:
   473–94), it would be logical to assume that such sacrifices also
   were made in other early civilizations for which confirming tex-
   tual evidence so far has not been discovered. This claim could
   be at least partially tested by looking for archaeological evidence
   of religious sacrifices in those civilizations. Because such sacrifices
   involved different materials, were performed using different ritu-
   als, and took place in different settings in each well-documented
   early civilization, it would not be possible for archaeologists to
   predict the precise nature or setting of such sacrifices in any one
   civilization, but it might be possible for them to identify archae-
   ological evidence of sacrifices and even to reconstruct the precise
   form such sacrifices took in any one society.
       Research of this sort can address cross-cultural uniformities aris-
   ing from psychological or other biological causes. In each case,
   however, the generalization must be treated as a hypothesis to be
   tested against specific archaeological evidence. One serious prob-
   lem with this approach, which applies to the example cited above,
   is that it encourages the application of inadequately tested gen-
   eralizations. For example, Mircea Eliade’s (1954) ideas about the
   universality among hunter-gatherers of shamanism and associated
   cosmological representations as known in Siberia have encouraged

                                   509
                A History of Archaeological Thought

   the interpretation of fragmentary data in ways that probably exag-
   gerate the extent of cross-cultural uniformity of ideas relating to
   these two subjects. Hence, considerable rigor is required in both
   formulating behavioral generalizations and applying them to spe-
   cific archaeological situations.
3. Historical interpretation. In this form of interpretation, archaeo-
   logical finds are examined in relation to historical, ethnographic,
   or any other sorts of written records that relate to the same
   time, place, and social group. Such interpretations deal with ideas,
   human behavior, or specific events. Ian Morris (1994b: 45–6)
   maintains that, because of the multivalency and ambiguity of
   meaning of material culture, written texts and oral traditions are
   the only means by which archaeologists can directly access all but
   the simplest and most general ideas from the past. We have already
   discussed the challenges involved in correlating and interrogat-
   ing both texts and archaeological data in ways that yield a maxi-
   mum amount of information about the past. Although limited to
   a small number of cultures that were literate or well documented
   by literate visitors, this approach provides the only opportunity
   for archaeologists to acquire a detailed and accurate understand-
   ing of precisely what material culture meant to members of an
   earlier society and how that meaning influenced their behavior.
   This sort of understanding also helps archaeologists to investigate
   how meaning relates to material culture in general. The histor-
   ical approach is thus of disproportionately great importance for
   gaining a general understanding of the meaning and behavioral
   significance of material culture.
4. Direct historical approach. The direct historical approach employs
   historical or ethnographic information about living cultures
   to interpret archaeological finds relating to earlier, historically
   undocumented stages of the same, or of historically closely
   related, cultures. Like historical interpretation, this is a homo-
   logical method. Major problems in applying this method are cre-
   ated by historical evidence that meaning and form can alter inde-
   pendently of one another. The same symbol or icon can acquire
   new meanings over time or the same meaning can be expressed
   in new and unrelated forms (Goodenough 1953–1968). By con-
   trast, there is also historical evidence that in some cultures, such
   as that of ancient Egypt, meanings persisted for millennia without

                                 510
                         Pragmatic Synthesis

   significant change. The direct historical approach also can be used
   to demonstrate how in particular areas there was radical cultural
   change before the historical period. In these cases, the direct his-
   torical approach cannot be used to assign culturally specific mean-
   ings to older and different cultures, unless these older cultures in
   turn can be shown to be historically related to yet some other his-
   torically attested culture. Bassy Andah’s (1995) argument that the
   interpretation of African archaeological finds must be grounded
   in a detailed knowledge of African meanings of artifacts derived
   from local ethnography failed to specify how archaeologists might
   ascertain the relevance of such homologies to finds that date from
   ever earlier periods. When applied over long periods of history,
   careful culture-historical documentation is required to distinguish
   homologies from analogies with respect to material culture (von
   Gernet 1993). Much more research needs to be carried out before
   it is possible to reach informed opinions about what long-term
   continuities in material culture can tell us about continuities in
   beliefs. In general, however, the more complex the material man-
   ifestation, the more likely there is continuity at least in general
   meaning (Hamell 1983).
5. Empirical approach. This method involves attempting to work out
   ancient systems of weight, measurement, or monetary value by
   searching for orderly differences in weights, the size of buildings
   or rooms, and currency (Renfrew 1982b: 16–19). This approach,
   which has long been known, is limited to sets of objects that
   were standardized according to strict mathematical criteria. It has
   recently been employed by some cognitive-processual archaeolo-
   gists, who generally use middle-range theory.
6. Structuralist approach. This approach to trying to reconstruct the
   patterns of thought associated with prehistoric cultures is based on
   Lévi-Strauss’s assumption that binary oppositions that are believed
   to be part of the “deep structure” underlying culture consti-
   tute the foundation of all communication codes. Although this
   approach has encouraged the search for patterning of material
   culture in the archaeological record, its underlying assumptions
   remain unproved and there is no way to link symbolic variations
   in the archaeological record in a convincing manner to hypothe-
   sized bilateral oppositions (Anthony 1995: 84–6). In a more gen-
   eral sense, Christopher Hallpike (1986: 288–371) and John Hall

                                 511
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

   (1986: 33–110) have suggested that in preindustrial civilizations
   idiosyncratic and change-resistant core principles, or patternings
   of behavior, beliefs, and habit that are not directly related to modes
   of subsistence, supply complex sets of propositions that play an
   important role in shaping the elaboration of social organization,
   knowledge, and values in historically related societies, often for
   thousands of years. Hallpike maintains that these patterns orig-
   inated as a result of historical accidents analogous to the opera-
   tion of random variation or founder effects in biological evolu-
   tion. Finally, some archaeologists have been trying to conjecture
   the meaning that was ascribed to stylistic parallels in the material
   culture of individual societies by treating these parallels as man-
   ifestations of underlying metaphors (Tilley 1999; Ortman 2000).
   Although both of these approaches exhibit promise for providing
   deeper insights into the beliefs that shaped aspects of the material
   culture of individual societies, verification depends on the direct
   historical approach.
7. Intuitive approach. The intuitive approach is based on the ques-
   tionable phenomenological assumption that because all humans
   share similar general cognitive systems and capacities for feelings,
   it should be possible for archaeologists, on exposure to archaeo-
   logical remains and their natural settings, to understand the past in
   at least some general fashion in the same way that prehistoric peo-
   ple experienced it as their present. Alain Gallay (1986: 198–200)
   has argued, however, that no way can be found to demonstrate an
   isometric relation between modern ideas about the past and ideas
   that were actually held in prehistoric times. The only ways that
   such ideas could be tested would be by means of behavioral cor-
   relations or (more likely) by the direct historical approach. Insofar
   as some behavioral interpretations might take the form of prox-
   emic generalizations about relations between people and spaces,
   they might be demonstrable by means of middle-range theory.

   The first five of these methods constitute a set of techniques for
inferring behavior and beliefs from archaeological data, each of which
has something to contribute but none of which is sufficient by itself
to do all that can be done. Together, they form a powerful battery
of techniques, each with a sound ontological grounding. The first
two offer analogical interpretations based on physical, biological, and

                                  512
                          Pragmatic Synthesis

psychological constants. These techniques are suited to deal with
ecological and economic factors as well as neurologically embed-
ded, species-specific operations of the human mind. The empirical
approach is based on mathematical constants and the historical and
direct historical approaches are constructed in accordance with cul-
tural theory. In contrast, structuralism in the strict sense is based on
a theory of how the human mind works that is unproved and prob-
ably erroneous, while the intuitive approach does not employ any
recognized scientific method, including hermeneutics as practiced
by philologists.
   There is, in addition, the contextual approach, which combines the
results of independent studies of multiple data sets relating to a single
archaeological site or culture to determine more reliably the behav-
ioral or cultural significance of archaeological data. David Edwards
(2003) has demonstrated how the results of the examination of food,
cooking methods, serving dishes, and evidence of the use of food
and dishes as found and illustrated in tombs can shed light on the
use and meaning of food in ancient Nubia. As already discussed,
the occurrence of uniformly simple burials in a society characterized
by a highly stratified series of housetypes and by other differential
wealth criteria suggests that these burials reflect some sort of egali-
tarian ideal that was not realized in everyday life. Archaeologists have
employed the contextual approach in an unselfconscious manner for
a long time. The idea that the Maya constructed ceremonial centers
that were inhabited by priests and only visited for ritual purposes by a
rural farming population gradually was dispelled as growing archae-
ological information about Maya subsistence, household organiza-
tion, craft production, and political organization revealed that Maya
centers were urban in nature (M. Becker 1979). The ability of some
archaeologists who have long studied a particular culture or region
to contextualize evidence on the basis of their general knowledge
explains how they accurately can grasp the significance of archaeo-
logical finds in ways that seem intuitive and unscientific to outsiders.
   Complementing the contextual approach is a reviving interest in
multidisciplinary studies of the past, which were discouraged for no
valid scientific reason by the methodological purism and exclusiv-
ity of early processual archaeology. There has been renewed recog-
nition that human skeletal evidence, when analyzed by biological
anthropologists, can complement, reinforce, and amplify what may

                                  513
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

be learned about prehistoric diets by means of floral and faunal anal-
yses (Cohen and Armelagos 1984) and reveal even more about band
exogamy than would the study of artifacts. Yet, for a long time, lit-
tle attention was paid to the value of systematically comparing the
results of archaeological studies with those of historical linguistics,
biological anthropology, oral traditions, historical ethnography, and
historical records, although Jesse Jennings (1979) published a multi-
disciplinary study of prehistoric Polynesia and Joyce Marcus (1983b)
a similar study dealing with the Maya. In recent years, there has
once again been growing interest in this method (Shennan 2002:
267–8; T. Ferguson 2003: 142). The findings of each contributing
discipline are no more reliable than the data and methodologies on
which they are based. If their interpretations correspond, however,
that reinforces the likelihood that the separate conclusions of each
discipline are correct. If they do not, specialists in each field are chal-
lenged to determine who is wrong. When combined, the findings of
these various approaches also may offer a more rounded understand-
ing of the past than any one approach could provide. The multidis-
ciplinary approach seeks to avoid past mistakes and misinterpreta-
tions by treating race, language, and culture as separate variables and
not assuming that changes in one of these categories automatically
imply parallel changes in another (F. Boas 1940; Sapir 1921: 121–235;
Trigger 1968a: 7–13).
   There is also a revival of interest in the method of multiple
working hypotheses (Chamberlin 1890), which in the 1960s was
ignored because processual archaeologists were promoting a deduc-
tive method grounded in a single high-level theory. Following this
method, archaeologists propose alternative interpretations that each
accord with available data. They then specify the test implications
that would confirm or refute each of these alternatives and seek out,
or await, further evidence that may support or refute particular inter-
pretations. Although this method is limited, as are all methods, by
the capacity for imaginative thinking, factual knowledge, and theo-
retical sophistication of individual archaeologists, it combines many
of the advantages of both deductive and inductive approaches, and
of Collingwood’s method of asking questions. Over time, new alter-
natives can be added and, once a problem seems definitively solved,
archaeologists can move on to investigate new problems using this
method.

                                   514
                         Pragmatic Synthesis

   Clearly the simplistic deductive schemes for inferring behavior and
culture from archaeological data that prevailed in the 1960s have
given way to more diverse, overlapping strategies. This permits the
“tacking” that Alison Wylie (1989a, 1993) sees as essential for such
operations. Tacking involves the use of independent lines of evidence
to test theories and of data structured by one theory to test propo-
sitions generated by another. This highly flexible approach reflects
a more realistic appreciation of the complexity of factors that shape
human behavior and cultural change.
   A very important technique for promoting a more objective under-
standing of the past is multivocality. This involves having people with
many different understandings about how human societies operate,
many different interests in the past, and many different views about
how the archaeological record should be studied involved in the plan-
ning and carrying out of archaeological research projects. The goal
is to ensure that a maximum number of alternative explanations of
the archaeological record are considered. When the questions being
asked lead to complementary findings, the result is a more richly
contextualized view of the past, and when they contradict each other
they challenge archaeologists to do more work to resolve these dif-
ferences. Thus, multivocality is closely linked to the method of mul-
tiple working hypotheses. Ian Hodder (1999) has attempted with his
recent excavations at Çatalhöyük to combine many independently
conceived research projects with a maximum exchange of ideas and
information among the researchers (Balter 2005).
   Alison Wylie (1992) sees multivocality as a major way of help-
ing to overcome bias, while at the same time relating archaeology
to a broader constituency. This approach is exemplified by a grow-
ing number of historical archaeology projects that invite the par-
ticipation of interest groups in their design and execution. Such
projects include the 5-Points Project in New York City, the African
burial ground in New York City, research on the Ludlow Massacre
in Colorado, and the involvement of African American communi-
ties in research on Annapolis (McGuire and Reckner 2002, 2003;
Ruppel et al. 2003; Walker 2003; Leone 2005). Like the method of
multiple working hypotheses, multivocality rejects the idea of pro-
cessual archaeology that archaeological research should be guided
by hypotheses formulated in accordance with a single high-level
theory.

                                 515
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

   By the year 2000, archaeology in the English-speaking world
was no longer dichotomized into processual and postprocessual
camps that were battling for supremacy. Both materialist and ideal-
ist approaches had produced numerous alternative positions, most of
which offered useful ideas about inferring human behavior and beliefs
from archaeological data. All of these approaches can be grouped
under a larger theoretical umbrella that is ontologically materialist
and epistemologically realist. For anyone who accepts the evolution-
ary origin of the human species, no other general perspective is pos-
sible. Analogical approaches have proved valuable for inferring many
features of technological, ecological, and economic behavior. These
approaches can be applied to both historical and prehistoric cul-
tures. Behavioral correlations based on innate biological tendencies
of human beings also provide analogies that facilitate inferring some
forms of social and ritual behavior and associated general beliefs.
Inferring culturally determined beliefs depends on homologies and,
hence, is usually restricted to historical cultures and to prehistoric cul-
tures that are closely related both phylogenetically and temporally to
historical cultures.
   Archaeologists experience considerable difficulty in acknowledg-
ing the limited circumstances under which they can infer culturally
determined beliefs and behavior from archaeological data. Over the
past 150 years, they have slowly become aware of the purely subjective
nature of ethnicity and, as they have done so, ethnicity has become an
increasingly intractable problem in the absence of relevant historical
or ethnographic data (S. Jones 1997). The study of gender, insofar as
gender is understood to be likewise a purely cultural construction, has
become subject to similar limitations, which have eliminated the uni-
formitarian, androcentric biases that until recently seriously distorted
archaeological interpretations. Although most prehistoric archaeol-
ogists continue to study relations between biological sex, as ascer-
tained by physical anthropologists, and material culture, usually in
the context of burials, radical relativists are now trying to demon-
strate that sex as well as gender is a cultural construction (Gosden
1999: 147–51). If gender behavior could be demonstrated to be bio-
logically grounded in significant respects, it would be easier for pre-
historic archaeologists to infer. Yet, given the currently limited state
of a biological understanding of human gender behavior, it seems
more responsible to study such behavior as if it were determined

                                   516
                          Pragmatic Synthesis

purely by cultural factors. Likewise, arguments that shamanism is
universally involved in the rock images produced by hunter-gatherer
cultures (Lewis-Williams 2002) appear to require far more substanti-
ation before they can be applied to the interpretation of all such rep-
resentations (Price 2001; Whitley and Keyser 2003). Finally, although
historical records have been used to demonstrate that some oral tra-
ditions have been accurately transmitted for over a century (Treaty 7
Elders et al. 1996), it has been shown that other oral traditions have
been altered over equally short periods for social and political reasons
(Vansina 1985; R. Mason 2000; Whiteley 2002). Roger Echo-Hawk
(2000) and Vine Deloria (1995) have made extravagant demands for
the uncritical acceptance of the factual nature of indigenous oral
traditions. Such traditions, as cultural creations that are subject to
both social and cultural manipulation, require independent confir-
mation before they can be accepted as reliable sources of historical
information.
   Although the establishment of additional behavioral generaliza-
tions may facilitate the inference of more general beliefs and rit-
ual behavior using archaeological data, Hawkes’s hierarchy currently
appears to describe correctly the limitations of what can reliably be
inferred about prehistoric societies for which no historical or rele-
vant ethnographic data are available. Those limitations suggest that
in the future the most important division within archaeology may be
between historical and prehistoric archaeology. Historical cultures
and to a lesser extent cultures for which some forms of indirect tex-
tual information are available can be studied from the point of view of
both behavior and culturally specific beliefs, whereas fully prehistoric
societies must be examined mainly from a behavioral perspective.
Unlike the difference between processual and postprocessual archae-
ology, that between the study of prehistoric and historical cultures is
pragmatic rather than theoretical and hence should not arouse such
strong sectarian tensions, although historical archaeology will be the
primary arena where the interests traditionally associated with post-
processual archaeology have fullest scope, whereas fully prehistoric
archaeology will be the field that corresponds most closely with the
current interests of processual archaeologists.
   The refusal of many postprocessual archaeologists to consider the
evidential limitations of their efforts to study prehistoric material has
resulted in attempts to justify inferences regarding habits and beliefs

                                  517
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

associated with prehistoric cultures that are based largely on specula-
tion and intuition. Such approaches are justified on the grounds that
they offer hypotheses that may later become testable or, even more
lamely, that nothing more convincing is currently possible. Such
interpretations become conduits through which all sorts of unex-
amined prejudices and personal biases are introduced into archaeol-
ogy. They ignore the alternative course of remaining silent regarding
matters that are unknowable. Unsubstantiated speculation currently
threatens to return archaeological interpretation to the highly sub-
jective and irresponsible state of “story-telling” from which Lewis
Binford and David Clarke, each in his own way, sought to rescue it
in the 1960s. I do not deny the importance of formulating hypothe-
ses for advancing a scientific understanding of the past, but maintain
that, if this activity is to be useful, it must be accompanied by serious
efforts to test such propositions. It is appropriate to recall Marvin
Harris’s (1968b) advice that archaeologists should focus on ques-
tions that their data permit them to examine and hopefully to answer.
Instead of developing theory for its own sake or because of the belief
that archaeologists should be able to do anything that historians or
sociocultural anthropologists can do, archaeologists should seek to
craft theories that are appropriate for their own database and the
analytical methods they can hope to devise for examining them.
   In reality, there are many different kinds of archaeology, each with
its own distinctive traditions. Despite all the practices that profes-
sional archaeologists have in common, each sort of archaeology is
produced by a different network of archaeologists who study dif-
ferent kinds of data, ask different questions, employ different sets
of analytical techniques, and exhibit different attitudes toward what
they are studying (Shennan 2002: 14; G. A. Clark 2003). Lower and
Middle Palaeolithic archaeology (“deep prehistory”) is studied dif-
ferently from Upper Palaeolithic and more recent hunter-gatherer
archaeology, Neolithic archaeology, or the archaeology of early civi-
lizations. Likewise, the practices of medieval, colonial, and industrial
archaeology differ from one another. Idiosyncratic differences also
can be observed among the work of archaeologists who pursue these
lines of research in different regions. Each early civilization tends
in significant ways to be studied and interpreted differently from
every other. In general, the differences that result from variations in
the sorts of data that are available conform with the more general

                                  518
                          Pragmatic Synthesis

differences between historical and prehistoric archaeology that have
already been noted, while those differences that reflect the cultures
of specific work groups tend to be more idiosyncratic. The latter are
also more likely to change in unpredictable ways as personnel and
the social contexts in which they work alter.


                         High-Level Theory
Although Gardin (1980: 27) rejects the idea that high-level theory is
a part of archaeology and many archaeologists who adopt a purely
inductive approach believe that high-level theory can be dispensed
with entirely (Courbin 1988), we have already argued that archaeol-
ogists can ignore high-level theory only at the risk of their interpreta-
tions of archaeological data being unconsciously shaped by the largely
unexamined beliefs of the societies in which they live. The racist
prejudices that dominated culture-historical archaeology in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were not the result of too
much theoretical sophistication but of too little. Archaeologists who
ignore theoretical debates in the social sciences risk being dominated
by the prejudices of their own societies or social groups, which can
influence the interpretation of archaeological evidence at all levels.
Idealists tend to assume that every culture is unique and must be
understood on its own terms, whereas those who believe cultures
to be shaped to a considerable degree by material constraints or
psychic unity strive to discover generalizations that can be applied
cross-culturally. My own study of similarities and differences among
early civilizations indicates that, although every early civilization was
unique in its totality, some aspects were shaped by factors that were
culturally specific, whereas others can be understood only in terms
of cross-cultural generalizations (Trigger 2003a).
   Palaeontologists have long understood that uniqueness does not
necessarily indicate a lack of orderly and hence understandable pro-
cesses. In 1852, Karl Marx made a major contribution to understand-
ing how change occurred in human societies when he observed that
human beings make their own history not on their own but within
the context of institutions, beliefs, values, and patterns of behavior
inherited from the past (Marx and Engels 1962, vol. I: 247). Thus,
Marx ascribed historical importance to cultural traditions, although
he believed that they could be altered relatively easily by the pursuit

                                  519
                A History of Archaeological Thought

of cross-culturally meaningful economic interests. Since then, social
scientists have debated how easily changeable or intractable cultural
heritages may be. Pierre Bourdieu (1977) has drawn attention to the
considerable extent to which nonverbalized and often unconscious
forms of learned behavior (habitus) inhibit change. There is also
much debate about what factors produce social and cultural change.
Self-interest has been joined by ecological conditions, functional lim-
itations, selection brought about by competition within and between
societies, and the biologically based nature of human beings. There
is also debate concerning to what degree change comes about as a
result of decisions made by individuals or interest groups or because
of factors beyond human control, located both in the ecological sys-
tem and in society itself. Mario Bunge (1979) has eloquently argued
the advantages of a systemic approach over either methodological
individualism or holistic ones. Even if archaeologists were able to
study the behavior of individual human agents in a wide variety of
circumstances, as they cannot do, they would find the interests of
these agents defined and controlled to a great extent by a vast array
of ecological factors, functional constraints, competing interests, and
cultural traditions operating at both the conscious and unconscious
levels. The outcome of efforts by individuals to bend or change the
rules is rarely predictable, nor is the manner in which circumstances
unforeseen by individuals or groups may play a significant role in
determining what happens next. That is why in human affairs events
can be explained but never predicted with any certainty.
   So far, no single generally accepted high-level theory has guided
the work of archaeologists or any other social scientists. Instead,
they embrace a spectrum of theories with orientations ranging from
extreme materialism to extreme idealism. Materialism has spawned
various technological, ecological, economic, and selectionist expla-
nations, while idealism has produced varied historical, structural,
and cultural options. The popularity of individual high-level theo-
ries rises and falls, but none of them has ever succeeded in excluding
all rival theories and few of them have completely died out. At present
racial explanations of human behavior are seeking to make a come-
back after sixty years of deserved obscurity (Rushton 1995). As the
social climate and intellectual fashions change, theoretical preferences
shift toward either the materialist or idealist end of the theoretical


                                  520
                          Pragmatic Synthesis

spectrum. Marxism was once a culturally aware materialist theory,
but in recent decades it has shifted increasingly toward an idealist
position (Godelier 1986; McGuire 1992, 1993; Trigger 1993).
   Archaeologists and other social scientists disagree among them-
selves concerning whether it is possible to transcend this plethora of
high-level theories by constructing a general framework that might
resolve their differences and integrate them in a harmonious fash-
ion. There is now broad agreement that no unicausal explanation
can account for all, or even most, of the similarities and differences
observed in human behavior or material culture. Ecological, eco-
nomic, and technological determinisms appear increasingly to be out-
moded, except among popular intellectual gurus (J. Diamond 1997).
Testable middle-level theories, such as Karl Wittfogel’s (1957) irriga-
tion hypothesis or Ester Boserup’s (1965) theory of agricultural inten-
sification, have been demonstrated not to correspond with evidence
in numerous instances (Spooner 1972). It is increasingly accepted
that, because many different factors influence human behavior, the
theoretical structure needed to explain this behavior will be complex.
There is also a growing consensus that an adequate general theory
must account for both cross-cultural regularities and idiosyncratic
cultural variation (van der Leeuw and McGlade 1997). This is dif-
ferent from the tendency of cultural evolutionists to try to explain
cross-cultural similarities while ignoring cultural differences or of new
cultural anthropologists to account for homologies while ignoring
analogies.
   The contrary opinion, that it is impossible to create an integrated
body of high-level theory, has been supported by postprocessual
archaeologists (Hodder 2003b). As it did the new cultural anthropol-
ogists and the Boasians before them, cultural relativism leads postpro-
cessual archaeologists to deny the existence of cross-cultural regular-
ities and view each culture as a unique example of human creativity.
The nature and importance of variables that determine behavior are
believed to vary greatly from one culture to another. In large measure,
cultural change comes about as a result of accidents and culturally
specific processes. From the beginning, this was a problematical view,
as even the early Boasians had to admit that each viable culture had
to provide for a set of minimal cultural prerequisites that would keep
enough people alive for the culture to survive (Aberle et al. 1950).


                                  521
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

The relativist response was that no prerequisite determined how that
prerequisite was provided for in any given culture (Sahlins 1976a).
   Ian Hodder (2001b) has questioned the wisdom of efforts to cre-
ate a unified body of archaeological, or social science, theory. He
suggests that instead we should view such theory as a collection of dis-
courses that often, like Kuhnian paradigms, are mutually incompre-
hensible. This perspective accords with a relativist, culturally-oriented
approach that seeks to deny that there are other than contingent
explanations for human behavior. Yet, such a position ignores major
cross-cultural regularities. Some of these are the result of functional
constraints that permit only certain types of economic, social, and
political institutions to coexist. Others result from convergent cul-
tural selection. Human history also demonstrates greater unilinear-
ity than a relativist position can countenance. This comes about as
a result of large, complex societies appropriating the resources of
their smaller and weaker neighbors (Trigger 1998a). Evidence of
the occurrence of numerous analogies in sociocultural systems dis-
tributed around the world supports the likelihood that functional
and selective factors play a significant role in shaping human behavior
(D. Brown 1988; Trigger 2003a). Rosemary Joyce (2002: 76) argues
that our inevitably limited and situated view of what is possible pre-
cludes our ability ever to achieve an objective understanding of the
forces that shape human behavior and sociocultural systems. This
view rejects the role of anthropology as a comparative study of cul-
ture. It also repudiates one of the basic working principles of science,
which is to assume that the world is knowable until the contrary has
been clearly demonstrated. Science does not claim ever to know the
truth, but scientists constantly strive to learn the truth. Postprocessu-
alists are like spectators who tell the blind men studying an elephant
that the beast is too big for them ever to learn much about it or that
they ought to establish whether an elephant is really there before
they start to investigate it. These are diversions from the main task,
which is to study what is literally at hand.
   A third position maintains that trying to construct a comprehen-
sive theory of human behavior is a task worth pursuing. Much work
has already been done that could contribute to creating such a frame-
work, especially when existing theories are freed from their dogmatic
contexts. Comparative studies, both synchronic and diachronic,
offer an empirically based strategy for systematically assessing the

                                  522
                          Pragmatic Synthesis

appropriateness of specific types of explanations (Trigger 2003a).
Until recently, the significance of such theories was all too often
determined on the basis of limited case studies or ad hoc explana-
tions supported by anecdotal evidence. If archaeologists are to help
to construct a comprehensive theoretical framework, they must take
account of cross-cultural regularities and idiosyncracies that relate not
only to the ecological and sociopolitical spheres but also to belief sys-
tems. They must address the biological proclivities of human beings,
the emergent properties of cultural systems, what is needed to sur-
vive in a world that exists independently of human volition, and the
complex ways in which all of these factors interact. Only an explicitly
emergentist approach is appropriate for this task (Bunge 2003).
   A comprehensive theory of human behavior might provide a com-
mon framework in relation to which archaeologists could acknowl-
edge, negotiate, and continue to attempt to resolve their theoretical
disagreements. Although it is highly unlikely that such an endeavor
would ever result in total agreement, it might provide stronger
and more efficacious incentives to achieve a reasoned reconciliation
of divergent viewpoints than does direct theoretical confrontation.
Even partial success in creating a broadly accepted corpus of theory
would facilitate the more informed selection of frames of reference
to guide research on specific problems (Binford 2001). Such a frame-
work also would reduce the need for archaeologists repeatedly to
renegotiate the same problems, as if nothing had been accomplished.
It thus would eliminate much useless reinventing of the wheel
(Trigger 2003d).
   Assessing the relative value of different propositions requires deter-
mining how well specific theoretical propositions correspond with
empirical evidence, including archaeological evidence. Constructing
a general theoretical framework requires ascertaining in what con-
texts particular sorts of explanations are useful and integrating these
approaches. Archaeologists must strive to establish under what con-
ditions and to what extent learned behavior is likely to predomi-
nate over individual innovation and how innovations do and do not
become established in society. What combinations of factors are func-
tionally likely, possible, or impossible? Under what circumstances
does natural selection favor certain behavioral traits or types of socio-
cultural systems over others and what effect does such selection have
on general patterns of cultural development? What sorts of behavior

                                  523
                A History of Archaeological Thought

reflect drives or thought patterns that are innate to humans and to
what extent can such drives and patterns be manipulated by cul-
tural and social factors? To what extent must long-term processes
be understood separately from short-term ones, as Fernand Braudel
(1972) proposes, or are such trajectories, as evolutionary biologists
believe, outcomes of the same processes that bring about short-term
change?
   Even without creating a formal theoretical framework, it seems that
sufficient evidence already exists to permit archaeologists to evalu-
ate in a general fashion the usefulness of various developments that
are occurring in archaeological and anthropological theory. It seems
unproductive for archaeologists to assume dogmatically either that
behavior is determined by ideas or that ideas are merely passive facil-
itators of behavior. Most archaeologists have long agreed that, as a
result of biological evolution, all human behavior is conceptually –
and, hence, culturally – mediated. As we have already noted, Childe
(1949, 1956b) embraced the idea that the world humans adapt to
is not the world as it really is but the world as specific groups of
humans believe it to be. Nevertheless, as a materialist, Childe also
believed that, in order to endure, every view of the world had to
accord to a significant degree with the world as it actually was.
Thus, archaeologists and other social scientists face two challenges:
understanding how people adjust to the real world and how they
understand that world. These problems are focused on behavior and
perception respectively. In engaging with these problems, archae-
ologists are addressing the two fundamental didactic missions of
anthropology: demonstrating the intelligence and rationality of all
peoples and celebrating their cultural creativity and diversity.
   Ecological archaeologists, applying the concepts of energy flow,
least effort, and optimal foraging to archaeological data can demon-
strate that prehistoric hunter-gatherers had a sound knowledge of
their environment and were able to devise strategies that exploited
that environment in a nearly optimal manner. The Cree people of
northern Quebec traditionally preferred to hunt caribou, which gave
them approximately a twenty-five-fold caloric return on the energy
that was required to kill the animals. They also knew the next most
appropriate hunting practices if caribou or other types of game were
not available. They also clearly understood that in prehistoric times


                                 524
                         Pragmatic Synthesis

they could never have survived by trapping only foxes, which yield
a lower caloric return than is required to hunt them (Feit 1978;
A. Tanner 1979). Demonstrating rationality of this sort is a matter
of no small importance. It confirms the ability of specific prehistoric
peoples to analyze the environment and exploit it in highly effective
ways. In richer environments a number of subsistence patterns may
work almost equally well, allowing cultural choice to play a greater
role in influencing what strategies were adopted.
   Effective subsistence patterns do not signify, however, that a
hunter-gatherer society’s understanding of the environment was
based on the same concepts as those used by Western cultural ecolo-
gists. Hunter-gatherers do not calculate their subsistence behavior in
terms of energy expenditures and gains measured in calories. In many
traditional societies, knowledge of the environment and the impact
that humans have on it is encoded in religious beliefs. We know from
ethnographic studies that the Cree believe that all animals are ratio-
nal beings like humans, but that each species has a different nature.
Humans cannot kill animals but, when a hunter has established the
right relations with animal spirits, animals will sacrifice their own
lives to support humans. Thus, relations with what we regard as the
natural world are not seen as based on knowledge of the environ-
ment, hunting skills, and calculations of caloric returns. They are
based on the kinds of relations individual hunters have with animal
spirits.
   Robert Boyd and Peter Richerson (1985) have demonstrated that
long-term transmissions of knowledge of this sort in the form of
cultural traditions are better adapted to serve individual and collec-
tive needs than are individual calculations. Individual calculations
are sometimes required to respond to changing conditions, but they
tend to be ad hoc and are often poorly thought through. Over time
the repeated use of ideas by large numbers of individuals tends to
favor the positive selection and improvement of their more effective
attributes and to ensure that innovations serve collective as well as
individual goals. The transmission of Cree ecological knowledge in
the form of religious concepts and ritual also enhanced the chances
of its survival. Traditional knowledge is not necessarily, or even typ-
ically, a collection of antiquated and dysfunctional beliefs from the
past, as E. B. Tylor maintained. Among the Cree, it provides a means


                                 525
                A History of Archaeological Thought

for encoding and preserving information that is essential for their sur-
vival. It was agreed that their understanding of how their environ-
ment worked and how a living might be extracted from it was far more
detailed and precise than that of the Western cultural ecologists who
worked with them in the 1970s. Much wrangling between processual
and postprocessual archaeologists might have been avoided had early
processual archaeologists, in accordance with their claim to be behav-
iorists, accepted that what they were discussing using archaeological
evidence was whether people in prehistoric societies had behaved
rationally in terms of their subsistence activities rather than what
specific concepts were guiding their behavior.
   In recent years, some postprocessual archaeologists have retreated
from their claims that they can reconstruct beliefs from archaeo-
logical evidence alone. They stress instead the utility of predisposi-
tions, habits, intentions, and other learned but often unconscious
tendencies as explanations of patterning in the archaeological record
(Gosden 1994). They argue that these psychological states may be
more important determinants of human behavior than are explicit
beliefs, as well as easier to infer intuitively from archaeological data
alone. Invariably, however, these interpretations remain the archae-
ologist’s speculations about the mental states that might have pro-
duced, or been produced by, a particular patterning of material cul-
ture that is preserved in the archaeological record.
   Beliefs about hunting, recorded by anthropologists from living
Cree hunters, present detailed information about the specific ideas
that relate these hunters to their game. These ideas are novel in
the sense that they differ from anything a social scientist coming
from a modern industrial society might have imagined about them.
They provide a basis for understanding in detail the specific cultural
mediation associated with Cree subsistence behavior. It would be
no more possible for an archaeologist to reconstruct these beliefs
from archaeological data alone than it would be for an archaeologist
to reconstruct the specific vocabulary and grammar of the language
spoken by a prehistoric group using only material culture as evidence;
something that no archaeologist or linguist, except perhaps Nikolay
Marr, has ever claimed is possible. Even if a behavioral generaliza-
tion existed to the effect that in all hunter-gatherer societies hunting
practices are mediated by religious beliefs, it would be impossible to
reconstruct the culturally specific content of such beliefs.

                                  526
                          Pragmatic Synthesis

   Yet historical archaeologists, equipped with ethnographic knowl-
edge of Cree beliefs, might be able to associate some of them with
archaeological evidence of special treatment accorded to the bones
of specific animal species. In this way, it might be possible to infer
the possible time depth of specific practices and to identify some
archaeological evidence concerning the possible antiquity of some
or all of the traditional belief system of Cree hunters. Archaeologists
also could use ecological studies to trace stability and changes in Cree
hunting practices and how they were or were not affected by envi-
ronmental changes and the development of the fur trade with Euro-
peans. Working from a historically documented context, archaeolo-
gists could hope to gain insights into how the patterning of archaeo-
logical data relating to Cree hunting was influenced by the culturally
specific ideas that guided this activity. In the absence of such data,
they would be limited to studying Cree behavior and calculating
to what extent it was guided by accurate knowledge of the envi-
ronment and how that environment might be exploited. This case
study suggests that what archaeologists can do in contexts in which
detailed textual information is and is not available is very different.
These differences are likely to persist regardless of what theoretical
developments occur. Because of this, I suggest that the distinction
between historical and prehistoric archaeology will probably remain
the most important one in archaeology for a long time.
   It is possible that the production of further behavioral generaliza-
tions and their application to understanding data relating to specific
societies will expand the ability of archaeologists to learn more about
the cultural as well as the societal aspects of prehistoric groups. Yet
what is already known about the nature of cross-cultural regulari-
ties and idiosyncracies suggests that the impact of such research is
likely to be limited. Although it is the duty of archaeologists to do all
they can to expand knowledge of the past, one of the most impor-
tant items on the theoretical agenda of archaeology should be to
consider realistically in what theoretical domains their discipline can
hope to make significant contributions to the social sciences and in
what problem areas it cannot. Archaeology clearly has a unique role
to play in studying the full scope of human history and providing a
general historical framework into which the findings of other social
science disciplines can be fitted. The study of material culture has
much to contribute to understanding various categories of human

                                  527
                A History of Archaeological Thought

behavior and, where data in verbal form are also available, to a better
understanding of how human beliefs and habits relate to material
culture. Determining what archaeologists can and cannot hope to
accomplish may help to increase the productivity of archaeological
research by assisting archaeologists to avoid cultivating theories and
pursuing approaches that ultimately prove to be unproductive and
offer little that is of value in return for their work.




                                 528
                                  c h a p t e r 10
               The Relevance of Archaeology

     The test of any good idea in archaeology, whatever its source, is
     whether it helps archaeologists look for things in the archaeological
     record that they might otherwise overlook or underrate.
      j o h n e . t e r r e l l , “Archaeological Inference and Ethnographic Analogies”
                                          (2003), p. 74



In this concluding chapter, I will review some general theoretical
challenges facing archaeology and consider how archaeologists might
respond more effectively to these problems in the future. I also will
discuss briefly the special roles that archaeology can play within the
social sciences and in modern society.


                       The Challenge of Relativism
Because archaeology deals with complex phenomena and is not
an experimental discipline, it is particularly vulnerable to what is
accepted as true being whatever seems to be most reasonable to
archaeologists, both individually and collectively. Archaeologists may
establish sound correlations, weed out logical inconsistencies, and
demonstrate that accepted interpretations do not accord with new
data. Yet this historical survey reveals that, even if archaeology has
grown considerably more resistant to subjectivity as its database and
techniques for studying these data have expanded, interpretations
are still subtly influenced by social, personal, and disciplinary percep-
tions of reality that often preclude an awareness of the full range of
alternative explanations that require testing. In many cases, neither
sufficient data nor strong enough correlations among the variables
being examined are available to counteract these biases.
   As archaeologists have grown more aware of the complexity of
what they have to explain, they also have become more interested
in learning how and to what extent their experience of the present

                                           529
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

influences their interpretations of the past. Even positivists, such
as Lewis Binford, have long accepted that the social milieu affects
the questions that archaeologists ask. Others, more open to a rela-
tivist perspective, see the milieu in which they live as affecting both
the problems archaeologists choose to address and the answers they
are predisposed to regard as reasonable. It is easy to illustrate that
throughout the world the interpretation of archaeological evidence
has been influenced by social, economic, and political considera-
tions. These interpretations consciously or unconsciously support
the political and economic interests of those who fund archaeological
research, by either reinforcing or defending the ideological postures
associated with them. Archaeological interpretations are colored by
gender prejudices, ethnic concerns, political control of research and
publishing, generational and personal conflicts among researchers,
and the personal idiosyncracies of charismatic archaeologists. They
are also influenced by the analytical models that are offered by
the physical, biological, and to a still greater degree the social
sciences.
   Most interpretations are not straightforward reflections of such
influences but versions of the past created by archaeologists try-
ing under specific historical circumstances to promote or defend
preferred social interests. Racial doctrines can be used to promote
national unity or to justify colonial aggression. Strong religious
beliefs can be held responsible for retarding technological progress
or hailed as a major factor promoting cultural development. The
options that are selected reflect the specific interests existing in mod-
ern societies and how individual archaeologists understand and relate
to those interests. Such considerations not only play a major role in
shaping variations in archaeological practice but also shift in response
to changing social conditions.
   At worst, these considerations could mean that there is no past
to study, not only in the undeniable positivist sense that what we
interpret is merely “the marks of the past in the present” but also
in accord with Collingwood’s more profound definition of history
as a discipline in which one relives the past in one’s own mind. This
observation implies that there is no way in which an archaeologist
or historian can verifiably reconstruct the past as it actually was. Yet
Ernst Gellner (1985: 134) points out that most archaeologists believe
that “the past was once present, as the present, and it was real.” All but

                                   530
                     The Relevance of Archaeology

the most extreme relativists are convinced that the things people did
in the past really happened and that their having happened has played
a significant role in shaping the archaeological record that we study.
The past therefore had a reality of its own that is independent of the
reconstructions and explanations that archaeologists may give of it.
Moreover, because the archaeological record, as a product of the past,
has been shaped by forces that are independent of our own beliefs,
the evidence that it provides at least potentially can act as a constraint
on archaeologists’ imaginations. To that extent, the study of the past
has different goals from writing a work of fiction. One of the most
important of these goals must be to recover knowledge of what has
been forgotten. Yet the crucial questions remain unanswered: How
far can archaeologists go in acquiring objective knowledge of the past
and how certain can they be of the accuracy of what they believe they
know about that past, given the propensity of value judgments to
color their interpretations?
   In recent years, many archaeologists have shifted from a naive pos-
itivism to a more far-reaching acceptance of relativism than at any
time in the past. Alison Wylie (1985b: 73) points out that even “the
most straightforward observational experience is actively structured
by the observer and acquires significance as evidence . . . only under
theory- and ‘paradigm’-specific interpretation.” Before past human
behavior is explained, it must be inferred from material remains that
in turn acquire status as data as a result of theory-influenced and,
hence, at least partly subjective processes of classification. Hence
both when classifying material remains and even more when inter-
preting human behavior, archaeologists are dealing with something
quite different from the objective facts postulated by those histori-
ans who continue to follow the precepts of the von Ranke school
(Patrik 1985). Such historians distinguish between a relatively stable
core of factual data about the past, which is deemed to be objective
and to expand incrementally as new documents are studied, and the
interpretation of these data, which is highly subjective and can differ
radically from one historian to another. The question that archae-
ologists face is therefore whether they must accept the position of
the extreme relativists or some containment of relativism is possi-
ble. The desire to gain deeper insight into this problem has been
the chief factor encouraging a growing interest in the history of
archaeology.

                                   531
                A History of Archaeological Thought


                The Development of Archaeology
The development of archaeological understanding cannot be redu-
ced to any single pattern described in Chapter 1. A number of genetic
models capture important aspects of a complexity that defies total
encapsulation by any one model. These models provide complemen-
tary insights into the development of archaeological thought.
   Contrary to the expectation of extreme relativists, the development
of archaeological understanding displays a considerable amount of
directionality, although not enough to support a unilinear, positivist
view of that development, such as that embraced by Gordon Willey
and Jeremy Sabloff in A History of American Archaeology (1974).
Archaeological findings about what human beings have done in the
past have irreversibly altered our understanding of human origins
and development, at least for people who are prepared to abide by
scientific canons of reasoning. Before the nineteenth century, evolu-
tionary schemes of human development were entertained alongside
creationist and degenerationist views and various cyclical specula-
tions. Each of these scenarios was a possible description of human
history, but there was no scientific evidence that would allow schol-
ars to determine which of these theories offered the most likely
explanation of human origins and cultural development. Since then,
archaeological data have presented solid evidence, which indicates
that human beings evolved from higher primate stock, most likely in
Africa. There is considerable disagreement about the significance of
morphological variations among early hominids and which of them
were the direct ancestors of modern human beings. Yet it is clear that
throughout most of their history human beings and their hominid
ancestors subsisted by eating wild plants and animals. It also seems
likely that scavenging and killing small game preceded the hunting
of large animals.
   By late Lower Palaeolithic times, hominids had spread from tropi-
cal regions at least into colder temperate climates and by the Middle
and Upper Palaeolithic periods some human beings had adapted to
living in periglacial conditions. Prior to 40,000 years ago, human
groups had made their way across a narrow stretch of ocean into
Australia–New Guinea and by at least 11,000 years ago they had
spread throughout the New World from Bering Strait to Tierra del
Fuego. By the end of the last Ice Age, if not earlier, denser and

                                 532
                    The Relevance of Archaeology

more sedentary food-collecting populations had developed in richer
natural environments in many parts of the world. Intensive food
collecting was supplemented by food production, which gradually
became the principal source of nourishment in many regions of the
Old and New Worlds. It has, however, become evident that the more
sedentary collecting societies, such as those that were encountered
on the west coast of Canada in the nineteenth century, have more
in common, demographically and in terms of social and political
organization, with sedentary tribal agricultural societies than they do
with big-game hunters (Testart 1982; Price and Brown 1985). This
observation has provided a new basis for interpreting the evidence
concerning “Mesolithic” societies in the Old World and “Archaic”
ones in the Americas, which in the past seemed anomalous and diffi-
cult to understand. There is no suggestion of historical connections
between many of the major zones in which plant and animal domes-
tication occurred and steadily increasing archaeological evidence of
continuities within various regions suggests that domestication was a
process that happened independently in many places. The same can
be said about the first civilizations, which evolved as some tribal agri-
cultural societies became transformed into hierarchical, class-based
ones, dominated by small elites who used part of the surplus wealth
they controlled to produce monumental architecture and works of
art that served, among other things, as status symbols.
   It is also clear that not all societies evolved through this sequence.
Some remained hunter-gatherers into modern times, whereas oth-
ers abandoned agriculture and took up big-game hunting when new
technologies made hunting and gathering a more productive option,
as happened on the Great Plains of North America in the eighteenth
century, or when environmental change or loss of productive lands
diminished the viability of agriculture. As some cultures grew more
complex, relations between neighboring societies of different sizes
and with dissimilar economies became more common. Under cer-
tain ecological conditions, more complex societies were able to dom-
inate and absorb less complex neighboring ones, but in other situa-
tions pastoral or hunter-gatherer societies succeeded in maintaining
their autonomy into modern times. This selective process explains
how more complex societies gradually replaced simpler ones over
large areas of the world, with pastoral and hunter-gatherer societies
remaining dominant only in areas unsuitable for agriculture. The

                                  533
                A History of Archaeological Thought

ability of more complex societies to dominate at least some weaker
and less complex ones also explains why the transition from hunting
and gathering to sedentary life to civilization is the dominant pattern
in human history.
   Although much remains to be learned about the timing and precise
nature of cultural stability and change in various parts of the world in
prehistoric times, the general picture outlined above is sustained by
an immense and growing corpus of evidence collected and analyzed
by an ever increasing number of archaeologists. This does not mean
that in the future archaeologists may not discover earlier intensive
collecting or agricultural societies than those currently known, new
early civilizations, or even unsuspected cultural connections between
different parts of the world. Yet, for over a century, the general pic-
ture of what happened in prehistoric times that has been derived from
archaeological discoveries has been refined rather than overturned.
The same cannot be said of either detailed or general explanations of
why these things happened. Moreover, although the broad outline
of prehistory presented in modern textbooks may not differ enor-
mously from some of the speculative evolutionary reconstructions of
the nineteenth or even the eighteenth centuries, it does differ in being
based on archaeological evidence that is replete with circumstantial
detail, both about the nature of individual cultures and about spe-
cific sequences of change. These data elaborate what is known about
both particular developmental sequences and the general pattern of
prehistory. The cumulative development of archaeological knowl-
edge indicates that erroneous interpretations of what happened in the
past can be detected as a result of the discovery of new archaeolog-
ical evidence, which contradicts previous conclusions; an awareness
of new theories of human behavior, which provide fresh insights into
the meaning of archaeological data; and the development of more
reliable means for inferring human behavior and beliefs from archae-
ological data.
   An alternative approach, and the one that has been used to trace
the history of archaeological theory in this volume, sees various the-
oretical perspectives, each of which addresses different sorts of ques-
tions, as coexisting but varying in relative importance over time and
in different places. This approach seems best suited for examining
the empirical content of different perspectives relating to archaeo-
logical analysis and for studying how they and their relations to one

                                  534
                    The Relevance of Archaeology

another have changed over time. The first coherently formulated
perspective was historical archaeology, which developed, initially as
classical archaeology, in Europe in the eighteenth century and has
persisted in recognizable form until the present. It focused on study-
ing the epigraphy, art, and architecture of ancient civilizations in
order to enhance knowledge of the elite cultures of those societies
that was originally derived from surviving texts. This approach was
deeply influenced by European humanism, especially as formulated
by the philosopher Johann Herder. Prehistoric archaeology came
into being in Scandinavia in the early nineteenth century and almost
from the beginning exhibited three complementary interests, in the
evolution of culture (evolutionary archaeology), the culture-history
of specific regions (culture-historical archaeology), and how people
had lived in the past (functional-processual archaeology). Evolution-
ary archaeology developed as Palaeolithic archaeology between 1860
and 1880, whereas culture-historical archaeology flourished preem-
inently between 1880 and 1960. Functional-processual archaeology
began to receive increasing attention around the beginning of the
twentieth century and after 1960 dominated much of the theoretical
work in archaeology, first with a behavioral (processual) emphasis
and then with a cultural (postprocessual) one.
   It has been widely assumed that the growth of functional-
processual archaeology at the expense of culture-historical archae-
ology was a linear process in which the construction of cultural
chronologies was superseded by efforts to explain the archaeolog-
ical record in terms of human behavior. This scenario also might
account for the major shift, brought about by the adoption of ele-
ments of processual and postprocessual archaeology, which is cur-
rently transforming the older historical archaeologies into practices
that more closely resemble prehistoric archaeology. Yet the pursuit
of functional-processual archaeology has reciprocally necessitated the
elaboration and refinement of cultural chronologies as the result of
an increasing need to distinguish ever briefer intervals of time in
the archaeological record. The result of this development appears to
be the breaking down of the distinction between culture-historical
and functional-processual archaeology. This is accompanied by a
similar erosion of the distinction between evolutionary and culture-
historical archaeology that results from the repudiation of the artifi-
cial dichotomy between historical and evolutionary change. In place

                                 535
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

of these older archaeologies, a new programmatic distinction appears
to be emerging between historical and prehistoric archaeology, based
on what can be accomplished in interpreting archaeological evidence
when written texts, oral traditions, and cultural homologies are and
are not available. The overall pattern suggests that a variety of differ-
ent approaches to doing archaeology had to be elaborated separately,
but possibly for the most part in no particular order, before they could
be used together.
   An approach based on theoretical perspectives is complemented by
the detailed examination of what theoretical concepts have guided
the development of archaeological research in particular countries
or regions. In these studies, a considerable degree of idiosyncratic
variation becomes evident. Yet, once again, it appears that, ideally,
archaeology everywhere is characterized by a broad set of topics that
must be investigated if the fullest possible range of information about
human behavior and human history is to be recovered. Still, today,
different kinds of data are studied selectively by archaeologists work-
ing in different localities and even on different periods in particular
localities. The order in which different modes of analysis are adopted
seems to be highly variable, reflecting the differing values, political
orientations, and academic allegiances of local archaeologists. Yet, as
archaeological research develops, it becomes increasingly evident that
dogmatic selectivity about low-level generalizations and middle-level
theory is unproductive, even if archaeologists disagree about the ulti-
mate use that is to be made of their data. As a result, in the absence of
dogmatic ideological controls, archaeologists in any particular region
will adopt an ever more inclusive range of analytical concerns, as far
as these are economically supportable.
   This suggests that an inclusive corpus of methods for inferring
human behavior ultimately will constitute the ideal, if not the reality,
of archaeological research everywhere. The principal factor encourag-
ing the realization of that goal is the spread of information about how
other groups of archaeologists are doing things, largely promoted by
a spirit of emulation. Opposing such dissemination are isolation, the
inertia associated with habitual behavior, and national pride, which
together or separately encourage the maintenance of local traditions
of archaeological research. It was local practices of this sort that in
the late nineteenth century the anthropologists and archaeologists at
the Smithsonian Institution attempted to crush with their campaign

                                  536
                   The Relevance of Archaeology

against the Davenport Academy and that David Clarke (1973) more
recently sought to replace with an international “scientific” archae-
ology. The successful creation of more generally agreed standards of
archaeological performance seems to result from long-term, multi-
lateral interaction among individual archaeologists rather than from
new ideas being summarily imposed on the discipline by a small num-
ber of proselytizing gurus.
   Theoretical approaches also exhibit cyclical tendencies. An inter-
est in cultural evolution revived in British and American archaeol-
ogy beginning in the 1930s, after several decades when evolution-
ism was ignored in favor of a culture-historical approach. Stuart
Piggott (1950) noted a more long-term alternation of rationalist and
romantic approaches to doing archaeology that dates back to the
eighteenth century. Evolutionary archaeology was an expression of
rationalism and culture-historical archaeology of romanticism. Only
recently have archaeologists begun to consider whether these two
approaches are in reality contradictory or complementary.
   Laura Nader (2001) suggests that shifts in theoretical orientations
are regularly accompanied by significant levels of collective amne-
sia, as a result of which abandoned, but potentially useful, concepts
must be reinvented at a later date. This creates a situation in which,
as a result of self-imposed mutual isolation, rival approaches tend
to inhibit, rather than encourage, progress. The recent efforts by
Darwinian archaeologists to examine culture-historical theory as it
applies to archaeology and to redeploy useful culture-historical con-
cepts in the context of their own selectionist synthesis are commend-
able examples of a systematic attempt to counteract such amnesia.
Evolving analytical techniques also appear to have some capacity to
counteract the negative effects of these cyclical trends. The influ-
ence of such techniques is exemplified by the impact that the Baco-
nian approach, championed by the Royal Society of London, had
on improving the practice of antiquarianism in England in the eigh-
teenth century.
   The external pressures that it is claimed were exerted on archae-
ological theory and practice by Michel Foucault’s successive epis-
temes often were moderated by local traditions of interpreting
archaeological data that persisted despite hypothesized major shifts
in overall intellectual orientations (Trigger 1978b; Chippindale
1983). Critically studying how specific archaeological concepts and

                                 537
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

understandings have developed makes it easier to avoid accepting
such beliefs as being natural and unquestionable (Moro Abadı́a and
González Morales 2003). Finally, Kuhn’s concept of paradigms seems
invalidated by his insistence on their incommensurability. Although
archaeologists who subscribe to any one school of interpretation may
have little sympathy for, and less than a deep understanding of, rival
approaches, they rarely fail to understand the basic ideas of their
opponents.


               Relations with Other Social Sciences
There also has been considerable disagreement about how archae-
ologists should relate to the other social sciences in their efforts
to explain human behavior. Classical archaeologists and those who
work as Egyptologists and Assyriologists mostly identify themselves
as humanists, whereas prehistoric archaeologists have cultivated close
associations with either history or anthropology. In general, in
Europe, ties have been closest with anthropology during brief peri-
ods of evolutionary interest in cross-cultural regularities and with his-
tory the rest of the time, when cultural (including culture-historical)
interests have been in the ascendant. In North America, the interests
of prehistoric archaeologists in evolutionary and cultural approaches
have followed similar shifts within anthropology.
   In Europe, prehistoric archaeology has tended to be institution-
alized either as an independent discipline or in history departments;
in North America it is usually located in anthropology departments.
Unfortunately, archaeologists constitute a minority of teaching staff
in most anthropology departments and the technical training of
archaeology students tends to be slighted in favor of training in gen-
eral anthropological theory. Hodder and Hutson (2003: 242–6) have
recently argued that archaeology should be an independent disci-
pline in which archaeologists are free to forge the links with those
disciplines that best enable them to explain archaeological data. Such
an arrangement, it is claimed, also would make it easier for archaeol-
ogists to create the kinds of theories relating to material culture that
are needed to infer behavior and ideas from archaeological data.
   Yet, regardless of the institutional settings in which they work, indi-
vidual archaeologists can never become intimately familiar with all
the sources of knowledge that are needed to interpret their findings.

                                   538
                     The Relevance of Archaeology

That would require links not only with all the social sciences but also
with psychology and neuroscience, in addition to maintaining long-
standing technical linkages with the physical and biological sciences.
In general, archaeologists share more interests in high-level theory
with anthropologists than with any other social scientists. For vari-
ous reasons, anthropologists, unlike political scientists, economists,
and sociologists, have not specialized in studying a particular sort of
human behavior. Instead, they continue to investigate every aspect of
non-industrial societies, employing perspectives that range from cul-
tural evolution to highly postmodern cultural studies. As historical
archaeologists in particular develop an increasing interest in human
cognition and behavior, archaeology and anthropology are coming
to share a growing number of theoretical and substantive inter-
ests that are focused on, but not limited to, the study of material
culture.
   Whatever institutional arrangements exist for archaeology, close
ties between anthropologists and archaeologists are essential for
the provision of both middle-ranging and high-level theory. The
sustained theoretical productivity of prehistoric archaeology in the
United States since the 1920s as a result of its close institutional ties to
anthropology, the important role played by French Marxist anthro-
pology in the development of postprocessual archaeology in Britain,
and the many contributions by archaeologists at Cambridge Univer-
sity, where archaeology and anthropology have been associated more
closely than in many other European universities, contrast with the
much slower and more diffuse production of high-level theory where
the two disciplines are less closely aligned.
   Archaeology, for its part, is the leading source of information about
long-term change and the only discipline that can construct a com-
prehensive historical framework into which the findings of socio-
cultural anthropology and the other social sciences can be pigeon-
holed, mainly as studies of the accommodation of human beings to
the development of the modern world system. Once again, how-
ever, the interests of anthropologists and archaeologists match more
closely than do those of archaeologists and any other social scientists.
It therefore seems preferable for archaeologists who have established
effective working relations with anthropologists to strive to improve
those relations rather than to replace them with new and probably
less productive ones (Trigger 1989c).

                                    539
                  A History of Archaeological Thought


                       Coping with Subjectivity
Over the years, archaeological interpretation has been progressively
facilitated by the development of new methods of dating, such as
by measuring the ratios of carbon and potassium-argon isotopes, the
more precise identification of plant and animal remains, and trace-
element analysis, all of which employ techniques developed by the
physical and biological sciences (for the limitations and complexi-
ties of some interpretations based on trace-element analysis, see Gill
[1987]). The introduction of computers also has permitted the anal-
ysis of much larger amounts of archaeological data than ever before.
This innovation has enhanced the ability of archaeologists to search
for patterning in their data and to formulate and test hypotheses using
ever-increasing amounts of data. Although the development of such
techniques depends on the internal dynamics of the physical and bio-
logical sciences, and their adoption by archaeologists demonstrably
is influenced by the goals, resources, knowledge, and personalities
of different researchers, it seems likely that, given enough time, any
significant new technique of this sort will be employed by archaeol-
ogists around the world. Likewise, although the recovery and classi-
fication of archaeological data are also influenced by the interests of
different groups of archaeologists, over time there has been a growing
understanding of the extent and significance of the formal variation
that occurs in the archaeological record.
   Archaeological evidence also intervenes at every level of interpreta-
tion to at least partially constrain and limit what it is possible to believe
about the past. Contrary to what some innovators allege, in their
desire to portray all previous phases in the development of archae-
ology as primitive and unscientific, archaeologists have long been
aware of the need to question accepted interpretations of archaeo-
logical data. They have also utilized new evidence in an attempt to
gain a more objective understanding of the past and, at least since the
eighteenth century, have sought to devise tests that relate to propos-
als concerning the behavioral significance of archaeological data. For
as long as this sort of verification has been attempted, archaeologists
have been engaged in scientific studies.
   There is evidence, as we have already noted, that the ongoing col-
lection and analysis of archaeological data have resulted in a more
robust understanding of prehistory as well as of the human behavior

                                    540
                    The Relevance of Archaeology

and other forces that have shaped that history. This makes possi-
ble the growing confidence with which archaeologists are able to
distinguish between their own interpretations of what happened in
prehistoric times and alternative popular beliefs that lack a scientifi-
cally acceptable factual basis (J. White 1974). The inability of sober
archaeological accounts of the past to satisfy many popular expecta-
tions also attests to the ideological importance of what archaeologists
are accomplishing. One example of opposition to a scientific under-
standing of the past is the persistent and widespread resistance to the
idea that more advanced cultures have developed as a result of inter-
nal processes that can be understood in scientific terms. Speculative
thinkers have long sought to trace the origin of known civilizations
back to mysterious beginnings on lost continents, such as Atlantis and
Mu, whereas in the early twentieth century hyperdiffusionists derived
agriculture and civilization from Egypt or Mesopotamia, where they
were alleged to have evolved as the result of a historical accident.
Since 1945, faced with the threat of nuclear annihilation, in devel-
oped countries increasing numbers of insecure and secularly oriented
members of the educated middle classes have taken comfort in the
belief that intelligent beings from another planet have been benevo-
lently guiding human development and will save humanity, or some
chosen remnant of it, from some ultimate catastrophe (J. Cole 1980;
Feder 1984, 1990; Eve and Harrold 1986). These salvationists, who
increasingly draw Atlantis and ancient Egypt into their historical con-
structions, look in vain to archaeology to provide evidence of inter-
planetary contacts that will support their arguments.
   It is not extraordinary that in the eighteenth century, when knowl-
edge of the archaeological record was almost nonexistent, even a
scholar such as William Stukeley, who was capable of carrying out
sound antiquarian research, should have been attracted to what we
now regard as the extravagant and unsubstantiated fantasies of the
degenerationist school, as they related to the druids. By the 1920s,
the hyperdiffusionist view of human history, although promoted by
reputable ethnologists and physical anthropologists, was overwhelm-
ingly rejected by archaeologists because it did not correspond with
the archaeological record as it even by then was understood for
various parts of the world. Hyperdiffusionist influences were lim-
ited to explaining restricted archaeological phenomena, such as the
megalithic monuments of western Europe.

                                  541
                 A History of Archaeological Thought

   Extraterrestrial salvationism was born and remains an amateur fad
with semireligious connotations. Despite its assertions to the con-
trary, its always tentative explanations of isolated archaeological finds
do not provide a satisfactory alternative interpretation of the archae-
ological record (von Daniken 1969, 1971). Extreme relativists, such
as Barnes and Feyerabend, may imply that the views of the past
held by professional archaeologists and believers in extraterrestrial
salvationism are cultural alternatives and that philosophers and his-
torians of science have no basis for distinguishing between them in
terms of their correctness or scientific status. Archaeologists can-
not, of course, rule out the possibility that extraterrestrial visitors
have influenced the course of human development to some degree,
any more than biologists can exclude the existence somewhere on
earth of a herd of purple unicorns. Yet, clumsy, inadequate, and
uncertain as our present scientific understandings of cultural change
may be, they account for what is observed in the archaeological
record in both its totality and its individual features, while extrater-
restrial salvationism keeps alive only by making speculative and always
inconclusive claims about isolated phenomena. It is surely folly,
given the available evidence, to claim equivalent status for these two
approaches.
   Archaeologists also have demonstrated their capacity to alter their
interpretations in order to account better for growing bodies of
archaeological data (Gallay 1986: 288–95). In the early part of the
twentieth century, diffusion was invoked to explain evidence of
change in the archaeological record that did not accord with earlier
racist views that North American Indians were incapable of cultural
change. Yet diffusion by itself implied a continuing belief in a lack
of creativity among these peoples. The New Archaeology not only
accounted for internal transformations in archaeological cultures that
were becoming increasingly evident as more detailed archaeologi-
cal research was carried out, but, in order to explain these changes,
archaeologists were compelled to invoke internal responses that un-
self-consciously eliminated the last vestiges of the view that indige-
nous North Americans were inherently less creative than were Euro-
peans. The influence of less hostile public stereotypes of indigenous
people in bringing about these changes should not be underesti-
mated, but neither should the constraint of the archaeological record
(Trigger 1980b).

                                  542
                     The Relevance of Archaeology

   It is the amateur fringe that continues to explain the prehistory
of the Americas in terms of Libyan, Carthaginian, Scandinavian,
Black African, and Asian visitors and thus denigrates, presumably
unwittingly, the indigenous peoples of the Western Hemisphere
by attributing major elements of their cultural heritage to others
(Fell 1976, 1982; for an anthropological explanation of the material
referred to in the second book, see Vastokas and Vastokas 1973).
In so doing, these amateurs rely exclusively on diffusionist canons
of archaeological interpretation that long ago were discovered to
be inadequate by professional archaeologists. Archaeologists do not
deny the importance of diffusion. Nor do they deny that some pas-
toralists and agriculturalists have become hunter-gatherers in the
course of human history. Yet these happenings are now viewed in
a broader context, in which other processes, such as ecological adap-
tation and internal cultural change, are occurring. Simultaneously,
an increasingly detailed archaeological record offers growing resis-
tance to faddish and unbalanced explanations of what happened in
the past.
   Yet, despite such progress, archaeology can never escape from the
influences of the social milieus in which it is practiced. Subjective fac-
tors clearly continue to influence the interpretation of archaeological
data. They are not merely a visible contaminant that can be removed
through the rigorous application of scientific method, as more zeal-
ous positivists maintain. Archaeologists continue to produce inter-
pretations of the archaeological record that promote national, eth-
nic, and other ideological agendas. At the same time, new political
issues, such as environmental protection, neoconservative economic
policies, and fighting terrorism, impress themselves on the minds
of archaeologists and influence their understanding of the modern
world and of the significance of archaeological findings. There is no
reason to believe that archaeologists are more objective today than
they were at any time in the past.
   Often biases are unconscious, but sometimes they are not. Some-
times they lead to a deeper, lasting understanding of the archaeologi-
cal record, although this happens rarely when archaeological findings
are purposefully misused for propaganda purposes. The deliberate
invention or misrepresentation of archaeological data for political
ends – as may have happened with respect to the events leading,
with loss of human life, to Hindu rioters demolishing the historic

                                   543
                A History of Archaeological Thought

Babri Mosque in Ayodhya, India in 1992 (J. Shaw 2000; Ratnagar
2004) – should entail the mandatory decertification of archaeologists
who engage in such unethical practices and be classified as a seri-
ous criminal offense at both the national and international levels if it
results in civil disturbances or harm to individuals. By contrast, the
deployment of archaeological evidence to help disfavored minority
groups to understand their pasts in a more objective and complete
manner is an activity to be applauded.
   In recent decades, archaeologists have become more aware of the
deleterious influences that nationalism, colonialism, and gender bias
exert on their interpretations of archaeological data and many have
been trying to counteract such influences. Yet, at the same time, new
demands and restrictions are being imposed on archaeologists by the
state and by various sectors of society. In many countries, much
archaeological research is being sponsored to stimulate tourism and
archaeologists are required to excavate and reconstruct sites in accor-
dance with policies formulated by governments and travel experts
who are seeking to attract more tourists and to stimulate the economy
(Silberman 1995: 258–61). Cultural resource management experts set
standards that dictate which sites can or cannot be dug, what sorts of
data are to be collected, and how finds are to be studied and reported
(Shennan 2002: 9–10). Indigenous peoples in some areas are gaining
power to control prehistoric archaeological research and to license
archaeological surveys and excavations. Often they seek archaeologi-
cal confirmation of their current beliefs about the past or support for
land claims. Although it is important that local people should play a
significant role in the study of their own past, serious problems arise
when any group exercising economic or political control attempts
to dictate the conclusions that archaeologists must draw from their
research. At the same time that they reach out to all possible groups,
archaeologists must resist threats to their personal and professional
integrity, regardless of who makes them.
   There is, however, a need to empower indigenous groups to guard
and protect their cultural heritage, especially as the theft and ille-
gal trade of antiquities increase around the world (Brodie et al.
2001; Kristiansen 2004b). Such empowerment must include training
indigenous people to become fully qualified professional archaeolo-
gists and providing impoverished indigenous groups with the eco-
nomic resources that they require to conserve their heritage. Only in

                                  544
                    The Relevance of Archaeology

this way can the last vestiges of colonialism be purged from archae-
ology. Cultural heritage should be legally recognized as the dual
possession of the descendants of the people who created it and of
all humanity, to whose cultural diversity and creativity it attests. It
should be illegal to exploit economically, damage, or willfully destroy
such heritage, and wherever possible the descendants of its creators
should be its custodians on behalf of humanity as a whole. Although
this formulation, which embodies many of the universalist ideas of
the Enlightenment, will not please those relativists who would main-
tain that every group should be free to do what it wants with its
own heritage, it reflects the reality of the modern world, in which
the whole of humanity is becoming inextricably interrelated (A. Hall
2003).
   Even without overt social and political pressures, there has always
been a temptation for archaeologists to leap to conclusions in the
absence of sufficient data or of adequate analysis and proper methods
of interpretation. This occurs at every level of archaeological research,
although it is perhaps at the highest level, the explanation of behav-
ior, that the most daring leaps have been made. Many archaeologists
are eager to draw far-reaching conclusions about the past from their
findings, even if this requires them to infer specific forms of behav-
ior without adequate linking arguments and to employ poorly tested
explanations of human behavior. Especially if interpretations corre-
spond with common sense and the beliefs of the investigator, archae-
ologists may be quite unaware of the inadequacies of their work. In
the past, toleration for this type of laxness resulted to a large degree
from a small number of researchers trying to cope with large and
intractable problems. In pioneering efforts to collect data and recon-
struct a broad picture of the past many of the requirements for doing
sound archaeological research were ignored.
   Finally, high-level theories exert their own nefarious influences
on archaeological interpretation. To some degree, such theories are
like languages. It is believed to be possible to express any idea in
any natural language, although the difficulty with which a particu-
lar concept may be conveyed will vary greatly from one language
to another, depending on its syntax and the content of its lexicon.
Moreover, a message can depart only a short distance from conven-
tional understandings and established norms before it loses intelli-
gibility and relevance to the receiver, however capable the person

                                  545
                A History of Archaeological Thought

delivering it may be at transmitting novel ideas through periphrases
and detailed explanations. In the same manner, the difficulty of con-
ceiving of a satisfactory explanation for a particular form of human
behavior will vary according to the general theory that is espoused.
In due course, growing problems in using a particular general the-
ory to explain human behavior may lead social scientists, including
archaeologists, to abandon that theory on the ground that it is inef-
ficient by comparison with some alternative one. In this way, the
constraints of evidence can exert a selective influence over general
theories. Alternatively, subjective factors may lead social scientists
to continue using a particular high-level theory long after its ineffi-
ciency has been demonstrated. Such theories often are modified and
upgraded in opportunistic ways to try to adapt them to new circum-
stances. Only rarely are high-level theories definitively abandoned.
   In recent years, archaeologists have been attempting in various
ways to counteract the effects of unseen biases and inadequate
research designs. By becoming more aware of how theories influ-
ence their research, they seek to reduce the impact that unexamined
preconceptions have on their findings. Although these efforts are not
always successful, simply discovering that certain beliefs may influ-
ence interpretations in specific ways can lessen the chances that such
concepts will distort findings. Studying the history of archaeology,
by enhancing an awareness of the theories that archaeologists used
in the past and what happened when these theories were employed
to interpret archaeological data, not only makes archaeologists more
aware of the biases that were built into such concepts but also lessens
the chances of their reinventing of the wheel. Other techniques also
are being employed to counter bias in the course of doing research.
Asking questions and formulating theories from as many standpoints
as possible is seen as a way to broaden the range of perspectives that
archaeologists can bring to bear on the study of any particular issue.
Independent arrays of data with their appropriate analytical methods
are also being used to investigate specific problems, with the expecta-
tion that concurrent results will reinforce the likelihood that the con-
clusion each approach reaches is valid. In this way, the database for
studying the past is expanded to include physical anthropology, lin-
guistics, and other nonarchaeological approaches. At the same time,
the contextual approach is being applied systematically. Although
neither archaeologists nor archaeological theory are free from bias,

                                  546
                    The Relevance of Archaeology

using these and other approaches is resulting in insights into the
behavioral and cultural significance of archaeological data that can
better withstand the discovery of new evidence and the development
of new theoretical perspectives.
   These developments at least partly explain why the views that mod-
ern archaeologists have concerning how societies evolved are radi-
cally different not only from the divinely ordered world of the ancient
Sumerians but also from the creationist views that dominated Euro-
pean society 200 years ago. Evolutionary archaeology developed not
as a neutral search for truth but in radical opposition to religious
ideas that no longer accounted adequately for geological and bio-
logical evidence. The findings of archaeology, however subjectively
interpreted, have altered our perception of the general course of
human history, of our relation to nature, and of our own nature in
ways that are irreversible without the total abandonment of the scien-
tific method. Archaeology is itself a product of social and economic
change, but what it has led us to believe about the past is more than
a fanciful projection of contemporary social concerns into the past.
Neither separate from society nor merely a reflection of it, archae-
ology has a role to play in a rational dialogue about the nature of
humanity, which a better understanding of the relations between
archaeological practice and its social context will facilitate. It has
been claimed that, by helping to expand our temporal and spatial
frames of reference, archaeology has irreversibly altered “the range
and quality of human thought” (C. Becker 1938: 25).
   Yet the struggle to establish these views is far from over. Reli-
gious fundamentalists, who make up a large portion of the population
of the United States, still support creationism. Archaeologists who
believe that the findings of their discipline represent a more accu-
rate view of human history than do religious fantasies cannot accept
extreme relativist pronouncements that archaeological and creation-
ist views offer equally valid interpretations of the past. Instead, they
are challenged to rescue the study of the past from an aggressive
miasma of atavistic speculation.
   The fact that archaeology can provide a growing number of
insights into what has happened in the past suggests that it may
constitute an increasingly effective basis for understanding social
change. That in turn indicates that over time it also may serve as an
increasingly effective guide for future development, not by providing

                                  547
                A History of Archaeological Thought

technocratic knowledge to social planners but by helping citizens to
make more informed choices with respect to public policy. In a world
that, as a result of increasingly powerful technologies, has become
too dangerous and is changing too quickly for humanity to rely to
any considerable extent on trial and error, knowledge derived from
archaeology may be important for human survival. If archaeology is
to serve that purpose, archaeologists must strive against heavy odds
to see the past and the human behavior that produced it as each
was, not as they or anyone else for their own reasons wish them to
have been.




                                548
              BIBLIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY

                 Studying the History of Archaeology
Since the late 1980s, there has been an explosion of books and papers
dealing with the history of archaeology. As a result, it is no longer pos-
sible to provide readers with a detailed guide to this literature. Only
general trends can be delineated, with relevant examples. When con-
sidering the history of the discipline, it is worth recalling that probably
as many as 90 percent of all archaeologists who have ever lived are alive
today (Christenson 1989b: 163).
   Some of the increasing production of histories of archaeology may
result from growing competition for funding among schools and
research groups (Croissant 2000: 205). A more general explanation is
that the history of archaeology has assumed a more central role in the
practice of archaeology as the result of a declining belief in culture-free
explanations of human behavior. A historical approach also provides a
basis for examining important epistemological issues from a perspective
that is already familiar to many archaeologists. Whatever the motives
for such studies, disciplinary histories have come to play a major role in
the evaluation of archaeological knowledge and the history of archae-
ology is now recognized as constituting a significant branch or subfield
of archaeology (J. Reid 1991).
   Growing concerns with problems of method and theory relating
to the history of archaeology resulted in a conference on these top-
ics held at Southern Illinois University in May 1987. The proceed-
ings were published by the organizer Andrew Christenson as Tracing
Archaeology’s Past (1989a), the first book to consider how to study the
history of archaeology. The same year, a committee on the History of
Archaeology was established within the Society for American Archae-
ology. Its goals were to identify, preserve, and make more accessible
old field notes, films, photographs, letters, and oral histories relating
to the history of archaeology. The following year, a series of symposia
on the history of archaeology was initiated that has alternated annually
between the meetings of the Society for American Archaeology and the
American Anthropological Association. Papers read at these symposia

                                   549
                          Bibliographical Essay

have been published by Reyman (1992), Kehoe and Emmerichs (1999),
Browman and Williams (2002), and Fowler and Wilcox (2003). In 1991,
Douglas Givens established the Bulletin of the History of Archaeology,
the first periodical dedicated to this subject. Two encyclopedias have
been published, one devoted to the history of classical archaeology
(De Grummond 1996) and the other to the history of archaeology in
general (Murray 1999a, 2001a). Papers are also devoted to enumerat-
ing, analyzing, and critiquing histories of archaeology (Trigger 1985a,
1994a; Givens 1992b; Murray 1999b) and to theorizing such studies
(Croissant 2000). A promising series of books dealing with the his-
tory of archaeology has been launched by Nathan Schlanger and Alain
Schnapp (2005–).
   Histories of archaeology have been written for many purposes: to
entertain readers; to commemorate important archaeologists, finds,
and research projects; and to instruct students, draw attention to
neglected data, justify specific programs or ideas, reveal biases, dis-
parage the research or conclusions of rival archaeologists, encourage
reflection about the goals of archaeology, and try to make archaeology
more objective.
   Most histories of archaeology have been written by archaeologists.
Some of these have been disciplinary elders reflecting on the past, but
over the years a growing number of active archaeologists have devoted
a substantial amount of their time to studying the history of their dis-
cipline. For the most part, archaeologists have had to train themselves
in historiographic methods, including techniques of archival research.
Some of these histories reveal their authors’ lack of knowledge of histo-
riographic methods. Their naiveté offers little resistance to the natural
tendencies of archaeologists to view their discipline’s history presentis-
tically and from a parochial viewpoint. Yet, many other archaeologists,
such as D. K. Grayson (1983), D. J. Meltzer (1983), and M. Bowden
(1991), have demonstrated high levels of proficiency in their research.
   Only a small number of historians and historians of science have
been attracted to studying the history of archaeology. These include
C. M. Hinsley (1981, 1985), S. Mendyk (1989), R. T. Ridley (1992),
A. B. Ferguson (1993), S. L. Marchand (1996), and B. Kuklick (1996).
Although some of these historians have made distinguished contribu-
tions to the history of archaeology, their relations with archaeologists
who study that history tend to remain elusive. This is wholly unlike the
close ties that have developed between archaeologists and philosophers
of science who study archaeology. Some historians of science appear
to believe that only they are qualified to write histories of archaeology
(Croissant 2000: 203).

                                   550
                         Bibliographical Essay

   Yet, even if it were true that “insiders” tend to be unduly presentis-
tic and self-justifying and to overemphasize the coherence, uniformity,
and unilinearity of the history of archaeology, whereas “outsiders” are
better equipped to understand its contextuality and subjective quali-
ties, archaeologists know from experience more about how archaeol-
ogy works than do historians. Writing the history of any scientific dis-
cipline requires familiarity with two separate fields. On the one hand,
substantive knowledge is required of the discipline being studied; on
the other, knowledge is needed of historical methodology, including
ideas about disciplinary formation, as well as a sound understanding of
the history of Western culture, in the context of which archaeology as
we know it has arisen. Only rarely do individual scholars achieve parity
in their understanding of both disciplines. Much could be gained from
cooperation among professional historians, historians of science, and
archaeologists who are studying the history of archaeology and nei-
ther archaeologists nor historians ought to claim a monopoly in this
endeavor. Yet, despite their lack of cooperation, the history of archae-
ology has matured in recent years, in the sense that understanding
the development of archaeology has grown both more diversified and
more contested.
   Some of the first histories of archaeology were written for didactic
purposes. The physicist Joseph Henry, who was the first secretary of
the Smithsonian Institution, sought to purge archaeology of useless
speculation and encourage factual research. He commissioned Samuel
Haven, the librarian of the American Antiquarian Society, to review
and expose the inadequacies of previous studies of American prehis-
tory in a work titled Archaeology of the United States (1856). Henry
also published accounts of recent developments in archaeology in the
Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution, which was widely dis-
tributed in North America. The most influential of these papers was
“General views on archaeology” by the Swiss geologist and archae-
ologist Adolf Morlot (1861). That paper, which summarized major
developments in the study of European prehistory over the previous
fifty years, did much to encourage the adoption of a more scientific
approach to doing archaeological research in North America.
   For the next century, however, most histories of archaeology were
chronicles of discovery that recounted by whom and under what cir-
cumstances the most spectacular archaeological finds had been made.
One of the most popular and enduring of these works, despite its super-
ficiality, was Gods, Graves and Scholars by C. W. Ceram (pseudonym
for Kurt Marek) (1951). Seton Lloyd’s Foundations in the Dust
(1947; 2nd ed. 1981) offered a more richly contextualized account of

                                  551
                          Bibliographical Essay

Mesopotamian archaeology, while Geoffrey Bibby (1956) and Michael
Hoffman (1979) provided histories of archaeological research on pre-
historic Europe and Egypt that also informed readers about what that
research had discovered concerning the past. Brian Fagan’s best-selling
The Rape of the Nile (1975) is evidence of the continuing popularity of
this genre. Recent general histories of archaeology for nonspecialists
include those by W. H. Stiebing Jr. (1993) and Paul Bahn (1996). In
popular histories of archaeology, little attention is paid to the work
of archaeologists such as Gordon Childe or Grahame Clark, who,
although they made no spectacular discoveries of archaeological data,
played a major role in shaping a professional understanding of how
archaeological data should be interpreted.
   German archaeologists have long taken great care to document the
history of research relating to every topic and site they investigate. They
do this because they accord great importance to ensuring continuity in
research and believe that their interpretations should take account of
all available work that is relevant to a topic. Hence chronicles of prior
investigations are vital for establishing the credibility of their research.
At the same time, they have, until recently, generally avoided analyzing
the intellectual and social histories of their discipline.
   The modern analytical study of the history of archaeology began
in England in the late 1930s, in the context of a growing awareness
of generational differences among professional archaeologists, which
led some younger ones to try to understand what was happening to
their discipline. These early intellectual histories of archaeology were
strongly influenced by publications such as Christopher Hussey’s The
Picturesque (1927) and Kenneth Clark’s The Gothic Revival (1928),
which sought to relate changes in literary and artistic fashions to shifts
in the broader history of ideas. Stanley Casson’s The Discovery of Man
(1939) was written to justify an already moribund evolutionary anthro-
pology and archaeology that he saw as a product of intellectual free-
dom resulting from Europe’s Age of Discovery. The main importance
of this book was that it indicated that an intellectual history of archae-
ology was possible and worthwhile. Brief sketches of the early devel-
opment of prehistoric archaeology were published around the same
time by P. Shorr (1935), H. J. E. Peake (1940), and V. G. Childe
(1953).
   The general study of the history of archaeology was guided for
several decades by Glyn Daniel. His paper The Three Ages (1943)
launched research that culminated in his A Hundred Years of Archae-
ology (1950; 2nd ed. 1975), which traced the development of archae-
ology in Britain and western Europe. Although Daniel maintained

                                    552
                          Bibliographical Essay

that archaeology had changed gradually and adventitiously, his overall
theme was the early development of evolutionary archaeology and its
eventual replacement by a culture-historical approach, which Daniel
clearly favored and regarded as essential to keep archaeology from
reverting to an object-oriented antiquarianism. His later works, dealing
primarily with western European archaeology, include Daniel (1967)
and (1981a).
   In 1956, Mikhail Miller, an undistinguished provincial émigré
archaeologist who had fled the Soviet Union during World War II,
published a polemical, Cold War history of Russian and Soviet
archaeology and in 1964 the French archaeologist Annette Laming-
Emperaire produced Origines de l’archéologie préhistorique en France,
which traced the development of prehistoric archaeology in that coun-
try from the medieval period to the late nineteenth century. Her book
was distinguished by a careful examination of how structures of teach-
ing and research, professional associations, and journals both reflected
and shaped the development of French archaeology.
   Glyn Daniel actively encouraged the writing of regional and national
histories of archaeology. A History of American Archaeology (1974;
2nd ed. 1980; 3rd ed. 1993) by Gordon Willey and Jeremy Sabloff,
Ole Klindt-Jensen’s A History of Scandinavian Archaeology (1975),
and Ignacio Bernal’s A History of Mexican Archaeology (1980) all first
appeared in his “World of Archaeology” series. Willey and Sabloff pro-
vided a historical legitimation of processual archaeology, while crit-
icizing what they regarded as its theoretical shortcomings. Klindt-
Jensen and Bernal followed Daniel in demonstrating parallels between
western European intellectual fashions and what was happening in
archaeology in their respective countries.
   In the United States, the analytical study of the history of archaeol-
ogy had resumed with Walter Taylor’s (1948) undiplomatic and unwel-
comed critique of what he regarded as the theoretical inadequacies and
methodological shortcomings that had characterized the work of the
previous generation of American archaeologists. This was followed by
Douglas Schwartz’s Conceptions of Kentucky Prehistory (1967), James
Fitting’s (1973) multiauthored study of the development of archaeol-
ogy in different regions of North America, and a short general account
by S. Gorenstein (1977). These studies, as well as Willey and Sabloff’s
history, divided the history of archaeology into a series of periods, each
with its own characteristics and clearly differentiated from earlier and
later periods by marked alterations in archaeological practice (Schuyler
1971). Sometimes these changes were explicitly identified as examples
of Kuhn’s paradigm shifts (Sterud 1973).

                                   553
                         Bibliographical Essay

   The study of the history of archaeology on a worldwide basis was
further stimulated by an international conference on the history of
archaeology held, under the sponsorship of the International Union
of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences, at Aarhus, Denmark, in
1978 (Daniel 1981b); by a series of papers on “Regional Traditions
of Archaeological Research” published in World Archaeology (Trigger
and Glover 1981, 1982); and by further papers in a Festschrift for Glyn
Daniel (J. D. Evans et al. 1981: 11–70). Since the early 1980s, many
monographs and collections of papers have been published that study
the development of archaeology in different regions: Mexico (Vázquez
León 1996, 2003), Latin America (Politis and Alberti 1999), the United
States (Patterson 1995; Kehoe 1998), various regions of the United
States (P. J. Watson 1990; J. Johnson 1993; O’Brien 1996a; Janetski
1997b; Fowler 2000; Rolingson 2001; Snead 2001; Tushingham et al.
2002), Canada (Smith and Mitchell 1998), Australia (Horton 1991),
sub-Saharan Africa (Robertshaw 1990), the Middle East (Silberman
1982, 1989; Meskell 1998), India (Chakrabarti 1988, 1997, 2003), cen-
tral Europe (Sklenář 1983), Denmark (Fischer and Kristiansen 2002),
and Italy (Guidi 1988: a general history of archaeology with special
sections devoted to Italy). Eve Gran-Aymerich (1998) has chronicled
the work done by French archaeologists not only in France but in
other parts of the world, especially North Africa and the Middle East.
Alice Kehoe’s (1998) study of the history of archaeology in the United
States is notable for its irreverence and staunch defense of Boasian
culture-historical archaeology.
   Growing interest in ethnicity and nationalism, beginning in the late
1980s as a result of the disintegration of the Soviet Union and the
growth of the European Union, stimulated the production of a series
of collective works dealing with the long-term impact that ethnicity and
nationalism had on archaeology in Europe and other parts of the world.
Books published include Kohl and Fawcett (1995), Dı́az-Andreu and
Champion (1996a), Graves-Brown et al. (1996), and Crooke (2000).
In addition, collections of papers dealing with regional archaeologies
have appeared periodically in the journal Antiquity, for example, Cleere
(1993). Many of these works are strongly externalist, examining how
specific social, political, economic, and ethnic factors have influenced
the practice of archaeology.
   In recent years, Spanish archaeologists have shown much interest in
the history of archaeology in their country; for a brief discussion and
bibliography, see M. Dı́az-Andreu (2003). Some German archaeolo-
gists also have become interested in critically examining the history
of archaeology in Germany, especially the nationalist tendencies of

                                  554
                         Bibliographical Essay

some archaeologists and their relations with National Socialism (Härke
2000a; Leube and Hegewisch 2002).
   Three general studies appeared beginning in the late 1980s. The first
edition of A History of Archaeological Thought (Trigger 1989a) sought
to trace the development of archaeological theory at a global level,
although most emphasis was on Europe, the United States, and the
Soviet Union. Attention was paid not only to the social and intellectual
contexts in which archaeological thought had developed but also to the
spread of ideas and the circumstances that promoted their perpetuation
and elaboration. The main developments were conceptualized in terms
of theoretical movements rather than successive stages or regional tra-
ditions. Jaroslav Malina and Zdenek Vašı́ček’s Archaeology Yesterday
and Today (1990) sought to contextualize the development of archae-
ology in relation to the growth of other sciences and the humanities.
They maintained that there could be no history of archaeology with-
out a history of science in general. Alain Schnapp’s The Discovery of
the Past (1997, French original 1993) detailed the development of an
interest in the material remains of the past from earliest times to the
nineteenth century.
   An already existing interest in relations between archaeology and its
social, political, and economic context was accentuated by the devel-
opment of postprocessual archaeology and by the founding of the
World Archaeological Congress in 1986 (Ucko 1987). The result was
an intensification of efforts to reveal biases in “hegemonic” inter-
pretations of the past and to enable repressed groups to reclaim
their cultural heritage (Lowenthal 1985; Cleere 1989; Gathercole and
Lowenthal 1989; Layton 1989a, 1989b; Stone and MacKenzie 1990;
Bond and Gillam 1994; Schmidt and Patterson 1995; Tunbridge and
Ashworth 1996; Bender 1998; Watkins 2003). These endeavors pro-
duced numerous historical studies that assigned a preponderant role
to social and cultural factors in shaping archaeological discourse (e.g.,
Hodder 1991a; Ucko 1995a), but they have not yet resulted in a
general history of archaeology, perhaps because of postprocessual
archaeologists’ widespread antipathy toward “grand narratives.” The
most ambitious product inspired by this approach has been Peter
Ucko’s “Encounters with Ancient Egypt,” an eight-volume collec-
tion of papers of widely varying quality that examine the long-term
reciprocal relations between the study of ancient Egypt and its varied
social, economic, and political contexts. At least four of these vol-
umes relate directly to the history of archaeology: R. Matthews and
C. Roemer (2003), J. Tait (2003), D. Jeffreys (2003), and P. J. Ucko
and T. Champion (2003).

                                  555
                          Bibliographical Essay

   Most recently, the desire of Darwinian archaeologists to incorpo-
rate major aspects of American culture-historical archaeology into their
own selectionist general theory has resulted in the production of a large
number of books and papers dealing with the history of American
prehistoric archaeology during the twentieth century. Although these
works serve a specific intellectual agenda, as do all histories of archae-
ology, they have made extremely important contributions to under-
standing the development of American archaeology. The major general
historical works produced by this group are M. J. O’Brien, Paradigms
of the Past: The Story of Missouri Archaeology (1996a), R. L. Lyman,
M. J. O’Brien, and R. C. Dunnell, The Rise and Fall of Culture
History (1997a), and, with a behavioral archaeologist, M. J. O’Brien,
R. L. Lyman, and M. B. Schiffer, Archaeology as a Process (2005).
Equally important specialized studies and biographies produced by
this group will be noted later.
   In addition to prehistoric archaeology, other branches of archae-
ology have produced their own histories. These works generally seek
to define the changing institutional structures of a particular branch
of archaeology, determine how it resembled and differed from other
branches over time, and discuss problems it may currently be encoun-
tering. Recent general studies of classical archaeology include A. M.
Snodgrass (1987), M. Shanks (1996), and S. L. Dyson (1998). Egypto-
logical archaeology has been surveyed by J. Wilson (1964) and D. M.
Reid (2002) and biblical archaeology by P. R. S. Moorey (1991) and
W. G. Dever (2003). The history of Maya archaeology has been exam-
ined by J. A. Sabloff (1990) and in C. W. Golden and G. Borgstede
(2004), and the impact on it of the decipherment of the Maya script has
been analyzed by M. D. Coe (1992). A. Andrén (1998) has surveyed his-
torical archaeology in global perspective. The development of medieval
archaeology is covered by Gerrard (2003). Histories of colonial and
industrial archaeology have not yet received monographic treatment
but are examined in papers in Murray (2001a). Historical sketches are
also frequently included in books dealing with issues of theory and
method related to these branches. Other histories deal with archaeo-
logical methods, such as aerial photography (Deuel 1973), chronology
(R. Taylor 1987; O’Brien and Lyman 1999a; Nash 1999, 2000a; Truncer
2003), marine archaeology (J. Taylor 1966), salvage archaeology
(Baldwin 1996), and settlement archaeology (Billman and Feinman
1999). Although early histories traced the development of new analyt-
ical techniques and their application to archaeology, more recent ones,
such as S. E. Nash’s It’s About Time (2000a) are paying more attention
to the ways in which the values and aspirations of archaeologists have

                                   556
                         Bibliographical Essay

shaped the reception and use of techniques that originated in other
disciplines.
   A growing number of historical studies examine specific archaeolog-
ical projects, controversies, and transitions. Much of the key research
that is expanding an understanding of the history of archaeology is of
this sort. Examples of such work include T. Kendrick’s (1950) inter-
pretation of the development of antiquarianism in Tudor England as
a triumph of Renaissance over medieval thought; Robert Silverberg’s
(1968) study of how the concept of the Moundbuilders both reflected
and reinforced prejudice against aboriginal Americans during the
nineteenth century; C. Chippindale’s (1983) examination of chang-
ing interpretations of Stonehenge; D. Grayson’s (1983) clarification
of key debates establishing the great antiquity of human beings in
Europe; D. Meltzer’s (1983) detailed analysis of nineteenth-century
controversies about the earliest human inhabitants of the New World;
B. Gräslund’s (1987) study of the role played by typology in the early
development of Scandinavian archaeology; I. Jenkin’s (1992) exami-
nation of the reasons for changing collecting and display policies in
the British Museum between 1800 and 1939; R. T. Ridley’s (1992)
study of the methodological innovations associated with French exca-
vations carried out during the Napoleonic occupation of Rome; S. L.
Marchand’s (1996) detailed examination of the impact of philhellenism
on German archaeology from 1750 to 1970; N. Abu El-Haj’s (2001)
documentation of how archaeology can be used to transform land-
scapes politically, and T. C. Patterson’s (2003) study of the impact of
Marxism on archaeological interpretation in the United States during
the twentieth century.
   Biographies focus on the role played by the individual in archaeol-
ogy. Written for most of the same purposes as more general histories
of archaeology, they are important for understanding the history of
the discipline. Although conventional biographies of archaeologists
seek mainly to chronicle the social life, personal contacts, and discov-
eries of their subjects (J. Hawkes 1982; Winstone 1990), others that
contextualize the work of archaeologists shed important light on the
history of archaeology (I. Graham 2002). Most of them make available
archival materials that are important for understanding disciplinary his-
tory. Among the most valuable contextualized biographies are those
by S. Piggott (1950; 2nd ed. 1985) on William Stukeley; R. Woodbury
(1973) and D. Givens (1992a) on Alfred Kidder; M. Hunter (1975)
on John Aubrey; C. C. Parslow (1995) on Karl Weber (which also
contributes to the general understanding of eighteenth-century clas-
sical archaeology); M. J. O’Brien and R. L. Lyman (1998) on James

                                  557
                         Bibliographical Essay

Ford; H. Grünert (2002) on Gustav Kossinna; and R. L. Lyman and
M. J. O’Brien (2003) on W. C. McKern and the Midwestern Taxo-
nomic Method. Less well known is the historian Gerald Killan’s (1983)
insightful biography of the nineteenth-century Canadian archaeolo-
gist David Boyle. At least five books on the life and work of Gordon
Childe (McNairn 1980; Trigger 1980a; S. Green 1981; Gathercole et al.
1995; Lech and Stepniowski 1999 – with English abstracts) as well
as numerous papers reflect the enormous and continuing fascination
with this archaeologist. A growing interest in feminism is reflected by
M. Allesbrook’s (1992) biography of Harriet Boyd Hawes, Char
Solomon’s (2002) biography of Tatiana Proskouriakoff, and S. L.
Dyson’s (2004) biography of Eugénie Strong as well as by collections
of papers examining the careers of female archaeologists edited by
C. Claassen (1994), M. Dı́az-Andreu and M. L. S. Sørensen (1998),
N. M. White et al. (1999), and part of A. Kehoe and M. B. Emmerichs
(1999). Chapman (1998) considers how M. Gimbutas’s life experi-
ences influenced her understanding of the past. Gordon Willey (1988)
published a series of short biographies of deceased archaeologists he
had known and T. Murray (1999a) contains biographies of fifty-eight
distinguished archaeologists, only a few of whom are still alive.
   Autobiographies tend to be sources for studying the history of
archaeology rather than contributions to it. R. S. MacNeish’s (1978)
account of his career contains many observations about the develop-
ment of American archaeology that blur this distinction. G. R. Willey
(1974a), G. Daniel and C. Chippindale (1989), and S. South (1998)
are collections of autobiographical essays that various senior archaeol-
ogists were invited to write. These essays contain, in addition to their
purely biographical component, many valuable observations about the
development of archaeology.
   Less attention has been paid to the history of archaeological insti-
tutions. Major studies of national institutions have been published
by Joan Evans (1956), A. S. Bell (1981), and C. M. Hinsley Jr.
(1981), the latter being a magisterial account of the anthropologi-
cal work of the Smithsonian Institution before 1910. Berta Stjern-
quist (2005) has written a history of the Historical Museum in Lund,
Sweden. Susan Allen (2002) presents a history of the Archaeological
Institute of America. The role of amateur archaeological societies in
nineteenth-century England is among the topics considered by S. Pig-
gott (1976), K. Hudson (1981), and P. Levine (1986). M. McKusick
(1970, 1991) has traced a celebrated conflict between the Smithsonian
Institution and a local amateur scientific society in the United States
concerning the authenticity of some finds made in the nineteenth

                                  558
                          Bibliographical Essay

century. P. Fagette (1996) and E. Lyon (1996) examine the impact
of government funding on the practice of American archaeology in
the 1930s. B. Kuklick (1996) and M. Balter (2005) study the histo-
ries of specific archaeological research projects. Balter (2005) and M.
J. O’Brien, R. L. Lyman, and M. B. Schiffer (2005) have adopted a
network approach, which examines the relations between cooperating
and competing individuals and institutions.
   Anthologies of significant papers dealing with the history of archae-
ology are especially valuable for students. Useful popular compilations
include J. Hawkes (1963) and, for the New World, Deuel (1967).
R. F. Heizer (1959) reprints a set of papers of enduring methodologi-
cal importance, including translations of originals published in foreign
languages. Anthologies dealing with major interpretative issues have
been edited by Heizer (1962a) and G. Daniel (1967). C. S. Larsen
(1985) presents papers on what were claimed to be “Palaeolithic”
remains in North America written in the nineteenth century and B.
Trigger (1986a) a collection dealing with North American studies
of coastal shell mounds from the same period. R. L. Lyman, M. J.
O’Brien, and R. C. Dunnell (1997b) reprint major theoretical papers
published by American culture-historical archaeologists. A. Fischer and
K. Kristiansen (2002) have translated into English many papers relating
to the history of Danish archaeology.
   Finally, there are a growing number of studies of “counter archae-
ologies” or “fantastic archaeologies” that offer alternatives to the inter-
pretations of professional archaeologists. Many of these studies have
a historical component: R. Wauchope (1962), J. P. White (1974),
C. Cazeau and S. Scott (1979), J. A. Sabloff (1982), K. L. Feder (1984,
1990), W. H. Stiebing Jr. (1984), and S. Williams (1991).
   General discussions of internalist and externalist approaches to the
study of disciplinary histories include Basalla (1968), Morrell (1981),
Lelas (1985), Tamarkin (1986), and Shapin (1992).
   I am opposed to presentistic explanations of the history of archae-
ology in the sense that I hold that past developments must be under-
stood in relation to the context in which they occurred, not measured
against what we presently believe about the past. I am not, however,
persuaded that it is possible for historians of archaeology totally to for-
get the present state of archaeology or that knowledge of the present
does not sometimes provide useful strategic guidance to historians.
In a summary history such as this one, it is impossible to discuss
many examples of seemingly fruitful competing trends in archaeolog-
ical research or numerous dead ends. This may give a false impression
of unilinearity in the development of archaeology. Yet, I have sought

                                   559
                          Bibliographical Essay

to combat this impression by drawing attention to some important
dead ends, by considering how archaeology might have developed
differently in specific instances, and by investigating variations in the
development of archaeology in different parts of the world. I have also,
however, drawn attention to theoretical and methodological innova-
tions that appear to have irreversibly altered the practice of archae-
ology and that produce something resembling a unilinear trend in
the development of the discipline. I am convinced that archaeology is
capable of answering many diverse questions about human behavior
and history, provided that it develops appropriate theories and means
to address them. Creating such theories is, however, comparable to
assembling a large jigsaw puzzle. There are thousands of different
sequences in which the pieces can be put together but, in the long
run, the same overall picture must emerge. As a result, the history of
archaeology displays directionality, even though it does not exhibit
unilinearity.


            Classical and Other Text-Based Archaeologies
The most comprehensive study of the origins of antiquarian research
is Schnapp (1997). For an older evolutionary sequence of conceptual-
izations of the past, see Childe (1956b).
   Ancient Egyptian and Mesopotamian historiography is discussed by
Van Seters (1983), Redford (1986), Baines (1989), and Jonker (1995),
and in Tait (2003), as well as more generally by Butterfield (1981). Clas-
sical, medieval, and early modern views of the past are surveyed within
the context of broader anthropological concerns by Casson (1939),
Hodgen (1964), and Slotkin (1965). Classical views are examined in
greater detail by Wace (1949), Shrimpton (1992), Antonaccio (1995),
Alcock, Cherry, and Elsner (2001), Alcock (2002), Boardman (2002),
and Press (2003). Medieval views of history are discussed by Sandford
(1944) and medieval western European relations with the surviving
monuments of antiquity by Peacock (1979) and Greenhalgh (1989).
Toulmin and Goodfield (1966) and Rossi (1985) examine early mod-
ern challenges to biblical chronologies and the changing philosophy
of history since the medieval period.
   The most comprehensive guide to the history of classical archaeol-
ogy is An Encyclopedia of the History of Classical Archaeology, edited by
De Grummond (1996). Lowenthal (1985) discusses changing mod-
ern attitudes toward classical antiquity. MacKendrick (1960) surveys
modern archaeology in Italy and Stoneman (1987) its early develop-
ment in Greece. Weiss (1969), Jacks (1993), and Barkan (1999) trace

                                   560
                         Bibliographical Essay

the Italian Renaissance’s discovery of classical antiquity, and Rowe
(1965) discusses the Renaissance as it relates to anthropology. Parslow
(1995), Ridley (1992), and Bignamini (2004) trace successive phases
in the development of excavation techniques at classical sites in Italy
into the early nineteenth century. For views on collecting, excava-
tion, and other ethical issues relating to the practice of archaeology in
the eighteenth century, see Ramage (1990, 1992). Marchand (1996)
provides a brilliantly researched analysis of classical archaeology in
Germany from the late eighteenth to the mid-twentieth century. Her
book also constitutes a model of how the history of archaeology should
be written. Gran-Aymerich (1998) traces the development of classical
archaeology in France, and Dyson (1989, 1998) examines its devel-
opment in the United States. Morris (1994a) and Shanks (1996) view
it from an international perspective. Bruford (1975), Jenkyns (1980),
and F. Turner (1981) investigate attitudes toward ancient Greece in
the nineteenth century. M. Bernal (1987) discusses (too one-sidedly)
the emphasis that was placed beginning in the nineteenth century
on the autochthonous nature of Greek culture. Bodnar (1960) pro-
vides a biography of Cyriacus of Ancona; Leppmann (1970) of
Winckelmann; Allesbrook (1992) of Hawes; and Dyson (2004) of
Eugénie Strong. R. Chamberlin (1983), Jenkins (1992), and Yalouri
(2001) discuss European attitudes toward classical heritage. For the
extension of classical archaeology to investigate the protohistory of
the Mediterranean region, see McDonald and Thomas (1990).
   The histories of Egyptology and Assyriology have been chroni-
cled in many popular works. A selective bibliography listing numer-
ous older contributions is found in Daniel (1975: 401–3). Among
the more informative general histories of the archaeology of ancient
Egypt are Greener (1966) and Fagan (1975). One of the most illu-
minating accounts of archaeological activities during the nineteenth
century, which also conveys the spirit of such research, is Amelia
Edwards’s Egypt and its Monuments: Pharaohs, Fellahs and Explorers
(1891). Wortham (1971) examines British studies of ancient Egypt
between 1549 and 1906. J. Wilson (1964) and N. Thomas (1995, 1996)
present histories of American archaeological research in Egypt. Greek
and Roman views about ancient Egypt are discussed in Matthews
and Roemer (2003). Medieval Arab interests are examined by El
Daly (2004) and early modern European views are analyzed by Yates
(1964), Wortham (1971), Irwin (1980), Curl (1982), Iversen (1993),
and Rossi (1985). More recent popular engagements with ancient
Egypt are examined by Carrott (1978) and by papers in Jeffries (2003)
and MacDonald and Rice (2003). Mitchell (1988) discusses European

                                  561
                        Bibliographical Essay

colonialism in Egypt. The impact of colonialism on Egyptology is
analyzed by J. Thompson (1992), D. Reid (1997, 2002), Ridley
(1998), Wood (1998), and Mayes (2003). Petrie’s career is chroni-
cled by Drower (1985) and Frankfort’s contributions are evaluated by
Wengrow (1999). Lloyd (1947, 1981) chronicles the history of Assyri-
ology, M. Larsen (1996) examines the development of Assyriology
in the 1840s and 1850s, and B. Kuklick (1996) investigates American
archaeological research in Iraq between 1880 and 1930.
   G. Wang (1985) provides a brief but very useful summary of tradi-
tional Chinese historiography. Rudolf (1962–1963), Chêng (1963: 1–
7), Li (1977: 3–13), Chang (1981), and Schnapp (1997: 74–9) trace the
development of antiquarian studies in China, as do Hoffman (1974),
Ikawa-Smith (1982, 2001), and Bleed (1986) for Japan. For informa-
tion about the concept of time in East Asia, see Vinsrygg (1986) and
G. Barnes (1990a).


                   Antiquarianism without Texts
The development of antiquarian research in Europe north of the Alps
is surveyed as part of more general histories by Daniel (1950), Laming-
Emperaire (1964), Klindt-Jensen (1975), Sklenář (1983), and Schnapp
(1997); and for America by Willey and Sabloff (1993) and Browman
and Williams (2002). Many studies have examined the early develop-
ment of antiquarianism in Britain. The best synthesis of this work is
Piggott (1989; see also Moir 1958). Readers should be on the lookout
for important future publications on this topic by Tim Murray, espe-
cially in his forthcoming comprehensive study, A History of Prehistoric
Archaeology in England. The historiography of the late medieval and
early modern periods has been studied by Walters (1934), Kendrick
(1950), and L. Fox (1956). L. Clark (1961), Lynch and Lynch (1968),
Marsden (1974, 1984), Piggott (1976, 1978), and Schnapp (1997) sur-
vey the development of a scientific approach to prehistoric archae-
ology before 1800. Aubrey’s archaeological manuscripts have been
reproduced by Fowles (1980, 1982) and Stukeley’s manuscript on
Stonehenge by Burl and Mortimer (2005). Laming-Emperaire (1964)
and Laurent (1999) survey the development of antiquarianism and pre-
historic archaeology in France.
   The recognition of prehistoric stone tools as being of human man-
ufacture and the role played by the Three-Age theory in the study of
prehistory before 1800 have been examined by Heizer (1962b), Daniel
(1963a, 1976), Rodden (1981), and Goodrum (2002). Biographical
studies that are particularly valuable for illuminating the development

                                 562
                         Bibliographical Essay

of antiquarianism include Piggott (1950, 1985) on Stukeley, Hunter
(1975) on Aubrey, R. H. Cunnington (1975) on William Cunnington,
and G. Parry (1995) on various English antiquaries of the seventeenth
century. Sweet (2004) examines British antiquaries of the eighteenth
century. For a useful critique of Piggott’s interpretation of Stukeley’s
career, see Ucko et al. (1991). These works do not confirm Crawford’s
(1932) mechanistic attribution of a leading role in the development
of antiquarian research to increasing numbers of finds resulting from
industrial development, although such development later assisted the
work of Boucher de Perthes. Pomian (1990) provides a study of the
collecting of antiquities between 1500 and 1800.
   Among numerous works examining the early attitudes of Europeans
toward indigenous peoples, especially those of the New World, are
Fairchild (1928), G. Boas (1948), H. Jones (1964), Huddleston (1967),
Chiappelli (1976), and MacCormack (1995). Spanish views are dis-
cussed by Hanke (1959), Keen (1971), and Pagden (1982), and English
and French ones by Pearce (1965), Jaenen (1976), Berkhofer (1978),
Vaughan (1979, 1982), Sheehan (1980), and Kupperman (1980). These
views partially explain the slowness with which antiquarianism devel-
oped in the New World.
   For studies of the Enlightenment, see Hampson (1982), Beiser
(1992), and Im Hof (1994). The Scottish Enlightenment is discussed
by Bryson (1945) and Schneider (1967), and in Herman’s (2001) pop-
ular but useful history. A critical, but one-sided, analysis of Enlight-
enment thought is provided by Vyverberg (1989). L. Furst (1969),
Beiser (1992), and Dumont (1994) provide background on eighteenth-
century romanticism and Barnard (1965, 2003) and Zammito (2002)
discuss the ideas of the German philosopher Johann Herder. Tully
(1989) traces ideas regarding progress from 1789 to 1989.


             The Beginnings of Prehistoric Archaeology
The general understanding of the early development of prehistoric
archaeology in Scandinavia is being radically transformed, especially
for readers of English, by the research of Peter Rowley-Conwy. His
findings have been very influential for revising the first half of this
chapter. Hopefully, the results of his investigations will be published
in full in the near future. Gräslund (1974, for an English summary see
1976; 1987) examines in detail the development of an understanding of
prehistoric chronology in Scandinavia. For other studies dealing with
the early development of Scandinavian archaeology, see Morlot (1861,
reprinted in Trigger 1986a), Bibby (1956), Klindt-Jensen (1975, 1976),

                                  563
                        Bibliographical Essay

Kristiansen (1985), and Fischer and Kristiansen (2002). Although much
has been written about the role played by Christian Thomsen in the
development of prehistoric archaeology, most accounts overemphasize
his application of the Three-Age concept and fail to deal adequately
with his methodological innovations (e.g., Klindt-Jensen 1975: 49–
57). Specialized studies of his work include Heizer (1962b), Daniel
(1976), Gräslund (1981), Rodden (1981), Rowley-Conwy (1984), and
Paddayya (1993). Sven Nilsson is discussed by Hegardt (1999). The
origin of the concept of hunter-gatherers is discussed in Pluciennik
(2002). The earliest use of the concept of prehistory as both adjective
and noun is considered by Clermont and Smith (1990) and Welinder
(1991). The development of the concept of the Mesolithic has been
examined by Rowley-Conwy (1996). Weiss (1969) and McKay (1976)
discuss numismatics and its relation to archaeology. For the begin-
nings of prehistoric archaeology in Scotland, see A. Bell (1981), Trig-
ger (1992), Kehoe (1998), and Hulse (1999). Morlot (1861), Childe
(1955), and Kaeser (2001, 2004a, 2004b) discuss analogous develop-
ments in Switzerland. The idea of progress and its use for understand-
ing the past during the nineteenth century is surveyed by Burrow
(1966), Bowler (1989), and Sanderson (1990); Herbert Spencer’s soci-
ological work is examined by Peel (1971). For more on J. W. Dawson,
see Sheets-Pyenson (1996).
   The developments in uniformitarian geology that provided a nec-
essary background for the emergence of Palaeolithic archaeology are
chronicled in Zittel (1901), Geikie (1905), Gillispie (1951), Chorley
et al. (1964), Davies (1969), Schneer (1969), and Porter (1977). Simi-
lar developments in evolutionary biology are covered by Irvine (1955),
Wendt (1955), Barnett (1958), Eiseley (1958), Haber (1959), and
J. Greene (1959).
   Groenen (1994) offers a detailed, analytical history of Palaeolithic
archaeology focused mainly on developments in France. The establish-
ment of a scientific understanding of human antiquity has been mas-
terfully researched by Gruber (1965) and Grayson (1983). Grayson’s
definitive treatment should be consulted for numerous primary and
secondary references. The study of prehistory in England before the
development of Palaeolithic archaeology is surveyed in Levine (1986),
Van Riper (1993), M. Morse (1999), and T. Murray (2001b). The
development of Palaeolithic archaeology in France and England is ana-
lyzed by Laming-Emperaire (1964), Van Riper (1993), Chazan (1995),
and Gran-Aymerich (1998). Sackett (1981, 1991, 2000) examines later
developments and, in particular, the influence of Mortillet. Warren and


                                 564
                         Bibliographical Essay

Rose (1994) discuss Pengelly’s excavation techniques. Grayson follows
French usage in equating the development of Palaeolithic archaeology
with the beginnings of prehistoric archaeology and excluding Scandi-
navian archaeology on the ground that it addressed mainly protohis-
toric times (defined as beginning everywhere at the time writing was
first developed in the Middle East ca. 3000 bc). This terminological
difference should not obscure the close similarity between Grayson’s
position and my own.
   The development of prehistoric archaeology in the United States
has been described by Willey and Sabloff (1993: 21–64). The Mound-
builder controversy is examined magisterially by Silverberg (1968) and
the work of Squier and Davis is evaluated by Welch (1998). Anthro-
pology in the United States during the nineteenth century is dis-
cussed by Bieder (1986). Squier’s archaeological work is examined by
Tax (1975) and the influence of Joseph Henry by Washburn (1967).
American shell-mound excavations are discussed by Christenson
(1985) and Trigger (1986a). R. Evans (2004) examines the appro-
priation of Mexican prehistory as part of the United States’ cultural
heritage. Interesting parallels can be noted with the appropriation of
the ancient civilizations of the Middle East by European scholars. Early
research on the Maya is surveyed by Brunhouse (1973). Desmond and
Messenger (1988) examine in detail the careers of two nineteenth-
century Maya antiquaries.
   The use of the terms antiquary and archaeologist to distinguish an
amateur from a professional dedicated to studying the material remains
of the past correlates roughly (and probably accidentally) with the first
use of the term scientist in 1833. Schnapp (2002) discusses similarities
and differences between antiquaries and archaeologists.


                      Evolutionary Archaeology
Little has been published in recent times about John Lubbock’s archae-
ological and ethnological writings. This dearth is incommensurate with
his importance as a promoter of Darwinian thought in archaeology.
His standard biographies remain Hutchinson (1914) and Duff (1924).
Tim Murray (1989) discusses his role in preserving ancient monuments.
   The debate between polygenists and monogenists is examined in its
British context by Stocking (1973) and in its American one by Stanton
(1960). The impact of Darwinian evolutionism on racial thinking and
the disagreements between Darwin and Wallace concerning the evo-
lutionary status of “primitive” human groups are examined by Eiseley


                                  565
                          Bibliographical Essay

(1958). Street (1975) presents popular British stereotypes of Africans
between 1858 and 1920 and Nederveen Pieterse (1992) analyzes images
of Africa and Africans in Western popular culture.
   Nineteenth-century prehistoric archaeology in the United States
is included in this section because it was primarily shaped, as was
American anthropology as a whole, by the colonial encounter between
dramatically expanding Euro-American settlement and the indigenous
peoples of central and western North America. General discussions of
racial behavior in the nineteenth century that are relevant for under-
standing archaeological practice in colonial settings are provided by
M. Harris (1968a), Stocking (1968, 1982), S. J. Gould (1981), Stepan
(1982), and Bieder (1986). The development of biological anthropol-
ogy and of racial views concerning the North American Indians has
been studied by Glass et al. (1959), Glacken (1967), and Horsman
(1975, 1981). Conn (1998) examines the role of museums in the United
States from 1876 to 1926. Willey and Sabloff (1993: 38–64) trace the
development of North American archaeology during the middle and
late nineteenth centuries and Silverberg (1968) chronicles the demise of
the Moundbuilder myth. Patterson (1991) considers the nature of pre-
professional archaeology in the United States. Hinsley (1981) examines
the role played by the Smithsonian Institution in the professionaliza-
tion of indigenous American studies, including archaeology. He also
examines social factors influencing the development of archaeology at
the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology (Hinsley 1985),
as does Appel (1992). McKusick (1970, 1991) offers a case study of the
competition to interpret prehistoric archaeological data between ama-
teur and professional archaeologists in the United States and Meltzer
(1983) analyzes the very active role played by archaeologists employed
by the United States federal government in nineteenth-century “Early
Man” controversies. Kehoe (1998) discusses the importance of Daniel
Wilson’s work for nineteenth-century American archaeology. Trigger
(1980b, 1985b, 1986b) examines the role of racism at this time. Max
Uhle’s varied contributions are discussed by Rowe (1954) and Menzel
(1977).
   The history of Australian archaeology is documented by Horton
(1991), Moser (1995a), T. Murray (2001c), and in a broader anthro-
pological context Griffiths (1996). Aspects of it are treated more briefly
by McCarthy (1959), Megaw (1966), Mulvaney (1969, 1981), R. Jones
(1979), Murray and White (1981), and McBryde (1986). Developments
since the middle of the twentieth century, with an emphasis on rela-
tions between archaeology and Australian politics, are examined in
collections of papers edited by Gathercole et al. (1995) and Bonyhady

                                   566
                          Bibliographical Essay

and Griffiths (1996). The most accessible accounts of the development
of New Zealand archaeology are Sorrenson (1977), Davidson (1979),
Gathercole (1981), Sutton (1985), and H. Allen (2001). Gather-
cole provides references to a number of other early studies in New
Zealand anthropological newsletters. Historical issues relating to
hunter-gatherer archaeology in isolated parts of the world are discussed
by Gamble (1992), Bowler (1992), T. Murray (1992), R. Jones (1992),
Mazel (1992), and Borrero (1992).
   The most comprehensive study of the history of African archae-
ology has been edited by Robertshaw (1990). Fagan (1981) and
Posnansky (1982) each provide a brief survey of the history of sub-
Saharan archaeology and M. Hall (1984), Schrire et al. (1986), T. Shaw
(1991), and Schlanger (2002, 2003) discuss the development of prehis-
toric archaeology in South Africa. Chanaiwa (1973), Garlake (1973,
1983), and H. Kuklick (1991b) chronicle and discuss archaeological
investigations at Great Zimbabwe and other stone ruins in south-
central Africa and the prolonged controversies that have surrounded
these sites. Works dealing with cultural contacts between Egypt and
the rest of Africa include O’Connor (1993), Trigger (1994b), Celenko
(1996), and O’Connor and Reid (2003). MacGaffey (1966) docu-
ments the impact of racist stereotypes on African ethnological studies.
M. Bernal (1987, 2001) polemically discusses controversies concern-
ing the role played by ancient Egyptian civilization in African and
world history; for alternative views see Lefkowitz and Rogers (1996).
Critiques of archaeological research in Africa include Ki-Zerbo (1981),
Andah (1985, 1995), Schrire (1995), N. Shepherd (2002b), and papers
in Schmidt and McIntosh (1996).
   Comments relating to colonial and postcolonial archaeology in var-
ious parts of the world are found in D. Miller (1980) and in papers
published in Ucko (1995a) and Schmidt and Patterson (1995).


                   Culture-Historical Archaeology
Culture-historical archaeology is currently of great interest to archaeol-
ogists and historians of archaeology. These include not only Darwinian
archaeologists, who seek to incorporate selected aspects of culture-
historical archaeology into their own approach, but also postprocessu-
alists and other archaeologists who are curious about what processual
archaeology replaced. This curiosity appears to have been stimulated
by a final rejection of the hegemonic claims of processual archaeology.
   For discussions of Ratzel, see Wanklyn (1961), J. D. Hunter
(1983), W. D. Smith (1991: 140–61), and Zimmerman (2001: 202–5).

                                   567
                         Bibliographical Essay

H. Kuklick (1991a) considers the role played by diffusion in British
anthropology. M. Harris (1968a: 373–92) and Trigger (1978a: 54–
74) discuss the development of diffusionism in anthropology and
archaeology; W. Adams et al. (1978) trace the separate employment
of the concepts of migration and diffusion to explain culture change;
Daniel (1963a: 104–27) discusses hyper-diffusionism; and Rouse (1958,
1986), Härke (1998), and Burmeister (2000) the archaeological analy-
sis of migrations. Elkin and Macintosh (1974) have edited a study of
the career of Grafton Elliot Smith.
   Despite his undeniable importance, no substantial biography of
Montelius is available, although a conference was held to celebrate the
150th anniversary of his birth (Åström 1995). Gräslund (1974, 1976,
1987) offers the most detailed analysis of Montelius’s assumptions,
methods, and contributions to the study of European prehistory, while
Klindt-Jensen (1975: 84–93) sets his work into its Scandinavian con-
text. Renfrew (1973a) critiques Montelius’s diffusionist assumptions.
   Kroeber and Kluckhohn (1952) document the origins and history of
the anthropological concept of culture. Although no equally detailed
study of the development of the concept of the archaeological culture is
available, Meinander (1981) and Dı́az-Andreu (1996a) ably summarize
what is known about its origins. The development of this concept in
Europe and America is compared in Trigger (1978a: 75–95). I am most
grateful to Peter Rowley-Conwy for tracing at my request the early use
of the term “culture” by Scandinavian archaeologists.
   Recent discussions of nationalism are provided by Gellner (1983),
Hobsbawm (1990), and B. Anderson (1991). Weber (1976) examines
the promotion of national unity in France and Dumont (1994) com-
pares French and German ideas of collective identity. Kohl (1998)
discusses the relation between nationalism and archaeology. For an
examination of the connections between ideas of ethnicity and racism,
see E. Barkan (1992).
   Unfortunately, no detailed evaluation of the important contribu-
tions of Kossinna to the development of archaeology has been pub-
lished in English. Grünert’s (2002) massive biography provides impor-
tant and hitherto unavailable information about Kossinna’s life and
career, but it does not supply the detailed summaries of Kossinna’s
publications that are necessary to understand the development of his
ideas. Schwerin von Krosigk (1982) discusses in detail Kossinna’s meth-
ods and theories with special reference to his papers that were until
recently deposited at the Christian-Albrechts University in Kiel. Klejn
(1974) summarizes Kossinna’s views and evaluates them in a judicious


                                  568
                          Bibliographical Essay

fashion. All these works are available only in German. The best discus-
sion of Kossinna’s work in English is Klejn (1999a). For Virchow’s
work in archaeology, see Ottaway (1973) and, for the context of
German archaeology and anthropology in which Virchow and his
followers worked, Fetten (2000) and Zimmerman (2001). German
nationalism is discussed by Kohn (1960) and in a broader European
context by Poliakov (1974). Thomas Huxley’s (1896: 271–328) essay
“The Aryan Question and Prehistoric Man” provides valuable insights
into how scholars viewed European prehistory at the end of the nine-
teenth century.
   A general account of Childe’s archaeological ideas is presented in
Trigger (1980a), some aspects of which are modified and updated in
later works (Trigger 1984b, 1986c). Childe’s specific contributions to
culture-historical archaeology are discussed in Trigger (1980a: 32–55).
S. Green (1981) chronicles his family background, life, and career;
McNairn (1980) and Patterson and Orser (2004) reproduce and com-
ment on extracts from his writings; and Gathercole et al. (1995)
examine Childe’s political activities in Australia. Specialized discus-
sions and evaluations of his work are found in Piggott (1958), Ravetz
(1959), J. Allen (1967, 1981), Gathercole (1971, 1976, 1982), Grahame
Clark (1976), Trigger (1982b), Tringham (1983), Veit (1984), Ridgway
(1985), Sherratt (1989), K. Greene (1999), and Bakker (2001). For a
discussion of Polish influence on Childe’s understanding of the con-
cept of the archaeological culture, compare Barford (2002: 177–8) and
Lech (2002: 212–17). An important evaluation of Childe’s contribu-
tions to archaeology is found in a set of papers presented at the Institute
of Archaeology in 1992 (D. Harris 1994). Familiarity with Myres (1911)
is essential to understand many specific aspects of Childe’s culture-
historical approach to European prehistory.
   Since the 1990s, there has been a strong interest in historical studies
that relate the practice of culture-historical archaeology to issues of
nationalism and identity (Kane 2003). In some of these studies, the
role of archaeology in nationalist movements has been brought into
sharper focus by employing analytical techniques derived from material
culture studies. Collections of papers dealing with national traditions of
archaeology across Europe are found in Dı́az-Andreu and Champion
(1996a), Graves-Brown et al. (1996), and Galaty and Watkinson (2004),
and for Europe since 1960 in Hodder (1991a). For a similar treatment
of archaeology in eastern Europe, see Cleere (1993) and for south-
eastern Europe and the Middle East Meskell (1998). More broadly
ranging collections of papers are found in Ucko (1995a) and Kohl and


                                   569
                         Bibliographical Essay

Fawcett (1995). The latter publication also critiques the political and
academic shortcomings of nationalist archaeology. Excellent accounts
of the development of local variants of culture-historical archaeology
also are found in the entries for many single countries in T. Murray
(2001a).
   In recent years, there has at last been growing interest in studying
the history of German archaeology. For major collections of papers,
see Härke (2000a) and Steuer (2001), as well as Leube and Hegewisch
(2002), the latter dealing specifically with archaeology during the Nazi
period. Important single papers include Klejn (1977), McCann (1989),
Veit (1989), Arnold (1990), Härke (1991, 1995, 2000b), Kossack
(1992), Arnold and Hassmann (1995), Wiwjorra (1996), Junker (1998),
Hassmann (2000), Wolfram (2000), Maischberger (2002), Eickhoff
(2005), and Halle (2005).
   Culture-historical archaeology in France is chronicled by Gran-
Aymerich (1998) and its relevance to French national identity is dis-
cussed by Audouze and Leroi-Gourhan (1981), Dietler (1994, 1998),
M. Heffernan (1994), Chazan (1995), Fleury-Ilett (1996), Laurent
(1999), Legendre (1999), and Demoule (1999). Guidi (1987) provides a
brief history of Italian archaeology in English. Important aspects of the
development of Dutch archaeology are discussed by Bazelmans et al.
(1997) and Bakker (2001) and the history of Spanish archaeology is
surveyed in a collection of papers edited by Mora and Dı́az-Andreu
(1997). For a history of Polish archaeology, see Lech (1999). Binétruy
(1994) has published a biography of Joseph Dechélette and Brodrick
(1963), Skrotzky (1964), Strauss (1992), and C. Cohen (1999) dis-
cuss Henri Breuil. Information about Dorothy Garrod is provided by
G. Clark (1999), P. J. Smith et al. (1997), and P. J. Smith (2000). The
most detailed account of Caton Thompson’s career is her autobiogra-
phy (Caton Thompson 1983).
   The history of archaeology in East Asia is examined in a series of
papers published by Malone and Kaner (1999). Chinese archaeology is
discussed by R. Pearson (1977), Li (1977), K. C. Chang (1981, 2002),
W. Watson (1981), Olsen (1987), An (1989), Chen (1989), Falken-
hausen (1993, 1995, 1999), T. Wang (1997), and Liu and Chen (2001);
Evasdottir (2004) offers an interesting account of how Chinese archae-
ologists conduct research. Japanese archaeology is examined by Ikawa-
Smith (1982, 1995), Tanaka (1984), Bleed (1986, 1989), Fawcett (1986,
1995), Habu (1989, 2004), G. Barnes (1990b), Habu and Fawcett
(1999), and Mizoguchi (2002, 2004); South Asian archaeology by
Chakrabarti (1981, 1982, 1988, 1997, 2001, 2003), Thapar (1984),


                                  570
                        Bibliographical Essay

Hassan (1995), Coningham and Lewer (2000), Ratnagar (2004), and
Singh (2004); and Middle Eastern archaeology by Masry (1981), D. M.
Reid (1985, 1997, 2002), Bahrani (1998), Hassan (1998), Wood (1998),
Abdi (2001), Bernbeck and Pollock (2004), Bernhardsson (2005),
and Erciyas (2005). A vast and growing literature, some of it highly
polemical, is focused on Israeli archaeology. A representative sampling
includes: Bar-Yosef and Mazar (1982), Paine (1983, 1994), Hanbury-
Tenison (1986), Shay (1989), Silberman (1989, 1993), Moorey (1991),
Ben-Yehuda (1995, 2002), Silberman and Small (1997), Abu El-Haj
(2001), Dever (2001a, 2001b, 2003), Finkelstein and Silberman (2001),
Hallote and Joffe (2002), and Kletter (2006). For colonial archaeology
in Palestine, see Silberman (1982, 1991) and T. Davis (2004).
   The history of archaeology in sub-Saharan Africa in the late colo-
nial and postcolonial periods is examined by Fagan (1981), Posnansky
(1982), M. Hall (1984), Nzewunwa (1984), Schrire (1995), Schlanger
(2002, 2003), and N. Shepherd (2002a, 2002b). Robertshaw (1990)
contains many excellent papers dealing with the transition from colo-
nial to national archaeologies. On the relation of sub-Saharan African
archaeology to the study of African history during this same time span,
see D. McCall (1964), Ki-Zerbo (1981), Ehret and Posnansky (1982),
and Andah (1995).
   Archaeology in Latin American countries is surveyed in Politis and
Alberti (1999); see also Burger (1989), Funari (1997), Politis (2003),
and Politis and Pérez-Gollán (2004). The history of Mexican archae-
ology during the culture-historical period is examined by I. Bernal
(1980, 1983), Lorenzo (1981, 1984), Cabrero (1993), and Vázquez
León (1996; 2nd ed. 2003). Maya archaeology is covered by Brunhouse
(1975), Hammond (1983), Marcus (1983b, 2003), Black (1990), and
Sabloff (1990); Brazilian archaeology by Barreto (1998), Goes Neves
(1998), and Funari (1999a, 2001).
   Major contributions dealing with the development of archaeo-
logical methods in the context of culture-historical archaeology are
reprinted in Heizer (1959); those relating to stratigraphy are found on
pages 222–343 and those relating to seriation (including the innova-
tive studies of Petrie and Kroeber) on pages 376–448. On the career of
Schliemann, see Calder and Cobet (1990), Herrmann (1990), and
Turner (1990). Pitt Rivers’s contributions to the development of exca-
vation techniques are examined by Bowden (1991), Wheeler’s by
J. Hawkes (1982), and Kenyon’s by Moorey (1979). For more on Pitt
Rivers, see M. Thompson (1977), R. Bradley (1983), and W. R. Chap-
man (1984, 1985, 1989). The development of excavation techniques in


                                 571
                         Bibliographical Essay

Germany is discussed by Kossack (1992) and their spread to Britain by
C. Evans (1989). For parallel developments in the United States, see
Fagette (1996) and Lyon (1996).
   Adams and Adams (1991) and W. Adams (2001) provide general dis-
cussions of the development of classification in archaeology. Although
little specific has been published, except by Gräslund (1987), about
the development of systems of artifact and cultural classification in
Europe, I have been able to summarize only in broad outline the vast
primary and secondary literature relating to those topics for United
States archaeology. In recent years, several Darwinian archaeologists
have produced outstanding in-depth studies of the analytical contri-
butions of early-twentieth-century culture-historical archaeologists in
the United States. The most general and important of these works are
Lyman, O’Brien, and Dunnell, The Rise and Fall of Culture History
(1997a), and its accompanying anthology of key methodological and
theoretical papers written by culture-historical archaeologists (1997b).
Also of major importance are an analytical biography of James A. Ford
(O’Brien and Lyman 1998) and a definitive study of the Midwestern
Taxonomic Method (Lyman and O’Brien 2003). Other works by this
group include O’Brien’s (1996a) history of Missouri archaeology, as
well as papers dealing with the development of stratigraphic excava-
tions (Lyman and O’Brien 1999) and the direct historical approach
(Lyman and O’Brien 2001). Outside this group, Browman and Givens
(1996) have discussed early stratified excavations in the United States,
Kehoe (1990) and Fisher (1997) have commented on the Midwest-
ern Taxonomic Method, Woodbury (1973) and Givens (1992a) have
published biographies of Kidder, and Pinsky (1992a, 1992b) has exam-
ined the relation between culture-historical archaeological practice and
Boasian anthropology.
   The most accessible general survey of Collingwood’s career and
ideas is his autobiography (Collingwood 1939). Studies of him from
a philosophical perspective include W. M. Johnston (1967) and Mink
(1969). For an insightful analysis of Hawkes’s “ladder” of inference, see
C. Evans (1998).


              Early Functional-Processual Archaeology
Fewer historical studies have been published dealing with early
functional-processual archaeology than might have been expected.
This may reflect the reluctance of many processual archaeologists and
their postprocessual critics to recognize the early beginnings of many
of their respective ideas.

                                  572
                         Bibliographical Essay

   The early development of environmental approaches in Scandinavia,
central Europe, and England is discussed by Morlot (1861), Daniel
(1975: 302–8), Bibby (1956), G. Wright (1971), Klindt-Jensen (1975),
Goudie (1976), Moberg (1981), and Kristiansen (2002). Deuel (1973)
discusses the impact of aerial photography on environmental research
in archaeology. Spate (1968) discusses environmental possibilism.
   M. Harris (1968a: 464–567) traces the early development of social an-
thropology. H. Kuklick (1991a) examines the replacement of culture-
historical anthropology by social anthropology in Britain. Some impor-
tant essays on the development of social anthropology are found in
Stocking (1984). Information about Durkheim is provided by Alpert
(1939), Duvignaud (1965), and T. Parsons (1968).
   Childe’s contributions to functional-processual archaeology are
examined in the main studies of his life and works listed in the previ-
ous section. H. Orenstein (1954) discusses his evolutionary theorizing,
K. Greene (1999) his use of the concept of “revolution,” and L. Klejn
(1994b) Childe’s relations with Soviet archaeologists.
   Studying the history of Soviet archaeology presents special difficul-
ties. Anything published in the Soviet Union while the Communist
Party was in power was subject to political censorship, whereas works
produced in the West, especially during the Cold War, were some-
times extremely polemical and frequently ill-informed. Since the col-
lapse of the Soviet Union, revisionist studies of the history of Soviet
archaeology have begun to appear, some of them based on careful
archival research. However, much research remains to be done on the
history of archaeology during the Soviet period. Because I do not
read Russian, I have been unable to use as effectively as I would wish
Genings’s (1982) monograph on the history of Soviet archaeology.
Klejn’s (1993a) major study of Soviet archaeology is available in
Spanish (Klejn 1993b) and German (1997) translations. Leo Klejn
informs me that the German edition contains more information than
the Spanish and Russian ones. This book contains much biographical
material relating to Soviet archaeologists.
   The most detailed history of Russian and early Soviet archaeology
available in English remains M. Miller (1956). It is, however, a highly
polemical work written by an émigré archaeologist during the Cold
War and is held in low regard by modern Russian historians of archae-
ology. It must be used with extreme caution as must works based
largely on it (e.g., Trigger 1984c). Periodizations of the development of
Russian and Soviet archaeology have been proposed by Miller (1956),
Gening (1982), Soffer (1985), Dolitsky (1985), and Klejn (1993a,
2001b).

                                  573
                         Bibliographical Essay

   The understanding of archaeology in the Soviet Union before the
imposition of Marxist orthodoxy, beginning in 1928, is being revolu-
tionized by the archival research of Nadezhda Platonova. She is reveal-
ing the distorted nature of later Soviet accounts of this period, begin-
ning in 1929 with Ravdonikas’s officially-mandated denunciation of
“old archaeology.” Various Western studies of scientific research and
cultural policy in the Soviet Union in the 1920s and 1930s help to
contextualize the creation of Soviet archaeology: G. Fischer (1967),
L. Graham (1967), S. Cohen (1973), S. Fitzpatrick (1974), Shapiro
(1982), and T. O’Connor (1983).
   Gening (1982) presents a comprehensive, albeit conventional, his-
tory of Soviet archaeology from the mid-1920s to the mid-1930s,
together with brief biographies of the major figures in Soviet archae-
ology at this time. Archaeology in the Soviet Union in the 1930s and
1940s is discussed in English by Golomshtok (1933), Tallgren (1936),
Grahame Clark (1936), Field and Prostov (1937), Artsikhovskii and
Brussov (1958), Avdiyev (1945), and in a series of papers by Childe
(1940b, 1942b, 1942c, 1942d, 1942e, 1943, 1945b, 1952). Major trans-
lated Soviet archaeological writings of the early post-war period include
rival Soviet (1959) and British (1961) versions of Mongait’s Archaeology
in the U.S.S.R., M. Thompson’s (1967) selected papers on the medieval
excavations at Novgorod, S. Semenov (1964) on use-wear analysis, and
various syntheses of Siberian archaeological research: Rudenko (1961,
1970), Michael (1962, 1964), Okladnikov (1965, 1970), and Chernetsov
and Moszyńska (1974). Useful information is also contained in entries
to the Great Soviet Encyclopedia, especially Artsikhovsky’s (1973) essay
on “Archaeology.” Surveys of work done during this period are pro-
vided by Field and Price (1949), Combier (1959), Chard (1961, 1963,
1969), Debetz (1961), Frumkin (1962), Boriskovsky (1965), and Klein
(1966). Polemical literature includes M. Thompson (1965) and Klejn
(1969, 1970). Extracts from Mongait’s notorious “The Crisis in Bour-
geois Archaeology” are translated in M. Miller (1956: 147–52). A
review of Tallgren’s archaeological work, including his contacts with
Soviet archaeologists, is provided by Kokkonen (1985).
   Examinations of Soviet archaeology in the post-Stalin period include
Klejn (1973a, 1973b, 1977), Levitt (1979), Ranov and Davis (1979),
R. Davis (1983), Tringham (1983), Soffer (1983, 1985), Dolitsky
(1985), and Kolpakov and Vishnyatsky (1990). Bulkin et al. (1982) pro-
vide a brief history of Soviet archaeology produced in the late 1970s.
Soviet archaeological publications of the post-Stalin period that are
translated into English include Dolukhanov (1979), Klejn (1982), and
a volume of papers on central Asia in the Bronze Age (Kohl 1981a).

                                  574
                         Bibliographical Essay

Translations of selected papers by Soviet archaeologists appeared reg-
ularly in the American journal Soviet Anthropology and Archeology.
   Changing Soviet applications of Marxist concepts to the social sci-
ences are reviewed by Danilova (1971) and by Petrova-Averkieva and
others in Gellner (1980). Soviet scholarly views about “primitive” soci-
eties are analyzed by Howe (1976, 1980) and Bloch (1985). Discussions
of the concept of culture by Soviet archaeologists are examined by
Bulkin et al. (1982), Klejn (1982), and R. Davis (1983).
   Works in English dealing with the history of Soviet archaeology
written since the collapse of the Soviet Union include Dolukhanov
(1995), Shnirelman (1995, 1996, 2001), Chernykh (1995), Kohl and
Tsetskhladze (1995), and Klejn (2001b), the latter as part of a brief
history of Russian and Soviet archaeology.
   B. Fagan (2001) has published an attractive, popular book-length
intellectual biography of Grahame Clark that contains admirable sum-
maries of all Clark’s important writings. Rowley-Conwy (1999) offers
an insightful analysis of Clark’s career and P. J. Smith (1997) provides
valuable accounts of Clark’s early research and publications and of his
role in the establishment of the Prehistoric Society (Smith 1999). Clark
authored a brief intellectual autobiography (Clark 1974) and a critique
of his own work at Star Carr (Clark 1972). He also set his life and
work into its Cambridge University context and reprinted his major
papers on economic topics (Clark 1989a, 1989b). Sieveking (1976) and
R. Chapman (1979) assess Clark’s influence on the work of David
Clarke and some of his other students. For an assessment of Eric
Higgs’s work, see Bailey (1999).
   Willey and Sabloff (1993) and Dunnell (1986) provide a detailed
chronicle of the development of a functionalist approach in United
States’ archaeology from the mid-1930s. They do not, however, explic-
itly trace the origins of this approach in the American archaeology of
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, as do W. Taylor
(1948: 73–80) and Trigger (1978c). J. Bennett (1943) and W. Taylor
(1948) provide contemporary accounts of the growth of a functional-
ist approach in the 1940s. Little has been written about Walter Taylor
in recent years apart from an interesting character sketch by Reyman
(1999). M. Harris (1968a: 393–463) describes and evaluates the culture
and personality approach in Boasian anthropology. The development
of the ecological approach in American archaeology is described auto-
biographically by Braidwood (1974) and MacNeish (1974, 1978) and
the early development of settlement archaeology is documented by
Trigger (1967) and Willey (1974b). Trigger (1984d) considers some
of the early weaknesses of this approach as well as its relation to the

                                  575
                         Bibliographical Essay

New Archaeology. Billman and Feinman (1999) evaluate settlement-
pattern archaeology from the perspective of fifty years.
  For the origins of radiocarbon dating and its application to archae-
ology, see Libby (1955), Renfrew (1973a), R. E. Taylor (1985, 1987),
Bowman (1990), R. E. Taylor et al. (1992), and Marlowe (1999).


                 Processualism and Postprocessualism
The broader perspective offered by the passage of time and by more
recent developments in archaeology permits a more contextualized
understanding of the history of processual archaeology than was pre-
sented in the original edition of this book. The most valuable study
of the history of American processual archaeology published in the
past fifteen years is O’Brien, Lyman, and Schiffer’s Archaeology as a
Process (2005), a work inspired by David Hull’s Science as a Process
(1988). Archaeology as a Process is based on the principle that one
cannot hope to understand the history of science without knowing
about the personalities, alliances, and rivalries of the people involved.
It thus presents a richly detailed account of processual archaeology.
Other recent general histories of American archaeology that discuss
both processual and postprocessual archaeology are Patterson’s (1995)
social history, Kehoe’s (1998) critical history, and the third edition
of Willey and Sabloff ’s (1993) history of American archaeology. Also
of major importance is Patterson’s (2003) study of the impact of
Marxism on American archaeology both before and after the inception
of New Archaeology, a work that can profitably be read in conjunc-
tion with R. McGuire (1992) and Kolakowski’s (1978a, 1978b, 1978c)
critical survey of the entire history of Marxist thought. These histories
of American archaeology provide alternative perspectives that comple-
ment my intellectual history. Apart from these works, few studies of the
history of processual and postprocessual archaeology transcend mere
polemic.
   M. Harris (1968a: 634–87) discusses the development of neoevo-
lutionism. Major anthropological works that cast doubt on the value
of this approach in the 1970s and early 1980s include Fried (1975),
Sahlins (1976), and Wolf (1982); see also Wallerstein (1974) for a more
nuanced view of sociocultural development.
   Gamble (1999) surveys Binford’s life and works. Important supple-
mentary information can be found in interviews of Binford conducted
by P. Sabloff (1988) and D. Van Reybrouck (2001). What appear to
be totally contradictory claims about his early intellectual orientation
appear in Preston (1995: 81) and Kehoe (1998: 118–21). Binford (1972:

                                  576
                         Bibliographical Essay

1–14) details his rebellion against the culture-historical approach,
specifically the variant of the Midwestern Taxonomic Method that he
encountered in the person of J. B. Griffin at the University of Michigan
in the 1950s. His early writings are reprinted in Binford (1972). The
widely shared disenchantment of young archaeologists with culture-
historical archaeology in the 1950s is noted in Trigger (1984d: 368–9).
Although there is disagreement about who first used the term “New
Archaeology” to denote the earliest manifestations of processual
archaeology, it appears to be derived from the title of Caldwell’s
(1959) paper “The New American Archaeology.” The term New
Archaeology had been applied to culture-historical archaeology long
before (Wissler 1917). Deetz is sometimes considered to be an inde-
pendent pioneer of New Archaeology (Willey and Sabloff 1980: 209).
The spread of New Archaeology into American historical archaeology
is chronicled by South (1977a, 1977b).
   Many of the most important early papers exemplifying the New
Archaeology can be found in S. and L. Binford (1968), Leone (1972),
Clarke (1972a), Redman (1973), and Renfrew (1973b). The first text-
book treatment of New Archaeology was P. J. Watson et al. (1971; 2nd
ed. 1984), although New Archaeology’s impact on American archae-
ology was already evident in the second edition of Hole and Heizer’s
(1969) influential general textbook of archaeology. A widely read pop-
ularization of new scientific techniques was published by David Wilson
(1975).
   David Clarke’s career is evaluated by Fletcher (1999). Clarke’s main
writings are found in Clarke (1968, 1979). His contributions are sur-
veyed and evaluated by students and colleagues in Clarke (1979)
and, more recently, in a collection of papers published in Antiquity
(Malone and Stoddart 1998). Renfrew’s early essays are reprinted in
Renfrew (1979, 1984).
   The most substantial polemic directed against New Archaeology was
written by the French classical archaeologist Courbin (1988), who in a
Rankean fashion equated archaeology with the recovery of archaeolog-
ical data. His book mainly succeeds in documenting the lack of theo-
retical sophistication and the narrow-mindedness of at least one distin-
guished culture-historical archaeologist. Brief but equally pugnacious
defenses of culture-historical archaeology include J. Hawkes (1968),
A. Hogarth (1972), and Daniel (1975: 370–4). All these polemics are
by Europeans. In the United States, such works are notable by their
absence. Ringing endorsements by older American archaeologists are
almost equally rare, the notable exception being by P. Martin (1971).
Critical evaluations of aspects of the general program of processual

                                  577
                        Bibliographical Essay

archaeology were offered by Bayard (1969), R. Watson (1972), Sabloff
et al. (1973), Dumond (1977), Trigger (1978a: 2–18), P. Larson (1979),
Gándara (1980, 1981), and Gibbon (1984). Criticism of Binford’s advo-
cacy of primary reliance on a deductive approach was made, among
others, by C. Morgan (1973, 1978), Read and LeBlanc (1978), M.
Salmon (1982), Kelley and Hanen (1988), Gibbon (1989), and Wylie
(1989b, 2002). The antihistoricism of American processual archaeology
was opposed on technical grounds by Sabloff and Willey (1967) and on
philosophical and strategic grounds by Trigger ([1970] 1978a: 19–36;
[1973] 1978a: 37–52). Although philosophical realism was promoted as
providing a more satisfactory epistemological basis for archaeological
research (Bhaskar 1978; Harré 1970, 1972; Harré and Madden 1975;
Gibbon 1989), Binford (1986, 1987a) continued to offer an energetic
defense of positivism.
   Important studies relating to ethnoarchaeology include Kleindienst
and Watson (1956), Jochim (1976), Yellen (1977), Binford (1978),
R. Gould (1978a, 1980), Tringham (1978), Kramer (1979, 1982), P. J.
Watson (1979), Hodder (1982b), Tooker (1982), Hayden and Cannon
(1984), and Kent (1984, 1987). Pinsky (1992a) provides a detailed study
of the use of ethnographic data by processual archaeologists. Ingersoll
et al. (1977), Coles (1979), and Hayden (1979) discuss experimental
archaeology.
   On the employment of statistics and other forms of mathemat-
ical analysis in processual archaeology, see Hodson et al. (1971),
Steiger (1971), Doran and Hodson (1975), Hodder and Orton (1976),
D. Thomas (1976, 1978), Cowgill (1977), Hodder (1978b), and Sabloff
(1981). Discussions of General Systems Theory can be found in Wiener
(1961), Buckley (1968), Bertalanffy (1969), F. Emery (1969), and
Laszlo (1972a, 1972b, 1972c). Saunders (1980) offers a general review
of catastrophe theory. Discussions of the unique properties of archae-
ological data and how such data can be made relevant to the social
sciences include Clarke (1973), Schiffer (1976), Binford (1977, 1981,
1983a, 1983b, 1984), and Bulkin et al. (1982).
   The most comprehensive survey of theoretical trends in American
archaeology during the 1970s and early to mid-1980s is the volume
edited by Meltzer et al. (1986), especially the papers published in it
by Dunnell, Jennings, Knudson, Leone, and P. J. Watson; see also
Lamberg-Karlovsky (1989). Other surveys include Willey and Sabloff
(1980: 248–64), Dunnell (1979, 1980b, 1981, 1982a, 1983, 1984, 1985),
Kohl (1981b, 1984), Wylie (1982, 1985a, 1985c), Gibbon (1984),
Trigger (1984e), Yengoyan (1985), Patterson (1986b), Leone et al.
(1987), and Earle and Preucel (1987). Gibbon (1984), Trigger (1984e),

                                 578
                          Bibliographical Essay

and Gallay (1986) discuss trends in archaeology resulting from the
declining influence of evolutionism and cultural ecology. Flannery
(1982) distances himself from many of the methodological concerns
of New Archaeology. Renfrew (1980) and Wiseman (1980a, 1980b)
discuss the changing relations between humanistic and social science
approaches as a result of processualism.
   The most detailed survey of postprocessual archaeology is by Hod-
der and Hutson (2003); it is an updated version of Hodder (1986,
1991d). Many alternative approaches to understanding this complex
subject are possible (e.g., Patterson 1990). The polemical exchanges
both between processual and postprocessual archaeologists and among
postprocessual archaeologists center to a considerable degree on
whether the ideas of processual and postprocessual archaeology are
complementary or mutually exclusive and to what extent postproces-
sual archaeology does or does not represent a single school of thought
(R. Chapman 2003: 13–15). Early attempts to define postprocessual
archaeology include Hodder (1985), Leone (1986), Earle and Preucel
(1987), Patterson (1989), Watson and Fotiadis (1990), and Preucel
(1995). Although postprocessualists emphasize the diversity of their
various positions, they are all idealist in orientation and their hetero-
geneity is not greater than that found among materialist archaeologists.
   Major works marking the development of postprocessual archae-
ology include Hodder (1982c, 1986, 1992, 1999, 2001, 2003a),
Miller and Tilley (1984), Shanks and Tilley (1987a, 1987b), Tilley
(1990a, 1993), Hodder et al. (1995), Karlsson (1998), and J. Thomas
(1996). Brück (2005) provides an overview of the use of the phe-
nomenological approach by archaeologists. Examinations of the con-
frontation between processual and postprocessual archaeologists are
found in collections of papers edited by Preucel (1991), Yoffee and
Sherratt (1993), and Preucel and Hodder (1996). Balter (2005) pro-
vides a detailed account of Hodder’s life and work. Bintliff (1993)
presented what turned out to be a premature obituary of postproces-
sual archaeology in which he argued that cognitive-processual archae-
ology represents an ideal “pragmatic merger” of the processual and
postprocessual approaches. For what knowledgeable British archaeol-
ogists have believed at different times their colleagues should know
about anthropology, compare Orme (1981), Hodder (1982a), and
C. Gosden (1999).
   Bintliff (1984), in the spirit of postprocessualism, offers an interest-
ing study of the impact of early-twentieth-century aesthetic concepts
on A. Evans’s reconstructions of Minoan mural paintings. Joyce (2002)
discusses the role of narrative in archaeological interpretation. Mithen

                                   579
                         Bibliographical Essay

(2003) provides an example of the responsible use of a narrative device
incorporating fiction to popularize archaeological findings; Ferris
(1999) similarly uses fictional scenarios to illustrate the significance
of alternative interpretations of the same archaeological evidence.
   For a survey of theoretical developments in European archaeology
between 1960 and 1990, see Hodder (1991a). The impact of proces-
sual and postprocessual archaeology in Latin America is discussed by
Politis and Alberti (1999) and in India by Paddayya (1983, 1990), S.
Singh (1985), Boivin and Fuller (2002), Fuller and Boivin (2002), and
Chakrabarti (2003).


                         Pragmatic Synthesis
Very little historical research has been published regarding the devel-
opment of archaeology since 1990. The polemical literature is noted
in Chapter 9.
   Hegmon (2003) provides a critical survey of the present state of
North American archaeology, although she does not go on to con-
sider how the synthesis of current approaches that she calls for can be
achieved. Peregrine (2000) offers an interesting discussion of what has
been happening to processual archaeology. Schiffer (2000a) and many
other American archaeologists stress the need for theoretical synthe-
sis to replace confrontation. In Europe, Kristiansen (2004a) consid-
ers the implications of the broader range of high-level theories that
archaeologists are currently employing and calls for a critical synthesis
of epistemologically incompatible approaches, in particular of those
that seek to dichotomize biological and cultural explanations. Politis
(2003) surveys crucial theoretical developments in Latin American
archaeology and R. Chapman (2003) provides a valuable account of
recent Marxist archaeology in Spain. Hodder (1999) and Hodder and
Hutson (2003) examine the current state of postprocessual archaeol-
ogy. Balter’s (2005) biography of Hodder and account of the work
being done at the site of Çatalhöyük also assesses recent developments
in postprocessual archaeology.
   Numerous collections of papers document the current state of
archaeological theory, among them Holtorf and Karlsson (2000),
Schiffer (2000a), Hodder (2001), Biehl et al. (2002), VanPool and
VanPool (2003), Bintliff (2004), and Meskell and Preucel (2004).
   Individually authored works that are especially relevant for under-
standing various current developments in archaeological theory
include Hodder (1999, 2003a), A. Jones (2002), Shennan (2002),
Renfrew and Bahn (2004), and J. Thomas (2004). Kristiansen and

                                  580
                        Bibliographical Essay

Larsson (2005), in their study of Bronze Age Europe, offer the
most extensive, empirically-based effort to transcend the dichotomy
between processual and postprocessual, or social and cultural,
approaches as well as a new treatment of cultural diffusion. They view
their approach as marking the beginning of a “new Culture History.”
While I lack the specialized knowledge needed to evaluate many of
their specific arguments, this work clearly exemplifies the more holis-
tic theoretical approaches that are becoming popular in archaeology.




                                 581
                           REFERENCES

Abbott, C. C. 1881. Primitive Industry. Salem, MA, G. A. Bates.
Abdi, K. 2001. Nationalism, politics, and the development of archaeology in
    Iran. American Journal of Archaeology 105: 51–76.
Abercromby, J. 1902. The oldest Bronze-Age ceramic type in Britain: its proba-
    ble origin in Central Europe. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute
    32: 373–97.
  1912. A Study of the Bronze Age Pottery of Great Britain and Ireland and its
    Associated Grave-Goods. 2 vols., Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Aberle, D. F., A. K. Cohen, A. K. Davis, M.-J. Levy Jr, and F. X. Sutton.
    1950.The functional prerequisites of a society. Ethics 60: 100–1.
Abramowicz, A. 1981. Sponte nascitur ollae . . . In G. Daniel, 1981b, pp. 146–9.
Abu El-Haj, N. 2001. Facts on the Ground: Archaeological Practice and Terri-
    torial Self-fashioning in Israeli Society. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago
    Press.
Adams, R. McC. 1965. Land Behind Baghdad. Chicago, IL, University of
    Chicago Press.
  1966. The Evolution of Urban Society: Early Mesopotamia and Prehispanic
    Mexico. Chicago, IL, Aldine.
  1974. Anthropological perspectives on ancient trade. Current Anthropology
    15: 239–58.
  1981. Heartland of Cities. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Adams, R. McC. and H. J. Nissen. 1972. The Uruk Countryside. Chicago, IL,
    University of Chicago Press.
Adams, W. Y. 2001. Classification. In T. Murray 2001a, pp. 336–53.
Adams, W. Y. and E. W. Adams. 1991. Archaeological Typology and Practical
    Reality: A Dialectical Approach to Artifact Classification and Sorting.
    Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Adams, W. Y., D. P. Van Gerven, and R. S. Levy. 1978. The retreat from
    migrationism. Annual Review of Anthropology 7: 483–532.
Alcock, S. E. 2002. Archaeologies of the Greek Past: Landscape, Monuments, and
    Memories. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Alcock, S. E., J. F. Cherry, and J. Elsner. 2001. eds. Pausanias: Travel and
    Memory in Roman Greece. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Alden, J. R. 1982. Trade and politics in proto-Elamite Iran. Current Anthro-
    pology 23: 613–40.



                                      583
                                  References

Alexander, J. and A. Mohammed. 1982. Frontier theory and the Neolithic
     period in Nubia. In Nubian Studies, ed. by J. M. Plumley pp. 34–40.
     Warminster, UK, Aris and Phillips.
Allen, H. 2001. New Zealand: prehistoric archaeology. In T. Murray, 2001a,
     pp. 938–50.
Allen, J. 1967. Aspects of Vere Gordon Childe. Labour History 12: 52–9.
  1981. Perspectives of a sentimental journey: V. Gordon Childe in Australia
     1917–1921. Australian Archaeology 12: 1–11.
Allen, J. P. 1999. A monument of Khaemwaset honoring Imhotep. In Gold of
     Praise: Studies on Ancient Egypt in Honor of Edward F. Wente, ed. by E.
     Teeter and J. A. Larson, pp. 1–10. Chicago, IL, Oriental Institute.
Allen, S. H. 2002. Excavating Our Past: Perspectives on the History of the Archae-
     ological Institute of America. Boston, MA, Archaeological Institute of
     America.
Allesbrook, M. 1992. Born to Rebel: The Life of Harriet Boyd Hawes. Oxford,
     Oxbow.
Allison, P. M. 2001. Using the material and written sources: turn of the millen-
     nium approaches to Roman domestic space. American Journal of Archae-
     ology 105: 181–208.
  2003. Pompeian Households: An Analysis of the Material Culture. Los
     Angeles, CA, UCLA, Costen Institute of Archaeology.
Alpert, H. 1939. Emile Durkheim and his Sociology. New York, Columbia Uni-
     versity Press.
Alters, B. J. and C. E. Nelson. 2002. Perspective: teaching evolution in higher
     education. Evolution 56: 1891–1901.
An, Z. 1989. Chinese archaeology: past and present. Archaeological Review
     from Cambridge 8(1): 12–18.
Andah, B. W. 1985. No Past! No Present! No Future! Anthropological Educa-
     tion and African Revolution. (inaugural lecture). Ibadan, Department of
     Archaeology and Anthropology, University of Ibadan.
  1995. European encumbrances to the development of relevant theory in
     African archaeology. In P. J. Ucko, 1995a, pp. 96–109.
Anderson, B. 1991. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and
     Spread of Nationalism. London, Verso.
Andersson, J. G. 1934. Children of the Yellow Earth. London, Kegan Paul.
Andrén, A. 1998. Between Artifacts and Texts: Historical Archaeology in Global
     Perspective. New York, Plenum.
Andresen, J. M., B. F. Byrd, M. D. Elson, R. H. McGuire, R. M. Mendoza, E.
     Staski, and J. P. White. 1981. The deer hunters: Star Carr reconsidered.
     World Archaeology 13: 31–46.
Andriolo, K. R. 1979. Kulturkreislehre and the Austrian mind. Man 14: 133–
     44.
Anthony, D. W. 1990. Migration in archeology: the baby and the bathwater.
     American Anthropologist 92: 895–914.
  1995. Nazi and ecofeminist prehistories: ideology and empiricism in Indo-
     European archaeology. In P. L. Kohl and C. Fawcett, pp. 82–96.

                                      584
                                 References

Antonaccio, C. M. 1995. An Archaeology of Ancestors: Tomb Cult and Hero
     Cult in Early Greece. Lanham, MD, Rowman and Littlefield.
Appel, T. A. 1992. A scientific career in the age of character: Jeffries Wyman
     and natural history at Harvard. In Science at Harvard University: His-
     torical Perspectives, ed. by C. A. Elliott and M. W. Rossiter, pp. 96–120.
     Bethlehem, PA, Lehigh University Press.
Arkell, A. J. 1961. A History of the Sudan from the Earliest Times to 1821. 2nd
     edn. London, Athlone Press.
Arnold, B. 1990. The past as propaganda: totalitarian archaeology in Nazi
     Germany. Antiquity 64: 464–78.
Arnold, B. and H. Hassmann. 1995. Archaeology in Nazi Germany: the legacy
     of the Faustian bargain. In P. L. Kohl and C. Fawcett, pp. 70–81.
Artsikhovsky, A. V. 1973. Archaeology. Great Soviet Encyclopedia 2: 245–50.
     New York, Macmillan.
Artsikhovskii, A. V. and A. Y. Brussov. 1958. On the task of the journal “Soviet
     Archaeology.” American Antiquity 23: 349–52.
Ascher, R. 1961. Analogy in archaeological interpretation. Southwestern Jour-
     nal of Anthropology 16: 317–25.
Ashmore, W. 2002. Decisions and dispositions: socializing spatial archaeology.
     American Anthropologist 104: 1172–83.
  2004. Social archaeologies of landscape. In L. Meskell and R. W. Preucel,
     pp. 255–71.
Ashmore, W. and B. Knapp. 1999. eds. Archaeologies of Landscape: Contem-
     porary Perspectives. Oxford, Blackwell.
Åström, P. 1995. Oscar Montelius, 150 Years. Stockholm, Alquist and Wiksell.
Atwater, C. 1820. Description of the antiquities discovered in the State of
     Ohio and other western states. Archaeologia Americana: Transactions
     and Collections of the American Antiquarian Society 1: 105–267.
Audouze, F. and A. Leroi-Gourhan. 1981. France: a continental insularity.
     World Archaeology 13: 170–89.
Audouze, F. and N. Schlanger. 2004. eds. Autour de l’homme: Contexte et
     actualité d’André Leroi-Gourhan. Antibes, Editions APDCA.
Avdiyev, V. 1945. Achievements of Soviet archaeology. American Journal of
     Archaeology 49: 221–5.
Aveni, A. F. 1981. Archaeoastronomy. Advances in Archaeological Method and
     Theory 4: 1–77.
Bachofen, J. J. 1861. Das Mutterrecht. Stuttgart, Krais und Hoffman.
Bahn, P. G. 1978. The “unacceptable face” of the Western European Upper
     Palaeolithic. Antiquity 52: 183–92.
  1996. ed. The Cambridge Illustrated History of Archaeology. Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
Bahrani, Z. 1998. Conjuring Mesopotamia: imaginative geography and a world
     past. In Meskell, pp. 159–74.
Bailey, G. 1999. Eric Higgs 1908–1976. In T. Murray 1999a, pp. 531–65.
Baines, J. 1989. Ancient Egyptian concepts and uses of the past. In Who Needs
     the Past? ed. by R. Layton, pp. 131–49. London, Unwin Hyman.

                                     585
                                  References

Baker, F. and J. Thomas. 1990. eds. Writing the Past in the Present. Lampeter,
     UK, St. David’s University College.
Bakker, J. A. 2001. Childe, Van Giffen, and Dutch archaeology until 1970. In
     Patina: Essays Presented to Jay Jordan Butler, ed. by W. H. Metz, B. L.
     van Beek, and H. Steegstra, Groningen, Metz et al., pp. 49–74.
Baldwin, G. C. 1996. Race Against Time: The Story of Salvage Archaeology.
     New York, Putnam.
Balfour, M. D. 1979. Stonehenge and Its Mysteries. New York, Scribner.
Balter, M. 2005. The Goddess and the Bull; Çatalhöyük: An Archaeological Jour-
     ney to the Dawn of Civilization. New York, Free Press.
Bamforth, D. B. 2002. Evidence and metaphor in evolutionary archaeology.
     American Antiquity 67: 435–52.
Bapty, I. and T. Yates. 1990. eds. Archaeology After Structuralism: Post-
     Structuralism and the Practice of Archaeology. London, Routledge.
Barford, P. M. 2002. Reflections on J. Lech’s vision of the history of “Polish”
     archaeology. Archaeologia Polona 40: 171–84.
  2004. Polish archaeology and Marxism: just a passing phase? In L.
     Vishnyatsky et al., pp. 182–97.
Barkan, E. 1992. The Retreat of Scientific Racism: Changing Concepts of Race
     in Britain and the United States between the World Wars. Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
Barkan, L. 1999. Unearthing the Past: Archaeology and Aesthetics in the Making
     of Renaissance Culture. New Haven, CT, Yale University Press.
Barker, G. 1999. ed. Companion Encyclopedia of Archaeology. 2 vols. London,
     Routledge.
Barley, M. W. 1977. ed. European Towns: Their Archaeology and Early History.
     New York, Academic Press.
Barnard, F. M. 1965. Herder’s Social and Political Thought: From Enlighten-
     ment to Nationalism. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
  2003. Herder on Nationality, Humanity, and History. Montreal, McGill-
     Queen’s University Press.
Barnes, A. S. 1939. The differences between natural and human flaking on
     prehistoric flint implements. American Anthropologist 41: 99–112.
Barnes, B. 1974. Scientific Knowledge and Sociological Theory. London,
     Routledge and Kegan Paul.
  1977. Interests and the Growth of Knowledge. London, Routledge and Kegan
     Paul.
Barnes, G. L. 1990a. The “idea of prehistory” in Japan. Antiquity 64: 929–
     40.
  1990b. The origins of bureaucratic archaeology in Japan. Journal of the Hong
     Kong Archaeological Society 12: 183–96.
  1993. China, Korea, and Japan: The Rise of Civilization in East Asia.
     London, Thames and Hudson.
Barnett, S. A. 1958. ed. A Century of Darwin. Cambridge, MA, Harvard Uni-
     versity Press.


                                      586
                                  References

Barreto, C. 1998. Brazilian archaeology from a Brazilian perspective. Antiquity
     72: 573–81.
Barrett, J. 1994. Fragments from Antiquity: An Archaeology of Social Life in
     Britain, 2900–1200 B. C. Oxford, Blackwell.
Barth, F. 1969. ed. Ethnic Groups and Boundaries: The Social Organization of
     Culture Difference. Boston, MA, Little, Brown.
Barton, C. M. and G. A. Clark. 1997. eds. Rediscovering Darwin: Evolutionary
     Theory and Archeological Explanation. Washington, DC, Archeological
     Papers of the American Anthropological Association 7.
Bar-Yosef, O. and A. Mazar. 1982. Israeli archaeology. World Archaeology 13:
     310–25.
Basalla, G. 1968. ed. The Rise of Modern Science; External or Internal Factors?
     Lexington, MA, Heath.
Baté, L. F. 1977. Arqueologı́a y materialismo histórico. México, DF, Ediciones
     de Cultura Popular.
  1978. Sociedad, formación económicosocial y cultura. México, DF, Ediciones
     de Cultura Popular.
  1998. El proceso de investigación en arqueologı́a. Barcelona, Editorial
     Crı́tica.
Bauer, H. H. 1992. Scientific Literacy and the Myth of the Scientific Method.
     Urbana, University of Illinois Press.
Bayard, D. T. 1969. Science, theory, and reality in the “New Archaeology.”
     American Antiquity 34: 376–84.
Bazelmans, J., J. Kolen, and H. T. Waterbolk. 1997. On the natural history
     of the peasant landscape: an archaeological dialogue with Tjalling Water-
     bolk. Archaeological Dialogues 4: 71–101.
Beard, M. 2001. “Pausanias in petticoats,” or The Blue Jane. In S. E. Alcock,
     J. F. Cherry, and J. Elsner, pp. 224–39.
Beardsley, R. K., P. Holder, A. D. Krieger, B. J. Meggers, J. B. Rinaldo, and
     P. Kutsche. 1956. Functional and evolutionary implications of community
     patterning. Menasha, WI, Society for American Archaeology, Memoir 11:
     129–57.
Beauchamp, W. M. 1900. Aboriginal Occupation of New York. Albany, Bulletin
     of the New York State Museum, 7 (32).
Becker, C. L. 1938. What is historiography? American Historical Review 44:
     20–8.
Becker, M. J. 1979. Priests, peasants, and ceremonial centers: the intellec-
     tual history of a model. In Maya Archaeology and Ethnohistory, ed. by
     N. Hammond and G. R. Willey, pp. 3–20. Austin, University of Texas
     Press.
Beiser, F. C. 1992. Enlightenment, Revolution, and Romanticism: The
     Genesis of Modern German Political Thought, 1790–1800. Cambridge, MA,
     Harvard University Press.
Bell, A. S. 1981. ed. The Scottish Antiquarian Tradition. Edinburgh, John
     Donald.


                                      587
                                  References

Bell, J. A. 1994. Interpretation and testability in theories about prehistoric
     thinking. In A. C. Renfrew and E. B. W. Zubrow, pp. 15–21.
Bellhouse, D. R. and W. D. Finlayson. 1979. An empirical study of probability
     sampling designs. Canadian Journal of Archaeology 3: 105–23.
Bellwood, P. and A. C. Renfrew. 2003. eds. Examining the Farming/Language
     Dispersal Hypothesis. Cambridge, McDonald Institute for Archaeological
     Research, Monograph.
Bender, B. 1993. ed. Landscape: Politics and Perspectives. Oxford, Berg.
  1998. Stonehenge: Making Space. Oxford, Berg.
Bender, B., S. Hamilton, and C. Tilley. 1997. Leskernick: stone worlds; alter-
     native narratives; nested landscapes. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society
     63: 147–78.
Benedict, R. 1934. Patterns of Culture. Boston, Houghton Mifflin.
Benjamin, W. 1969. Illuminations. New York, Schocken.
Bennett, J. W. 1943. Recent developments in the functional interpretation of
     archaeological data. American Antiquity 9: 208–19.
  1944. Middle American influences on cultures of the southeastern United
     States. Acta Americana 2: 25–50.
Bennett, W. C. 1945. Interpretations of Andean archaeology. Transactions of
     the New York Academy of Sciences, series 2, vol. 7: 95–9.
Bent, J. T. 1892. The Ruined Cities of Mashonaland. London, Longmans,
     Green.
Benvenisti, M. 2000. Sacred Landscape: The Buried History of the Holy Land
     Since 1948. Berkeley, University of California Press.
Ben-Yehuda, N. 1995. The Masada Myth: Collective Memory and Mythmaking
     in Israel. Madison, University of Wisconsin Press.
  2002. Sacrificing Truth: Archaeology and the Myth of Masada. Amherst, NY,
     Humanity Books.
Berkhofer, R. F. Jr. 1978. The White Man’s Indian: Images of the American
     Indian from Columbus to the Present. New York, Knopf.
Berlinski, D. 1976. On Systems Analysis. Cambridge, MA, M.I.T. Press.
Bernal, I. 1980. A History of Mexican Archaeology. London, Thames and
     Hudson.
  1983. The effect of settlement pattern studies on the archaeology of Central
     Mexico. In Prehistoric Settlement Patterns: Essays in Honor of Gordon R.
     Willey, ed. by E. Z. Vogt and R. M. Leventhal, pp. 389–98. Albuquerque,
     University of New Mexico Press.
Bernal, M. 1987. Black Athena: The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civiliza-
     tion, vol. 1, The Fabrication of Ancient Greece, 1785–1985. London, Free
     Association Books.
  2001. Black Athena Writes Back: Martin Bernal Responds to his Critics.
     Durham, NC, Duke University Press.
Bernbeck, R. and S. Pollock. 2004. The political economy of archaeological
     practice and the production of heritage in the Middle East. In L. Meskell
     and R. W. Preucel, pp. 335–52.


                                      588
                                 References

Bernhardsson, M. T. 2005. Reclaiming a Plundered Past: Archaeology and
     Nation Building in Modern Iraq. Austin, University of Texas Press.
Bertalanffy, L. von. 1969. General System Theory. New York, Braziller.
Best, E. 1916. Maori and Maruiwi. Transactions of the New Zealand Institute
     48: 435–47.
Bhaskar, R. 1978. A Realist Theory of Science. 2nd edn. Atlantic Highlands,
     NJ, Humanities Press.
Bibby, G. 1956. The Testimony of the Spade. New York, Knopf.
Bieder, R. E. 1975. Albert Gallatin and the survival of Enlightenment thought
     in nineteenth-century American anthropology. In Toward a Science of
     Man: Essays in the History of Anthropology, ed. by T. H. H. Thoresen,
     pp. 91–8. The Hague, Mouton.
  1986. Science Encounters the Indian, 1820–1880: The Early Years of American
     Ethnology. Norman, University of Oklahoma Press.
Biehl, P. F., A. Gramsch, and A. Marciniak. 2002. eds. Archäologien Europas:
     Geschichte, Methoden und Theorien/Archaeologies of Europe: History, Meth-
     ods and Theories. Münster, Waxmann.
Bietak, M. 1979. The present state of Egyptian archaeology. Journal of Egyp-
     tian Archaeology 65: 156–60.
Bignamini, I. 2004. ed. Archives and Excavations: Essays on the History of
     Archaeological Excavations in Rome and Southern Italy from the Renais-
     sance to the Nineteenth Century. Archaeological Monographs of the British
     School at Rome 14. London, British School at Rome.
Billman, B. R. and G. M. Feinman. 1999. eds. Settlement Pattern Studies in
     the Americas: Fifty Years since Viru. Washington, DC, Smithsonian Insti-
     tution Press.
Binétruy, M.-S. 1994. Itinéraires de Joseph Déchelette. Lyon, LUGD.
Binford, L. R. 1962. Archaeology as anthropology. American Antiquity 28:
     217–25.
  1965. Archaeological systematics and the study of culture process. American
     Antiquity 31: 203–10.
  1967a. Smudge pits and hide smoking: the use of analogy in archaeological
     reasoning. American Antiquity 32: 1–12.
  1967b. Comment. Current Anthropology 8: 234–5.
  1968a. Some comments on historical versus processual archaeology. South-
     western Journal of Anthropology 24: 267–75.
  1968b. Archeological perspectives. In S. R. and L. R. Binford, pp. 5–32.
  1971. Mortuary practices: their study and their potential. In J. A. Brown,
     pp. 6–29.
  1972. An Archaeological Perspective. New York, Seminar Press.
  1977. ed. For Theory Building in Archaeology. New York, Academic Press.
  1978. Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology. New York, Academic Press.
  1980. Willow smoke and dogs’ tails: hunter-gatherer settlement systems and
     archaeological site formation. American Antiquity 45: 4–20.
  1981. Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myths. New York, Academic Press.


                                     589
                                  References

  1983a. Working at Archaeology. New York, Academic Press.
  1983b. In Pursuit of the Past. London, Thames and Hudson.
  1984. Faunal Remains from Klasies River Mouth. New York, Academic
     Press.
  1986. In pursuit of the future. In D. J. Meltzer et al., pp. 459–79.
  1987a. Data, relativism and archaeological science. Man 22: 391–404.
  1987b. Research ambiguity: frames of reference and site structure. In
     S. Kent, pp. 449–512.
  2001. Constructing Frames of Reference: An Analytical Method for Archaeo-
     logical Theory Building Using Ethnographic and Environmental Data Sets.
     Berkeley, University of California Press.
Binford, L. R. and S. R. Binford. 1966. A preliminary analysis of functional vari-
     ability in the Mousterian of the Levallois facies. American Anthropologist
     68 (2, 2): 238–95.
Binford, L. R. and J. A. Sabloff. 1982. Paradigms, systematics, and archaeology.
     Journal of Anthropological Research 38: 137–53.
Binford, L. R. and N. M. Stone. 1986. Zhoukoudian: a closer look. Current
     Anthropology 27: 453–75.
Binford, S. R. and L. R. Binford. 1968. eds. New Perspectives in Archeology.
     Chicago, IL, Aldine.
Bintliff, J. L. 1984. Structuralism and myth in Minoan studies. Antiquity 58:
     33–8.
  1991. ed. The Annales School and Archaeology. Leicester, UK, Leicester Uni-
     versity Press.
  1993. Why Indiana Jones is smarter than the post-processualists. Norwegian
     Archaeological Review 26: 91–100.
  2004. ed. A Companion to Archaeology. Oxford, Blackwell.
Bird, A. 2000. Thomas Kuhn. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
Bird-David, N. 1990. The giving environment: another perspective on the
     economic system of gatherer-hunters. Current Anthropology 31: 189–96.
Bisson, M. S. 2000. Nineteenth century tools for twenty-first century
     archaeology? Why the Middle Paleolithic typology of François Bordes
     must be replaced. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 7:
     1–48.
Black, J. L. 1986. G.-F. Müller and the Imperial Russian Academy. Montreal,
     McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Black, S. L. 1990. The Carnegie Uaxactun Project and the development of
     Maya archaeology. Ancient Mesoamerica 1: 257–76.
Blakeslee, D. J. 1987. John Rowzée Peyton and the myth of the Mound
     Builders. American Antiquity 52: 784–92.
Blanton, R. E. 1978. Monte Albán: Settlement Patterns at the Ancient Zapotec
     Capital. New York, Academic Press.
Blanton, R. E., S. A. Kowalewski, G. Feinman, and J. Appel. 1981. Ancient
     Mesoamerica: A Comparison of Change in Three Regions. Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.


                                      590
                                   References

Bleed, P. 1986. Almost archaeology: early archaeological interest in Japan. In
    Windows on the Japanese Past: Studies in Archaeology and Prehistory, ed.
    by R. Pearson, G. L. Barnes, and K. L. Hutterer, pp. 57–67. Ann Arbor,
    MI, Center for Japanese Studies, University of Michigan.
  1989. Foreign archaeologists in Japan: strategies for exploitation. Archaeo-
    logical Review from Cambridge 8(1): 19–26.
Bloch, M. 1985. Marxism and Anthropology. Oxford, Oxford University
    Press.
Boardman, J. 2002. The Archaeology of Nostalgia: How the Greeks Re-created
    their Mythical Past. London, Thames and Hudson.
Boas, F. 1887. Museums of ethnology and their classification. Science 9: 587–9.
  1940. Race, Language and Culture. New York, Macmillan.
Boas, F. et al. 1909. eds. Putnam Anniversary Volume: Anthropological Essays
    Presented to Frederic W. Putnam in Honor of his 70th Birthday. New York,
    Stechert.
Boas, G. 1948. Essays on Primitivism and Related Ideas in the Middle Ages.
    Baltimore, MD, Johns Hopkins Press.
Bodnar, E. W. 1960. Cyriacus of Ancona and Athens. Bruxelles, Latomus.
Böhner, K. 1981. Ludwig Lindenschmit and the Three Age system. In
    G. Daniel, 1981b, pp. 120–6.
Boivin, N. and D. Q. Fuller. 2002. Looking for post-processual theory in South
    Asian archaeology. In S. Settar and R. Korisettar, pp. 191–215.
Bond, G. C. and A. Gillam. 1994. eds. Social Construction of the Past:
    Representation as Power. London, Routledge.
Bonyhady, T. and T. Griffiths. 1996. eds. Prehistory to Politics: John Mulvaney,
    The Humanities and the Public Intellectual. Melbourne, Melbourne Uni-
    versity Press.
Boone, J. L. and E. A. Smith. 1998. Is it evolution yet? A critique of evolu-
    tionary archaeology. Current Anthropology 39: S141–S173.
Bordes, F. H. 1953. Essai de classification des industries “moustériennes.”
    Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique Française 50: 457–66.
  1972. A Tale of Two Caves. New York, Harper and Row.
Boriskovsky, P. J. 1965. A propos des récents progrès des études paléolithiques
    en U.R.S.S. L’Anthropologie 69: 5–30.
Borrero, L. A. 1992. Pristine archaeologists and the settlement of southern
    South America. Antiquity 66: 768–70.
Boserup, E. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth. London, Allen and
    Unwin.
Boule, M. 1905. L’origine des éoliths. L’Anthropologie 16: 257–67.
Bourdieu, P. 1977. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge, Cambridge
    University Press.
  1980. Questions de sociologie. Paris, Les Editions de Minuit.
Bowden, M. 1991. Pitt Rivers: The Life and Archaeological Work of
    Lieutenant-General Augustus Henry Lane Fox Pitt Rivers. Cambridge,
    Cambridge University Press.


                                       591
                                 References

Bowler, P. J. 1989. The Invention of Progress: The Victorians and the Past.
     Oxford, Blackwell.
  1992. From “savage” to “primitive”: Victorian evolutionism and the inter-
     pretation of marginalized peoples. Antiquity 66: 721–9.
Bowman, S. 1990. Radiocarbon Dating. Berkeley, University of California
     Press.
Boyd, R. and P. J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process.
     Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Boyer, P. 1994. The Naturalness of Religious Ideas: A Cognitive Theory of Reli-
     gion. Berkeley, University of California Press.
  1996. What makes anthropomorphism natural: intuitive ontology and cul-
     tural representations. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 2:
     83–97.
Boyle, D. 1904. Who made the effigy stone pipes. Archaeological Report for
     Ontario, 1903, pp. 27–35, 48–56.
Bradley, J. W. 1987. Evolution of the Onondaga Iroquois: Accommodating
     Change, 1500–1655. Syracuse, NY, Syracuse University Press.
Bradley, R. 1983. Archaeology, evolution and the public good: the intellectual
     development of General Pitt Rivers. Archaeological Journal 140: 1–9.
  1984. The Social Foundations of Prehistoric Britain. London, Longman.
  1993. Altering the Earth: The Origins of Monuments in Continental
     Europe. Edinburgh, Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, Monograph
     Series 8.
  1998. The Significance of Monuments: On the Shaping of Human Experience
     in Neolithic and Bronze Age Europe. London, Routledge.
  2000. An Archaeology of Natural Places. London, Routledge.
  2002. The Past in Prehistoric Societies. London, Routledge.
  2003. The translation of time. In R. M. Van Dyke and S. E. Alcock,
     pp. 221–7.
Braidwood, R. J. 1974. The Iraq Jarmo Project. In G. R. Willey, 1974a,
     pp. 59–83.
  1981. Archaeological retrospect 2. Antiquity 55: 19–26.
Braithwaite, M. 1984. Ritual and prestige in the prehistory of Wessex c. 2,200–
     1, 400 BC: a new dimension to the archaeological evidence. In D. Miller
     and C. Tilley, pp. 93–110.
Brasser, T. J. C. 1971. Group identification along a moving frontier.
     Verhandlungen des XXXVIII Internationalen Amerikanistenkongresses
     (Munich) 2: 261–5.
Braudel, F. 1972. The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age
     of Philip II. 2 vols. London, Fontana.
Braun, D. P. 1983. Pots as tools. In J. A. Moore and A. S. Keene, pp. 107–
     34.
Bray, T. L. and T. W. Killion. 1994. eds. Reckoning With the Dead: The
     Larsen Bay Repatriation and the Smithsonian Institution. Washington,
     DC, Smithsonian Institution Press.


                                     592
                                  References

Breasted, J. H. 1912. Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt.
     New York, Scribner.
Brodie, N., J. Doole, and C. Renfrew. 2001. eds. Trade in Illicit Antiquities:
     The Destruction of the World’s Archaeological Heritage. Cambridge,
     McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research.
Brodrick, A. H. 1963. Father of Prehistory: The Abbé Henri Breuil, His Life and
     Times. New York, Morrow.
Bronowski, J. 1971. Symposium on technology and social criticism: Introduc-
     tion – technology and culture in evolution. Philosophy of the Social Sciences
     1: 195–206.
Bronson, B. 1972. Farm labor and the evolution of food production. In B.
     Spooner, pp. 190–218.
Brose, D. S. 1973. The northeastern United States. In J. E. Fitting, pp. 84–115.
Brothwell, D. R. and E. S. Higgs. 1963. eds. Science in Archaeology. London,
     Thames and Hudson.
Broughton, J. M. and J. F. O’Connell. 1999. On evolutionary ecology, selec-
     tionist archaeology, and behavioral archaeology. American Antiquity 64:
     153–65.
Browman, D. L. 2002. The Peabody Museum, Frederic W. Putnam, and the
     rise of US anthropology, 1866–1903. American Anthropologist 104: 508–
     19.
Browman, D. L. and D. R. Givens. 1996. Stratigraphic excavation: the first
     “new archaeology”. American Anthropologist 98: 80–95.
Browman, D. L. and S. Williams. 2002. eds. New Perspectives on the Origins of
     Americanist Archaeology. Tuscaloosa, University of Alabama Press.
Brown, D. E. 1988. Hierarchy, History, and Human Nature. Tucson, Univer-
     sity of Arizona Press.
Brown, I. W. 1993. William Bartram and the direct historical approach.
     In Archaeology of Eastern North America: Papers in Honor of Stephen
     Williams, pp. 277–82. Jackson, Mississippi Department of Archives and
     History, Archaeological Report 25.
Brown, J. A. 1971. ed. Approaches to the Social Dimensions of Mortuary
     Practices. Washington, DC, Society for American Archaeology, Memoir
     no. 25.
Brown, J. A. and S. Struever. 1973. The organization of archaeological
     research: an Illinois example. In C. L. Redman, pp. 261–80.
Brown, K. S. 1994. Seeing stars: character and identity in the landscapes of
     modern Macedonia. Antiquity 68: 784–96.
Brown, S. 2001. Iran. In T. Murray, 2001a, pp. 674–82.
Brück, J. 2005. Experiencing the past? The development of a phenomenologi-
     cal archaeology in British prehistory. Archaeological Dialogues 12: 45–72.
Bruford, W. H. 1975. The German Tradition of Self-Cultivation. Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
Brunhouse, R. L. 1973. In Search of the Maya: The First Archaeologists. Albu-
     querque, University of New Mexico Press.


                                      593
                                 References

  1975. Sylvanus G. Morley and the World of the Ancient Mayas. Norman:
     University of Oklahoma Press.
Bruwer, A. J. 1965. Zimbabwe, Rhodesia’s Ancient Greatness. Johannesburg,
     Keartland.
Bryson, G. 1945. Man and Society: The Scottish Inquiry of the Eighteenth Cen-
     tury. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
Buckley, W. F. 1968. ed. Modern Systems Research for the Behavioral Scientist:
     A Sourcebook. Chicago, IL, Aldine.
Bulkin, V. A., L. S. Klejn, and G. S. Lebedev. 1982. Attainments and problems
     of Soviet archaeology. World Archaeology 13: 272–95.
Bulleid, A. H. and H. St. George Gray. 1911, 1917. The Glastonbury Lake
     Village: A Full Description of the Excavations and the Relics Discov-
     ered, 1892–1907. 2 vols. Glastonbury, UK, Glastonbury Antiquarian
     Society.
Bunge, M. 1979. A World of Systems. Dordrecht, D. Reidel.
  1996. Finding Philosophy in Social Science. New Haven, CT, Yale University
     Press.
  1997. Mechanism and explanation. Philosophy of the Social Sciences 27: 410–
     65.
  2003. Emergence and Convergence: Qualitative Novelty and the Unity of
     Knowledge. Toronto, University of Toronto Press.
Burger, R. L. 1989. An overview of Peruvian archaeology (1976–1986). Annual
     Review of Anthropology 18: 37–69.
Burkitt, M. C. 1921. Prehistory: A Study of Early Cultures in Europe and the
     Mediterranean Basin. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
  1928. South Africa’s Past in Stone and Paint. Cambridge, Cambridge
     University Press.
Burl, A. and N. Mortimer. 2005. eds. Stukeley’s “Stonehenge”: An Unpublished
     Manuscript, 1721–1724. New Haven, CT, Yale University Press.
Burling, R. 1962. Maximization theories and the study of economic anthro-
     pology. American Anthropologist 64: 802–21.
Burmeister, S. 2000. Archaeology and migration. Current Anthropology 41:
     539–67.
Burrow, J. W. 1966. Evolution and Society: A Study in Victorian Social Theory.
     Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Butterfield, H. 1981. The Origins of History. New York, Basic Books.
Butterworth, B. 1999. What Counts: How Every Brain is Hardwired for Math.
     New York, Free Press.
Butzer, K. W. 1976. Early Hydraulic Civilization in Egypt. Chicago, IL, Uni-
     versity of Chicago Press.
Byers, A. M. 1999. Intentionality, symbolic pragmatics, and material culture:
     revisiting Binford’s view of the Old Copper Complex. American Antiq-
     uity 64: 265–87.
  2004. The Ohio Hopewell Episode: Paradigm Lost and Paradigm Gained.
     Akron, OH, The University of Akron Press.


                                     594
                                  References

Byrne, D. 1993. The Past of Others: Archaeological Heritage Management in
     Thailand and Australia. Ph.D. diss., Canberra, Department of Anthropol-
     ogy, Australian National University.
Cabrero, G., M. T. 1993. ed. II Coloquio Pedro Bosh-Gimpera. México, DF,
     Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Instituto de Investigaciones
     Anthropológicas.
Calder, W. M. and J. Cobet. 1990. Heinrich Schliemann nach Hundert Jahren.
     Frankfurt, Klostermann.
Caldwell, J. R. 1958. Trend and Tradition in the Prehistory of the Eastern United
     States. Menasha, WI, American Anthropological Association, Memoir no.
     88.
  1959. The new American archeology. Science 129: 303–7.
  1964. Interaction spheres in prehistory. In Hopewellian Studies, ed. by J. R.
     Caldwell and R. L. Hall, pp. 133–43. Springfield, Illinois State Museum
     Scientific Papers no. 12.
Cancian, F. 1966. Maximization as norm, strategy, and theory: a comment on
     programmatic statements in economic anthropology. American Anthro-
     pologist 68: 465–70.
Cannon, A. 1989. The historical dimension in mortuary expressions of status
     and sentiment. Current Anthropology 30: 437–58.
Cannon, G. 1990. The Life and Mind of Oriental Jones: Sir William Jones, the
     Father of Modern Linguistics. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Carr, E. H. 1967. What is History? New York, Vintage.
Carrasco, D. 1982. Quetzalcoatl and the Irony of Empire. Chicago, IL, Uni-
     versity of Chicago Press.
Carrithers, M. 1992. Why Humans Have Cultures: Explaining Anthropology
     and Social Diversity. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Carrott, R. G. 1978. The Egyptian Revival: Its Sources, Monuments, and Mean-
     ing, 1808–1858. Berkeley, University of California Press.
Carson, R. L. 1962. Silent Spring. Boston, Houghton Mifflin.
Casson, S. 1921. The Dorian invasions reviewed in the light of new evidence.
     Antiquarian Journal 1: 198–224.
  1939. The Discovery of Man. London, Hamish Hamilton.
Caton Thompson, G. 1931. The Zimbabwe Culture. Oxford, Oxford University
     Press.
  1983. Mixed Memoirs. Gateshead, UK, Paradigm Press.
Cauvin, J. 2000. The Birth of the Gods and the Origins of Agriculture.
     Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Cazeau, C. and S. Scott. 1979. Explaining the Unknown: Great Mysteries Reex-
     amined. New York, Da Capo Press.
Celenko, T. 1996. Egypt in Africa. Indianapolis, IN, Indianapolis Museum of
     Art.
Ceram, C. W. 1951. Gods, Graves, and Scholars: The Study of Archaeology. New
     York, Knopf.
Césaire, A. 1955. Discourse on Colonialism. New York, Monthly Review Press.


                                      595
                                 References

Chakrabarti, D. K. 1981. Indian archaeology: the first phase, 1784–1861. In
    G. Daniel, 1981b, pp. 169–85.
 1982. The development of archaeology in the Indian subcontinent. World
    Archaeology 13: 326–44.
 1988. A History of Indian Archaeology: From the Beginning to 1947. New
    Delhi, Munshiram Manoharlal.
 1997. Colonial Indology: Sociopolitics of the Ancient Indian Past. New Delhi,
    Munshiram Manoharlal.
 2001. South Asia. In T. Murray, 2001a, pp. 1183–94.
 2003. Archaeology in the Third World: A History of Indian Archaeology since
    1947. New Delhi, D. K. Printworld.
Chamberlin, R. 1983. Loot! The Heritage of Plunder. London, Thames and
    Hudson.
Chamberlin, T. C. 1890. The method of multiple working hypotheses.
    Science 15(366): 92–6. Reprinted in Science 148(1965): 745–59.
Chambers, R. 1844. Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation. London, John
    Churchill.
Champion, T. 1991. Theoretical archaeology in Britain. In I. Hodder, 1991a,
    pp. 129–60.
 1996. Three nations or one? Britain and the national use of the past. In
    M. Dı́az-Andreu and T. Champion, 1996a, pp. 119–45.
Chanaiwa, D. 1973. The Zimbabwe Controversy: A Case of Colonial Histo-
    riography. Syracuse, NY, Syracuse University, Program of East African
    Studies.
Chang, K. C. 1963. The Archaeology of Ancient China. New Haven, CT, Yale
    University Press.
 1981. Archaeology and Chinese historiography. World Archaeology 13: 156–
    69.
 1986. The Archaeology of Ancient China. 4th ed. New Haven, CT, Yale
    University Press.
 2002. Reflections on Chinese archaeology in the second half of the twentieth
    century. Journal of East Asian Archaeology 3: 5–13.
Chapman, J. 1998. The impact of modern invasions and migrations on
    archaeological explanation: a biographical sketch of Marija Gimbutas. In
    M. Dı́az-Andreu and M. L. S. Sørensen, pp. 295–314.
Chapman, R. 1979. “Analytical Archaeology” and after – Introduction. In
    D. L. Clarke, pp. 109–43.
 2003. Archaeologies of Complexity. London, Routledge.
Chapman, W. R. 1984. Pitt Rivers and his collection, 1874–1883: the chron-
    icle of a gift horse. In The General’s Gift – A Celebration of the Pitt
    Rivers Museum Centenary, ed. by B. A. L. Cranstone and S. Seidenberg.
    Journal of the Anthropological Society of Oxford, Occasional Paper 3:
    6–25.
 1985. Arranging ethnology: A. H. L. F. Pitt Rivers and the typological
    tradition. G. W. Stocking, Jr, pp. 15–48.


                                     596
                                 References

 1989. The organizational context in the history of archaeology: Pitt Rivers
    and other British archaeologists in the 1860s. Antiquaries Journal 69:
    23–42.
Chard, C. S. 1961. New developments in Siberian archaeology. Asian Perspec-
    tives 5: 118–26.
 1963. Soviet scholarship on the prehistory of Asiatic Russia. Slavic Review
    22: 538–46.
 1969. Archaeology in the Soviet Union. Science 163: 774–9.
Chazan, M. 1995. Concepts of time and the development of Palaeolithic
    chronology. American Anthropologist 97: 457–67.
Chen, C. 1989. Chinese archaeology and the West. Archaeological Review from
    Cambridge 8(1): 27–35.
Chêng, T.-K. 1963. Archaeology in China, vol. 3, Chou China. Cambridge,
    Heffer.
Chernetsov, V. N. and W. Moszyńska. 1974. Prehistory of Western Siberia.
    Montreal, McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Chernykh, E. N. 1995. Postscript: Russian archaeology after the collapse of the
    USSR – infrastructural crisis and the resurgence of old and new nation-
    alisms. In P. L. Kohl and C. Fawcett, pp. 139–48.
Chiappelli, F. 1976. First Images of America: The Impact of the New World on
    the Old. Berkeley and Los Angeles, University of California Press.
Childe, V. G. 1925a. The Dawn of European Civilization. London, Kegan
    Paul.
 1925b. National art in the Stone Age. Nature 116: 195–7.
 1926. The Aryans: A Study of Indo-European Origins. London, Kegan
    Paul.
 1928. The Most Ancient East: The Oriental Prelude to European Prehistory.
    London, Kegan Paul.
 1929. The Danube in Prehistory. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
 1930. The Bronze Age. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
 1931. Skara Brae: A Pictish Village in Orkney. London, Kegan Paul.
 1932. Chronology of prehistoric Europe: a review. Antiquity 6: 206–12.
 1933a. Is prehistory practical? Antiquity 7: 410–18.
 1933b. Races, peoples and cultures in prehistoric Europe. History 18: 193–
    203.
 1934. New Light on the Most Ancient East: The Oriental Prelude to
    European Prehistory. London, Kegan Paul.
 1935a. The Prehistory of Scotland. London, Kegan Paul.
 1935b. Changing methods and aims in prehistory. Proceedings of the
    Prehistoric Society 1: 1–15.
 1936. Man Makes Himself. London, Watts (pages cited from 4th edn,
    1965).
 1939. The Dawn of European Civilization. 3rd edn. London, Kegan Paul.
 1940a. Prehistoric Communities of the British Isles. London, Chambers.
 1940b. Archaeology in the U.S.S.R. Nature 145: 110–11.


                                     597
                                 References

 1942a. What Happened in History. Harmondsworth, UK, Penguin (pages
     cited from 1st American edn, 1946).
 1942b. Prehistory in the U.S.S.R. I. Palaeolithic and Mesolithic, A: Caucasus
     and Crimea. Man 42: 98–100.
 1942c. Prehistory in the U.S.S.R. I. Palaeolithic and Mesolithic, B.: The
     Russian Plain. Man 42: 100–3.
 1942d. Prehistory in the U.S.S.R. II. The Copper Age in South Russia. Man
     42: 130–6.
 1942e. The significance of Soviet archaeology. Labour Monthly 24: 341–3.
 1942f. The chambered cairns of Rousay. Antiquaries Journal 22: 139–42.
 1943. Archaeology in the U.S.S.R. The forest zone. Man 43: 4–9.
 1944a. Progress and Archaeology. London, Watts.
 1944b. The future of archaeology. Man 44: 18–19.
 1945a. Directional changes in funerary practices during 50,000 years. Man
     45: 13–19.
 1945b. Archaeology and anthropology [in the USSR]. Nature 156: 224–5.
 1946a. Scotland before the Scots. London, Methuen.
 1946b. Archaeology and anthropology. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology
     2: 243–51.
 1947. History. London, Cobbett.
 1949. Social Worlds of Knowledge. London, Oxford University Press.
 1950a. Prehistoric Migrations in Europe. Oslo, Aschehaug.
 1950b. Cave man’s buildings. Antiquity 24: 4–11.
 1951. Social Evolution. New York, Schuman.
 1952. Archaeological organization in the USSR. Anglo-Soviet Journal 13(3):
     23–6.
 1953. The constitution of archaeology as a science. In Science, Medicine and
     History, ed. by E. A. Underwood, pp. 3–15. Oxford, Oxford University
     Press.
 1954. Prehistory. In The European Inheritance, ed. by E. Barker, G. Clark,
     and P. Vaucher, pp. 3–155. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
 1955. The significance of lake dwellings in the history of prehistory. Sibrium
     2(2): 87–91.
 1956a. Piecing Together the Past: The Interpretation of Archaeological Data.
     London, Routledge & Kegan Paul.
 1956b. Society and Knowledge: The Growth of Human Traditions. New York,
     Harper.
 1958a. The Prehistory of European Society. Harmondsworth, UK, Penguin.
 1958b. Retrospect. Antiquity 32: 69–74.
 1958c. Valediction. Bulletin of the Institute of Archaeology. University of
     London 1: 1–8.
Childe, V. G. and M. C. Burkitt. 1932. A chronological table of prehistory.
     Antiquity 6: 185–205.
Chilton, E. S. 1999. ed. Material Meanings: Critical Approaches to the
     Interpretation of Material Culture. Salt Lake City, University of Utah
     Press.

                                     598
                                 References

Chinchilla Mazariegos, O. 1998. Archaeology and nationalism in Guatemala
    at the time of independence. Antiquity 72: 376–86.
Chippindale, C. 1983. Stonehenge Complete. London, Thames and Hudson.
  1993. Ambition, deference, discrepancy, consumption: the intellectual back-
    ground to a post-processual archaeology. In N. Yoffee and A. Sherratt,
    pp. 27–36.
Chorley, R. J., A. J. Dunn, and R. P. Beckinsale. 1964. The History of the Study
    of Landforms or the Development of Geomorphology, vol.1, Geomorphology
    before Davis. London, Methuen.
Chorley, R. J. and P. Haggett. 1967. eds. Models in Geography. London,
    Methuen.
Choy, M. 1960. Le Revolución Neolı́tica en los orı́genes de la civilización
    Americana. In R. Matos Mendieta, Antiguo Peru, espacio y tiempo,
    pp. 149–97. Lima, Librerı́a Juan Mejı́a Baca.
Chrisomalis, S. and B. G. Trigger. 2004. Reconstructing prehistoric ethnicity:
    problems and possibilities. In A Passion for the Past: Papers in Honour
    of James F. Pendergast, ed. by J. V. Wright and J.-L. Pilon, pp. 419–33.
    Gatineau, Quebec, Canadian Museum of Civilization, Mercury Series,
    Archaeological Paper 164.
Christenson, A. L. 1985. The identification and study of Indian shell middens
    in eastern North America: 1643–1861. North American Archaeologist 6:
    227–44.
  1989a. ed. Tracing Archaeology’s Past: The Historiography of Archaeology.
    Carbondale, Southern Illinois University Press.
  1989b. The past is still alive: the immediacy problem and writing the history
    of archaeology. In A. L. Christenson, 1989a, pp. 162–68.
Claassen, C. 1994. ed. Women in Archaeology. Philadelphia, University of
    Pennsylvania Press.
Clark, G. A. 2003. American archaeology’s uncertain future. In S. D. Gillespie
    and D. L. Nichols, 2003, pp. 51–67.
Clark, J. G. D. (Grahame). 1932. The Mesolithic Age in Britain. Cambridge,
    Cambridge University Press.
  1936. Russian archaeology: the other side of the picture. Proceedings of the
    Prehistoric Society 2: 248–9.
  1939. Archaeology and Society. London, Methuen.
  1940. Prehistoric England. London, Batsford.
  1942. Bees in antiquity. Antiquity 16: 208–15.
  1945. Man and nature in prehistory, with special reference to Neolithic
    settlement in northern Europe. Conference on the Problems and Prospects
    of European Archaeology, pp. 20–28. London, Institute of Archaeology,
    Occasional Paper 6.
  1952. Prehistoric Europe: The Economic Basis. London, Methuen.
  1953. The economic approach to prehistory: Albert Reckitt Archaeological
    Lecture, 1953. Proceedings of the British Academy 39: 215–38.
  1954. Excavations at Star Carr. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
  1957. Archaeology and Society. 3rd edn. London, Methuen.

                                     599
                                 References

  1961. World Prehistory: An Outline. Cambridge, Cambridge University
     Press.
  1966. The invasion hypothesis in British archaeology. Antiquity 40: 172–89.
  1969. World Prehistory: A New Outline. Cambridge, Cambridge University
     Press.
  1972. Star Carr: A Case Study in Bioarchaeology. Reading, MA, Addison-
     Wesley Modular Publications, McCaleb Module no. 10.
  1974. Prehistory Europe: the economic basis. In Willey, 1974a, pp. 31–57.
  1975. The Earlier Stone Age Settlement of Scandinavia. Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
  1976. Prehistory since Childe. Bulletin of the Institute of Archaeology, Uni-
     versity of London 13: 1–21.
  1977. World Prehistory in New Perspective. Cambridge, Cambridge Univer-
     sity Press.
  1989a. Prehistory at Cambridge and Beyond. Cambridge, Cambridge
     University Press.
  1989b. Economic Prehistory: Papers on Archaeology. Cambridge, Cambridge
     University Press.
  1999. Dorothy Garrod 1892–1968. In T. Murray, 1999a, pp. 401–12.
Clark, K. M. 1928. The Gothic Revival: An Essay in the History of Taste.
     London, Constable. 3rd edn. 1962. London, Murray.
Clark, L. K. 1961. Pioneers of Prehistory in England. London, Sheed and
     Ward.
Clarke, D. L. 1968. Analytical Archaeology. London, Methuen.
  1970. Beaker Pottery of Great Britain and Ireland. 2 vols. Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
  1972a. ed. Models in Archaeology. London, Methuen.
  1972b. A provisional model of an Iron Age society and its settlement system.
     In D. L. Clarke, 1972a, pp. 801–69.
  1973. Archaeology: the loss of innocence. Antiquity 47: 6–18.
  1977a. ed. Spatial Archaeology. London, Academic Press.
  1977b. Spatial information in archaeology. In D. L. Clarke, 1977a, pp. 1–32.
  1979. Analytical Archaeologist. New York, Academic Press.
Cleere, H. 1984. ed. Approaches to Archaeological Heritage. Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
  1989. ed. Archaeological Heritage Management in the Modern World.
     London, Unwin Hyman.
  1993. ed. Central European archaeology in transition. Antiquity 67: 121–56.
Clermont, N. and P. E. L. Smith. 1990. Prehistoric, prehistory, prehisto-
     rian . . . who invented the terms? Antiquity 64: 97–102.
Clifford, J. 1988. The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-Century Ethnography,
     Literature, and Art. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
Coe, M. D. 1992. Breaking the Maya Code. London, Thames and Hudson.
Cohen, C. 1999. Abbé Henri Breuil 1877–1961. In T. Murray, 1999a,
     pp. 301–12.


                                     600
                                 References

Cohen, M. N. 1977. The Food Crisis in Prehistory. New Haven, CT, Yale Uni-
     versity Press.
Cohen, M. N. and G. J. Armelagos. 1984. eds. Paleopathology at the Origins
     of Agriculture. New York, Academic Press.
Cohen, S. F. 1973. Bukharin and the Bolshevik Revolution: A Political Biogra-
     phy. New York, Knopf.
Cole, F.-C. and T. Deuel. 1937. Rediscovering Illinois. Chicago, IL, University
     of Chicago Press.
Cole, J. R. 1980. Cult archaeology and unscientific method and theory.
     Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory 3: 1–33.
Coles, J. 1979. Experimental Archaeology. London, Academic Press.
Coles, J., A. Goodall, and A. Minnitt. 1992. Arthur Bulleid and the Glaston-
     bury Lake Village, 1892–1992. Taunton, UK, Somerset Levels Project,
     Somerset County Council Museums Service.
Collingwood, R. G. 1930. The Archaeology of Roman Britain. London,
     Methuen.
 1939. An Autobiography. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
 1946. The Idea of History. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Collis, J. 1996. Celts and politics. In P. Graves-Brown et al., pp. 167–78.
Colton, H. S. 1932. A Survey of Prehistoric Sites in the Region of Flagstaff,
     Arizona. Washington, DC, Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American
     Ethnology, Bulletin 104.
Colton, H. S. and L. L. Hargrave. 1937. Handbook of Northern Arizona Pottery
     Wares. Flagstaff, Museum of Northern Arizona, Bulletin no. 11.
Combier, J. 1959. Recherches sur l’âge de la Pierre en U.R.S.S. L’Anthropologie
     63: 160–74.
Coningham, R. and N. Lewer. 2000. eds. Archaeology and identity in South
     Asia: interpretations and consequences. Antiquity 74: 664–712.
Conkey, M. W. and J. D. Spector. 1984. Archaeology and the study of gender.
     Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory 7: 1–38.
Conkey, M. W. and R. Tringham. 1995. Archaeology and the goddess: explor-
     ing the contours of feminist archaeology. In Feminisms in the Academy,
     ed. by D. C. Stanton and A. J. Stewart, pp. 199–247. Ann Arbor, Univer-
     sity of Michigan Press.
Conn, S. 1998. Museums and American Intellectual Life, 1876–1926. Chicago,
     IL, University of Chicago Press.
Conroy, G. C. 1990. Primate Evolution. New York, Norton.
Cook, S. 1966. The obsolete “anti-market” mentality: a critique of the sub-
     stantive approach to economic anthropology. American Anthropologist
     68: 323–45.
Cooney, G. 1995. Theory and practice in Irish archaeology. In P. J. Ucko,
     1995a, pp. 263–77.
 1996. Building the future on the past: archaeology and the construction of
     national identity in Ireland. In M. Dı́az-Andreu and T. Champion, 1996a,
     pp. 146–63.


                                     601
                                 References

Corbey, R. and W. Roebroeks. 2001. eds. Studying Human Origins: Disci-
    plinary History and Epistemology. Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam
    Press.
Cordell, L. S. and F. Plog. 1979. Escaping the confines of normative thought:
    a reevaluation of Puebloan prehistory. American Antiquity 44: 405–29.
Costopoulos, A. 2002. Playful agents, inexorable process: elements of a coher-
    ent theory of iteration in anthropological simulation. Archeologia e Cal-
    colatori 13: 259–65.
Coudart, A. 1999. André Leroi-Gourhan 1911–1986. In T. Murray, 1999a,
    pp. 653–64.
Courbin, P. 1988. What is Archaeology? An Essay on the Nature of Archaeolog-
    ical Research. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Cowgill, G. L. 1975. On causes and consequences of ancient and modern
    population changes. American Anthropologist 77: 505–25.
  1977. The trouble with significance tests and what we can do about it.
    American Antiquity 42: 350–68.
  2000. “Rationality” and contexts in agency theory. In M.-A. Dobres and
    J. E. Robb, pp. 51–60.
Coye, N. 1997. La préhistoire en parole et en acte: Méthodes et enjeux de la
    pratique archéologique (1830–1950). Paris, L’Harmattan.
Crawford, O. G. S. 1912. The distribution of Early Bronze Age settlements in
    Britain. Geographical Journal 40: 299–303.
  1921. Man and his Past. London, Oxford University Press.
  1923. Air survey and archaeology. Geographical Journal 61: 342–60.
  1932. The dialectical process in the history of science. Sociological Review
    24: 165–73.
Crawford, O. G. S. and A. Keiller. 1928. Wessex from the Air. Oxford, Oxford
    University Press.
Creel, H. G. 1937. The Birth of China: A Study of the Formative Period of
    Chinese Civilization. New York, Raynal and Hitchcock.
Croissant, J. L. 2000. Narrating archaeology: a historiography and notes
    toward a sociology of archaeological knowledge. In S. E. Nash, 2000a,
    pp. 186–206.
Cronin, C. 1962. An analysis of pottery design elements indicating possible
    relationships between three decorated types. Fieldiana Anthropology 53:
    105–14.
Crooke, E. M. 2000. Politics, Archaeology, and the Creation of a National
    Museum in Ireland: An Expression of National Life. Dublin, Irish Aca-
    demic Press.
Crumley, C. L. 1976. Toward a locational definition of state systems of settle-
    ment. American Anthropologist 78: 59–73.
Culbert, T. P. 1973. ed. The Classic Maya Collapse. Albuquerque, University
    of New Mexico Press.
Cunliffe, B. 1974. Iron Age Communities in Britain. London, Routledge and
    Kegan Paul.


                                     602
                                 References

Cunnington, R. H. 1975. From Antiquary to Archaeologist. Princes Risbor-
     ough, UK, Shire Publications.
Curl, J. S. 1982. The Egyptian Revival: An Introductory Study of a Recurring
     Theme in the History of Taste. London, George Allen and Unwin.
Cushing, F. H. 1886. A study of Pueblo pottery as illustrative of Zuñi culture
     growth. Washington, DC, Bureau of American Ethnology, Annual Report
     4: 467–521.
d’Agostino, B. 1991. The Italian perspective on theoretical archaeology. In I.
     Hodder, 1991a, pp. 52–64.
Dall, W. H. 1877. On succession in the shell-heaps of the Aleutian Islands.
     Washington, DC, United States Geological and Geographic Survey, Con-
     tributions to North American Ethnology 1: 41–91.
Dalton, G. 1961. Economic theory and primitive society. American Anthropol-
     ogist 63: 1–25.
Daniel, G. E. 1943. The Three Ages: An Essay on Archaeological Method.
     Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
  1950. A Hundred Years of Archaeology. London, Duckworth.
  1958. Editorial. Antiquity 32: 65–8.
  1963a. The Idea of Prehistory. Cleveland, OH, World.
  1963b. The personality of Wales. In Culture and Environment: Essays in
     Honour of Sir Cyril Fox, ed. by I. Ll. Foster and L. Alcock, pp. 7–23.
     London, Routledge and Kegan Paul.
  1967. The Origins and Growth of Archaeology. Harmondsworth, UK,
     Penguin.
  1975. A Hundred and Fifty Years of Archaeology. 2nd edn. London,
     Duckworth.
  1976. Stone, bronze and iron. In J. V. S. Megaw, pp. 35–42.
  1981a. A Short History of Archaeology. London, Thames and Hudson.
  1981b. ed. Towards a History of Archaeology. London, Thames and
     Hudson.
Daniel, G. E. and C. Chippindale. 1989. eds. The Pastmasters: Eleven Modern
     Pioneers of Archaeology. London, Thames and Hudson.
Daniel, G. E. and C. Renfrew. 1988. The Idea of Prehistory. 2nd edn.
     Edinburgh, Edinburgh University Press.
Daniels, S. G. H. 1972. Research design models. In D. Clarke, 1972a,
     pp. 201–29.
Danilova, L. V. 1971. Controversial problems of the theory of precapitalist
     societies. Soviet Anthropology and Archeology 9: 269–328.
Dark, K. R. 1995. Theoretical Archaeology. Ithaca, NY, Cornell University
     Press.
Darnton, R. 1984. The Great Cat Massacre and Other Episodes in French Cul-
     tural History. New York, Basic Books.
Davidson, J. M. 1979. New Zealand. In J. D. Jennings, pp. 222–48.
Davies, G. L. 1969. The Earth in Decay: A History of British Geomorphology,
     1578–1878. New York, American Elsevier.


                                     603
                                 References

Davis, R. S. 1983. Theoretical issues in contemporary Soviet Paleolithic archae-
     ology. Annual Review of Anthropology 12: 403–28.
Davis, T. W. 2004. Shifting Sands: The Rise and Fall of Biblical Archaeology.
     Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Dawkins, W. B. 1874. Cave Hunting: Researches on the Evidence of Caves
     Respecting the Early Inhabitants of Europe. London, Macmillan.
Dawson, J. W. 1888. Fossil Men and their Modern Representatives. 3rd
     edn. London, Hodder and Stoughton(1st edn 1880, Montreal, Dawson
     Brothers).
 1901. Fifty Years of Work in Canada, Scientific and Educational. London,
     Ballantyne, Hanson.
Debetz, G. F. 1961. The social life of early Paleolithic man as seen through
     the work of the Soviet anthropologists. In Social Life of Early Man, ed.
     by S. L. Washburn, pp. 137–49. Chicago, IL, Aldine.
Deetz, J. J. F. 1965. The Dynamics of Stylistic Change in Arikara Ceramics.
     Urbana, University of Illinois Press.
 1968. Late man in North America: archeology of European Americans. In
     B. J. Meggers, pp. 121–30.
 1977. In Small Things Forgotten. Garden City, NY, Anchor.
De Grummond, N. T. 1996. ed. An Encyclopedia of the History of Classical
     Archaeology. 2 vols. London, Fitzroy Dearborn.
De Laet, S. J. 1957. Archaeology and its Problems. New York, Macmillan.
Delâge, D. 1985. Le pays renversé: Amérindiens et européens en Amérique du
     nord-est 1600–1664. Montreal, Boréal Express.
Deloria, V., Jr. 1995. Red Earth, White Lies: The Foremost American Indian
     Activist Exposes the Myth of Scientific Fact, and the Truth of his People’s
     Oral Tradition. New York, Scribner.
Demoule, J.-P. 1999. Ethnicity, culture and identity: French archaeologists
     and historians. Antiquity 73: 190–98.
Denbow, J. R. 1984. Prehistoric herders and foragers of the Kalahari: the
     evidence for 1500 years of interaction. In C. Schrire, pp. 175–93.
Dennell, R. 1990. Progressive gradualism, imperialism and academic fashion:
     Lower Paleolithic archaeology in the 20th century. Antiquity 64: 549–58.
Dennett, D. C. 2003. Freedom Evolves. New York, Viking.
Desmond, A. J. 1982. Archetypes and Ancestors: Palaeontology in Victorian
     London 1850–1875. London, Blond and Briggs.
 1989. The Politics of Evolution: Morphology, Medicine, and Reform in Radical
     London. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Desmond, A. J. and J. Moore. 1992. Darwin. Harmondsworth, UK, Penguin
     Books.
Desmond, L. G. and P. M. Messenger. 1988. A Dream of Maya: Augustus and
     Alice LePlongeon in Nineteenth-Century Yucatan. Albuquerque: Univer-
     sity of New Mexico Press.
Deuel, L. 1967. Conquistadors Without Swords: Archaeologists in the Americas.
     New York, St. Martin’s Press.


                                     604
                                   References

  1973. Flights into Yesterday: The Story of Aerial Archaeology. Har-
     mondsworth, UK, Penguin.
Dever, W. G. 2001a. Syro-Palestinian and biblical archaeology. In T. Murray,
     2001a, pp. 1244–53.
  2001b. Israel. In T. Murray, 2001a, pp. 715–21.
  2003. Who Were the Early Israelites and Where Did They Come From? Grand
     Rapids, MI, William B. Eerdmans.
Devon, Earl of. 1873. Inaugural address to the annual meeting held at Exeter,
     1873. Archaeological Journal 30: 205–10.
Diamond, J. M. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies.
     New York, Norton.
Diamond, S. 1974. In Search of the Primitive: A Critique of Civilization. New
     Brunswick, NJ, Transaction Books.
Dı́az-Andreu, M. 1993. Theory and ideology in archaeology: Spanish archae-
     ology under the Franco régime. Antiquity 67: 74–82.
  1996a. Constructing identities through culture: the past in the forging of
     Europe. In P. Graves-Brown et al., pp. 48–61.
  1996b. Islamic archaeology and the origin of the Spanish nation. In M.
     Dı́az-Andreu and T. Champion, pp. 68–89.
  1997. Nationalism, ethnicity and archaeology – the archaeological study of
     Iberians through the looking glass. Journal of Mediterranean Studies 7:
     155–68.
  2003. Review of F. Garcia et al., 58 anys i 7 dies: Correspondència de Pere Bosch
     Gimpera a Lluı́s Pericot (1919–1974). Bulletin of the History of Archaeology
     13(2): 15–17.
  2004. Britain and the other: the archaeology of imperialism. In History,
     Nationhood and the Question of Britain, ed. by H. Brocklehurst and
     R. Phillips, pp. 227–41. New York, Palgrave Macmillan.
Dı́az-Andreu, M. and T. Champion. 1996a. eds. Nationalism and Archaeology
     in Europe. London, UCL Press.
  1996b. Nationalism and archaeology in Europe: an introduction. In M.
     Dı́az-Andreu and T. Champion, 1996a, pp. 1–23.
Dı́az-Andreu, M. and M. L. S. Sørensen. 1998. eds. Excavating Women: A
     History of Women in European Archaeology. London, Routledge.
Diehl, R. A. 1983. Tula: The Toltec Capital of Ancient Mexico. London, Thames
     and Hudson.
Dietler, M. 1994. “Our ancestors the Gauls”: archaeology, ethnic nationalism,
     and the manipulation of ethnic identity in modern Europe. American
     Anthropologist 96: 584–605.
  1998. A tale of three sites: the monumentalization of Celtic oppida and the
     politics of collective memory and identity. World Archaeology 30: 72–89.
Diop, C. A. 1974. The African Origin of Civilization: Myth or Reality.
     Westport, CT, Lawrence Hill.
Dixon, R. B. 1913. Some aspects of North American archeology. American
     Anthropologist 15: 549–77.


                                       605
                                 References

 1928. The Building of Cultures. New York, Scribner’s.
Dobres, M.-A. and J. E. Robb. 2000. eds. Agency in Archaeology. New York,
    Routledge.
Dodson, A. 1988. Egypt’s first antiquarians? Antiquity 62: 513–7.
Dolitsky, A. B. 1985. Siberian Paleolithic archaeology: approaches and analytic
    methods. Current Anthropology 26: 361–78.
Dolukhanov, P. M. 1979. Ecology and Economy in Neolithic Eastern Europe.
    London, Duckworth.
 1995. Archaeology in Russia and its impact on archaeological theory. In P. J.
    Ucko, 1995a, pp. 327–42.
Dommasnes, L. H. 1992. Two decades of women in prehistory and in archae-
    ology in Norway: a review. Norwegian Archaeological Review 25: 1–14.
Donald, M. 1991. Origins of the Modern Mind: Three Stages in the Evolution of
    Culture and Cognition. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
Dongoske, K. E., M. Aldenderfer, and K. Doehner. 2000. Working Together:
    Native Americans and Archaeologists. Washington, DC, Society for
    American Archaeology.
Donnan, C. B. 1976. Moche Art and Iconography. Los Angeles, CA, UCLA,
    Latin American Center Publications.
Doran, J. E. and F. R. Hodson. 1975. Mathematics and Computers in Archae-
    ology. Edinburgh, Edinburgh University Press.
Dragadze, T. 1980. The place of “ethnos” theory in Soviet anthropology. In
    E. Gellner, pp. 161–70.
Dray, W. 1957. Laws and Explanation in History. Oxford, Oxford University
    Press.
Drower, M. S. 1985. Flinders Petrie: A Life in Archaeology. London, Gollancz.
Duff, A. G. 1924. The Life-Work of Lord Avebury (Sir John Lubbock) 1834–1913.
    London, Watts.
Duff, R. S. 1950. The Moa-Hunter Period of Maori Culture. Wellington, Gov-
    ernment Printer.
Duke, P. 1991. Points in Time: Structure and Event in a Late Northern Plains
    Hunting Society. Niwot, University Press of Colorado.
 1995. Working through theoretical tensions in contemporary archaeology: a
    practical attempt from southwestern Colorado. Journal of Archaeological
    Method and Theory 2: 201–29.
Dumond, D. E. 1977. Science in archaeology: the saints go marching in.
    American Antiquity 42: 330–49.
Dumont, L. 1994. German Ideology: From France to Germany and Back.
    Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Dunnell, R. C. 1970. Seriation method and its evaluation. American Antiquity
    35: 305–19.
 1971. Systematics in Prehistory. New York, Free Press.
 1978. Style and function: a fundamental dichotomy. American Antiquity
    43: 192–202.
 1979. Trends in current Americanist archaeology. American Journal of
    Archaeology 83: 437–49.

                                     606
                                 References

  1980a. Evolutionary theory and archaeology. Advances in Archaeological
     Method and Theory 3: 35–99.
  1980b. Americanist archaeology: the 1979 contribution. American Journal
     of Archaeology 84: 463–78.
  1981. Americanist archaeology: the 1980 literature. American Journal of
     Archaeology 85: 429–45.
  1982a. Americanist archaeological literature: 1981. American Journal of
     Archaeology 86: 509–29.
  1982b. Science, social science, and common sense: the agonizing
     dilemma of modern archaeology. Journal of Anthropological Research 38:
     1–25.
  1983. A review of the Americanist archaeological literature for 1982.
     American Journal of Archaeology 87: 521–44.
  1984. The Americanist literature for 1983: a year of contrasts and challenges.
     American Journal of Archaeology 88: 489–513.
  1985. Americanist archaeology in 1984. American Journal of Archaeology 89:
     585–611.
  1986. Five decades of American archaeology. In D. J. Meltzer et al., pp.
     23–49.
  2001. United States of America, prehistoric archaeology. In T. Murray,
     2001a, pp. 1289–1307.
Durkheim, E. 1893. De la division du travail social. Paris, Alcan.
  1895. Les Règles de la méthode sociologique. Paris, Alcan.
  1897. Le Suicide. Paris, Alcan.
  1912. Les Formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse. Paris, Alcan.
Duvignaud, J. 1965. Durkheim: sa vie, son oeuvre. Paris, Presses Universitaires
     de France.
Dymond, D. P. 1974. Archaeology and History: A Plea for Reconciliation.
     London, Thames and Hudson.
Dyson, S. L. 1989. The role of ideology and institutions in shaping clas-
     sical archaeology in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. In A. L.
     Christenson, 1989a, pp. 127–35.
  1993. From new to new age archaeology: archaeological theory and classical
     archaeology: a 1990’s perspective. American Journal of Archaeology 97:
     195–206.
  1998. Ancient Marbles to American Shores: Classical Archaeology in the
     United States. Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press.
  2004. Eugénie Sellers Strong: Portrait of an Archaeologist. London,
     Duckworth.
Earl, G. W. 1863. On the shell-mounds of Province Wellesley, in the Malay
     Peninsula. Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London 2: 119–29.
Earle, T. K. and R. W. Preucel. 1987. Processual archaeology and the radical
     critique. Current Anthropology 28: 501–38.
Echo-Hawk, R. C. 2000. Ancient history in the New World: integrating oral
     traditions and the archaeological record in deep time. American Antiquity
     65: 267–90.

                                     607
                                 References

Edwards, A. A. B. 1891. Egypt and its Monuments: Pharaohs, Fellahs and
     Explorers. New York, Harper.
Edwards, D. N. 2003. Ancient Egypt in the Sudanese Middle Nile: a case of
     mistaken identity. In D. O’Connor and A. Reid, pp. 137–50.
Edwards, I. E. S. 1985. The Pyramids of Egypt. Revised edn. Harmondsworth,
     UK, Penguin.
Eggan, F. R. 1966. The American Indian. London, Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Eggers, H. J. 1950. Das problem der ethnischen Deuten in der Frühgeschichte.
     In Ur- und Frühgeschichte als historische Wissenschaft (Festschrift
     E. Wahle), ed. by H. Kirchner, pp. 49–59. Heidelberg, Winter
     Universitätsverlag.
Ehret, C. and M. Posnansky. 1982. eds. The Archaeological and Linguis-
     tic Reconstruction of African History. Berkeley, University of California
     Press.
Ehrlich, P. R. 1968. The Population Bomb. New York, Ballantine.
Eickhoff, M. 2005. German archaeology and National Socialism: some histo-
     riographical remarks. Archaeological Dialogues 12: 73–90.
Eiseley, L. C. 1958. Darwin’s Century: Evolution and the Man Who Discovered
     It. Garden City, NY, Doubleday.
Eisenstadt, S. N. 1986. ed. Origins and Diversity of Axial Age Civilizations.
     Albany, State University of New York Press.
Ekholm, K. and J. Friedman. 1979. “Capital” imperialism and exploita-
     tion in ancient world systems. In Power and Propaganda: A Sympo-
     sium on Ancient Empires, ed. by M. T. Larsen, pp. 41–58. Copenhagen,
     Akademisk Forlag.
El Daly, O. 2004. Egyptology: The Missing Millennium, Ancient Egypt in
     Medieval Arabic Writings. London, UCL Press.
Eldredge, N. 1982. La macroévolution. La Recherche 13 (133): 616–26.
Eliade, M. 1954. The Myth of the Eternal Return. New York, Pantheon Books.
Elisseeff, D. 1986. China: Treasures and Splendors. Paris, Les Editions
     Arthaud.
Elkin, A. P. and N. W. G. Macintosh. 1974. eds. Grafton Elliot Smith: The
     Man and his Work. Sydney, Sydney University Press.
Ellegård, A. 1981. Stone Age science in Britain? Current Anthropology 22:
     99–125.
Elliot Smith, G. see G. E. Smith.
Embree, L. 1992. ed. Metaarchaeology: Reflections by Archaeologists and Philoso-
     phers. Dordrecht, Kluwer.
Emery, F. E. 1969. ed. Systems Thinking. New York, Penguin.
Emery, W. B. 1961. Archaic Egypt. Harmondsworth, UK, Penguin.
Engelstad, E. 1991. Feminist theory and post-processual archaeology. In
     D. Walde and N. Willows, pp. 116–120.
Erciyas, D. B. 2005. Ethnic identity and archaeology in the Black Sea region
     of Turkey. Antiquity 79: 179–90.
Erman, A. 1894. Life in Ancient Egypt. London, Macmillan.


                                     608
                                 References

Evans, A. J. 1890. On a late-Celtic urn-field at Aylesford, Kent. Archaeologia
     52: 315–88.
  1896. The “Eastern Question” in anthropology. Proceedings of the British
     Association for the Advancement of Science, 1896, 906–22.
Evans, C. 1989. Archaeology and modern times: Bersu’s Woodbury 1938 and
     1939. Antiquity 63: 436–50.
  1995. Archaeology against the state: roots of internationalism. In P. J. Ucko,
     1995a, pp. 312–26.
  1998. Historicism, chronology and straw men: situating Hawkes’ “ladder of
     inference.” Antiquity 72: 398–404.
  1999. Christopher Hawkes 1905–1992. In T. Murray, 1999a, pp. 461–
     79.
Evans, Joan. 1956. A History of the Society of Antiquaries. London, The Society
     of Antiquaries.
Evans, John. 1864. The Coins of the Ancient Britons. London, B. Quaritch.
  1872. The Ancient Stone Implements, Weapons, and Ornaments, of Great
     Britain. London, Longmans, Green.
  1881. The Ancient Bronze Implements, Weapons, and Ornaments, of Great
     Britain and Ireland. London, Longmans, Green.
Evans, J. D., B. Cunliffe, and C. Renfrew. 1981. eds. Antiquity and Man:
     Essays in Honour of Glyn Daniel. London, Thames and Hudson.
Evans, R. T. 2004. Romancing the Maya: Mexican Antiquity in the American
     Imagination, 1820–1915. Austin, University of Texas Press.
Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 1940. The Nuer. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
  1949. The Sanusi of Cyrenaica. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
  1962. Anthropology and history. In Essays in Social Anthropology, by E. E.
     Evans-Pritchard, pp. 46–65. London, Faber.
Evasdottir, E. E. S. 2004. Obedient Autonomy: Chinese Intellectuals and the
     Achievement of Orderly Life. Vancouver, BC, UBC Press.
Eve, R. A. and F. B. Harrold. 1986. Creationism, cult archaeology, and other
     pseudoscientific beliefs. Youth and Society 17: 396–421.
Fabião, C. 1996. Archaeology and nationalism: the Portuguese case. In
     M. Dı́az-Andreu and T. Champion, 1996a, pp. 90–107.
Fagan, B. M. 1975. The Rape of the Nile: Tomb Robbers, Tourists, and Archae-
     ologists in Egypt. New York, Charles Scribner’s.
  1981. Two hundred and four years of African archaeology. In J. D. Evans
     et al., pp. 42–51.
  2001. Grahame Clark: An Intellectual Life of an Archaeologist. Boulder, CO,
     Westview Press.
Fagette, P. 1996. Digging for Dollars: American Archaeology and the New Deal.
     Albuquerque, University of New Mexico Press.
Fairbanks, C. H. 1942. The taxonomic position of Stalling’s Island, Georgia.
     American Antiquity 7: 223–31.
Fairchild, H. N. 1928. The Noble Savage: A Study in Romantic Naturalism.
     New York, Columbia University Press.


                                     609
                                  References

Falkenhausen, L. von. 1993. On the historiographical orientation of Chinese
     archaeology. Antiquity 67: 839–49.
  1995. The regionalist paradigm in Chinese archaeology. In P. L. Kohl and
     C. Fawcett, pp. 198–217.
  1999. Su Bingqi 1909–1997. In T. Murray, 1999a, pp. 591–9.
Fawcett, C. 1986. The politics of assimilation in Japanese archaeology. Archae-
     ological Review from Cambridge 5(1): 43–57.
  1995. Nationalism and postwar Japanese archaeology. In P. L. Kohl and
     C. Fawcett, 232–46.
Feder, K. L. 1984. Irrationality and popular archaeology. American Antiquity
     49: 525–41.
  1990. Frauds, Myths, and Mysteries: Science and Pseudoscience in Archaeology.
     Mountain View, CA, Mayfield Publishing.
Fedigan, L. M. 1986. The changing role of women in models of human evo-
     lution. Annual Review of Anthropology 15: 25–66.
Feit, H. 1978. Waswanipi Realities and Adaptations: Resource Management
     and Cognitive Structure. PhD dissertation, Montreal, McGill University.
Fell, B. 1976. America B.C.: Ancient Settlers in the New World. New York,
     Quadrangle.
  1982. Bronze Age America. Boston, MA, Little, Brown.
Ferguson, A. B. 1993. Utter Antiquity: Perceptions of Prehistory in Renaissance
     England. Durham, NC, Duke University Press.
Ferguson, T. J. 2003. Anthropological archaeology conducted by tribes: tra-
     ditional cultural properties and cultural affiliation. In S. D. Gillespie and
     D. L. Nichols, pp. 137–44.
Ferris, N. 1999. Telling tales: interpretive trends in southern Ontario Late
     Woodland archaeology. Ontario Archaeology 68: 1–62.
Fetten, F. G. 2000. Archaeology and anthropology in Germany before 1945.
     In H. Härke, 2000a, pp. 140–79.
Fewkes, J. W. 1896. The prehistoric culture of Tusayan. American Anthropol-
     ogist 9: 151–73.
Feyerabend, P. K. 1975. Against Method: Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of
     Knowledge. London, NLB.
Field, H. and K. Price. 1949. Recent archaeological discoveries in the Soviet
     Union. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 5: 17–27.
Field, H. and E. Prostov. 1937. Archaeology in the Soviet Union. American
     Anthropologist 39: 457–90.
Finkelstein, I. and N. A. Silberman. 2001. The Bible Unearthed: Archaeology’s
     New Vision of Ancient Israel and the Origin of its Sacred Texts. New York,
     Free Press.
Finley, M. I. 1975. The Use and Abuse of History. London, Chatto and
     Windus.
Fischer, A. and K. Kristiansen. 2002. eds. The Neolithisation of Denmark: 150
     Years of Debate. Sheffield, UK, J. R. Collis.
Fischer, G. 1967. ed. Science and Ideology in Soviet Society. New York, Atherton
     Press.

                                      610
                                 References

Fischer, U. 1987. Zur Ratio der prähistorischen Archäologie. Germania 65:
     175–95.
Fish, S. K. and S. A. Kowalewski. 1990. eds. The Archaeology of Regions: A
     Case for Full-Coverage Survey. Washington, DC, Smithsonian Institution
     Press.
Fisher, A. K. 1997. Origins of the Midwestern Taxonomic Method. Mid-
     Continental Journal of Archaeology 22: 117–22.
Fitting, J. E. 1973. ed. The Development of North American Archaeology.
     Garden City, NY, Anchor Books.
Fitzpatrick, A. P. 1996. “Celtic” Iron Age Europe: the theoretical basis. In
     P. Graves-Brown et al., 1996, pp. 238–55.
Fitzpatrick, S. 1974. Cultural revolution in Russia 1928–32. Journal of Con-
     temporary History 9: 33–51.
Flannery, K. V. 1965. The ecology of early food production in Mesopotamia.
     Science 147: 1247–55.
  1966. The postglacial “readaptation” as viewed from Mesoamerica.
     American Antiquity 31: 800–5.
  1967. Culture history v. culture process: a debate in American archaeology.
     Scientific American 217(2): 119–22.
  1968. Archeological systems theory and early Mesoamerica. In B. J. Meggers,
     pp. 67–87.
  1972. The cultural evolution of civilizations. Annual Review of Ecology and
     Systematics 3: 399–426.
  1973. Archaeology with a capital S. In C. L. Redman,
     pp. 47–53.
  1976. ed. The Early Mesoamerican Village. New York, Academic Press.
  1982. The golden Marshalltown: a parable for the archaeology of the 1980s.
     American Anthropologist 84: 265–78.
  1983. Archaeology and ethnology in the context of divergent evolution. In
     K. V. Flannery and J. Marcus, pp. 361–2.
  1986. A visit to the master. In Guilá Naquitz: Archaic Foraging and
     Early Agriculture in Oaxaca, Mexico, ed. by Kent Flannery, pp. 511–19.
     Orlando, FL, Academic Press.
Flannery, K. V. and J. Marcus. 1983. eds. The Cloud People: Divergent Evolution
     of the Zapotec and Mixtec Civilizations. New York, Academic Press.
   1993. Cognitive archaeology. Cambridge Archaeological Journal 3: 260–70.
Fleck, L. 1979. Genesis and Development of a Scientific Fact. Chicago, IL,
     University of Chicago Press.
Fletcher, R. 1977. Settlement studies (micro and semi-micro). In D. L. Clarke,
     1977a, pp. 47–162.
  1995. The Limits of Settlement Growth: A Theoretical Outline. Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
  1999. David Clarke 1938–1976. In T. Murray, 1999a, pp. 855–68.
Fleure, H. J. and W. E. Whitehouse. 1916. Early distribution and valleyward
     movement of population in south Britain. Archaeologia Cambrensis 16:
     101–40.

                                     611
                                   References

Fleury-Ilett, B. 1996. The identity of France: archetypes in Iron Age studies.
     In P. Graves-Brown et al., pp. 196–208.
Flood, J. 1983. Archaeology of the Dreamtime. Sydney, Collins.
Ford, J. A. 1936. Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and
     Mississippi. New Orleans, Louisiana State Geological Survey, Department
     of Conservation, Anthropological Study no. 2.
  1938. A chronological method applicable to the Southeast. American Antiq-
     uity 3: 260–4.
Ford, J. A. and G. R. Willey. 1941. An interpretation of the prehistory of the
     eastern United States. American Anthropologist 43: 325–63.
Ford, R. I. 1973. Archeology serving humanity. In C. L. Redman, pp.
     83–93.
Forge, A. 1972. Normative factors in the settlement size of Neolithic cultivators
     (New Guinea). In Man, Settlement and Urbanism, ed. by P. J. Ucko,
     R. Tringham and G. W. Dimbleby, pp. 363–76. London, Duckworth.
Fossey, J. M. 1988. Topography and Population of Ancient Boiotia. Chicago,
     IL, Ares.
Foucault, M. 1970. The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences.
     London, Tavistock.
  1972. The Archaeology of Knowledge. New York, Pantheon.
Fowler, D. D. 1987. Uses of the past: archaeology in the service of the state.
     American Antiquity 52: 229–48.
  2000. A Laboratory for Anthropology: Science and Romanticism in the
     American Southwest, 1846–1930. Albuquerque, University of New Mexico
     Press.
Fowler, D. D. and D. R. Wilcox. 2003. eds. Philadelphia and the Development
     of Americanist Archaeology. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.
Fowles, J. 1980, 1982. ed. John Aubrey’s Monumenta Britannica, annotated
     by R. Legg. Sherborne, UK, Dorset Publishing Company.
Fox, C. 1923. The Archaeology of the Cambridge Region. Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
  1932. The Personality of Britain. Cardiff, UK, National Museum of Wales.
Fox, E. 2001. Sacred Geography: A Tale of Murder and Archaeology in the Holy
     Land. New York, Henry Holt.
Fox, L. 1956. ed. English Historical Scholarship in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
     Centuries. London, Oxford University Press.
Francis, D. and T. Morantz. 1983. Partners in Furs: A History of the Fur Trade
     in Eastern James Bay, 1600–1870. Montreal, McGill-Queen’s University
     Press.
Frankfort, H. 1948. Kingship and the Gods: A Study of Ancient Near Eastern
     Religion as the Integration of Society and Nature. Chicago, IL, University
     of Chicago Press.
Fraser, S. M. 1998. The public forum and the space between: the materiality of
     social strategy in the Irish Neolithic. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society
     64: 203–24.


                                       612
                                 References

  2004. Metaphorical journeys: landscape, monuments, and the body in a
     Scottish Neolithic. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 70: 129–51.
Freidel, D. A., L. Schele, and J. Parker. 1993. Maya Cosmos: Three Thousand
     Years on the Shaman’s Path. New York, William Morrow.
Frick, W. 1934. The teaching of history and prehistory in Germany. Nature
     133: 298–9.
Fried, M. H. 1967. The Evolution of Political Society. New York, Random
     House.
  1975. The Notion of Tribe. Menlo Park, CA, Cummings.
Friedman, J. and M. J. Rowlands. 1978a. eds. The Evolution of Social Systems.
     London, Duckworth.
Friedman, J. and M. J. Rowlands. 1978b. Notes towards an epigenetic model
     of the evolution of “civilization.” In J. Friedman and M. J. Rowlands,
     1978a, pp. 201–76.
Fritz, J. M. 1973. Relevance, archeology, and subsistence theory. In C. L.
     Redman, pp. 59–82.
Frumkin, G. 1962. Archaeology in Soviet Central Asia and its ideological back-
     ground. Central Asian Review 10: 334–42.
Fuller, D. Q. and N. Boivin. 2002. Beyond description and diffusion: a history
     of processual theory in the archaeology of South Asia. In S. Settar and
     R. Korisettar, pp. 159–90.
Fuller, P. 1980. Beyond the Crisis in Art. London, Writers and Readers.
Funari, P. 1997. Archaeology, history, and historical archaeology in South
     America. International Journal of Historical Archaeology 1: 189–206.
  1999a. Brazilian archaeology: a reappraisal. In G. G. Politis and B. Alberti,
     pp. 17–37.
  1999b. Historical archaeology from a world perspective. In P. Funari,
     M. Hall, and S. Jones, pp. 37–66.
  2001. Brazil. In T. Murray, 2001a, pp. 180–93.
Funari, P., M. Hall, and S. Jones. 1999. eds. Historical Archaeology: Back from
     the Edge. London, Routledge.
Furst, L. 1969. Romanticism in Historical Perspective. Oxford, Oxford Uni-
     versity Press.
Galaty, M. L. and C. Watkinson. 2004. eds. Archaeology Under Dictatorship.
     New York, Kluwer.
Gallay, A. 1986. L’Archéologie demain. Paris, Belfond.
  1989. Logicism: a French view of archaeological theory founded in compu-
     tational perspective. Antiquity 63: 27–39.
Gamble, C. 1992. Archaeology, history and the uttermost ends of the earth –
     Tasmania, Tierra del Fuego and the Cape. Antiquity 66: 712–20.
  1999. Lewis Binford b. 1929. In T. Murray, 1999a, pp. 811–34.
Gamio, M. 1916. Forjando Patria (Pro Nacionalismo). México, DF, Porrúa
     Hermanos.
Gándara, M. 1980. La vieja “Nueva Arqueologı́a” (primera parte). Boletı́n de
     Antropologı́a Americana 2: 7–45.


                                     613
                                 References

  1981. La vieja “Nueva Arqueologı́a” (segunda parte). Boletı́n de
    Antropologı́a Americana 3: 7–70.
Gardin, J.-C. 1965. On a possible interpretation of componential analysis in
    archeology. American Anthropologist 67(5), pt. 2: 9–22.
  1967. Methods for the descriptive analysis of archaeological materials.
    American Antiquity 32: 13–30.
  1980. Archaeological Constructs: An Aspect of Theoretical Archaeology.
    Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
  1992. Semiotic trends in archaeology. In J.-C. Gardin and C. S. Peebles,
    pp. 87–104.
  2004. Current progress in theoretical archaeology. In L. Vishnyatsky et al.,
    pp. 87–99.
Gardin, J.-C. and C. S. Peebles. 1992. eds. Representations in Archaeology.
    Bloomington, Indiana University Press.
Garlake, P. S. 1973. Great Zimbabwe. London, Thames and Hudson.
  1983. Prehistory and ideology in Zimbabwe. In Past and Present in
    Zimbabwe, ed. by J. D. Y. Peet and T. Ranger, pp. 1–19. Manchester,
    UK, Manchester University Press.
  1984. Ken Mufuka and Great Zimbabwe. Antiquity 58: 121–3.
Gathercole, P. 1971. “Patterns in prehistory”: an examination of the later
    thinking of V. Gordon Childe. World Archaeology 3: 225–32.
  1976. Childe the “outsider.” RAIN 17: 5–6.
  1981. New Zealand prehistory before 1950. In Glyn Daniel, 1981b, pp. 159–
    68.
 1982. Gordon Childe: man or myth? Antiquity 56: 195–8.
 1984. A consideration of ideology. In M. Spriggs, 1984a, pp. 149–54.
Gathercole, P., T. H. Irving and G. Melleuish. 1995. eds. Childe and Australia:
    Archaeology, Politics, and Ideas. St. Lucia, University of Queensland
    Press.
Gathercole, P. and D. Lowenthal. 1989. eds. The Politics of the Past. London,
    Unwin Hyman.
Gayre, R. 1972. The Origin of Zimbabwean Civilisation. Salisbury, Southern
    Rhodesia, Galaxie Press.
Gazzaniga, M. S. 1992. Nature’s Mind: The Biological Roots of Thinking, Emo-
    tions, Sexuality, Language, and Intelligence. New York, Basic Books.
 1998. The Mind’s Past. Berkeley, University of California Press.
Geary, P. 1986. Sacred commodities: the circulation of medieval relics. In
    The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective, ed. by
    A. Appadurai, pp. 169–91. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Geertz, C. 1965. The impact of the concept of culture on the concept of man.
    In New Views of the Nature of Man, ed. by J. R. Platt, pp. 93–118. Chicago,
    IL, University of Chicago Press.
 1973. The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays. New York, Basic
    Books.
Geikie, A. 1905. The Founders of Geology. 2nd edn. London, Macmillan.


                                     614
                                  References

Gellner, E. 1980. ed. Soviet and Western Anthropology. London, Duckworth.
  1983. Nations and Nationalism. Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press.
  1985. Relativism and the Social Sciences. Cambridge, Cambridge University
      Press.
Gening, V. F. 1982. Ocherki po Istorii Sovetskoy Arkheologii. Kiev, Naukova
      Dumka.
Geras, N. 1983. Marx and Human Nature: Refutation of a Legend. London,
      Verso.
Gero, J. M. 1983. Gender bias in archaeology: a cross-cultural perspective. In
      J. M. Gero, D. M. Lacy and M. L. Blakey, pp. 51–7.
Gero, J. M. and M. W. Conkey. 1991. eds. Engendering Archaeology: Women
      and Prehistory. Oxford, Blackwell.
Gero, J. M., D. M. Lacy, and M. L. Blakey. 1983. eds. The Socio-Politics
      of Archaeology. Amherst, University of Massachusetts, Department of
      Anthropology, Research Report no. 23.
Gerrard, C. 2003. Medieval Archaeology: Understanding Traditions and Con-
      temporary Approaches. London, Routledge.
Gibbon, G. E. 1984. Anthropological Archaeology. New York, Columbia Uni-
      versity Press.
  1985. Classical and anthropological archaeology: a coming rapprochement?
      In Contributions to Aegean Archaeology, ed. by N. C. Wilkie and W. D.
      E. Coulson, pp. 283–94. Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press.
  1989. Explanation in Archaeology. Oxford, Blackwell.
Giddens, A. 1984. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Struc-
      turation. Berkeley, University of California Press.
Gilchrist, R. 1994. Gender and Material Culture: The Archaeology of Religious
      Women. London, Routledge.
  1999. Gender and Archaeology: Contesting the Past. London, Routledge.
Gill, D. W. J. 1987. Metru.Menece: an Etruscan painted inscription on
      a mid 5th-century BC red-figure cup from Populonia. Antiquity 61:
      82–7.
Gillespie, S. D. and D. L. Nichols. 2003. eds. Archaeology is Anthropology.
     Washington, DC, Archeological Papers of the American Anthropological
     Association 13.
Gillispie, C. C. 1951. Genesis and Geology: A Study in the Relations of Scientific
      Thought, Natural Theology, and Social Opinion in Great Britain, 1790–
      1850. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
Gilman, A. 1976. Bronze Age dynamics in southeast Spain. Dialectical Anthro-
      pology 1: 307–19.
  1981. The development of social stratification in Bronze Age Europe. Cur-
      rent Anthropology 22: 1–23.
Gimbutas, M. 1982. The Goddesses and Gods of Old Europe, 6500–3500 BC:
      Myths and Cult Images. London, Thames and Hudson.
Givens, D. R. 1992a. Alfred Vincent Kidder and the Development of Ameri-
      canist Archaeology. Albuquerque, University of New Mexico Press.


                                      615
                                 References

  1992b. The role of biography in writing the history of archaeology. In J. E.
    Reyman, pp. 51–66.
Gjessing, G. 1968. The social responsibility of the social scientist. Current
    Anthropology 9: 397–402.
Glacken, C. J. 1967. Traces on the Rhodian Shore: Nature and Culture in
    Western Thought from Ancient Times to the End of the Eighteenth Century.
    Berkeley and Los Angeles, University of California Press.
Gladwin, W. and H. S. Gladwin. 1930. A Method for the Designation of South-
    western Pottery Types. Globe, AZ, Medallion Papers no. 7.
  1934. A Method for Designation of Cultures and their Variations. Globe, AZ,
    Medallion Papers no. 15.
Glass, H. B., O. Temkin, and W. L. Straus Jr. 1959. eds. Forerunners of Darwin,
    1745–1859. Baltimore, MD, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Glassie, H. H. 1975. Folk Housing in Middle Virginia: A Structural Analysis
    of Historic Artifacts. Knoxville, University of Tennessee Press.
Gledhill, J. 1984. The transformation of Asiatic formations: the case of late
    prehispanic Mesoamerica. In M. Spriggs, 1984a, pp. 135–48.
Gobineau, J.-A., comte de. 1853–5. Essai sur l’inégalité des races humaines. 4
    vols. Paris, Didot.
Godelier, M. 1986. The Mental and the Material: Thought, Economy and Society.
    London, Verso.
Godwin, H. 1933. British Maglemose harpoon sites. Antiquity 7: 36–48.
Goes Neves, E. 1998. Twenty years of Amazonian archaeology in Brazil (1977–
    1997). Antiquity 72: 625–32.
Goffman, E. 1963. Behavior in Public Places: Notes on the Social Organization
    of Gatherings. New York, Free Press.
Golden, C. W. and G. Borgstede. 2004. eds. Continuities and Changes in Maya
    Archaeology: Perspectives at the Millennium. London, Routledge.
Golomshtok, E. 1933. Anthropological activities in Soviet Russia. American
    Anthropologist 35: 301–27.
Gomaà, F. 1973. Chaemwese, Sohn Ramses’ II und Hoherpriester von Memphis.
    Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz.
González Marcén, P. and R. Risch. 1990. Archaeology and historical
    materialism: outsider’s reflections on theoretical discussions in British
    archaeology. In F. Baker and J. Thomas, pp. 94–104.
Goodenough, E. R. 1953–68. Jewish Symbols in the Greco-Roman Period.
    13 vols. New York, Pantheon Books.
Goodrum, M. R. 2002. The meaning of ceraunia: archaeology, natural his-
    tory and the interpretation of prehistoric stone artefacts in the eighteenth
    century. British Journal of the History of Science 35: 255–69.
Goodwin, A. J. H. and C. Van Riet Lowe. 1929. The Stone Age Cultures of
    South Africa. Cape Town, Annals of the South African Museum no. 27.
Gopal, L. 1985. Foreword. In Trigger 1985c, pp. i–vi.
Gopnik, M. 1997. ed. The Inheritance and Innateness of Grammars. Oxford,
    Oxford University Press.


                                     616
                                 References

Gordon, R. J. 1992. The Bushman Myth: The Making of a Namibian Underclass.
     Boulder, CO, Westview Press.
Gorenstein, S. 1977. History of American archaeology. In Perspectives on
     Anthropology, 1976, ed. by A. F. C. Wallace, pp. 86–115. Washington,
     DC, American Anthropological Association, Special Publication 10.
Gorodzov, V. A. 1933. The typological method in archaeology. American
     Anthropologist 35: 95–102.
Gosden, C. 1994. Social Being and Time. Oxford, Blackwell.
  1999. Anthropology and Archaeology: A Changing Relationship. London,
     Routledge.
  2004. Archaeology and Colonialism: Cultural Contact from 5000 BC to the
     Present. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Goudie, A. 1976. Geography and prehistory. Journal of Historical Geography
     2: 197–205.
Gould, R. A. 1978a. ed. Explorations in Ethnoarchaeology. Albuquerque,
     University of New Mexico Press.
  1978b. Beyond analogy in ethnoarchaeology. In R. A. Gould, 1978a,
     pp. 249–93.
  1980. Living Archaeology. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Gould, R. A. and M. B. Schiffer. 1981. eds. Modern Material Culture: The
     Archaeology of Us. New York, Academic Press.
Gould, S. J. 1980. The Panda’s Thumb: More Reflections in Natural History.
     New York, Norton.
  1981. The Mismeasure of Man. New York, Norton.
Gould, S. J. and N. Eldredge. 1977. Punctuated equilibria: the tempo and
     mode of evolution reconsidered. Paleobiology 3: 115–51.
   1993. Punctuated equilibrium comes of age. Nature 366: 223–7.
Gradmann, R. 1906. Beziehung zwischen Pflanzengeographie und Siedlungs-
     geschichte. Geographische Zeitschrift 12: 305–25.
Graham, I. 2002. Alfred Maudslay and the Maya: A Biography. Norman, Uni-
     versity of Oklahoma Press.
Graham, L. R. 1967. The Soviet Academy of Sciences and the Communist Party,
     1927–1932. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
Graham-Campbell, J. and D. Kidd. 1980. The Vikings. London, British
     Museum Publications.
Gramsci, A. 1992. Prison Notebooks. New York, Columbia University
     Press.
Gran-Aymerich, E. 1998. Naissance de l’archéologie moderne, 1798–1945. Paris,
     CNRS Editions.
Grant, G. 1965. Lament for a Nation: The Defeat of Canadian Nationalism.
     Toronto, McClelland and Stewart.
Grant, M. 1916. The Passing of the Great Race; or, the Racial Basis of European
     History. New York, Scribner’s.
Gräslund, B. 1974. Relativ Datering: Om Kronologisk Metod i Nordisk Arke-
     ologi. Uppsala, TOR no. 16.


                                     617
                                   References

  1976. Relative chronology: dating methods in Scandinavian archaeology.
     Norwegian Archaeological Review 9: 69–126.
  1981. The background to C. J. Thomsen’s Three-Age system. In G. Daniel,
     1981b, pp. 45–50.
  1987. The Birth of Prehistoric Chronology. Cambridge, Cambridge University
     Press.
Graves, M. W. and C. Erkelens. 1991. Who’s in control? Method and theory
     in Hawaiian archaeology. Asian Perspectives 30: 1–17.
Graves-Brown, P., S. Jones, and C. Gamble. 1996. eds. Cultural Identity
     and Archaeology: The Construction of European Communities. London,
     Routledge.
Grayson, D. K. 1983. The Establishment of Human Antiquity. New York, Aca-
     demic Press.
  1986. Eoliths, archaeological ambiguity, and the generation of “middle
     range” research. In D. J. Meltzer et al., pp. 77–133.
Green, S. 1981. Prehistorian: A Biography of V. Gordon Childe. Bradford-on-
     Avon, UK, Moonraker Press.
Greene, J. C. 1959. The Death of Adam. Ames, Iowa State University Press.
Greene, K. 1999. V. Gordon Childe and the vocabulary of revolutionary
     change. Antiquity 73: 97–109.
Greener, L. 1966. The Discovery of Egypt. London, Cassell.
Greenhalgh, M. 1989. The Survival of Roman Antiquities in the Middle Ages.
     London, Duckworth.
Griffin, J. B. 1980. The Mesoamerican-southeastern U.S. connection. Early
     Man 2(3): 12–18.
Griffiths, T. 1996. Hunters and Collectors: The Antiquarian Imagination in
     Australia. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Groenen, M. 1994. Pour une histoire de la préhistoire: le Paléolithique. Grenoble,
     J. Millon.
Gruber, J. W. 1965. Brixham Cave and the antiquity of man. In Context and
     Meaning in Cultural Anthropology, ed. by M. E. Spiro, pp. 373–402. New
     York, Free Press.
Grünert, H. 2002. Gustaf Kossinna (1858–1931), Vom Germanisten zum
     Prähistoriker: Ein Wissenschaftler im Kaiserreich und in der Weimarer
     Republik. Rahden / Westfalen, Leidorf.
Guest, E. 1883. Origines Celticae (a Fragment), ed. by W. Stubbs and
     C. Deedes. London, Macmillan.
Guidi, A. 1987. The development of prehistoric archaeology in Italy: a short
     review. Acta Archaeologica 58: 237–47.
  1988. Storia della Paletnologia. Rome, Editori Laterza.
  1996. Nationalism without a nation: the Italian case. In M. Dı́az-Andreu
     and T. Champion, 1996a, pp. 108–18.
Gutting, G. 1989. Michel Foucault’s Archaeology of Scientific Reason.
     Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Haber, F. C. 1959. The Age of the World: Moses to Darwin. Baltimore, MD,
     Johns Hopkins University Press.

                                       618
                                 References

Habermas, J. 1971. Knowledge and Human Interests. Boston, MA, Beacon
     Press.
 1975. Legitimation Crisis. Boston, MA, Beacon Press.
Habu, J. 1989. Contemporary Japanese archaeology and society. Archaeolog-
     ical Review from Cambridge 8(1): 36–45.
 2004. Ancient Jomon of Japan. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Habu, J. and C. Fawcett. 1999. Jomon archaeology and the representation of
     Japanese origins. Antiquity 73: 587–93.
Hall, A. J. 2003. The American Empire and the Fourth World. Montreal,
     McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Hall, J. 1986. Powers and Liberties: The Causes and Consequences of the Rise of
     the West. Harmondsworth, UK, Penguin.
Hall, M. 1984. The burden of tribalism: the social context of southern African
     Iron Age studies. American Antiquity 49: 455–67.
Hall, R. N. 1909. Prehistoric Rhodesia. London, Unwin.
Hall, R. N. and W. G. Neal. 1902. The Ancient Ruins of Rhodesia. London,
     Methuen.
Halle, U. 2005. Archaeology in the Third Reich, academic scholarship and the
     rise of the “lunatic fringe.” Archaeological Dialogues 12: 91–102.
Hallote, R. S. and A. H. Joffe. 2002. The politics of Israeli archaeology:
     between “nationalism” and “science” in the age of the second repub-
     lic. Israel Studies 7(3): 84–116.
Hallowell, A. I. 1960. The beginnings of anthropology in America. In Selected
     Papers from the American Anthropologist 1880–1920, ed. by F. de Laguna,
     pp. 1–90. Evanston, IL, Row, Peterson and Company.
Hallpike, C. R. 1979. The Foundations of Primitive Thought. Oxford, Oxford
     University Press.
 1986. The Principles of Social Evolution. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Hamann, B. 2002. The social life of pre-sunrise things: indigenous Mesoamer-
     ican archaeology. Current Anthropology 43: 351–82.
Hamell, G. 1983. Trading in metaphors: the magic of beads. In Proceedings
     of the 1982 Glass Trade Bead Conference, ed. by C. F. Hayes, III, pp. 5–
     28. Rochester, NY, Rochester Museum and Science Center, Research
     Records no. 16.
Hamilakis, Y., M. Pluciennik, and S. Tarlow. 2002. eds. Thinking through the
     Body: Archaeologies of Corporeality. New York, Plenum.
Hammond, N. 1983. Lords of the jungle: a prosopography of Maya archaeol-
     ogy. In Civilization in the Ancient Americas, ed. by R. M. Leventhal and
     A. L. Kolata, pp. 3–32. Albuquerque, University of New Mexico Press.
Hampson, N. 1982. The Enlightenment. Harmondsworth, UK, Penguin.
Hanbury-Tenison, J. 1986. Hegel in prehistory. Antiquity 60: 108–14.
Handsman, R. G. 1981. Early capitalism and the Center Village of Canaan,
     Connecticut: a study of transformations and separations. Artifacts 9(3):
     1–22.
Hanen, M. and J. Kelley. 1992. Gender and archaeological knowledge. In
     L. Embree, pp. 195–225.

                                     619
                                 References

Hanke, L. 1959. Aristotle and the American Indians. Chicago, IL, Regnery.
Harding, R. 2003. Archaeology and religious landscapes in India: a case study.
     Bulletin of the History of Archaeology 13(2): 4–8.
Härke, H. 1991. All quiet on the Western Front? Paradigms, methods and
     approaches in West German archaeology. In Ian Hodder, 1991a, pp. 187–
     222.
  1995. “The Hun is a methodical chap”: reflections on the German tradition
     of pre- and proto-history. In P. J. Ucko, 1995a, pp. 46–60.
  1998. Archaeologists and migrations: a problem of attitude. Current Anthro-
     pology 39: 19–45.
  2000a. ed. Archaeology, Ideology and Society: The German Experience.
     Frankfurt am Main, Peter Lang.
  2000b. The German experience. In H. Härke, 2000a, pp. 12–39.
  2000c. Social analysis of mortuary evidence in German protohistoric archae-
     ology. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 19: 369–84.
Harré, R. 1970. The Principles of Scientific Thinking. Chicago, IL, University
     of Chicago Press.
  1972. The Philosophies of Science: An Introductory Survey. Oxford, Oxford
     University Press.
Harré, R. and E. H. Madden. 1975. Causal Powers: A Theory of Natural Neces-
     sity. Oxford, Blackwell.
Harrington, J. C. 1955. Archeology as an auxiliary science to American history.
     American Anthropologist 57: 1121–1130.
Harrington, M. R. 1924. An Ancient Village Site of the Shinnecock Indians.
     New York, Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural
     History, no. 22, pt. 5.
Harris, D. R. 1994. ed. The Archaeology of V. Gordon Childe: Contemporary
     Perspectives. London, UCL Press.
Harris, M. 1968a. The Rise of Anthropological Theory. New York, Crowell.
  1968b. Comments. In S. R. and L. R. Binford, 1968, pp. 359–61.
  1974. Cows, Pigs, Wars and Witches. New York, Random House.
  1977. Cannibals and Kings: The Origins of Cultures. New York, Random
     House.
  1979. Cultural Materialism: The Struggle for a Science of Culture. New York,
     Random House.
  1981. America Now: The Anthropology of a Changing Culture. New York,
     Simon and Schuster.
Harrison, R. J. 1980. The Beaker Folk: Copper Age Archaeology in Western
     Europe. London, Thames and Hudson.
Hart, J. P. and J. E. Terrell. 2002. eds. Darwin and Archaeology: A Handbook
     of Key Concepts. Westport, CT, Bergin and Garvey.
Harvey, D. 1989. The Condition of Postmodernity. Oxford, Blackwell.
Hassan, F. A. 1995. The World Archaeological Congress in India: politicizing
     the past. Antiquity 69: 874–7.
  1998. Memorabilia: archaeological materiality and national identity in Egypt.
     In L. Meskell, pp. 200–16.

                                     620
                                 References

Hassmann, H. 2000. Archaeology in the “Third Reich.” In H. Härke, 2000a,
    pp. 65–139.
Haven, S. 1856. Archaeology of the United States. Washington, DC,
    Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge, no. 8(2).
 1864. Report of the librarian. Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Soci-
    ety, April 1864: 30–52.
Haverfield, F. J. 1912. The Romanization of Roman Britain. 2nd edn. Oxford,
    Oxford University Press.
Hawkes, C. F. 1954. Archeological theory and method: some suggestions from
    the Old World. American Anthropologist 56: 155–68.
Hawkes, J. 1963. ed. The World of the Past. 2 vols. New York, Knopf.
 1968. The proper study of mankind. Antiquity 42: 255–62.
 1982. Mortimer Wheeler: Adventurer in Archaeology. London, Weidenfeld
    and Nicolson.
Hayden, B. 1979. ed. Lithic Use-Wear Analysis. New York, Academic Press.
Hayden, B. and A. Cannon. 1984. The Structure of Material Systems: Ethnoar-
    chaeology in the Maya Highlands. Washington, DC, Society for American
    Archaeology, Paper no. 3.
Heffernan, M. J. 1994. A state scholarship: the political geography of French
    international science during the nineteenth century. Transactions of the
    Institute of British Geographers 19: 21–45.
Heffernan, T. F. 1988. Wood Quay: The Clash over Dublin’s Viking Past. Austin,
    University of Texas Press.
Hegardt, J. 1999. Sven Nilsson. In T. Murray, 1999a, pp. 65–78.
 2001. Sweden. In T. Murray, 2001a, pp. 1224–36.
Hegmon, M. 2003. Setting theoretical egos aside: issues and theory in North
    American archaeology. American Antiquity 68: 213–43.
Heizer, R. F. 1959. ed. The Archaeologist at Work: A Source Book in Archaeo-
    logical Method and Interpretation. New York, Harper and Row.
 1962a. ed. Man’s Discovery of his Past: Literary Landmarks in Archaeology.
    Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall.
 1962b. The background of Thomsen’s Three-Age system. Technology and
    Culture 3: 259–66.
Held, D. 1980. Introduction to Critical Theory: Horkheimer to Habermas.
    Berkeley, University of California Press.
Hellmich, M. 1923. Die Besiedlung Schlesiens in vor- und frühgeschichtlicher
    Zeit. Breslau, Preuss und Jünger.
Hempel, C. G. 1942. The function of general laws in history. The Journal of
    Philosophy 39: 35–48.
 1962. Deductive-nomological vs. statistical explanation. In Scientific Expla-
    nation, Space, and Time, ed. by H. Feigl and G. Maxwell, pp. 98–169.
    Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press.
 1965. Aspects of Scientific Explanation. New York, Free Press.
 1966. Philosophy of Natural Science. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall.
Hempel, C. G. and P. Oppenheim. 1948. Studies in the logic of explanation.
    Philosophy of Science 15: 135–75.

                                     621
                                 References

Herman, A. 2001. How the Scots Invented the Modern World. New York,
     Crown.
Herold, J. C. 1962. Bonaparte in Egypt. New York, Harper and Row.
Herrmann, J. 1990. Heinrich Schliemann: Wegbereiter einer neuen Wis-
     senschaft. Berlin, Akademie-Verlag.
Herzfeld, M. 1992. Metapatterns: archaeology and the uses of evidential
     scarcity. In J.-C. Gardin and C. S. Peebles, pp. 66–86.
Hewett, E. L. 1906. Antiquities of the Jemez Plateau, New Mexico. Washington,
     DC, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin no. 32.
Hides, S. 1996. The genealogy of material culture and cultural identity. In
     P. Graves-Brown et al., 1996, pp. 25–47.
Higgs, E. S. 1968. Archaeology – where now? Mankind 6: 617–20.
 1972. ed. Papers in Economic Prehistory. Cambridge, Cambridge University
     Press.
 1975. ed. Palaeoeconomy. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Hill, J. N. 1968. Broken K Pueblo: patterns of form and function. In S. R. and
     L. R. Binford, pp. 103–42.
 1970. Broken K Pueblo: Prehistoric Social Organization in the American
     Southwest. Tucson, University of Arizona Press.
Hinsley, C. M., Jr. 1981. Savages and Scientists: The Smithsonian Institution
     and the Development of American Anthropology 1846–1910. Washington,
     DC, Smithsonian Institution Press.
 1985. From shell-heaps to stelae: early anthropology at the Peabody
     Museum. In G. W. Stocking, Jr, pp. 49–74.
 1999. Frederic Ward Putnam. In T. Murray, 1999a, pp. 141–54.
Hobsbawm, E. J. 1964. ed. Karl Marx, Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations.
     London, Lawrence and Wishart.
 1990. Nations and Nationalism since 1780: Programme, Myth, Reality.
     Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Hodder, I. 1978a. ed. The Spatial Organisation of Culture. London,
     Duckworth.
 1978b. ed. Simulation Studies in Archaeology. Cambridge, Cambridge Uni-
     versity Press.
 1982a. The Present Past: An Introduction to Anthropology for Archaeologists.
     London, Batsford.
 1982b. Symbols in Action: Ethnoarchaeological Studies of Material Culture.
     Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
 1982c. ed. Symbolic and Structural Archaeology. Cambridge, Cambridge
     University Press.
 1984a. Burials, houses, women and men in the European Neolithic. In
     D. Miller and C. Tilley, 1984a, pp. 51–68.
 1984b. Archaeology in 1984. Antiquity 58: 25–32.
 1985. Postprocessual archaeology. Advances in Archaeological Method and
     Theory 8: 1–26.
 1986. Reading the Past: Current Approaches to Interpretation in Archaeology.
     Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

                                     622
                                 References

 1987a. ed. Archaeology as Long-term History. Cambridge, Cambridge
    University Press.
 1987b. The Archaeology of Contextual Meanings. Cambridge, Cambridge
    University Press.
 1988. Material culture texts and social change: a theoretical discussion and
    some archaeological examples. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 54:
    67–75.
 1990. The Domestication of Europe: Structure and Contingency in Neolithic
    Societies. Oxford, Blackwell.
 1991a. ed. Archaeological Theory in Europe: The Last Three Decades. London,
    Routledge.
 1991b. Preface. In I. Hodder, 1991a, pp. vii–xi.
 1991c. Interpretive archaeology and its role. American Antiquity 56:
    7–18.
 1991d. Reading the Past: Current Approaches to Interpretation in Archaeol-
    ogy. 2nd ed. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
 1992. ed. Theory and Practice in Archaeology. London, Routledge.
 1999. The Archaeological Process: An Introduction. Oxford, Blackwell.
 2001a. ed. Archaeological Theory Today. Cambridge, UK, Polity Press.
 2001b. Introduction: a review of contemporary theoretical debates in archae-
    ology. In I. Hodder, 2001a, pp. 1–13.
 2003a. Archaeology Beyond Dialogue. Salt Lake City, University of Utah
    Press.
 2003b. Archaeology as a discontinuous domain. In T. L. VanPool and C. S.
    VanPool, pp. 5–9.
Hodder, I. et al. 1995. eds. Interpreting Archaeology: Finding Meaning in the
    Past. London, Routledge.
Hodder, I. and M. Hassall. 1971. The non-random spacing of Romano-British
    walled towns. Man 6: 391–407.
Hodder, I. and S. Hutson. 2003. Reading the Past: Current Approaches to
    Interpretation in Archaeology. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Hodder, I. and C. Orton. 1976. Spatial Analysis in Archaeology. Cambridge,
    Cambridge University Press.
Hodgen, M. T. 1964. Early Anthropology in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
    Centuries. Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press.
Hodson, F. R., D. G. Kendall, and P. Tăutu. 1971. eds. Mathematics in the
    Archaeological and Historical Sciences. Edinburgh, Edinburgh University
    Press.
Hoebel, E. A. 1949. Man in the Primitive World. New York, McGraw-Hill.
Hoffman, M. A. 1974. The rise of antiquarianism in Japan and Western Europe.
    Arctic Anthropology 11, supplement: 182–8.
 1979. Egypt before the Pharaohs: The Prehistoric Foundations of Egyptian Civ-
    ilization. New York, Knopf.
Hogarth, A. C. 1972. Common sense in archaeology. Antiquity 46: 301–4.
Hogarth, D. G. 1899. ed. Authority and Archaeology, Sacred and Profane.
    London, John Murray.

                                     623
                                  References

Hole, F. and R. F. Heizer. 1969. An Introduction to Prehistoric Archaeology.
    2nd edn. New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Holmes, T. R. 1907. Ancient Britain and the Invasions of Julius Caesar.
    Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Holmes, W. H. 1903. Aboriginal pottery of the eastern United States.
    Washington, DC, Bureau of American Ethnology, Annual Report 20: 1–
    237.
 1914. Areas of American culture characterization tentatively outlined as an
    aid in the study of the antiquities. American Anthropologist 16: 413–46.
Holtorf, C. 2002. Notes on the life history of a pot sherd. Journal of Material
    Culture 7: 49–71.
Holtorf, C. and H. Karlsson. 2000. eds. Philosophy and Archaeological Practice:
    Perspectives for the 21st Century. Göteborg, Bricoleur Press.
Hood, D. 1964. Davidson Black: A Biography. Toronto, University of Toronto
    Press.
Hooton, E. A. 1938. Apes, Men, and Morons. London, Allen and Unwin.
Horsman, R. 1975. Scientific racism and the American Indian in the mid-
    nineteenth century. American Quarterly 27: 152–68.
 1981. Race and Manifest Destiny: The Origins of American Racial Anglo-
    Saxonism. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
Horton, D. 1991. Recovering the Tracks: The Story of Australian Archaeology.
    Canberra, Aboriginal Studies Press.
Howe, J. E. 1976. Pre-agricultural society in Soviet theory and method. Arctic
    Anthropology 13: 84–115.
 1980. The Soviet Theories of Primitive History: Forty Years of Speculation
    on the Origins and Evolution of People and Society. PhD thesis, Seattle,
    University of Washington.
Huddleston, L. E. 1967. Origins of the American Indians: European Concepts,
    1492–1729. Austin, University of Texas Press.
Hudson, K. 1981. A Social History of Archaeology: The British Experience.
    London, Macmillan.
Hull, D. L. 1988. Science as a Process: An Evolutionary Account of the Social and
    Conceptual Development of Science. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago
    Press.
Hulse, E. 1999. ed. Thinking with Both Hands: Sir Daniel Wilson in the Old
    World and The New. Toronto, University of Toronto Press.
Hunt, L. 1989. Introduction: history, culture, and text. In The New Cultural
    History: Essays, ed. by L. Hunt, pp. 1–22. Berkeley, University of California
    Press.
Hunt, T. L., C. P. Lipo, and S. L. Sterling. 2001. eds. Posing Questions for a
    Scientific Archaeology. Westport, CT, Bergin and Garvey.
Hunter, J. 1983. Perspective on Ratzel’s Political Geography. Lanham, MD,
    University Press of America.
Hunter, M. 1975. John Aubrey and the Realm of Learning. London,
    Duckworth.


                                      624
                                  References

Huntington, R. and P. Metcalf. 1979. Celebrations of Death. Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
Hurt, T. D. and G. F. M. Rakita. 2001. eds. Style and Function: Conceptual
     Issues in Evolutionary Archaeology. Westport, CT, Bergin and Garvey.
Hussey, C. 1927. The Picturesque: Studies in a Point of View. New York,
     Putnam’s.
Hutchinson, H. G. 1914. Life of Sir John Lubbock, Lord Avebury. 2 vols.
     London, Macmillan.
Huxley, T. H. 1896. Man’s Place in Nature and Other Anthropological Essays.
     New York, Appleton.
Iggers, G. G. and J. M. Powell. 1990. eds. Leopold von Ranke and the Shaping
     of the Historical Discipline. Syracuse, NY, Syracuse University Press.
Ihering, H. von. 1895. A civilisacão prehistorica do Brasil meridional. São
     Paulo, Revista do Museu Paulista 1: 34–159.
Ikawa-Smith, F. 1982. Co-traditions in Japanese archaeology. World Archae-
     ology 13: 296–309.
   1995. The Jomon, the Ainu, and the Okinawans: the changing politics of
     ethic identity in Japanese archeology. In Communicating with Japan:
     An Interdisciplinary Anthology, ed. by D. J. Dicks, pp. 43–56. Montreal,
     Concordia University.
   2001. Japan. In T. Murray, 2001a, pp. 734–44.
Im Hoff, U. 1994. The Enlightenment. Oxford, Blackwell.
Ingersoll, D., J. Yellen, and W. Macdonald. 1977. eds. Experimental Archae-
     ology. New York, Columbia University Press.
Ingold, T. 1996. Hunting and gathering as ways of perceiving the environment.
     In Redefining Nature: Ecology, Culture and Domestication, ed. by R. Ellen
     and K. Fukui, pp. 117–55. Oxford, Berg.
Irvine, W. 1955. Apes, Angels, and Victorians. New York, McGraw-Hill.
Irwin, J. T. 1980. American Hieroglyphs: The Symbol of the Egyptian Hiero-
     glyphs in the American Renaissance. New Haven, CT, Yale University
     Press.
Isaac, R. 1982. The Transformation of Virginia, 1740–1790. Chapel Hill, Uni-
     versity of North Carolina Press.
Isaacs, J. 1980. ed. Australian Dreaming: 40,000 Years of Aboriginal History.
     Sydney, Lansdowne Press.
Iversen, E. 1993. The Myth of Egypt and its Hieroglyphs in European Tradition.
     Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
Jacks, P. 1993. The Antiquarian and the Myth of Antiquity: The Origins
     of Rome in Renaissance Thought. Cambridge, Cambridge University
     Press.
Jacob-Friesen, K. H. 1928. Grundfragen der Urgeschichtsforschung: Stand und
     Kritik der Forschung über Rassen, Völker und Kulturen in urgeschichtlicher
     Zeit. Hannover, Helwing.
Jacobs, J. 2000. German unification and East German archaeology. In
     H. Härke, 2000a, pp. 339–52.


                                      625
                                 References

Jacobson, J. 1979. Recent developments in South Asian prehistory and proto-
     history. Annual Review of Anthropology 8: 467–502.
Jaenen, C. 1976. Friend and Foe: Aspects of French-Amerindian Cultural Con-
     tact in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries. Toronto, McClelland and
     Stewart.
Jahnkuhn, H. 1977. Einführung in die Siedlungsarchäologie. Berlin, de
     Gruyter.
Jairazbhoy, R. A. 1974, 1976. The Old World Origins of American Civilization.
     2 vols. Totawa, NJ, Rowman and Littlefield.
Janetski, J. C. 1997a. Fremont hunting and resource intensification in the
     eastern Great Basin. Journal of Archaeological Science 24: 1075–88.
   1997b. 150 years of Utah archaeology. Utah Historical Quarterly 65: 101–
     33.
Jarman, M. R., G. N. Bailey, and H. N. Jarman. 1982. eds. Early European
     Agriculture: Its Foundations and Development. Cambridge, Cambridge
     University Press.
Jaspers, K. 1953. The Origin and Goal of History. New Haven, CT, Yale Uni-
     versity Press.
Jeffreys, D. 2003. ed. Views of Ancient Egypt since Napoleon Bonaparte: Impe-
     rialism, Colonialism and Modern Appropriations. London, UCL Press.
Jencks, C. 1986. What is Postmodernism? New York, St. Martin’s Press.
Jenkins, I. 1992. Archaeologists and Aesthetes in the Sculpture Galleries of the
     British Museum, 1800–1939. London, British Museum Press.
Jenkyns, R. 1980. The Victorians and Ancient Greece. Cambridge, MA, Harvard
     University Press.
Jenness, D. 1932. Fifty years of archaeology in Canada. Royal Society of
     Canada, Fifty Years Retrospect, Anniversary Volume, 1882–1932, pp. 71–
     6. Toronto, Ryerson Press.
Jennings, J. D. 1979. ed. The Prehistory of Polynesia. Cambridge, MA, Harvard
     University Press.
Jochim, M. A. 1976. Hunter-Gatherer Subsistence and Settlement: A Predictive
     Model. New York, Academic Press.
Johnson, G. A. 1978. Information sources and the development of decision-
     making organizations. In Social Archeology, ed. by C. L. Redman et al.,
     pp. 87–112. New York, Academic Press.
   1981. Monitoring complex system integration and boundary phenomena
     with settlement size data. In Archaeological Approaches to the Study of
     Complexity, ed. by S. E. van der Leeuw, pp. 143–88. Amsterdam, Van
     Giffen Institute.
Johnson, J. K. 1993. ed. The Development of Southeastern Archaeology.
     Tuscaloosa, University of Alabama Press.
Johnson, L. L. 1978. A history of flint-knapping experimentation, 1838–1976.
     Current Anthropology 19: 337–72.
Johnson, M. H. 1989. Conceptions of agency in archaeological interpretation.
     Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 8: 189–211.


                                     626
                                  References

  1996. An Archaeology of Capitalism. Oxford, Blackwell.
  1999. Archaeological Theory: An Introduction. Oxford, Blackwell.
Johnson, S. 1970. Johnson’s Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland, ed. by
     R. W. Chapman. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Johnston, W. M. 1967. The Formative Years of R. G. Collingwood. The Hague,
     Martinus Nijhoff.
Jones, A. 2002. Archaeological Theory and Scientific Practice. Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
Jones, H. M. 1964. O Strange New World: American Culture, The Formative
     Years. New York, Viking Press.
Jones, R. 1979. The fifth continent: problems concerning the human colo-
     nization of Australia. Annual Review of Anthropology 8: 445–66.
  1992. Philosophical time travellers. Antiquity 66: 744–57.
Jones, S. 1997. The Archaeology of Ethnicity: Constructing Identities in the Past
     and Present. London, Routledge.
Jonker, G. 1995. The Topography of Remembrance: The Dead, Tradition and
     Collective Memory in Mesopotamia. Leiden, Brill.
Joyce, R. A. 2002. The Languages of Archaeology: Dialogue, Narrative, and
     Writing. Oxford, Blackwell.
  2003. Concrete memories: fragments of the past in the Classic Maya present
     (500–1000 AD). In R. M. Van Dyke and S. E. Alcock, pp. 104–25.
  2004. Embodied subjectivity: gender, femininity, masculinity, sexuality. In
     L. Meskell and R. W. Preucel, pp. 82–95.
Junker, K. 1998. Research under dictatorship: the German Archaeological
     Institute 1929–1945. Antiquity 72: 282–92.
Kaeser, M.-A. 2001. Switzerland. In T. Murray, 2001a, pp. 1236–44.
  2002. On the international roots of prehistory. Antiquity 76: 170–77.
  2004a. L’Univers du préhistorien: science, foi et politique dans l’oeuvre et la
     vie d’Edouard Desor, 1811–1882. Paris: L’Harmattan.
  2004b. Les Lacustres: archéologie et mythe national. Lausanne, Presses Poly-
     techniques et Universitaires Romandes.
Kaiser, T. 1995. Archaeology and ideology in southeast Europe. In P. L. Kohl
     and C. Fawcett, pp. 99–119.
Kaiser, W. 1957. Zur inneren Chronologie der Naqadakultur. Archaeologia
     Geographica 6: 69–77.
Kane, S. 2003. ed. The Politics of Archaeology and Identity in a Global Context.
     Boston, MA, Archaeological Institute of America.
Karlsson, H. 1998. Re-thinking Archaeology. Gotarc Series B, 8. Göteborg,
     Göteborg University, Department of Archaeology.
Keen, B. 1971. The Aztec Image in Western Thought. New Brunswick, NJ,
     Rutgers University Press.
Kehoe, A. B. 1990. The monumental Midwestern Taxonomic Method. In
     The Woodland Tradition in the Western Great Lakes, ed. by G. Gibbon,
     pp. 31–36. Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Publications in Anthro-
     pology 4.


                                      627
                                 References

  1998. The Land of Prehistory: A Critical History of American Archaeology.
     New York, Routledge.
Kehoe, A. B. and M. B. Emmerichs. 1999. eds. Assembling the Past: Studies
     in the Professionalization of Archaeology. Albuquerque, University of New
     Mexico Press.
Kelley, J. H. and M. P. Hanen. 1988. Archaeology and the Methodology of
     Science. Albuquerque, University of New Mexico Press.
Kelly, R. L. 1995. The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in Hunter-Gatherer Life-
     ways. Washington, DC, Smithsonian Institution Press.
  2000. Elements of a behavioral ecological paradigm for the study of prehis-
     toric hunter-gatherers. In M. B. Schiffer, 2000a, pp. 63–78.
Kendall, D. G. 1969. Some problems and methods in statistical archaeology.
     World Archaeology 1: 68–76.
  1971. Seriation from abundance matrices. In F. R. Hodson, D. G. Kendall,
     and P. Tăutu, pp. 215–52.
Kendrick, T. D. 1950. British Antiquity. London, Methuen.
Kent, S. 1984. Analyzing Activity Areas: An Ethnoarchaeological Study of the
     Use of Space. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
  1987. ed. Method and Theory for Activity Area Research: An Ethnoarchaeo-
     logical Approach. New York, Columbia University Press.
Keur, D. L. 1941. Big Bead Mesa. Menasha, WI, Society for American Archae-
     ology, Memoir 1.
Kidder, A. V. 1924. An Introduction to the Study of Southwestern Archaeol-
     ogy. New Haven, CT, Papers of the Southwestern Expedition, Phillips
     Academy, no. 1.
  1935. Year Book, no. 34. Washington, DC, Carnegie Foundation.
  1962. An Introduction to the Study of Southwestern Archaeology, with an
     Introduction, “Southwestern Archaeology Today,” by Irving Rouse. New
     Haven, CT, Yale University Press.
Killan, G. 1983. David Boyle: From Artisan to Archaeologist. Toronto, Univer-
     sity of Toronto Press.
Kingsley, M. H. 1897. Travels in West Africa: Congo Français, Corisco and
     Cameroons. London, Macmillan.
Kirch, P. V. and M. D. Sahlins. 1992. Anahulu: The Anthropology of History
     in the Kingdom of Hawaii. 2 vols. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago
     Press.
Ki-Zerbo, J. 1981. ed. General History of Africa, vol. I, Methodology and
     African Prehistory. Berkeley and Los Angeles, University of California
     Press.
Klein, R. G. 1966. Chellean and Acheulean on the territory of the Soviet Union:
     a critical review of the evidence as presented in the literature. American
     Anthropologist 68(2), pt. 2: 1–45.
Kleindienst, M. R. and P. J. Watson. 1956. “Action archaeology”: the archae-
     ological inventory of a living community. Anthropology Tomorrow 5:
     75–8.


                                     628
                                 References

Klejn, L. S. 1969. Characteristic methods in the current critique of
     Marxism in archeology. Soviet Anthropology and Archeology 7(4): 41–
     53.
  1970. Archaeology in Britain: a Marxist view. Antiquity 44: 296–303.
  1973a. Marxism, the systemic approach, and archaeology. In Renfrew 1973b,
     pp. 691–710.
  1973b. On major aspects of the interrelationship of archaeology and ethnol-
     ogy. Current Anthropology 14: 311–20.
  1974. Kossinna im Abstand von vierzig Jahren. Jahresschrift für mit-
     teldeutsche Vorgeschichte 58: 7–55.
  1977. A panorama of theoretical archaeology. Current Anthropology 18: 1–
     42.
  1982. Archaeological Typology. Oxford, BAR, International Series, no. 153.
  1990. Theoretical archaeology in the making: a survey of books published
     in the West in 1974–1979. Fennoscandia Archaeologica 7: 3–15.
  1991. A Russian lesson for theoretical archaeology: a reply. Fennoscandia
     Archaeologica 8: 67–71.
  1993a. Fenomen Sovetskoy Arkheologii. St. Petersburg, Farn.
  1993b. La Arqueologı́a Soviética: Historia y Teorı́a de una Escuela Descono-
     cida. Barcelona, Editoria Crı́tica.
  1994a. Overcoming national romanticism in archaeology. Fennoscandia
     Archaeologica 11: 87–8.
  1994b. Childe and Soviet archaeology: a romance. In D. R. Harris, pp. 75–
     99.
  1997. Das Phänomen der sowjetischen Archäologie. Frankfurt am Main, Peter
     Lang.
  1999a. Gustaf Kossinna 1858–1931. In T. Murray, 1999a, pp. 233–46.
  1999b. Vasiliy Alekeyevich Gorodcov. In T. Murray, 1999a, pp. 247–62.
  2001a. Metaarchaeology. Acta Archaeologica 27: 1–149.
  2001b. Russia. In T. Murray, 2001a, pp. 1127–45.
Klemm, G. F. 1843–52. Allgemeine Cultur-Geschichte der Menschheit. 10 vols.
     Leipzig, Teubner.
  1854–1855. Allgemeine Kulturwissenschaft. Leipzig, J. A. Romberg.
Kletter, R. 2006. Just Past? The Making of Israeli Archaeology. London,
     Equinox.
Klindt-Jensen, O. 1975. A History of Scandinavian Archaeology. London,
     Thames and Hudson.
  1976. The influence of ethnography on early Scandinavian archaeology. In
     J. V. S. Megaw, pp. 43–8.
Kluckhohn, C. 1940. The conceptual structure in Middle American studies.
     In The Maya and their Neighbors, ed. by C. L. Hay et al., pp. 41–51. New
     York, Appleton-Century.
Knapp, A. B. 1988. Ideology, archaeology and polity. Man 23: 133–63.
  1992. ed. Archaeology, Annales, and Ethnohistory. Cambridge, Cambridge
     University Press.


                                     629
                                 References

Knorr-Cetina, K. D. 1981. The Manufacture of Knowledge: An Essay on the
    Constructivist and Contextual Nature of Science. Oxford, Pergamon.
Koepping, K.-P. 1983. Adolf Bastian and the Psychic Unity of Mankind: The
    Foundations of Anthropology in Nineteenth Century Germany. St. Lucia,
    University of Queensland Press.
Kohl, P. L. 1975. The archaeology of trade. Dialectical Anthropology 1: 43–50.
  1978. The balance of trade in southwestern Asia in the mid-third millennium
    B.C. Current Anthropology 19: 463–92.
  1979. The “world economy” of West Asia in the third millennium B.C. In
    South Asian Archaeology 1977, ed. by M. Taddei, vol. 1, pp. 55–85. Naples,
    Istituto Universitario Orientale, Seminario di Studi Asiatici.
  1981a. ed. The Bronze Age Civilization of Central Asia: Recent Soviet Dis-
    coveries. Armonk, NY, Sharpe.
  1981b. Materialist approaches in prehistory. Annual Review of Anthropology
    10: 89–118.
  1984. Force, history and the evolutionist paradigm. In M. Spriggs, 1984a,
    pp. 127–34.
  1987. The ancient economy, transferable technologies, and the Bronze Age
    world system: a view from the northwestern frontier of the ancient Near
    East. In Centre and Periphery in the Ancient World, ed. by M. J. Rowlands
    and M. T. Larsen, pp. 13–24. Cambridge, Cambridge University
    Press.
  1993. Limits to a post-processual archaeology (or, the dangers of a new
    scholasticism). In N. Yoffee and A. Sherratt, pp. 13–19.
  1998. Nationalism and archaeology: on the construction of nations and the
    reconstructions of the remote past. Annual Review of Anthropology 27:
    223–46.
Kohl, P. L. and C. Fawcett. 1995. eds. Nationalism, Politics, and the Practice
    of Archaeology. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Kohl, P. L. and J. A. Pérez Gollán. 2002. Religion, politics, and prehistory:
    reassessing the lingering legacy of Oswald Menghin. Current Anthropol-
    ogy 43: 561–610.
Kohl, P. L. and G. R. Tsetskhladze. 1995. Nationalism, politics, and the prac-
    tice of archaeology in the Caucasus. In P. L. Kohl and C. Fawcett, pp. 149–
    74.
Kohn, H. 1960. The Mind of Germany. New York, Scribner’s.
Kokkonen, J. 1985. Aarne Michaël Tallgren and Eurasia Septentrionalis Anti-
    qua. Fennoscandia Archaeologica 2: 3–10.
Kolakowski, L. 1976. La Philosophie positiviste. Paris, Denoël.
  1978a. Main Currents of Marxism, vol. 1, The Founders. Oxford, Oxford
    University Press.
  1978b. Main Currents of Marxism, vol. 2, The Golden Age. Oxford, Oxford
    University Press.
  1978c. Main Currents of Marxism, vol. 3, The Breakdown. Oxford, Oxford
    University Press.


                                     630
                                  References

Kolpakov, E. M. and L. B. Vishnyatsky. 1990. Current theoretical discussion
     in Soviet archaeology: an essay. Fennoscandia Archaeologica 7: 17–25.
Kossack, G. 1992. Prehistoric archaeology in Germany: its history and current
     situation. Norwegian Archaeological Review 25: 73–109.
Kossinna, G. 1911. Die Herkunft der Germanen. Leipzig, Kabitzsch.
  1926–1927. Ursprung und Verbreitung der Germanen in Vor- und
     Frühgeschichtlicher Zeit. 2 vols. Berlin, Lichterfelde.
Kosso, P. 2001. Knowing the Past: Philosophical Issues of History and Archaeol-
     ogy. Amherst, NY, Humanity Books.
Kotsakis, K. 1991. The powerful past: theoretical trends in Greek archaeology.
     In I. Hodder, 1991a, pp. 65–90.
Kramer, C. 1979. ed. Ethnoarchaeology: Implications of Ethnography for Archae-
     ology. New York, Columbia University Press.
  1982. Village Ethnoarchaeology: Rural Iran in Archaeological Perspective.
     New York, Academic Press.
Kristiansen, K. 1981. A social history of Danish archaeology (1805–1975). In
     G. Daniel, 1981b, pp. 20–44.
  1984. Ideology and material culture: an archaeological perspective. In
     M. Spriggs, 1984a, pp. 72–100.
  1985. A short history of Danish archaeology: an analytical perspective.
     In Archaeological Formation Processes, ed. by K. Kristiansen, pp. 12–34.
     Copenhagen, Nationalmusset.
  1993. “The strength of the past and its great might”; an essay on the use of
     the past. Journal of European Archaeology 1: 3–32.
  1996. European origins – “civilisation” and “barbarism.” In P. Graves-
     Brown et al., 1996, pp. 138–44.
  2002. The birth of ecological archaeology in Denmark: history and research
     environments 1850–2000. In A. Fischer and K. Kristiansen, pp. 11–31.
  2004a. Genes versus agents: a discussion of the widening theoretical gap in
     archaeology (with comments). Archaeological Dialogues 11: 77–132.
  2004b. Who owns the past? reflections on roles and responsibilities. In
     L. Vishnyatsky et al., pp. 79–86.
Kristiansen, K. and T. B. Larsson. 2005. The Rise of Bronze Age Society: Travels,
     Transmissions and Transformations. Cambridge, Cambridge University
     Press.
Kroeber, A. L. 1909. The archaeology of California. In F. Boas et al., pp. 1–42.
  1916. Zuñi potsherds. New York, Anthropological Papers of the American
     Museum of Natural History 18(1): 7–37.
  1952. The Nature of Culture. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
  1953. ed. Anthropology Today. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Kroeber, A. L. and C. Kluckhohn. 1952. Culture – A Critical Review of Con-
     cepts and Definitions. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University, Papers of the
     Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology no. 47.
Kroker, A. 1984. Technology and the Canadian Mind: Innis/McLuhan/
     Grant. Montreal, New World Perspectives.


                                      631
                                 References

Kruglov, A. P. and G. V. Podgayetsky. 1935. Rodovoe Obshchestvo Stepei Vos-
     tochnoi Evropy. Leningrad, Izvestiia GAIMK no. 119.
Kubler, G. 1962. The Shape of Time: Remarks on the History of Things. New
     Haven, CT, Yale University Press.
Kuhn, T. S. 1962. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago, IL, Uni-
     versity of Chicago Press.
  1970. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 2nd edn. Chicago, IL, Univer-
     sity of Chicago Press.
  1977. The Essential Tension: Selected Studies in Scientific Tradition and
     Change. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Kuklick, B. 1996. Puritans in Babylon: The Ancient Near East and American
     Intellectual Life, 1880–1930. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
Kuklick, H. 1991a. The Savage Within: The Social History of British Anthropol-
     ogy, 1885–1945. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
  1991b. Contested monuments: the politics of archaeology in southern
     Africa. In Colonial Situations: Essays on the Contextualization of Ethno-
     graphic Knowledge (History of Anthropology 7), ed. by G. W. Stocking Jr,
     pp. 135–69. Madison, University of Wisconsin Press.
Kupperman, K. O. 1980. Settling with the Indians: The Meeting of English
     and Indian Cultures in America, 1580–1640. Totowa, NJ, Rowman and
     Littlefield.
Kus, S. 1984. The spirit and its burden: archaeology and symbolic activity. In
     M. Spriggs, 1984a, pp. 101–7.
  1992. Toward an archaeology of body and soul. In J.-C. Gardin and C. S.
     Peebles, pp. 168–77.
  2000. Ideas are like burgeoning grains on a young rice stalk: some ideas on
     theory in anthropological archaeology. In M. B. Schiffer, 2000a, pp. 156–
     72.
Kushner, G. 1970. A consideration of some processual designs for archaeology
     as anthropology. American Antiquity 35: 125–32.
Lacovara, P. 1981. The Hearst excavations at Deir-el-Ballas: the eighteenth
     dynasty town. In Studies in Ancient Egypt, the Aegean, and the Sudan,
     ed. by W. K. Simpson and W. M. Davis, pp. 120–4. Boston, MA, Museum
     of Fine Arts.
Lakoff, G. 1987. Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal
     about the Mind. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G. and M. Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago, IL, Uni-
     versity of Chicago Press.
Lal, M. 1984. Settlement History and Rise of Civilization in Ganga-Yamuna
     Doab. Delhi, B. R. Publishing.
Lamberg-Karlovsky, C. C. 1975. Third millennium modes of exchange and
     modes of production. In J. A. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky,
     pp. 341–68.
  1981. Afterword. In Kohl, 1981a, pp. 386–97.
  1985. The Near Eastern “breakout” and the Mesopotamian social contract.
     Symbols, spring issue, 8–11, 23–4.

                                     632
                              Further Reading

  1989. ed. Archaeological Thought in America. Cambridge, Cambridge
    University Press.
Laming-Emperaire, A. 1962. La signification de l’art rupestre paléolithique.
    Paris, Picard.
  1964. Origines de l’archéologie préhistorique en France, des superstitions
    médiévales à la découverte de l’homme fossile. Paris, Picard.
Lampeter Archaeological Workshop. 1997. Relativism, objectivity and the pol-
    itics of the past. Archaeological Dialogues 4: 164–84.
Landau, M. 1991. Narratives of Human Evolution. New Haven, CT, Yale
    University Press.
Laplace, G. 1964. Essai de typologie systématique. Annali dell’ Universita di
    Ferrara 15: 1–85.
Larsen, C. S. 1985. ed. The Antiquity and Origin of Native North Americans.
    New York, Garland.
Larsen, M. T. 1996. The Conquest of Assyria: Excavations in an Antique Land,
    1840–60. London, Routledge.
Larson, P. A., Jr. 1979. Archaeology and science: surviving the preparadigmatic
    crisis. Current Anthropology 20: 230–1.
Laszlo, E. 1972a. Introduction to Systems Philosophy. New York, Gordon and
    Breach.
  1972b. ed. The Relevance of General Systems Theory. New York, Braziller.
  1972c. The Systems View of the World. New York, Braziller.
Latham, R. G. and A. W. Franks. 1856. eds. Horae Ferales; or Studies in the
    Archaeology of the Northern Nations, by the late John M. Kemble. London,
    Lovell, Reeve.
Latour, B. and S. Woolgar. 1979. Laboratory Life: The Social Construction of
    Scientific Facts. Beverly Hills, CA, Sage.
Laudan, L. 1990. Science and Relativism: Some Key Controversies in the Philos-
    ophy of Science. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Laufer, B. 1913. Remarks. American Anthropologist 15: 573–7.
Laurent, O. 1999. The origins of French archaeology. Antiquity 73: 176–83.
Layton, R. 1989a. ed. Conflict in the Archaeology of Living Traditions. London,
    Unwin Hyman.
  1989b. ed. Who Needs the Past? Indigenous Values and Archaeology. London,
    Unwin Hyman.
Leach, E. R. 1970. Lévi-Strauss. London, Fontana/Collins.
  1973. Concluding address. In C. Renfrew, 1973b, pp. 761–71.
Leakey, L. S. B. 1931. The Stone Age Cultures of Kenya Colony. Cambridge,
    Cambridge University Press.
Leakey, M. 1984. Disclosing the Past. New York, Doubleday.
Lech, J. 1999. Between Captivity and Freedom: Polish Archaeology in the 20th
    Century. Warsaw, Arwil.
  2002. On Polish archaeology in the 20th century: remarks and polemic.
    Archaeologia Polona 40: 185–252.
Lech, J. and F. M. Stepniowski. eds. 1999. V. Gordon Childe i Archaeologia w
    XX wieku. Warsaw, Wydawnictwo Naukowe PWM.

                                     633
                                  References

Lee, R. B. 1990. Primitive communism and the origin of social inequality. In
     S. Upham, pp. 225–46.
Lee, R. B. and I. DeVore. 1968. eds. Man the Hunter. Chicago, IL, Aldine.
Leeds, E. T. 1913. The Archaeology of Anglo-Saxon Settlements. Oxford,
     Clarendon Press.
Lefkowitz, M. R. and G. M. Rogers. 1996. eds. Black Athena Revisited. Chapel
     Hill, University of North Carolina Press.
Legendre, J.-P. 1999. Archaeology and ideological propaganda in annexed
     Alsace (1940–1944). Antiquity 73: 184–90.
Lelas, S. 1985. Typology of internal and external factors in the development
     of knowledge. Ratio 27: 67–81.
Leonard, R. D. 2001. Evolutionary archaeology. In I. Hodder, 2001a, pp. 65–
     97.
Leonard, R. D. and G. T. Jones. 1987. Elements of an inclusive evolutionary
     model for archaeology. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 6: 199–
     219.
Leone, M. P. 1972. ed. Contemporary Archaeology. Carbondale, Southern
     Illinois University Press.
  1981. Archaeology’s relationship to the present and the past. In R. Gould
     and M. Schiffer, pp. 5–14.
  1982. Some opinions about recovering mind. American Antiquity 47: 742–
     60.
  1984. Interpreting ideology in historical archaeology: using the rules of per-
     spective in the William Paca Garden in Annapolis, Maryland. In D. Miller
     and C. Tilley, 1984a, pp. 25–35.
  1986. Symbolic, structural, and critical archaeology. In D. J. Meltzer et al.,
     pp. 415–38.
  2005. The Archaeology of Liberty in an American Capital: Excavations in
     Annapolis. Berkeley, University of California Press.
Leone, M. P. and P. B. Potter, Jr. 1988. eds. The Recovery of Meaning:
     Historical Archaeology in the Eastern United States. Washington, DC,
     Smithsonian Institution Press.
Leone, M. P., P. B. Potter Jr and P. A. Shackel. 1987. Toward a critical archae-
     ology. Current Anthropology 28: 283–302.
Leppmann, W. 1970. Winckelmann. New York, Knopf.
Lepsius, C. R. 1880. Nubische Grammatik, mit einer Einleitung über die Völker
     und Sprachen Afrikas. Berlin, Hertz.
Leroi-Gourhan, A. 1964. Les religions de la préhistoire. Paris, Presses Universi-
     taires de France.
  1993. Gesture and Speech. Boston, MA, M.I.T. Press.
Leube, A. and M. Hegewisch. 2002. eds. Prähistorie und Nationalsozialismus:
     die mittel- und osteuropäische Ur- und Frühgeschictsforschung in den Jahren
     1933–1945. Heidelberg, Synchron.
Levi, P. 1979. Pausanias: Guide to Greece. 2 vols. Harmondsworth, UK,
     Penguin.


                                      634
                                 References

Levine, P. 1986. The Amateur and the Professional: Antiquarians, Histori-
      ans and Archaeologists in Victorian England, 1838–1886. Cambridge,
      Cambridge University Press.
Levitt, J. 1979. A review of experimental traceological research in the USSR.
      In B. Hayden, pp. 27–38.
Lewis, T. M. N. and M. Kneberg. 1941. The Prehistory of the Chickamauga
      Basin in Tennessee. Knoxville, Tennessee Anthropology Papers, no. 1.
Lewis-Williams, J. D. 2002. The Mind in the Cave: Consciousness and the Origins
      of Art. London, Thames and Hudson.
Lewis-Williams, J. D. and T. A. Dowson. 1988. The signs of all times: entoptic
      phenomena in Upper Palaeolithic art. Current Anthropology 29: 201–45.
Li, Chi. 1977. Anyang. Seattle, University of Washington Press.
Libby, W. F. 1955. Radiocarbon Dating. 2nd edn. Chicago, IL, University of
      Chicago Press.
Ligi, P. 1993. National romanticism in archaeology: the paradigm of Slavonic
      colonization in north-west Russia. Fennoscandia Archaeologica 10: 31–9.
Lillios, K. T. 1995. Nationalism and Copper Age research in Portugal during
      the Salazar regime (1932–1974). In P. L. Kohl and C. Fawcett, pp. 57–
      69.
Linebaugh, D. W. 2005. The Man Who Found Thoreau: Roland W. Robbins
      and the Rise of Historical Archaeology in America. Durham, University of
      New Hampshire Press.
Linton, R. 1944. North American cooking pots. American Antiquity 9:
      369–80.
Lissarrague, F. 1990. Aesthetics of the Greek Banquet: Images of Wine and Rit-
      ual. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
Little, B. J. 1994. People with history: an update on historical archaeology in
      the United States. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 1: 5–40.
Liu, L. and X. Chen. 2001. China. In T. Murray, 2001a, pp. 315–33.
Lloyd, S. H. 1947. Foundations in the Dust: A Story of Mesopotamian Explo-
      ration. Oxford, Oxford University Press (2nd edn, London, Thames and
      Hudson, 1981).
Locke, J. [1690] 1952. The Second Treatise of Government, ed. by Thomas P.
      Peardon. New York, Liberal Arts Press.
Longacre, W. A. 1968. Some aspects of prehistoric society in east-central
      Arizona. In S. R. and L. R. Binford, pp. 89–102.
  1970. Archaeology as Anthropology: A Case Study. Tucson, University of
      Arizona Press.
Longacre, W. A. and J. M. Skibo. 1994. eds. Kalinga Ethnoarchaeology:
      Expanding Archaeological Method and Theory. Washington, DC,
      Smithsonian Institution Press.
Loprieno, A. 2003. Views of the past in Egypt during the first millennium BC.
      In J. Tait, 2003, pp. 139–54.
Lord, B. 1974. The History of Painting in Canada: Toward a People’s Art.
      Toronto, NC Press.


                                     635
                                 References

Lorenzo, J. L. 1981. Archaeology south of the Rio Grande. World Archaeology
     13: 190–208.
  1984. Mexico. In H. Cleere, pp. 89–100.
Lorenzo, J. L., A. P. Elias, and J. G. Barcena. 1976. Hacia una Arqueo-
     logı́a Social: Reunión de Teotihuacán. México, DF, Instituto Nacional
     de Antropologı́a e Historia.
Low, B. S. 2000. Why Sex Matters: A Darwinian Look at Human Behavior.
     Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
Lowenthal, D. 1985. The Past is a Foreign Country. Cambridge, Cambridge
     University Press.
Lowther, G. R. 1962. Epistemology and archaeological theory. Current
     Anthropology 3: 495–509.
Lubbock, John [Lord Avebury]. 1865. Pre-historic Times, as Illustrated by
     Ancient Remains, and the Manners and Customs of Modern Savages.
     London, Williams and Norgate.
  1869. Pre-historic Times. 2nd edn. London, Williams and Norgate.
  1870. The Origin of Civilisation and the Primitive Condition of Man.
     London, Longmans, Green.
Lucas, A. 1926. Ancient Egyptian Materials. London, Arnold.
Lumbreras, L. 1974. La Arqueologı́a como Ciencia Social. Lima, Ediciones
     Histar.
Lustig, J. 1997. ed. Anthropology and Egyptology: A Developing Dialogue.
     Sheffield, UK, Sheffield Academic Press.
Lyell, C. 1863. The Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man, with
     Remarks on Theories of the Origin of Species by Variation. London,
     Murray.
Lyman, R. L. and M. J. O’Brien. 1998. The goals of evolutionary archaeology:
     history and explanation. Current Anthropology 39: 615–52.
   1999. Americanist stratigraphic excavation and the measurement of culture
     change. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 6: 55–108.
   2001. The direct historical approach, analogical reasoning, and theory in
     Americanist archaeology. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 8:
     303–42.
  2003. W. C. McKern and the Midwestern Taxonomic Method. Tuscaloosa,
     University of Alabama Press.
Lyman, R. L., M. J. O’Brien, and R. C. Dunnell. 1997a. The Rise and Fall of
     Culture History. New York, Plenum.
  1997b. eds. Americanist Culture History: Fundamentals of Time, Space, and
     Form. New York, Plenum.
Lynch, B. D. and T. F. Lynch. 1968. The beginnings of a scientific approach
     to prehistoric archaeology in 17th and 18th century Britain. Southwestern
     Journal of Anthropology 24: 33–65.
Lynott, M. J. and A. Wylie. 1995. eds. Ethics in American Archaeology: Chal-
     lenges for the 1990s. Washington, DC, Society for American Archaeology.
Lyon, E. A. 1996. A New Deal for Southeastern Archaeology. Tuscaloosa,
     University of Alabama Press.

                                     636
                                References

Lyotard, J.-F. 1984. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge.
    Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press.
McBryde, I. 1985. ed. Who Owns the Past? Melbourne, Oxford University
    Press.
  1986. Australia’s once and future archaeology. Archaeology in Oceania 21:
    13–28.
McCall, D. F. 1964. Africa in Time-Perspective. Boston, MA, Boston Univer-
    sity Press.
McCann, W. J. 1989. “Volk und Germanentum”: the presentation of the past
    in Nazi Germany. In P. Gathercole and D. Lowenthal, pp. 74–88.
McCarthy, F. D. 1959. Methods and scope of Australian archaeology. Mankind
    5: 297–316.
McDonald, W. A. 1966. Some suggestions on directions and a modest pro-
    posal. Hesperia 35: 413–18.
McDonald, W. A. and C. G. Thomas. 1990. Progress into the Past: The Redis-
    covey of Mycenaean Civilization. 2nd ed. Bloomington, Indiana University
    Press.
McGregor, J. C. 1941. Southwestern Archaeology. New York, Wiley.
McGuire, J. D. 1899. Pipes and smoking customs of the American aborigines,
    based on material in the U.S. National Museum. Washington, DC, United
    States National Museum, Annual Report, 1897, pt. 1: 351–645.
McGuire, R. H. 1983. Breaking down cultural complexity: inequality and het-
    erogeneity. Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory 6: 91–142.
  1992a. A Marxist Archaeology. San Diego, CA, Academic Press.
  1992b. Archaeology and the First Americans. American Anthropologist 94:
    816–36.
  1993. Archaeology and Marxism. Archaeological Method and Theory 5:
    101–57.
  2004. Contested pasts: archaeology and Native Americans. In L. Meskell
    and R. W. Preucel, pp. 374–95.
McGuire, R. H. and R. Paynter. 1991. eds. The Archaeology of Inequality.
    Oxford, Blackwell.
McGuire, R. H. and P. Reckner. 2002. The unromantic West: labor, capital
    and struggle. Historical Archaeology 36: 44–58.
   2003. Building a working-class archaeology: the Colorado Coal Field War
    project. Industrial Archaeology Review 25: 83–95.
McIntosh, R. J. 2001. Africa, francophone. In T. Murray, 2001a, pp. 21–35.
McKay, A. G. 1976. Archaeology and the creative imagination. In Sympo-
    sium on New Perspectives in Canadian Archaeology, ed. by A. G. McKay,
    pp. 227–34. Ottawa, Royal Society of Canada, Symposium 15.
McKern, W. C. 1937. An hypothesis for the Asiatic origin of the Woodland
    culture pattern. American Antiquity 3: 138–43.
  1939. The Midwestern Taxonomic Method as an aid to archaeological cul-
    ture study. American Antiquity 4: 301–13.
McKusick, M. 1970. The Davenport Conspiracy. Iowa City, University of
    Iowa.

                                    637
                                 References

 1991. The Davenport Conspiracy Revisited. Ames, Iowa State University
    Press.
McLennan, J. F. 1865. Primitive Marriage. Edinburgh, Adam and Charles
    Black.
McNairn, B. 1980. Method and Theory of V. Gordon Childe. Edinburgh,
    Edinburgh University Press.
McNeill, W. H. 1986. Mythistory and Other Essays. Chicago, IL, University of
    Chicago Press.
McNitt, F. 1990. Richard Wetherill-Anasazi: Pioneer Explorer of Southwestern
    Ruins. Albuquerque, University of New Mexico Press.
MacCormack, C. P. and M. Strathern. 1980. eds. Nature, Culture and Gender.
    Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
MacCormack, S. 1995. Limits of understanding: perceptions of Greco-Roman
    and Amerindian paganism in early modern Europe. In America in
    European Consciousness 1493–1750, ed. by K. O. Kupperman, pp. 79–129.
    Chapel Hill, University of North Carolina Press.
 1991. Religion in the Andes: Vision and Imagination in Early Colonial Peru.
    Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
MacDonald, S. and M. Rice. 2003. eds. Consuming Ancient Egypt. London,
    UCL Press.
MacGaffey, W. 1966. Concepts of race in the historiography of northeast
    Africa. Journal of African History 7: 1–17.
MacKendrick, P. 1960. The Mute Stones Speak: The Story of Archaeology in Italy.
    New York, St. Martin’s Press.
MacNeish, R. S. 1952. Iroquois Pottery Types: A Technique for the Study
    of Iroquois Prehistory. Ottawa, National Museum of Canada, Bulletin
    no. 124.
 1974. Reflections on my search for the beginnings of agriculture in Mexico.
    In G. R. Willey, 1974a, pp. 205–34.
 1978. The Science of Archaeology? North Scituate, MA, Duxbury Press.
 1992. The Origins of Agriculture and Settled Life. Norman, University of
    Oklahoma Press.
MacWhite, E. 1956. On the interpretation of archeological evidence in histor-
    ical and sociological terms. American Anthropologist 58: 3–25.
Maischberger, M. 2002. German archaeology during the Third Reich, 1933–
    45: a case study based on archival evidence. Antiquity 76: 209–18.
Majewski, T. 2003. Historical archaeology and disciplinary exegesis. In S. D.
    Gillespie and D. L. Nichols, pp. 77–84.
Makkay, J. 1991. Gordon Childe (1892–1957) and Hungary: a centenary trib-
    ute. The New Hungarian Quarterly 32: 107–14.
Malina, J. and Z. Vašı́ček. 1990. Archaeology Yesterday and Today: The
    Development of Archaeology in the Sciences and Humanities. Cambridge,
    Cambridge University Press.
Malinowski, B. 1922. Argonauts of the Western Pacific. New York, E. P.
    Dutton.


                                     638
                                  References

 1945. The Dynamics of Culture Change: An Inquiry into Race Relations in
    Africa. New Haven, CT, Yale University Press.
Mallows, W. 1985. The Mystery of the Great Zimbabwe. London, Robert
    Hale.
Malmer, M. P. 1963. Metodproblem inom järnålderns Konsthistoria
    (with English summary). Lund, Acta Archaeologica Lundensia, series
    altera, 3.
Malone, C. and S. Kaner. 1999. eds. Heritage and archaeology in the Far East.
    Antiquity 73: 585–629.
Malone, C. and S. Stoddart. 1998. eds. David Clarke’s “Archaeology: the loss
    of innocence” (1973) 25 years after. Antiquity 72: 676–702.
Malthus, T. 1798. An Essay on the Principle of Population. London,
    J. Johnson.
Marchak, M. P. 1991. The Integrated Circus: The New Right and the
    Restructuring of Global Markets. Montreal, McGill-Queen’s University
    Press.
Marchand, S. L. 1996. Down from Olympus: Archaeology and Philhellenism in
    Germany, 1750–1970. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
Marcus, J. 1983a. A synthesis of the cultural evolution of the Zapotec and
    Mixtec. In K. V. Flannery and J. Marcus, pp. 355–60.
 1983b. Lowland Maya archaeology at the crossroads. American Antiquity
    48: 454–88.
 1992. Mesoamerican Writing Systems: Propaganda, Myth, and History in Four
    Ancient Civilizations. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
 2003. Recent advances in Maya archaeology. Journal of Archaeological
    Research 11: 71–148.
Marcuse, H. 1964. One Dimensional Man. London, Routledge and Kegan
    Paul.
Mariátegui, J. C. 1952. Siete ensayos de interpretación de la realidad Peruana.
    Lima, Biblioteca Amauta.
Marlowe, G. 1999. Year one: radiocarbon dating and American archaeology,
    1947–1948. American Antiquity 64: 9–32.
Marsden, B. M. 1974. The Early Barrow-Diggers. Park Ridge, UK, Noyes Press.
 1984. Pioneers of Prehistory: Leaders and Landmarks in English Archaeology
    (1500–1900). Ormskirk, UK, Hesketh.
Marshall, Y. 2002. ed. Community archaeology. World Archaeology 34, 2.
Martin, P. S. 1971. The revolution in archaeology. American Antiquity 36:
    1–8.
Martin, P. S., C. Lloyd, and A. Spoehr. 1938. Archaeological work in the
    Ackmen-Lowry area, southwestern Colorado, 1937. Chicago, IL, Field
    Museum of Natural History, Anthropological Series 23: 217–304.
Martin, P. S. and F. Plog. 1973. The Archaeology of Arizona. Garden City, NY,
    Natural History Press.
Martin, P. S., G. I. Quimby, and D. Collier. 1947. Indians Before Columbus.
    Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.


                                      639
                                 References

Martin, P. S. and J. Rinaldo. 1939. Modified Basket Maker sites, Ackmen-
    Lowry area, southwestern Colorado, 1938. Chicago, IL, Field Museum of
    Natural History, Anthropological Series 23: 305–499.
Marvin, U. B. 1973. Continental Drift: The Evolution of a Concept.
    Washington, DC, Smithsonian Institution Press.
Marx, K. 1906. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy. New York, The Mod-
    ern Library, Random House.
Marx, K. and F. Engels. 1962. Selected Works in Two Volumes. Moscow, Foreign
    Languages Publishing House.
 1964. On Religion. New York, Schocken.
Mason, O. T. 1895. The Origins of Invention. New York, Scribner.
 1896. Influence of environment upon human industries or arts. Washington,
    DC, Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution for 1895: 639–65.
Mason, R. J. 2000. Archaeology and Native American oral traditions. American
    Antiquity 65: 239–66.
Masry, A. H. 1981. Traditions of archaeological research in the Near East.
    World Archaeology 13: 222–39.
Masterman, M. 1970. The nature of a paradigm. In Criticism and the Growth
    of Knowledge, ed. by I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave, pp. 59–89. Cambridge,
    Cambridge University Press.
Matos Moctezuma, E. 1984. The templo mayor of Tenochtitlan: economics
    and ideology. In Ritual Human Sacrifice in Mesoamerica, ed. by E. H.
    Boone, pp. 133–64. Washington, DC, Dumbarton Oaks.
Matthews, R. and C. Roemer, 2003. eds. Ancient Perspectives on Egypt.
    London, UCL Press.
Mayes, S. 2003. The Great Belzoni: The Circus Strongman Who Discovered
    Egypt’s Ancient Treasures. New York, Tauris Parke.
Mazel, A. D. 1992. Changing fortunes: 150 years of San hunter-gatherer history
    in the Natal Drakensberg, South Africa. Antiquity 66: 758–67.
Meacham, W. 1977. Continuity and local evolution in the Neolithic of South
    China: a non-nuclear approach. Current Anthropology 18: 419–40.
Meeks, D. and C. Favard-Meeks. 1996. Daily Life of the Egyptian Gods. Ithaca,
    NY, Cornell University Press.
Megaw, J. V. S. 1966. Australian archaeology: how far have we progressed?
    Mankind 6: 306–12.
 1976. ed. To Illustrate the Monuments: Essays on Archaeology Presented to
    Stuart Piggott. London, Thames and Hudson.
Megaw, R. and J. V. S. Megaw. 1989. Celtic Art: From Its Beginnings to the
    Book of Kells. London, Thames and Hudson.
Meggers, B. J. 1955. The coming of age of American archeology. In New
    Interpretations of Aboriginal American Culture History, ed. by M. T.
    Newman, pp. 116–29. Washington, DC, Anthropological Society of
    Washington.
 1960. The law of cultural evolution as a practical research tool. In Essays in
    the Science of Culture, ed. by G. E. Dole and R. L. Carneiro, pp. 302–16.
    New York, Crowell.

                                     640
                                 References

 1968. ed. Anthropological Archeology in the Americas. Washington, DC,
     Anthropological Society of Washington.
Meillassoux, C. 1981. Maidens, Meal and Money: Capitalism and the Domestic
     Economy. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Meinander, C. F. 1981. The concept of culture in European archaeological
     literature. In G. Daniel, 1981b, pp. 100–11.
Meltzer, D. J. 1979. Paradigms and the nature of change in American archae-
     ology. American Antiquity 44: 644–57.
 1983. The antiquity of man and the development of American archaeology.
     Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory 6: 1–51.
 1999. William Henry Holmes 1846–1933. In T. Murray, 1999a, pp. 175–
     91.
Meltzer, D. J., D. D. Fowler, and J. A. Sabloff. 1986. eds. American Archaeol-
     ogy Past and Future: A Celebration of the Society for American Archaeology
     1935–1985. Washington, DC, Smithsonian Institution Press.
Mendyk, S. A. E. 1989. “Speculum Britanniae”: Regional Study, Antiquari-
     anism, and Science in Britain to 1700. Toronto, University of Toronto
     Press.
Menzel, D. 1977. The Archaeology of Ancient Peru and the Work of Max
     Uhle. Berkeley, University of California, R. H. Lowie Museum of
     Anthropology.
Meskell, L. M. 1996. The somatisation of archaeology: discourses, institutions,
     corporeality. Norwegian Archaeological Review 29: 1–16.
 1998. ed. Archaeology Under Fire: Nationalism, Politics and Heritage in the
     Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East. London, Routledge.
 1999. Archaeologies of Social Life: Age, Sex, Class et cetera in Ancient Egypt.
     Oxford, Blackwell.
 2002. The intersections of identity and politics in archaeology. Annual
     Review of Anthropology 31: 279–301.
Meskell, L. and R. W. Preucel. 2004. eds. A Companion to Social Archaeology.
     Oxford, Blackwell.
Meyer, E. 1884–1902. Geschichte des Alterthums. 5 vols. Stuttgart, J. G. Cotta.
Michael, H. N. 1962. ed. Studies in Siberian Ethnogenesis. Toronto, University
     of Toronto Press.
 1964. The Archaeology and Geomorphology of Northern Asia: Selected Works.
     Toronto, University of Toronto Press.
Miller, D. 1980. Archaeology and development. Current Anthropology 21:
     709–26.
 1984. Modernism and suburbia as material ideology. In D. Miller and
     C. Tilley, pp. 37–49.
 1985. Artefacts as Categories: A Study of Ceramic Variability in Central
     India. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Miller, D., M. Rowlands, and C. Tilley. 1989a. eds. Domination and Resis-
     tance. London, Unwin Hyman.
 1989b. Introduction. In D. Miller, M. Rowlands, and C. Tilley, 1989a,
     pp. 1–26.

                                     641
                                 References

Miller, D. and C. Tilley. 1984a. eds. Ideology, Power and Prehistory. Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
 1984b. Ideology, power and long-term social change. In D. Miller and C.
     Tilley, 1984a, pp. 147–52.
Miller, M. O. 1956. Archaeology in the U.S.S.R. London, Atlantic Press.
Millon, R., R. B. Drewitt, and G. L. Cowgill. 1973. Urbanization at Teoti-
     huacán, Mexico, vol. 1, The Teotihuacán Map. Austin, University of Texas
     Press.
Mills, W. C. 1902. Excavations of the Adena Mound. Ohio Archaeological and
     Historical Quarterly 10: 452–79.
Mink, L. O. 1969. Mind, History, and Dialectic: The Philosophy of R. G.
     Collingwood. Bloomington, Indiana University Press.
Mitchell, T. 1988. Colonising Egypt. New York, Cambridge University Press.
Mithen, S. J. 1990. Thoughtful Foragers: A Study of Prehistoric Decision Making.
     Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
 1993. Simulating mammoth hunting and extinction: implications for the
     Late Pleistocene of the Central Russian Plain. In Hunting and Animal
     Exploitation in the Later Palaeolithic and Mesolithic of Eurasia, ed. by
     G. L. Peterkin, H. Bricker, and P. Mellars, pp. 163–78. Tucson, AZ,
     Archeological Papers of the American Anthropological Association 4.
 1996. The Prehistory of the Mind: A Search for the Origins of Art, Religion
     and Science. London, Thames and Hudson.
 2003. After the Ice: A Global Human History, 20,000–5000 BC. London,
     Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Mizoguchi, K. 2002. An Archaeological History of Japan, 30,000 B.C. to A.D.
     700. Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press.
 2004. Identity, modernity, and archaeology: the case of Japan. In L. Meskell
     and R. W. Preucel, pp. 396–414.
Moberg, C.-A. 1976. Introduction à l’archéologie. Paris, Maspero.
 1981. From artefacts to timetables to maps (to mankind?): regional traditions
     in archaeological research in Scandinavia. World Archaeology 13: 209–21.
Moir, E. 1958. The English Antiquaries. History Today 8: 781–92.
Molino, J. 1992. Archaeology and symbol systems. In J.-C. Gardin and C. S.
     Peebles, pp. 15–29.
Momigliano, A. 1966. Ancient history and the antiquarian. In Studies in
     Historiography by A. Momigliano, pp. 1–39. London, Weidenfeld and
     Nicolson.
Mongait, A. L. 1959. Archaeology in the U.S.S.R. Moscow, Foreign Languages
     Publishing House.
 1961. Archaeology in the USSR. trans. by M. W. Thompson. Har-
     mondsworth, UK, Penguin.
Monks, G. G. 1981. Seasonality studies. Advances in Archaeological Method
     and Theory 4: 177–240.
Montané, J. C. 1980. Marxismo y Arqueologı́a. México, Ediciones de Cultura
     Popular.


                                     642
                                  References

Montelius, O. 1885. Om tidsbestämning inom bronsåldern med särskildt
   afseende på Skandinavien. Stockholm, Vitterhets Historie och Antikvitets
   Akademien, Handlingar 30, ny, följd, 10.
 1899. Der Orient und Europa. Stockholm, Königl. Akademie der schönen
   Wissenschaften, Geschichte und Alterthumskunde.
 1903. Die typologische Methode: Die älteren Kulturperioden im Orient und
   in Europa, vol. 1. Stockholm, Selbstverlag.
Moore, C. B. 1892. Certain shell heaps of the St. John’s River, Florida, hitherto
   unexplored. American Naturalist 26: 912–22.
Moore, J. A. and A. S. Keene. 1983. Archaeological Hammers and Theories.
   New York, Academic Press.
Moorehead, W. K. 1909. A study of primitive culture in Ohio. In F. Boas et al.,
   pp. 137–50.
 1910. The Stone Age in North America. 2 vols. Boston, MA, Houghton
   Mifflin.
Moorey, P. R. S. 1979. Kathleen Kenyon and Palestinian archaeology. Palestine
   Exploration Quarterly (January–June): 3–10.
 1991. A Century of Biblical Archaeology. Cambridge, UK, Lutterworth Press.
Mora, G. and M. Dı́az-Andreu. 1997. eds. La Cristalización del Pasado: Génesis
   y Desarrollo del Marco Institucional de la Arqueologı́a en España. Málaga,
   Servicio de Publicationes de la Universidad de Málaga.
Moret, A. and G. Davy. 1926. From Tribe to Empire: Social Organization
   among Primitives and in the Ancient East. London, Kegan Paul.
Morgan, C. G. 1973. Archaeology and explanation. World Archaeology 4: 259–
   76.
 1978. Comment on D. W. Read and S. A. LeBlanc, “Descriptive statements,
   covering laws, and theories in archaeology.” Current Anthropology 19:
   325–6.
Morgan, L. H. 1877. Ancient Society. New York, Holt.
 1881. Houses and House-life of the American Aborigines. Washington, DC,
   Contribution to North American Ethnology 4, U.S. Geological and Geo-
   graphical Survey of the Rocky Mountain Region.
Morlot, A. 1861. General views on archaeology. Washington, DC, Annual
   Report of the Smithsonian Institution for 1860: 284–343.
Moro Abadı́a, O. 2002. Towards a definition of time in archaeology: French
   prehistoric archaeology (1850–1900). Papers from the Institute of Archae-
   ology 13: 51–63.
Moro Abadı́a, O. and M. R. González Morales. 2003. L’art bourgeois de la
   fin du XIXe siècle face à l’art mobilier Paléolithique. L’anthropologie 107:
   455–70.
  2004. Towards a genealogy of the concept of “paleolithic mobiliary art.”
   Journal of Anthropological Research 60: 321–39.
Morrell, J. B. 1981. “Externalism” and “Internalism.” In Dictionary of the
   History of Science, ed. by W. F. Bynum, E. J. Browne, and R. Porter,
   pp. 145–46, 211. London, Macmillan.


                                      643
                                 References

Morris, I. 1987. Burial and Ancient Society: The Rise of the Greek City-State.
   Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
 1994a. ed. Classical Greece: Ancient Histories and Modern Archaeologies.
   Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
 1994b. Archaeologies of Greece. In I. Morris, 1994a, pp. 8–47.
 2000. Archaeology as Cultural History. Oxford, Blackwell.
Morse, E. S. 1879. Traces of an early race in Japan. Popular Science Monthly
   14: 257–66.
Morse, M. A. 1999. Craniology and the adoption of the Three-Age System in
   Britain. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 65: 1–16.
Mortillet, G. de. 1883. Le préhistorique: antiquité de l’homme. Paris,
   C. Reinwald.
 1897. Formation de la nation française. Paris, Alcan.
Morton, S. G. 1839. Crania Americana. Philadelphia, PA, Dobson.
 1844. Crania Aegyptiaca. Philadelphia, PA, Penington.
Moser, S. 1992. The visual language of archaeology: a case study of the
   Neanderthals. Antiquity 66: 831–44.
 1995a. Archaeology and its Disciplinary Culture: The Professionalization of
   Australian Prehistoric Archaeology. PhD dissertation, Sydney, University
   of Sydney.
 1995b. The “aboriginalization” of Australian archaeology: the contribu-
   tion of the Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies to the indige-
   nous transformation of the discipline. In P. J. Ucko, 1995a, pp. 150–
   77.
Much, M. 1907. Die Trugspiegelung orientalischer Kultur in den vorgeschi-
   chtlichen Zeitaltern nord- und mittel-Europas. Jena, Costenoble.
Mufuka, K. 1983. Dzimbahwe Life and Politics in the Golden Age, 1100–1500
   AD. Harare, Harare Publishing House.
Mulvaney, D. J. 1969. The Prehistory of Australia. London, Thames and
   Hudson.
 1981. Gum leaves on the Golden Bough: Australia’s Palaeolithic survivals
   discovered. In J. D. Evans et al. pp. 52–64.
Mulvaney, D. J. and J. P. White. 1987. eds. Australians to 1788. Broadway,
   NSW, Fairfax, Syme and Weldon.
Murdock, G. P. 1949. Social Structure. New York, Macmillan.
Murdock, G. P., C. S. Ford, A. E. Hudson, R. Kennedy, L. W. Simmons, and
   J. H. Whiting. 1938. Outline of Cultural Materials. New Haven, CT, Yale
   University, Institute of Human Relations.
Murray, P. 1980. Discard location: the ethnographic data. American Antiquity
   45: 490–502.
Murray, T. 1989. The history, philosophy and sociology of archaeology: the
   case of the Ancient Monuments Protection Act (1882). In Critical Tra-
   ditions in Contemporary Archaeology: Essays in the Philosophy, History, and
   Socio-Politics of Archaeology, ed. by V. Pinsky and A. Wylie, pp. 55–67.
   Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.


                                     644
                                 References

 1992. Tasmania and the constitution of “the dawn of humanity.” Antiquity
    66: 730–43.
 1999a. ed. Encyclopedia of Archaeology: The Great Archaeologists. 2 vols. Santa
    Barbara, CA, ABC-CLIO.
 1999b. Epilogue: the art of archaeological biography. In T. Murray, 1999a,
    pp. 869–83.
 2001a. ed. Encyclopedia of Archaeology: History and Discoveries. 3 vols. Santa
    Barbara, CA, ABC-CLIO.
 2001b. Britain, prehistoric archaeology. In T. Murray, 2001a, pp. 199–217.
 2001c. Australia, prehistoric. In T. Murray, 2001a, pp. 121–27.
 2004a. ed. The Archaeology of Contact in Settler Societies. Cambridge,
    Cambridge University Press.
 2004b. Archbishop Ussher and archaeological time. In L. Vishnyatsky et al.,
    pp. 204–15.
Murray, T. and J. P. White. 1981. Cambridge in the bush? Archaeology in
    Australia and New Guinea. World Archaeology 13: 255–63.
Myhre, B. 1991. Theory in Scandinavian archaeology since 1960: a view from
    Norway. In I. Hodder, 1991a, pp. 161–86.
Myres, J. L. 1911. The Dawn of History. London, Williams and Norgate.
 1923a. Primitive man, in geological time. In Cambridge Ancient History, vol.
    1, ed. by J. B. Bury, S. A. Cook, and F. E. Adcock, pp. 1–56. Cambridge,
    Cambridge University Press.
 1923b. Neolithic and Bronze Age cultures. Ibid., pp. 57–111.
Nader, L. 2001. Anthropology! distinguished lecture – 2000. American
    Anthropologist 103: 609–20.
Nagel, E. 1961. The Structure of Science: Problems in the Logic of Scientific
    Explanation. New York, Harcourt, Brace and World.
Nash, S. E. 1999. Time, Trees, and Prehistory: Tree-Ring Dating and the Devel-
    opment of North American Archaeology, 1914–1950. Salt Lake City, Uni-
    versity of Utah Press.
 2000a. ed. It’s About Time: A History of Archaeological Dating in North
    America. Salt Lake City, University of Utah Press.
 2000b. Just a matter of time? North American archaeological dating in the
    twenty-first century. In Nash, 2000a, pp. 208–10.
Nederveen Pieterse, J. 1992. White on Black: Images of Africa and Blacks in
    Western Popular Culture. New Haven, CT, Yale University Press.
Neff, H. 2000. On evolutionary ecology and evolutionary archaeology: some
    common ground? Current Anthropology 41: 427–29.
Nelson, M. C., S. M. Nelson, and A. Wylie. 1994. eds. Equity Issues for Women
    in Archeology. Washington, DC, Archeological Papers of the American
    Anthropological Association 5.
Nelson, N. C. 1916. Chronology of the Tano ruins, New Mexico. American
    Anthropologist 18: 159–80.
Nelson, S. M. 1997. Gender in Archaeology: Analyzing Power and Prestige.
    Walnut Creek, CA, AltaMira.


                                     645
                                 References

Nicholas, G. P. and T. D. Andrews. 1997. eds. At a Crossroads: Archaeol-
     ogy and First Peoples in Canada. Burnaby, BC, Simon Fraser University,
     Archaeology Press, Publication 24.
Nicholson, H. B. 1976. ed. Origins of Religious Art and Iconography in Pre-
     classic Mesoamerica. Los Angeles, UCLA, Latin American Center Publi-
     cations.
Nilsson, S. 1868. The Primitive Inhabitants of Scandinavia. 3rd edn, trans. by
     J. Lubbock. London, Longmans, Green.
Noble, D. F. 1977. America by Design: Science, Technology, and the Rise of
     Corporate Capitalism. New York, Knopf.
Nott, J. C. and G. R. Gliddon. 1854. Types of Mankind. Philadelphia, PA,
     Lippincott, Grambo.
Nzewunwa, N. 1984. Nigeria. In H. Cleere, pp. 101–8.
O’Brien, M. J. 1996a. Paradigms of the Past: The Story of Missouri Archaeology.
     Columbia, University of Missouri Press.
  1996b. ed. Evolutionary Archaeology: Theory and Application. Salt Lake City,
     University of Utah Press.
  2005. Evolutionism and North America’s archaeological record. World
     Archaeology 37: 26–45.
O’Brien, M. J. and T. D. Holland. 1990. Variation, selection, and the archae-
     ological record. Archaeological Method and Theory 2: 31–79.
O’Brien, M. J. and R. D. Leonard. 2001. Style and function: an introduction.
     In T. D. Hurt and G. Rakita, pp. 1–23.
O’Brien, M. J. and R. L. Lyman. 1998. James A. Ford and the Growth of
     Americanist Archaeology. Columbia, University of Missouri Press.
  1999a. Seriation, Stratigraphy, and Index Fossils: The Backbone of Archaeo-
     logical Dating. New York, Kluwer Academic/Plenum.
   1999b. The Bureau of American Ethnology and its legacy to southeastern
     archaeology. Journal of the Southwest 41: 407–40.
  2000. eds. Applying Evolutionary Archaeology: A Systematic Approach. New
     York, Plenum.
O’Brien, M. J., R. L. Lyman, and R. D. Leonard. 1998. Basic incompatibilities
     between evolutionary and behavioral archaeology. American Antiquity
     63: 485–98.
O’Brien, M. J., R. L. Lyman, and M. B. Schiffer. 2005. Archaeology as a
     Process: Processualism and Its Progeny. Salt Lake City, University of Utah
     Press.
O’Connor, D. 1993. Ancient Nubia: Egypt’s Rival in Africa. Philadelphia,
     University of Pennsylvania, The University Museum.
O’Connor, D. and A. Reid. 2003. eds. Ancient Egypt in Africa. London, UCL
     Press.
O’Connor, T. E. 1983. The Politics of Soviet Culture, Anatolii Lunacharskii.
     Ann Arbor, MI, University Microfilms International Research Press.
Odell, G. H. 2001. Research problems R us. American Antiquity 66: 679–85.
Odum, E. P. 1953. Fundamentals of Ecology. Philadelphia, PA, Saunders.


                                     646
                                 References

Okladnikov, A. P. 1965. The Soviet Far East in Antiquity. Toronto, University
    of Toronto Press.
  1970. Yakutia Before Its Incorporation into the Russian State. Montreal,
    McGill-Queen’s University Press.
O’Laverty, J. 1857. Relative antiquity of stone and bronze weapons. Ulster
    Journal of Archaeology 5: 122–7.
Oldfield, E. 1852. Introductory address. Archaeological Journal 9: 1–6.
Oliveira, V. and S. O. Jorge. 1995. Theoretical underpinnings of Portuguese
    archaeology in the twentieth century. In P. J. Ucko, 1995a, pp. 251–62.
Olsen, B. 1990. Roland Barthes: from sign to text. In Tilley, 1990a, pp. 163–
    205.
Olsen, J. W. 1987. The practice of archaeology in China today. Antiquity 61:
    282–90.
Orenstein, H. 1954. The evolutionary theory of V. Gordon Childe. Southwest-
    ern Journal of Anthropology 10: 200–14.
Orme, B. 1973. Archaeology and ethnology. In Renfrew, 1973b, pp. 481–92.
  1981. Anthropology for Archaeologists: An Introduction. London,
    Duckworth.
Orser, C. E., Jr. 1996. A Historical Archaeology of the Modern World. New
    York, Plenum.
  2004. Historical Archaeology. 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, Pearson
    Prentice Hall.
Ortman, S. G. 2000. Conceptual metaphor in the archaeological record: meth-
    ods and an example from the American Southwest. American Antiquity
    65: 613–45.
Orton, C. 1980. Mathematics in Archaeology. London, Collins.
O’Shea, J. M. 1984. Mortuary Variability: An Archaeological Investigation.
    New York, Academic Press.
Osgood, C. B. 1951. Culture: its empirical and non-empirical character. South-
    western Journal of Anthropology 7: 202–14.
Ottaway, J. H. 1973. Rudolf Virchow: an appreciation. Antiquity 47: 101–8.
Owen, A. L. 1962. The Famous Druids: A Survey of Three Centuries of English
    Literature on the Druids. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Paddayya, K. 1980. On the threshold: a review article on the latest develop-
    ments in method and theory in archaeology. Bulletin of the Deccan College
    Research Institute 39: 117–34.
  1982. Ecological archaeology and the ecology of archaeology: the archae-
    ologist’s viewpoint. Bulletin of the Deccan College Research Institute 41:
    130–50.
  1983. Myths about the New Archaeology. Saeculum 34: 70–104.
  1986. The epistemology of archaeology: a postscript to the New Archaeol-
    ogy. Bulletin of the Deccan College Postgraduate and Research Institute
    45: 89–115.
  1990. The New Archaeology and Aftermath: A View from Outside the Anglo-
    Saxon World. Pune, Ravish.


                                     647
                                 References

  1993. C. J. Thomsen and the Three Age system. Man and Environment 18:
     129–40.
Pagden, A. 1982. The Fall of Natural Man. Cambridge, Cambridge University
     Press.
Paine, R. 1983. Israel and totemic time? Royal Anthropological Institute News
     59: 19–22.
  1994. Masada: a history of a memory. History and Anthropology 6: 371–409.
Pande, G. C. 1985. An Approach to Indian Culture and Civilization. Varanasi,
     Banaras Hindu University, Monograph of the Department of Ancient
     Indian History, Culture and Archaeology no. 15.
Panofsky, E. 1960. Renaissance and Renascences in Western Art. Stockholm,
     Almquist and Wiksell.
Parker, A. C. 1907. Excavations in an Erie Indian Village and Burial Site at
     Ripley, Chautauqua County, New York. Albany, New York State Museum,
     Bulletin no. 117.
  1916. The origin of the Iroquois as suggested by their archeology. American
     Anthropologist 18: 479–507.
  1920. The Archaeological History of New York. Albany, New York State
     Museum, Bulletins nos. 235–8.
Parker Pearson, M. 1982. Mortuary practices, society and ideology: an eth-
     noarchaeological study. In I. Hodder, 1982c, pp. 99–113.
  1984. Social change, ideology and the archaeological record. In M. Spriggs,
     1984a, pp. 59–71.
  1999. The Archaeology of Death and Burial. Stroud, UK, Sutton
     Publishing.
Parry, G. 1995. The Trophies of Time: English Antiquarians of the Seventeenth
     Century. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
  1999. John Aubrey 1626–1697. In T. Murray, 1999a, pp. 15–37.
Parslow, C. C. 1995. Rediscovering Antiquity: Karl Weber and the Excavation of
     Herculaneum, Pompeii, and Stabiae. Cambridge, Cambridge University
     Press.
Parsons, T. 1968. Durkheim, Emile. In D. L. Sills, vol. 4, pp. 311–20.
Patrik, L. E. 1985. Is there an archaeological record? Advances in Archaeolog-
     ical Method and Theory 8: 27–62.
Patterson, T. C. 1983. The historical development of a coastal Andean social
     formation in central Peru: 6000 to 500 B.C. In Investigations of the Andean
     Past, ed. by D. Sandweiss, pp. 21–37. Ithaca, NY, Cornell University, Latin
     American Studies Program.
  1986a. The last sixty years: toward a social history of Americanist archeology
     in the United States. American Anthropologist 88: 7–26.
  1986b. Some postwar theoretical trends in U.S. archeology. Culture 6:
     43–54.
  1989. History and the post-processual archaeologies. Man 24: 555–66.
  1990. Some theoretical tensions within and between the processual and
     postprocessual archaeologies. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 9:
     189–200.

                                     648
                                 References

  1991. Who did archaeology in the United States before there were archaeol-
     ogists and why? Preprofessional archaeologies of the nineteenth century.
     In R. W. Preucel, pp. 242–50.
  1994. Social archaeology in Latin America: an appreciation. American Antiq-
     uity 59: 531–7.
  1995. Toward a Social History of Archaeology in the United States. Fort Worth,
     TX, Harcourt Brace.
  1997. Inventing Western Civilization. New York, Monthly Review Press.
  1999. The political economy of archaeology in the United States. Annual
     Review of Anthropology 28: 155–74.
  2003. Marx’s Ghost: Conversations with Archaeologists. Oxford, Berg.
Patterson, T. C. and C. E. Orser Jr. 2004. eds. Foundations of Social
     Archaeology: Selected Writings of V. Gordon Childe. Walnut Creek, CA,
     AltaMira Press.
Pauketat, T. R. 2003. Materiality and the immaterial in historical-processual
     archaeology. In T. L. and C. S. VanPool, pp. 41–53.
Peace, W. J. 1988. Vere Gordon Childe and American anthropology. Journal
     of Anthropological Research 44: 417–33.
  1993. Leslie White and evolutionary theory. Dialectical Anthropology 18:
     123–51.
Peacock, D. P. S. 1997. Charlemagne’s black stones: the re-use of Roman
     columns in early medieval Europe. Antiquity 71: 709–15.
Peake, H. J. E. 1922. The Bronze Age and the Celtic World. London, Benn.
  1940. The study of prehistoric times. Journal of the Royal Anthropological
     Institute 70: 103–46.
Peake, H. J. E. and H. J. Fleure. 1927. The Corridors of Time, vol. 3, Peasants
     and Potters. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Pearce, R. H. 1965. Savagism and Civilization: A Study of the Indian and the
     American Mind. Baltimore, MD, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Pearson, R. J. 1977. The social aims of Chinese archaeology. Antiquity 51:
     8–10.
Peel, J. D. 1971. Herbert Spencer: The Evolution of a Sociologist. London,
     Heinemann Educational.
Peregrine, P. 2000. A tale of two archaeologies. Ethnohistory 47: 249–56.
Perry, W. J. 1923. The Children of the Sun. London, Methuen.
  1924. The Growth of Civilization. London, Methuen.
Petrie, W. M. F. 1901. Diospolis Parva. London, Egypt Exploration Fund.
  1911. The Revolutions of Civilisation. London, Harper.
  1939. The Making of Egypt. London, Sheldon.
Petrova-Averkieva, Yu. 1980. Historicism in Soviet ethnographic science. In
     E. Gellner, pp. 19–27.
Phillips, P. 1955. American archaeology and general anthropological theory.
     Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 11: 246–50.
Phillips, P. and G. R. Willey. 1953. Method and theory in American archeology:
     an operational basis for culture-historical integration. American Anthro-
     pologist 55: 615–33.

                                     649
                                  References

Piggott, S. 1935. Stukeley, Avebury and the druids. Antiquity 9: 22–32.
  1950. William Stukeley: An Eighteenth-Century Antiquary. Oxford, Oxford
     University Press.
  1958. Vere Gordon Childe, 1892–1957. Proceedings of the British Academy
     44: 305–12.
  1959. Approach to Archaeology. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
  1968. The Druids. London, Thames and Hudson.
  1976. Ruins in a Landscape: Essays in Antiquarianism. Edinburgh,
     Edinburgh University Press.
  1978. Antiquity Depicted: Aspects of Archaeological Illustration. London,
     Thames and Hudson.
  1983. The Earliest Wheeled Transport: From the Atlantic Coast to the Caspian
     Sea. London, Thames and Hudson.
  1985. William Stukeley: An Eighteenth-Century Antiquary, rev. edn.
     London, Thames and Hudson.
  1989. Ancient Britons and the Antiquarian Imagination: Ideas from the
     Renaissance to the Regency. London, Thames and Hudson.
Pinker, S. 2002. The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature. New
     York, Viking Press.
Pinsky, V. 1992a. Anthropology and the New Archaeology: A Critical Study of
     Disciplinary Change in American Archaeology. PhD dissertation, Depart-
     ment of Archaeology, Cambridge University.
  1992b. Archaeology, politics, and boundary formation: the Boas censure
     (1919) and the development of American archaeology during the inter-
     war years. In J. E. Reyman, pp. 161–89.
Pitt-Rivers, A. H. L.-F. 1906. The Evolution of Culture and Other Essays.
     Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Plog, F. 1982. Can the centuries-long experience of the Hohokam . . . be
     ignored? Early Man 4(4): 24–5.
Plog, S. 1980. Stylistic Variation in Prehistoric Ceramics: Design Analysis in the
     American Southwest. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Pluciennik, M. 2002. The invention of hunter-gatherers in seventeenth-century
     Europe. Archaeological Dialogues 9: 98–151.
Polanyi, K. 1944. The Great Transformation. New York, Farrar and Rinehart.
  1966. Dahomey and the Slave Trade: An Analysis of an Archaic Economy.
     Seattle, University of Washington Press.
Polanyi, K., C. M. Arensberg, and H. W. Pearson. 1957. Trade and Market in
     the Early Empires. Glencoe, IL, Free Press.
Poliakov, L. 1974. The Aryan Myth: A History of Racist and Nationalist Ideas
     in Europe. New York, Basic Books.
Politis, G. G. 2003. The theoretical landscape and the methodological devel-
     opment of archaeology in Latin America. American Antiquity 68: 245–72.
Politis, G. G. and B. Alberti. 1999. eds. Archaeology in Latin America. London,
     Routledge.




                                      650
                                  References

Politis, G. G. and J. A. Pérez Gollán. 2004. Latin American archaeology:
     from colonialism to globalization. In L. Meskell and R. W. Preucel, 2004,
     pp. 353–73.
Pomian, K. 1990. Collectors and Curiosities: Paris and Venice 1500–1800.
     London, Polity Press.
Popper, K. R. 1959. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. London, Hutchinson.
Porter, R. 1977. The Making of Geology: Earth Science in Britain 1660–1815.
     Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Posnansky, M. 1976. Archaeology as a university discipline – Ghana, 1967–71.
     Proceedings of the Panafrican Congress of Prehistory, pp. 329–31.
  1982. African archaeology comes of age. World Archaeology 13: 345–58.
Possehl, G. L. 2002. The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective.
     Walnut Creek, CA, AltaMira Press.
Prescott, W. H. 1843. History of the Conquest of Mexico. New York, Harper.
  1847. History of the Conquest of Peru. New York, Harper and Brothers.
Press, G. A. 2003. The Development of the Idea of History in Antiquity. Montreal,
     McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Preston, D. 1995. The mystery of Sandia Cave. The New Yorker, June 12,
     pp. 66–83.
Preucel, R. W. 1991. ed. Processual and Postprocessual Archaeologies: Mul-
     tiple Ways of Knowing the Past. Carbondale, Southern Illinois Univer-
     sity at Carbondale, Center for Archaeological Investigations, Occasional
     Paper 10.
  1995. The postprocessual condition. Journal of Archaeological Research
     3:147–75.
Preucel, R. W. and M. S. Chesson. 1994. Blue corn girls: a herstory of three
     early women archaeologists at Tecolote, New Mexico. In C. Claassen,
     pp. 67–84.
Preucel, R. W. and I. Hodder. 1996. eds. Contemporary Archaeology in Theory:
     A Reader. Oxford, Blackwell.
Price, B. J. 1977. Shifts in production and organization: a cluster-interaction
     model. Current Anthropology 18: 209–33.
Price, D. 1993. Threatening Anthropology: McCarthyism and the FBI’s
     Surveillance of Activist Anthropologists. Durham, NC, Duke University
     Press.
Price, N. S. 2001. ed. The Archaeology of Shamanism. London, Routledge.
Price, T. D. and J. A. Brown. 1985. eds. Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers: The
     Emergence of Cultural Complexity. New York, Academic Press.
Prichard, J. C. 1813. Researches into the Physical History of Man. London, John
     and Arthur Arch.
Priest, J. 1833. American Antiquities, and Discoveries in the West. Albany, NY,
     Hoffman and White.
Pumpelly, R. 1908. ed. Explorations in Turkestan. 2 vols. Washington, DC,
     Carnegie Institution.




                                      651
                                 References

Puodžiūnas, G. and A. Girininkas. 1996. Nationalism doubly oppressed:
    archaeology and nationalism in Lithuania. In M. Dı́az-Andreu and T.
    Champion, 1996a, pp. 243–55.
Raab, L. M. and A. C. Goodyear. 1984. Middle-range theory in archaeology: a
    critical review of origins and applications. American Antiquity 49: 255–68.
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R. 1922. The Andaman Islanders. Cambridge, Cambridge
    University Press.
Raglan, F. R. R. S. 1939. How Came Civilization? London, Methuen.
Ramage, N. 1990. Sir William Hamilton as collector, exporter, and dealer: the
    acquisition and dispersal of his collections. American Journal of Archae-
    ology 94: 469–80.
  1992. Goods, graves, and scholars: 18th-century archaeologists in Britain
    and Italy. American Journal of Archaeology 96: 653–61.
Ramsden, P. G. 1977. A Refinement of Some Aspects of Huron Ceramic Analysis.
    Ottawa, Archaeological Survey of Canada, Mercury Series no. 63.
  1996. The current state of Huron archaeology. Northeast Archaeology 51:
    101–12.
Randall-MacIver, D. 1906. Mediaeval Rhodesia. London, Macmillan.
Randall-MacIver, D. and C. L. Woolley. 1909. Areika. Philadelphia, University
    of Pennsylvania, University Museum.
Ranov, V. A. and R. S. Davis. 1979. Toward a new outline of the Soviet Central
    Asian Paleolithic. Current Anthropology 20: 249–70.
Rappaport, R. A. 1968. Pigs for the Ancestors: Ritual in the Ecology of a New
    Guinea People. New Haven, CT, Yale University Press.
Rathje, W. L. 1974. The Garbage Project: a new way of looking at the problems
    of archaeology. Archaeology 27: 236–41.
  1975. The last tango in Mayapán: a tentative trajectory of production-
    distribution systems. In J. A. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky,
    pp. 409–48.
Ratnagar, S. 2004. Archaeology at the heart of a political confrontation: the
    case of Ayodhya. Current Anthropology 45: 239–59.
Ratzel, F. 1882–1891. Anthropogeographie. Stuttgart, Engelhorn.
  1896–1898. The History of Mankind. trans. by A. J. Butler. 3 vols. London,
    Macmillan.
Rautman, A. E. 2000. ed. Reading the Body: Representations and Remains in
    the Archaeological Record. Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press.
Ravetz, A. 1959. Notes on the work of V. Gordon Childe. The New Reasoner
    10: 55–66.
Read, D. W. and S. A. LeBlanc. 1978. Descriptive statements, covering laws,
    and theories in archaeology. Current Anthropology 19: 307–35.
Redfield, R. 1953. The Primitive World and Its Transformations. Ithaca, NY,
    Cornell University Press.
Redford, D. B. 1986. Pharaonic King-Lists, Annals and Day Books: A Con-
    tribution to the Study of the Egyptian Sense of History. Mississauga, ON,
    Benben Publications.


                                     652
                                 References

Redman, C. L. 1973. ed. Research and Theory in Current Archeology. New
    York, Wiley.
  1986. Qsar es-Seghir: An Archaeological View of Medieval Life. New York,
    Academic Press.
  1991. In defense of the seventies – the adolescence of New Archeology.
    American Anthropologist 93: 295–307.
Redman, C. L. et al. 1978. eds. Social Archeology: Beyond Subsistence and Dat-
    ing. New York, Academic Press.
Reid, A. 2003. Ancient Egypt and the source of the Nile. In D. O’Connor and
    A. Reid, pp. 55–76.
Reid, D. M. 1985. Indigenous Egyptology: the decolonization of a profession.
    Journal of the American Oriental Society 105: 233–46.
  1997. Nationalizing the Pharaonic past: Egyptology, imperialism, and
    Egyptian nationalism, 1922–1952. In Rethinking Nationalism in the Arab
    Middle East, ed. by J. Jankowski and I. Gershoni, pp. 35–69. New York,
    Columbia University Press.
  2002. Whose Pharaohs? Archaeology, Museums, and Egyptian National Iden-
    tity from Napoleon to World War I. Berkeley, University of California
    Press.
Reid, J. J. 1991. On the history of archaeology and archaeologists. American
    Antiquity 56: 195–6.
Reid, J. J., W. L. Rathje, and M. B. Schiffer. 1974. Expanding archaeology.
    American Antiquity 39: 125–6.
Reinach, S. 1893. Le Mirage oriental. Paris, G. Masson.
  1903. L’Art et la magie: à propos des peintures et des gravures de l’âge du
    renne. L’Anthropologie 14: 257–66.
Reisner, G. A. 1910. The Archaeological Survey of Nubia, Report for 1907–1908.
    2 vols. Cairo, National Printing Department.
  1923a. Excavations at Kerma, I–III. Boston, MA, Harvard African Studies
    5.
  1923b. Excavations at Kerma, IV–V. Boston, MA, Harvard African Studies
    6.
Renfrew, A. C. 1972. The Emergence of Civilisation: The Cyclades and the
    Aegean in the Third Millennium B.C. London, Methuen.
  1973a. Before Civilization: The Radiocarbon Revolution and Prehistoric
    Europe. London, Cape.
  1973b. ed. The Explanation of Culture Change: Models in Prehistory. London,
    Duckworth.
  1973c. Wessex as a social question. Antiquity 47: 221–5.
  1973d. Social Archaeology (inaugural lecture). Southampton, The
    University.
  1975. Trade as action at a distance: questions of integration and communi-
    cation. In J. A. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky, pp. 3–59.
  1978a. Trajectory discontinuity and morphogenesis. American Antiquity
    43: 203–22.


                                     653
                                   References

  1978b. Space, time and polity. In J. Friedman and M. J. Rowlands, 1978a,
    pp. 89–112.
  1979. Problems in European Prehistory. Cambridge, Cambridge University
    Press.
  1980. The great tradition versus the great divide: archaeology as
    anthropology? American Journal of Archaeology 84: 287–98.
  1982a. Explanation revisited. In Theory and Explanation in Archaeology, ed.
    by A. C. Renfrew, M. J. Rowlands, and B. A. Segraves, pp. 5–23. New
    York, Academic Press.
  1982b. Towards an Archaeology of Mind (inaugural lecture). Cambridge,
    Cambridge University Press.
  1984. Approaches to Social Archaeology. Edinburgh, Edinburgh University
    Press.
  1988. Archaeology and Language: The Puzzle of Indo-European Origins. New
    York, Cambridge University Press.
  1992. Archaeology, genetics and linguistic diversity. Man 27: 445–78.
Renfrew, A. C. and P. Bahn. 2004. Archaeology: Theories, Methods and Practice.
    4th edn. London, Thames and Hudson.
Renfrew, A. C. and J. F. Cherry. 1986. eds. Peer Polity Interaction and Socio-
    Political Change. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Renfrew, A. C. and K. L. Cooke. 1979. eds. Transformations: Mathematical
    Approaches to Culture Change. New York, Academic Press.
Renfrew, A. C., J. E. Dixon and J. R. Cann. 1968. Further analysis of Near
    Eastern obsidians. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 34: 319–31.
Renfrew, A. C. and C. Scarre. 1998. eds. Cognition and Material Culture:
    The Archaeology of Symbolic Storage. Cambridge, McDonald Institute for
    Archaeological Research.
Renfrew, A. C. and S. Shennan. 1982. eds. Ranking, Resource and
    Exchange: Aspects of the Archaeology of Early European Society. Cambridge,
    Cambridge University Press.
Renfrew, A. C. and E. B. W. Zubrow. 1994. eds. The Ancient Mind: Elements
    of Cognitive Archaeology. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Reyman, J. E. 1992. ed. Rediscovering our Past: Essays on the History of
    American Archaeology. Aldershot, UK, Avebury.
  1999. Walter W. Taylor 1913–1997. In T. Murray, 1999a, pp. 681–
    700.
Ribes, R. 1966. Pièces de la période archaı̈que trouvées vers 1700 dans la region
    de Bécancour. Cahiers d’archéologie québecoise 2(1): 22–34.
Ridgway, D. 1985. V. Gordon Childe a venticinque anni dalla morte. In Studi
    di Paletnologia in Onore di Salvatore M. Puglisi, ed. by M. Liverani,
    A. Palmieri, and R. Peroni, pp. 3–11. Rome, Università di Roma.
Ridley, R. T. 1992. The Eagle and the Spade: Archaeology in Rome during the
    Napoleonic Era, 1809–1814. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
  1998. Napoleon’s Proconsul in Egypt: The Life and Times of Bernardino
    Drovetti. London, Rubicon.


                                       654
                                 References

Rindos, D. 1984. The Origins of Agriculture: An Evolutionary Perspective. New
    York, Academic Press.
  1989. Undirected variation and the Darwinian explanation of culture
    change. Archaeological Method and Theory 1: 1–45.
Ritchie, W. A. 1944. The Pre-Iroquoian Occupations of New York State.
    Rochester, NY, Rochester Museum of Arts and Sciences Memoir no. 1.
  1965. The Archaeology of New York State. Garden City, NY, Natural History
    Press.
Ritchie, W. A. and R. E. Funk. 1973. Aboriginal Settlement Patterns in the
    Northeast. Albany, New York State Museum and Science Service, Memoir
    no. 20.
Rivers, W. H. R. 1914. The History of Melanesian Society. Cambridge,
    Cambridge University Press.
Robb, J. E. 1998. The archaeology of symbols. Annual Review of Anthropology
    27: 329–46.
Roberts, C. 1996. The Logic of Historical Explanation. University Park,
    Pennsylvania State University Press.
Robertshaw, P. T. 1990. ed. A History of African Archaeology. London, James
    Currey.
Rodden, J. 1981. The development of the Three Age System: archaeology’s
    first paradigm. In G. Daniel, 1981b, pp. 51–68.
Rolingson, M. A. 2001. ed. Historical Perspectives on Midsouth Archeology.
    Fayetteville, Arkansas Archeological Survey.
Roscoe, P. 2002. Culture. In J. P. Hart and J. E. Terrell, pp. 107–24.
Rose, M. A. 1991. The Post-Modern and the Post-Industrial: A Critical Analysis.
    Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Rosenau, P. M. 1992. Post-Modernism and the Social Sciences: Insights, Inroads,
    and Intrusions. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
Rossi, P. 1985. The Dark Abyss of Time: The History of the Earth and the History
    of Nations from Hooke to Vico. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Rouse, I. B. 1939. Prehistory in Haiti: A Study in Method. New Haven, CT,
    Yale University Publications in Anthropology no. 21.
  1953. The strategy of culture history. In A. L. Kroeber, pp. 57–76.
  1958. The inference of migrations from anthropological evidence. In Migra-
    tions in New World Culture History, ed. by R. H. Thompson, pp. 63–8.
    Tucson, University of Arizona, Social Science Bulletin no. 27.
  1965. The place of “peoples” in prehistoric research. Journal of the Royal
    Anthropological Institute 95: 1–15.
  1972. Introduction to Prehistory. New York, McGraw-Hill.
  1986. Migrations in Prehistory: Inferring Population Movement from Cul-
    tural Remains. New Haven, CT, Yale University Press.
Rowe, J. H. 1954. Max Uhle, 1856–1944: A Memoir of the Father of Peruvian
    Archaeology. Berkeley, University of California Press.
  1965. The renaissance foundations of anthropology. American Anthropolo-
    gist 67: 1–20.


                                     655
                                 References

Rowlands, M. J. 1984a. Objectivity and subjectivity in archaeology. In
    M. Spriggs, 1984a, pp. 108–13.
  1984b. Conceptualizing the European Bronze and Early Iron Ages. In
    European Social Evolution: Archaeological Perspectives, ed. by J. Bintliff,
    pp. 147–56. Bradford, UK, University of Bradford.
Rowley-Conwy, P. 1984. C. J. Thomsen and the Three Age system: a contem-
    porary document. Antiquity 58: 129–31.
  1996. Why didn’t Westropp’s “Mesolithic” catch on in 1872? Antiquity 70:
    940–44.
  1999. Sir Grahame Clark 1907–1995. In T. Murray, 1999a, pp. 507–29.
Rudenko, S. I. 1961. The Ancient Culture of the Bering Sea and the Eskimo
    Problem. Toronto, University of Toronto Press.
  1970. Frozen Tombs of Siberia: The Pazyryk Burials of Iron Age Horsemen.
    Berkeley, University of California Press.
Rudolph, R. C. 1962–1963. Preliminary notes on Sung archaeology. Journal
    of Asian Studies 22: 169–77.
Ruiz, A. and F. Nocete. 1990. The dialectic of the past and the present in
    the construction of a scientific archaeology. In F. Baker and J. Thomas,
    pp. 105–11.
Ruiz, A., A. Sanchez, and J. P. Bellon. 2002. The history of Iberian
    archaeology: one archaeology for two Spains. Antiquity 76: 184–90.
Ruiz Zapatero, G. 1996. Celts and Iberians: ideological manipulations in
    Spanish archaeology. In P. Graves-Brown et al., pp. 179–95.
Ruppel, T., J. Neuwirth, M. P. Leone, and G.-M. Fry. 2003. Hidden in
    view: African spiritual spaces in North American landscapes. Antiquity 77:
    321–35.
Rushton, J. P. 1995. Race, Evolution, and Behavior: A Life History Perspective.
    New Brunswick, NJ, Transaction Publishers.
Sabloff, J. A. 1981. ed. Simulations in Archaeology. Albuquerque, University
    of New Mexico Press.
  1982. ed. Archaeology: Myth and Reality: Readings from Scientific American.
    San Francisco, CA, W. H. Freeman.
  1990. The New Archaeology and the Ancient Maya. New York, Scientific
    American Library.
Sabloff, J. A., T. W. Beale, and A. M. Kurland Jr. 1973. Recent developments
    in archaeology. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
    Science 408: 103–18.
Sabloff, J. A. and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky. 1975. eds. Ancient Civilization
    and Trade. Albuquerque, University of New Mexico Press.
Sabloff, J. A. and G. R. Willey. 1967. The collapse of Maya civilization in the
    southern lowlands: a consideration of history and process. Southwestern
    Journal of Anthropology 23: 311–36.
Sabloff, P. L. W. 1998. Conversations with Lew Binford. Norman, University
    of Oklahoma Press.
Sackett, J. R. 1981. From de Mortillet to Bordes: a century of French Palae-
    olithic research. In G. Daniel, 1981b, pp. 85–99.

                                     656
                                   References

  1991. Straight archaeology French style: the phylogenetic paradigm in his-
     toric perspective. In Perspectives on the Past: Theoretical Biases in Mediter-
     ranean Hunter-Gatherer Research, ed. by G. A. Clark, pp. 109–39.
     Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press.
  2000. Human antiquity and the Old Stone Age: the nineteenth cen-
     tury background to paleoanthropology. Evolutionary Anthropology 9(1):
     37–49.
Sahlins, M. D. 1958. Social Stratification in Polynesia. Seattle, University of
     Washington Press.
  1968. Tribesmen. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall.
  1972. Stone Age Economics. Chicago, IL, Aldine.
  1976a. Culture and Practical Reason. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago
     Press.
  1976b. The Use and Abuse of Biology: An Anthropological Critique of Socio-
     biology. Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press.
Sahlins, M. D. and E. R. Service. 1960. eds. Evolution and Culture. Ann Arbor,
     University of Michigan Press.
Said, E. W. 1978. Orientalism. New York, Pantheon.
Saitta, D. J. 1983. The poverty of philosophy in archaeology. In J. A. Moore
     and A. S. Keene, pp. 299–304.
  1992. Radical archaeology and middle-range methodology. Antiquity 66:
     886–97.
Salmon, M. H. 1982. Philosophy and Archaeology. New York, Academic
     Press.
Salmon, M. H. and W. C. Salmon. 1979. Alternative models of scientific expla-
     nation. American Anthropologist 81: 61–74.
Salmon, W. C. 1967. The Foundations of Scientific Inference. Pittsburgh, PA,
     University of Pittsburgh Press.
  1984. Scientific Explanation and the Causal Structure of the World.
     Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
  1992. Explanation in archaeology: an update. In L. Embree, pp. 243–53.
Salmon, W. C., R. C. Jeffrey, and J. Greeno. 1971. Statistical Explanation and
     Statistical Relevance. Pittsburgh, PA, Pittsburgh University Press.
Salzman, P. C. 2000. Black Tents of Baluchistan. Washington, DC, Smithsonian
     Institution Press.
Sanders, W. T., J. R. Parsons, and R. S. Santley. 1979. The Basin of
     Mexico: Ecological Processes in the Evolution of a Civilization. New York,
     Academic Press.
Sanders, W. T. and B. J. Price. 1968. Mesoamerica: The Evolution of a Civi-
     lization. New York, Random House.
Sanderson, S. K. 1990. Social Evolutionism: A Critical History. Oxford,
     Blackwell.
Sanford, E. M. 1944. The study of ancient history in the middle ages. Journal
     of the History of Ideas 5: 21–43.
Sanoja, M. and I. Vargas. 1978. Antiguas formaciones y modos de producción
     Venezolanos. Caracas, Monte Avila Editores.

                                       657
                                  References

Sapir, E. 1916. Time Perspective in Aboriginal American Culture: A Study in
     Method. Ottawa, Geological Survey of Canada, Memoir 90.
  1921. Language: An Introduction to the Study of Speech. New York, Harcourt,
     Brace.
Sartre, J.-P. 1971–1972. L’idiot de la famille: Gustave Flaubert de 1821–1857.
     3 vols. Paris, Gallimard.
Sauer, E. W. 2004. ed. Archaeology and Ancient History: Breaking Down the
     Boundaries. London, Routledge.
Saunders, P. T. 1980. An Introduction to Catastrophe Theory. Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
Saxe, A. A. 1970. Social Dimensions of Mortuary Practices. PhD dissertation,
     Department of Anthropology, University of Michigan.
Scham, S. A. 2001. The archaeology of the disenfranchised. Journal of Archae-
     ological Method and Theory 8: 183–213.
Schiffer, M. B. 1972. Archaeological context and systemic context. American
     Antiquity 37: 156–65.
  1976. Behavioral Archeology. New York, Academic Press.
  1978–1985. ed. Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, vols. 1–8.
     New York, Academic Press.
  1995. Behavioral Archaeology: First Principles. Salt Lake City, University of
     Utah Press.
  1996. Some relationships between behavioral and evolutionary archaeolo-
     gies. American Antiquity 61: 643–62.
  2000a. ed. Social Theory in Archaeology. Salt Lake City, University of Utah
     Press.
  2000b. Social theory in archaeology: building bridges. In M. B. Schiffer,
     2000a, pp. 1–13.
Schlanger, N. 2002. Making the past for South Africa’s future: the prehistory
     of Field-Marshal Smuts (1920s–1940s). Antiquity 76: 200–9.
  2003. The Burkitt affair revisited: colonial implications and identity politics
     in early South African prehistoric research. Archaeological Dialogues 10:
     5–55.
Schlanger, N. and A. Schnapp. 2005–. eds. Histories of Archaeology (series).
     Oxford, Berghahn Books.
Schliz, A. 1906. Der schnurkeramische Kulturkreis und seine Stellung zu der
     anderen neolithischen Kulturformen in Sudwestdeutschland. Zeitschrift
     für Ethnologie 38: 312–45.
Schmidt, P. R. and R. J. McIntosh. 1996. eds. Plundering Africa’s Past.
     Bloomington, Indiana University Press.
Schmidt, P. R. and T. C. Patterson. 1995. eds. Making Alternative Histories:
     The Practice of Archaeology and History in Non-Western Settings. Santa
     Fe, NM, School of American Research Press.
Schnapp, A. 1993. La Conquête du passé: aux origines de l’archéologie. Paris,
     Editions Carré.
  1997. The Discovery of the Past: The Origins of Archaeology. London, British
     Museum Press.

                                      658
                                  References

  2002. Between antiquarians and archaeologists – continuities and ruptures.
     Antiquity 76: 134–40.
Schnapp, A. and K. Kristiansen. 1999. Discovering the past. In G. Barker,
     pp. 3–47.
Schneer, C. J. 1969. ed. Toward a History of Geology. Cambridge, MA, M.I.T.
     Press.
Schneider, L. 1967. ed. The Scottish Moralists on Human Nature and Society.
     Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Schofield, J. F. 1948. Primitive Pottery: An Introduction to South African
     Ceramics, Prehistoric and Protohistoric. Cape Town, South African
     Archaeological Society, Handbook Series no. 3.
Schrire, C. 1980. An inquiry into the evolutionary status and apparent identity
     of San hunter-gatherers. Human Ecology 8: 9–32.
  1984. ed. Past and Present in Hunter Gatherer Studies. New York, Academic
     Press.
  1995. Digging through Darkness: Chronicles of an Archaeologist. Char-
     lottesville, University Press of Virginia.
Schrire, C., J. Deacon, M. Hall, and D. Lewis-Williams. 1986. Burkitt’s mile-
     stone. Antiquity 60: 123–31.
Schuyler, R. L. 1971. The history of American archaeology: an examination of
     procedure. American Antiquity 36: 383–409.
  1978. ed. Historical Archaeology: A Guide to Substantive and Theoretical
     Contributions. New York, Baywood Publishers.
  2001. Historical archaeology. In T. Murray, 2001a, pp. 623–30.
Schwartz, D. W. 1967. Conceptions of Kentucky Prehistory: A Case Study in the
     History of Archeology. Lexington, University of Kentucky Press.
  1981. The foundations of northern Rio Grande archaeology. Archaeological
     Society of New Mexico, Anthropological Papers 6: 251–73.
Schwerin von Krosigk, H. 1982. Gustav Kossinna: Der Nachlass – Versuch einer
     Analyse. Neumünster, Karl Wachholtz.
Scott, J. 2003. The Pleasures of Antiquity: British Collectors of Greece and Rome.
     New Haven, CT, Yale University Press.
Searle, J. R. 1983. Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind.
     Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Seligman, C. G. 1930. Races of Africa. London, Butterworth.
Semenov, S. A. 1964. Prehistoric Technology. London, Cory, Adams and
     Mackay.
Semenov, Yu. I. 1980. The theory of socio-economic formations and world
     history. In E. Gellner, pp. 29–58.
Service, E. R. 1962. Primitive Social Organization. New York, Random House.
  1975. Origins of the State and Civilization. New York, Norton.
Settar, S. and R. Korisettar. 2002. eds. Archaeology and Historiography: History,
     Theory and Method (Indian Archaeology in Retrospect, vol. 4). New Delhi,
     Manohar.
Shackel, P. A. 1996. Culture Change and the New Technology: An Archaeology
     of the Early American Industrial Era. New York, Plenum.

                                      659
                                 References

Shanks, M. 1996. Classical Archaeology of Greece: Experiences of the Discipline.
    London, Routledge.
Shanks, M. and C. Tilley. 1982. Ideology, symbolic power and ritual
    communication: a reinterpretation of Neolithic mortuary practices. In
    I. Hodder, 1982c, pp. 129–54.
  1987a. Re-Constructing Archaeology: Theory and Practice. Cambridge,
    Cambridge University Press. 2nd edn. 1993.
  1987b. Social Theory and Archaeology. Cambridge, UK, Polity Press.
   1989. Archaeology into the 1990s. Norwegian Archaeological Review 22:
    1–54.
Shapin, S. 1992. Disciplining and bounding: the history and sociology of sci-
    ence as seen through the externalism-internalism debate. History of Science
    30: 333–69.
Shapiro, J. 1982. A History of the Communist Academy, 1918–1936. Ann Arbor,
    MI, University Microfilms International.
Shaw, J. 2000. Ayodhya’s sacred landscape: ritual memory, politics and archae-
    ological “fact.” Antiquity 74: 693–700.
Shaw, T. 1991. Goodwin’s graft, Burkitt’s craft. Antiquity 65: 579–80.
Shay, T. 1989. Israeli archaeology – ideology and practice. Antiquity 63:
    768–72.
Sheehan, B. W. 1980. Savagism and Civility: Indians and Englishmen in Colo-
    nial Virginia. New York, Cambridge University Press.
Sheehy, J. 1980. The Rediscovery of Ireland’s Past: The Celtic Revival, 1830–
    1930. London, Thames and Hudson.
Sheets-Pyenson, S. 1996. John William Dawson: Faith, Hope, and Science.
    Montreal, McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Shennan, S. J. 1989a. ed. Archaeological Approaches to Cultural Identity.
    London, Unwin Hyman.
  1989b. Introduction. In S. J. Shennan 1989a, pp. 1–32.
  2002. Genes, Memes and Human History: Darwinian Archaeology and Cul-
    ture History. London, Thames and Hudson.
Shennan, S. J. and J. R. Wilkinson. 2001. Ceramic style change and neutral
    evolution: a case study from Neolithic Europe. American Antiquity 66:
    577–93.
Shepherd, L. 1993. Lifting the Veil: The Feminine Face of Science. Boston, MA,
    Shambhala.
Shepherd, N. 2002a. Disciplining archaeology: the invention of South African
    prehistory, 1923–1953. Kronos 28: 127–45.
  2002b. The politics of archaeology in Africa. Annual Review of Anthropology
    31: 189–209.
Sherratt, A. G. 1979. Problems in European prehistory. In D. L. Clarke,
    pp. 193–206.
  1989. V. Gordon Childe: archaeology and intellectual history. Past and
    Present 125: 151–85.
  1993. The relativity of theory. In N. Yoffee and A. Sherratt, pp. 119–30.


                                     660
                                  References

   1996. “Settlement patterns” or “landscape studies”? reconciling reason and
      romance. Archaeological Dialogues 3: 140–59.
Sherratt, Y. 2006. Continental Philosophy of Social Science: Hermeneutics,
      Genealogy, and Critical Theory, from Greece to the Twenty–First Century.
      Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Shetrone, H. C. 1920. The culture problem in Ohio archaeology. American
      Anthropologist 22: 144–72.
Shnirelman, V. A. 1995. From internationalism to nationalism: forgotten pages
      of Soviet archaeology in the 1930s and 1940s. In P. L. Kohl and C. Fawcett,
      pp. 120–38.
   1996. The faces of nationalist archaeology in Russia. In M. Dı́az-Andreu
      and T. Champion, 1996a, pp. 218–42.
   1999. Passions about Arkaim: Russian nationalism, the Aryans, and the pol-
      itics of archaeology. Inner Asia 1: 267–82.
   2001. The Value of the Past: Myths, Identity and Politics in Transcaucasia.
      Osaka, National Museum of Ethnology, Senri Ethnological Studies 57.
Shorr, P. 1935. The genesis of prehistorical research. Isis 23: 425–43.
Shrimpton, G. S. 1992. History and Memory in Ancient Greece. Montreal,
      McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Sielmann, B. 1971. Zur Interpretationsmöglichkeit ökologischer Befunde im
      Neolithikum Mitteleuropas. Germania 49: 231–38.
Sieveking, G. 1976. Progress in economic and social archaeology. In Problems
      in Economic and Social Archaeology, ed. by G. Sieveking, I. H. Longworth,
      and K. E. Wilson, pp. xv–xxvi. London, Duckworth.
Silberman, N. A. 1982. Digging for God and Country. New York, Knopf.
   1989. Between Past and Present: Archaeology, Ideology, and Nationalism in
      the Modern Middle East. New York, Henry Holt.
   1991. Desolation and restoration: the impact of a biblical concept on Near
      Eastern archaeology. Biblical Archaeologist, June, 76–87.
   1993. A Prophet from Amongst You: The Life of Yigael Yadin. Reading, MA,
      Addison-Wesley.
   1995. Promised lands and chosen peoples: the politics and poetics of archae-
      ological narrative. In P. L. Kohl and C. Fawcett, pp. 249–62.
Silberman, N. A. and D. Small. 1997. eds. The Archaeology of Israel: Construct-
      ing the Past, Interpreting the Present. Sheffield, UK, Sheffield Academic
      Press.
Sills, D. L. 1968. ed. International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences. 19 vols.
      New York, Macmillan.
Silverberg, R. 1968. Mound Builders of Ancient America. Greenwich, CT, New
      York Graphic Society.
Singh, S. 1985. Models, Paradigms and the New Archaeology. Varanasi, Banaras
      Hindu University, Department of Ancient Indian History, Culture and
      Archaeology.
Singh, U. 2004. The Discovery of Ancient India: Early Archaeologists and the
      Beginnings of Archaeology. Delhi, Permanent Black.


                                      661
                                  References

Skibo, J. M. and G. M. Feinman. 1999. eds. Pottery and People: A Dynamic
     Interaction. Salt Lake City, University of Utah Press.
Skibo, J. M., W. H. Walker, and A. E. Nielsen. 1995. eds. Expanding Archae-
     ology. Salt Lake City, University of Utah Press.
Skinner, H. D. 1921. Culture areas in New Zealand. Journal of the Polynesian
     Society 30: 71–8.
Sklenář, K. 1983. Archaeology in Central Europe: The First 500 Years. Leicester,
     UK, Leicester University Press.
Skrotzky, N. 1964. L’abbé Breuil. Paris, Editions Seghers.
Slapšak, B. and P. Novaković. 1996. Is there national archaeology without
     nationalism? Archaeological tradition in Slovenia. In M. Dı́az-Andreu and
     T. Champion, 1996a, pp. 256–93.
Slobodin, R. 1978. W. H. R. Rivers. New York, Columbia University
     Press.
Slotkin, J. S. 1965. ed. Readings in Early Anthropology. New York, Viking
     Fund Publications in Anthropology no. 40.
Smith, A. T. 2003. The Political Landscape: Constellations of Authority in Early
     Complex Polities. Berkeley, University of California Press.
Smith, B. D. 1978. ed. Mississippian Settlement Patterns. New York, Academic
     Press.
Smith, G. E. 1911. The Ancient Egyptians and their Influence upon the Civi-
     lization of Europe. New York, Harper.
   1915. The Migrations of Early Culture. London, Longmans.
   1928. In the Beginning: The Origin of Civilization. London, G. Howe.
   1933. The Diffusion of Culture. London, Watts.
Smith, H. I. 1910. The Prehistoric Ethnology of a Kentucky Site. New York,
     Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History
     no. 6, pt. 2.
Smith, M. A. 1955. The limits of inference. Archaeological Newsletter 6:
     3–7.
Smith, M. L. 2003. ed. The Social Construction of Ancient Cities. Washington,
     DC, Smithsonian Institution Press.
Smith, P. E. L. and T. C. Young Jr. 1972. The evolution of early agriculture
     and culture in Greater Mesopotamia: a trial model. In B. Spooner, pp.
     1–59.
Smith, P. J. 1997. Grahame Clark’s new archaeology: the Fenland Research
     Committee and Cambridge prehistory in the 1930s. Antiquity 71:
     11–30.
   1999. “The coup”: how did the Prehistoric Society of East Anglia become
     the Prehistoric Society? Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 65: 465–
     70.
   2000. Dorothy Garrod, first woman Professor at Cambridge. Antiquity 74:
     131–6.
Smith, P. J., J. Callander, P. G. Bahn, and G. Pincon. 1997. Dorothy Garrod
     in words and pictures. Antiquity 71: 288–99.


                                      662
                                   References

Smith, P. J. and D. Mitchell. 1998. eds. Bringing Back the Past: Historical Per-
      spectives on Canadian Archaeology. Ottawa, Canadian Museum of Civi-
      lization, Archaeological Survey of Canada, Mercury Series, 158.
Smith, S. P. 1913, 1915. The Lore of the Whare Wananga. Wellington, The
      Polynesian Society.
Smith, S. T. 2003. Wretched Kush: Ethnic Identities and Boundaries in Egypt’s
      Nubian Empire. London, Routledge.
Smith, W. D. 1991. Politics and the Sciences of Culture in Germany, 1840–1920.
      New York, Oxford University Press.
Smolla, G. 1964. Analogien und Polaritäten. In Studien aus Alteuropa
      (Tackenberg-Festschrift), ed. by R. von Uslar and K. J. Narr, vol. 1, pp. 30–
      35. Cologne, Böhlau.
Snead, J. E. 2001. Ruins and Rivals: The Making of Southwest Archaeology.
      Tucson, University of Arizona Press.
Snodgrass, A. M. 1964. Early Greek Armour and Weapons. Edinburgh,
      Edinburgh University Press.
  1980. Archaic Greece: The Age of Experiment. London, Dent.
  1985. The New Archaeology and the classical archaeologist. American Jour-
      nal of Archaeology 89: 31–7.
  1987. An Archaeology of Greece: The Present State and Future Scope of a
      Discipline. Berkeley, University of California Press.
Snow, D. R. 2002. Individuals. In J. P. Hart and J. E. Terrell, pp. 161–81.
Soffer, O. 1983. Politics of the Paleolithic in the USSR: a case of paradigms
      lost. In J. M. Gero, D. M. Lacy, and M. L. Blakey, pp. 91–105.
  1985. The Upper Paleolithic of the Central Russian Plain. New York, Aca-
      demic Press.
Sollas, W. J. 1911. Ancient Hunters and their Modern Representatives. London,
      Macmillan. 2nd edn 1924.
Solli, B. 1996. Narratives of Veøy: on the poetics and scientifics of archaeology.
      In P. Graves-Brown et al., pp. 209–27.
Solomon, C. 2002. Tatiana Proskouriakoff: Interpreting the Ancient Maya.
      Norman, University of Oklahoma Press.
Sørensen, M. L. S. 1996. The fall of a nation, the birth of a subject: the national
      use of archaeology in nineteenth-century Denmark. In M. Dı́az-Andreu
      and T. Champion, 1996a, pp. 24–47.
  1999. Mats P. Malmer b. 1921. In T. Murray, 1999a, pp. 775–89.
Sorrenson, M. P. K. 1977. The whence of the Maori: some nineteenth cen-
      tury exercises in scientific method. Journal of the Polynesian Society 86:
      449–78.
South, S. A. 1977a. Method and Theory in Historical Archaeology. New York,
      Academic Press.
  1977b. ed. Research Strategies in Historical Archaeology. New York, Aca-
      demic Press.
  1998. Pioneers in Historical Archaeology: Breaking New Ground. New York,
      Plenum.


                                       663
                                 References

Spate, O. H. K. 1968. Environmentalism. In D. L. Sills, vol. 5, pp. 93–7.
Spaulding, A. C. 1946. Northeastern archaeology and general trends in the
     northern forest zone. In Man in Northeastern North America, ed. by F.
     Johnson, pp. 143–67. Andover, MA, Robert S. Peabody Foundation for
     Archaeology, Papers no. 3.
  1953. Statistical techniques for the discovery of artifact types. American
     Antiquity 18: 305–13.
  1960. The dimensions of archaeology. In Essays in the Science of Culture
     in Honor of Leslie A. White, ed. by G. E. Dole and R. L. Carneiro,
     pp. 437–56. New York, Crowell.
  1968. Explanation in archeology. In S. R. Binford and L. R. Binford,
     pp. 33–9.
Spector, J. 1993. What this Awl Means: Feminist Archaeology at a Wahpeton
     Dakota Village. St. Paul, Minnesota Historical Society Press.
Speer, A. 1970. Inside the Third Reich: Memoirs by Albert Speer. New York,
     Macmillan.
Spencer, W. B. 1901. Guide to the Australian Ethnographical Collection in the
     National Museum of Victoria. Melbourne, Government Printer.
Spencer, W. B. and F. J. Gillen. 1899. The Native Tribes of Central Australia.
     London, Macmillan.
Spier, L. 1917. An Outline for a Chronology of Zuñi Ruins. New York, Anthro-
     pological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History no. 18,
     pt. 3.
Spinden, H. J. 1928. Ancient Civilizations of Mexico and Central America.
     New York, American Museum of Natural History Handbook Series
     no. 3.
Spooner, B. 1972. ed. Population Growth: Anthropological Implications.
     Cambridge, MA, M.I.T. Press.
Spriggs, M. 1984a. ed. Marxist Perspectives in Archaeology. Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
  1984b. Another way of telling: Marxist perspectives in archaeology. In
     M. Spriggs, 1984a, pp. 1–9.
Squier, E. G. and E. H. Davis. 1848. Ancient Monuments of the Missis-
     sippi Valley. Washington, DC, Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge
     no. 1.
Stanton, W. 1960. The Leopard’s Spots: Scientific Attitudes toward Race in
     America, 1815–59. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Steiger, W. L. 1971. Analytical archaeology? Mankind 8: 67–70.
Stepan, N. 1982. The Idea of Race in Science: Great Britain 1800–1900.
     Hamden, CT, Archon Books.
Sterud, E. L. 1973. A paradigmatic view of prehistory. In A. C. Renfrew, 1973b,
     pp. 3–17.
Steuer, H. 2001. ed. Eine hervorragend nationale Wissenschaft: Deutsche
     Prähistoriker zwischen 1900 und 1995. Ergänzungbände zum Reallexikon
     der Germanischen Altertumskunde 29. Berlin, W. de Gruyter.


                                     664
                                  References

Stevenson, D. 1988. Origins of Freemasonry. Cambridge, Cambridge Univer-
     sity Press.
Steward, J. H. 1937a. Ancient Caves of the Great Salt Lake Region. Washington,
     DC, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin no. 116.
   1937b. Ecological aspects of southwestern society. Anthropos 32: 87–
     104.
   1953. Evolution and process. In A. L. Kroeber, pp. 313–26.
   1955. Theory of Culture Change. Urbana, University of Illinois Press.
   1968. Cultural ecology. In D. L. Sills, 4: 337–44.
Steward, J. H. and F. M. Setzler. 1938. Function and configuration in archae-
     ology. American Antiquity 4: 4–10.
Stiebing, W. H., Jr. 1984. Ancient Astronauts, Cosmic Collisions and other
     Popular Theories about Man’s Past. Buffalo, NY, Prometheus Books.
   1993. Uncovering the Past: A History of Archaeology. Buffalo, NY,
     Prometheus Books.
Stjernquist, B. 2005. The Historical Museum and Archaeological Research at
     Lund University 1805–2005. Lund, Papers of the Historical Museum,
     University of Lund, 1.
Stocking, G. W., Jr. 1968. Race, Culture, and Evolution: Essays in the History
     of Anthropology. New York, Free Press.
   1973. From chronology to ethnology: James Cowles Prichard and British
     anthropology 1800–1850. In J. C. Prichard, Researches into the Physical
     History of Man, ed. by G. W. Stocking Jr, pp. ix–cx. Chicago, IL, Uni-
     versity of Chicago Press.
   1982. Race, Culture, and Evolution: Essays in the History of Anthropology.
     2nd edn. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
   1984. ed. Functionalism Historicized: Essays on British Social Anthropology
     (History of Anthropology 2). Madison, University of Wisconsin Press.
   1985. ed. Objects and Others: Essays on Museums and Material Culture (His-
     tory of Anthropology 3). Madison, University of Wisconsin Press.
   1987. Victorian Anthropology. New York, Free Press.
Stoczkowski, Wiktor. 2002. Explaining Human Origins: Myth, Imagination
     and Conjecture. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Stone, P. and R. MacKenzie. 1990. The Excluded Past: Archaeology in Educa-
     tion. London, Unwin Hyman.
Stoneman, R. 1987. Land of Lost Gods: The Search for Classical Greece. Norman,
     University of Oklahoma Press.
Stow, G. W. and G. M. Theal. 1905. The Native Races of South Africa. London,
     Sonnenschein.
Strauss, L. G. 1992. L’abbé Henri Breuil: archaeologist. Bulletin of the History
     of Archaeology 2(1): 5–9.
Street, B. V. 1975. The Savage in Literature: Representations of “Primitive”
     Society in English Fiction, 1858–1920. London, Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Stringer, C. and C. Gamble. 1993. In Search of the Neanderthals: Solving the
     Puzzle of Human Origins. London, Thames and Hudson.


                                      665
                                 References

Strong, W. D. 1935. An Introduction to Nebraska Archeology. Washington,
     DC, Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections no. 93 (10).
  1936. Anthropological theory and archaeological fact. In Essays in Anthropol-
     ogy Presented to A. L. Kroeber, ed. by R. H. Lowie, pp. 359–70. Berkeley,
     University of California Press.
  1951. Cultural resemblances in nuclear America: parallelisms or diffusion?
     In The Civilizations of Ancient America: Selected Papers of the IXIXth
     International Congress of Americanists, ed. by Sol Tax, pp. 271–9.
     Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Struever, S. 1968. Problems, methods and organization: a disparity in the
     growth of archeology. In B. J. Meggers, pp. 131–51.
Sumner, W. M. 1990. Full-coverage regional archaeological survey in the Near
     East: an example from Iran. In S. K. Fish and S. A. Kowalewski, pp. 87–
     115.
Sutton, D. G. 1985. The whence of the Moriori. New Zealand Journal of
     History 19: 3–13.
Swartz, B. K., Jr. 1967. A logical sequence of archaeological objectives. Amer-
     ican Antiquity 32: 487–97.
Swayze, N. 1960. The Man Hunters. Toronto, Clarke, Irwin.
Sweet, R. 2004. Antiquaries: The Discovery of the Past in Eighteenth-Century
     Britain. London, Palgrave Macmillan.
Swidler, N., K. E. Dongoske, R. Anyon, and A. S. Downer. 1997. eds. Native
     Americans and Archaeologists: Stepping Stones to Common Ground. Walnut
     Creek, CA, AltaMira Press.
Tabı́o, E. and E. Rey. 1966. Prehistoria de Cuba. La Habana, Academia de
     Ciencias de Cuba.
Tainter, J. A. 1988. The Collapse of Complex Societies. Cambridge, Cambridge
     University Press.
Tait, J. 2003. ed. “Never Had the Like Occurred”: Egypt’s View of its Past.
     London, UCL Press.
Tallgren, A. M. 1936. Archaeological studies in Soviet Russia. Eurasia Septen-
     trionalis Antiqua 10: 129–70.
  1937. The method of prehistoric archaeology. Antiquity 11: 152–61.
Tamarkin, B. 1986. Naturalized philosophy of science, history of science and
     the internal/external debate. Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the
     Philosophy of Science Association, 1986(1): 258–68.
Tanaka, M. 1984. Japan. In H. Cleere, pp. 82–8.
Tanner, A. 1979. Bringing Home Animals: Religious Ideology and Mode of
     Production of the Mistassini Cree Hunters. St. John’s, Memorial University
     of Newfoundland, Institute of Social and Economic Research, Social and
     Economic Studies 23.
Tanner, N. M. 1981. On Becoming Human. Cambridge, Cambridge University
     Press.
Tansley, A. G. 1935. The use and abuse of vegetation concepts and terms.
     Ecology 16: 284–307.


                                     666
                                      References

Tardits, C. 1981. ed. Contribution de la recherche ethnologique à l’histoire des
     civilisations du Cameroun. 2 vols. Paris, Editions du CNRS.
Tax, T. G. 1975. E. George Squier and the mounds, 1845–1850. In Toward
     a Science of Man: Essays in the History of Anthropology, ed. by T. H. H.
     Thoresen, pp. 99–124. The Hague, Mouton.
Taylor, J. 1966. ed. Marine Archaeology: Developments during Sixty Years in
     the Mediterranean. New York, Crowell.
Taylor, R. E. 1985. The beginnings of radiocarbon dating in American
     Antiquity: a historical perspective. American Antiquity 50: 309–25.
  1987. Radiocarbon Dating: An Archaeological Perspective. San Diego, CA,
     Academic Press.
Taylor, R. E., A. Long, and R. S. Kra. 1992. eds. Radiocarbon After Four
     Decades: An Interdisciplinary Perspective. New York, Springer.
Taylor, W. W. 1948. A Study of Archeology. Menasha, WI, American Anthro-
     pological Association Memoir 69. (Pages cited from the 1967 reprint,
     Carbondale, Southern Illinois University Press.)
  1972. Old wine and new skins: a contemporary parable. In M. P. Leone,
     pp. 28–33.
Teltser, P. A. 1995. ed. Evolutionary Archaeology: Methodological Issues.
     Tucson, University of Arizona Press.
Terrell, J. E. 2003. Archaeological inference and ethnographic analogies:
     rethinking the “Lapita cultural complex.” In S. D. Gillespie and D. L.
     Nichols, 2003, pp. 69–76.
Testart, A. 1982. Les chasseurs-cueilleurs ou l’origine des inégalités. Paris, Société
     d’Ethnographie, Mémoire no. 26.
Teviotdale, D. 1932. The material culture of the moa-hunters in Murihiku.
     Journal of the Polynesian Society 41: 81–120.
Textor, R. B. 1967. A Cross-Cultural Summary. New Haven, CT, HRAF Press.
Thapar, B. K. 1984. India. In H. Cleere, pp. 63–72.
Thom, R. 1975. Structural Stability and Morphogenesis. Reading, MA,
     Benjamin.
Thomas, C. 1894. Report on the Mound Explorations of the Bureau of Ethnology.
     Washington, DC, Bureau of American Ethnology, Annual Report, 12: 3–
     742.
  1898. Introduction to the Study of North American Archaeology. Cincinnati,
     OH, Clarke.
Thomas, D. H. 1972. A computer simulation model of Great Basin Shoshon-
     ean subsistence and settlement patterns. In D. L. Clarke, 1972a, pp. 671–
     704.
  1974. An archaeological perspective on Shoshonean bands. American
     Anthropologist 76: 11–23.
  1976. Figuring Anthropology: First Principles of Probability and Statistics.
     New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
  1978. The awful truth about statistics in archaeology. American Antiquity
     43: 231–44.


                                          667
                                 References

  2000. Skull Wars: Kennewick Man, Archaeology, and the Battle for Native
     American Identity. New York, Basic Books.
Thomas, J. 1996. Time, Culture, and Identity: An Interpretative Archaeology.
     New York, Routledge.
  2000. Reconfiguring the social, reconfiguring the material. In M. B. Schiffer,
     2000a, pp. 143–55.
  2001. Archaeologies of place and landscape. In I. Hodder, 2001a, pp.
     165–86.
  2004. Archaeology and Modernity. London, Routledge.
Thomas, N. 1995. ed. The American Discovery of Ancient Egypt. Los Angeles,
     CA, Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
  1996. ed. The American Discovery of Ancient Egypt: Essays. Los Angeles, CA,
     Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
Thompson, J. 1992. Sir Gardner Wilkinson and his Circle. Austin, University
     of Texas Press.
Thompson, M. W. 1965. Marxism and culture. Antiquity 39: 108–16.
  1967. Novgorod the Great. London, Evelyn, Adams and Mackay.
  1977. General Pitt-Rivers: Evolution and Archaeology in the Nineteenth Cen-
     tury. Bradford-on-Avon, UK, Moonraker Press.
Thomson, D. F. 1939. The seasonal factor in human culture. Proceedings of
     the Prehistoric Society 5: 209–21.
Thomson, G. 1949. Review of V. G. Childe, History. The Modern Quarterly
     N. S. 4: 266–9.
Thruston, G. P. 1890. The Antiquities of Tennessee. Cincinnati, OH, Clarke.
Thwaites, R. G. 1896–1901. The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents. 73 vols.
     Cleveland, OH, Burrows Brothers.
Tilley, C. Y. 1984. Ideology and the legitimation of power in the Middle
     Neolithic of southern Sweden. In D. Miller and C. Tilley, 1984a, pp. 111–
     46.
  1990a. ed. Reading Material Culture: Structuralism, Hermeneutics and Post-
     Structuralism. Oxford, Blackwell.
  1990b. Michel Foucault: towards an archaeology of archaeology. In C.
     Tilley, 1990a, pp. 281–347.
  1993. ed. Interpretative Archaeology. Oxford, Berg.
  1994. A Phenomenology of Landscape: Places, Paths and Monuments. Oxford,
     Berg.
  1999. Metaphor and Material Culture. Oxford, Blackwell.
Toffler, A. 1970. Future Shock. New York, Random House.
Tooker, E. 1982. ed. Ethnography by Archaeologists. Washington, DC, The
     American Ethnological Society.
Tosi, M. 1984. The notion of craft specialization and its representation in the
     archaeological record of early states in the Turanian Basin. In M. Spriggs,
     1984a, pp. 22–52.
Toulmin, S. E. 1970. Does the distinction between normal and revolutionary
     science hold water? In Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, ed. by I.


                                     668
                                  References

    Lakatos and A. Musgrave, pp. 39–47. Cambridge, Cambridge University
    Press.
Toulmin, S. E. and J. Goodfield. 1966. The Discovery of Time. New York,
    Harper and Row.
Treaty 7 Elders and Tribal Council with W. Hildebrant, S. Carter, and D. First
    Rider. 1996. The True Spirit and Original Intent of Treaty 7. Montreal,
    McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Treherne, P. 1995. The warrior’s beauty: the masculine body and self-identity
    in Bronze-Age Europe. Journal of European Archaeology 3: 105–44.
Trevelyan, G. M. 1952. Illustrated English Social History, vol. 4, The Nineteenth
    Century. London, Longmans, Green.
“Trevelyan.” 1857. Letters on Irish antiquities by a Cornish man. Ulster Jour-
    nal of Archaeology 5: 150–2, 185–7, 336–42.
Trevor-Roper, H. R. 1966. The Rise of Christian Europe. 2nd edn. London,
    Thames and Hudson.
Trigger, B. G. 1965. History and Settlement in Lower Nubia. New Haven, CT,
    Yale University Publications in Anthropology no. 69.
  1966. Sir John William Dawson: a faithful anthropologist. Anthropologica 8:
    351–9.
  1967. Settlement Archaeology – its goals and promise. American Antiquity
    32: 149–60.
  1968a. Beyond History: The Methods of Prehistory. New York, Holt, Rinehart
    and Winston.
  1968b. The determinants of settlement patterns. In Settlement Archaeology,
    ed. by K. C. Chang, pp. 53–78. Palo Alto, CA, National Press.
  1968c. Major concepts of archaeology in historical perspective. Man 3: 527–
    41.
  1969. The personality of the Sudan. In East African History, ed. by
    D. F. McCall, N. R. Bennett, and J. Butler, pp. 74–106. New York,
    Praeger.
  1976. Nubia under the Pharaohs. London, Thames and Hudson.
  1978a. Time and Traditions: Essays in Archaeological Interpretation. Edin-
    burgh, Edinburgh University Press.
  1978b. The strategy of Iroquoian prehistory. In Archaeological Essays in
    Honor of Irving B. Rouse, ed. by R. C. Dunnell and E. S. Hall Jr,
    pp. 275–310. The Hague, Mouton.
  1978c. William J. Wintemberg: Iroquoian archaeologist. In Essays in North-
    eastern Anthropology in Memory of Marian E. White, ed. by W. E. Engel-
    brecht and D. K. Grayson, pp. 5–21. Rindge, Occasional Publications in
    Northeastern Anthropology no. 5.
  1980a. Gordon Childe: Revolutions in Archaeology. London, Thames and
    Hudson.
  1980b. Archaeology and the image of the American Indian. American Antiq-
    uity 45: 662–76.
  1981a. Anglo-American archaeology. World Archaeology 13: 138–55.


                                      669
                                References

1981b. Archaeology and the ethnographic present. Anthropologica 23: 3–17.
1982a. Archaeological analysis and concepts of causality. Culture 2(2): 31–
  42.
1982b. If Childe were alive today. University of London, Bulletin of the Insti-
  tute of Archaeology 19: 1–20.
1984a. Alternative archaeologies: nationalist, colonialist, imperialist. Man
  19: 355–70.
1984b. Childe and Soviet archaeology. Australian Archaeology 18: 1–16.
1984c. Marxism and archaeology. In On Marxian Perspectives in Anthropol-
  ogy, ed. by J. Maquet and N. Daniels, pp. 59–97. Malibu, CA, Undena.
1984d. History and Settlement in Lower Nubia in the perspective of fifteen
  years. In Meroitistische Forschungen 1980, ed. by F. Hintze. Meroitica 7:
  367–80.
1984e. Archaeology at the crossroads: what’s new? Annual Review of
  Anthropology 13: 275–300.
1985a. Writing the history of archaeology: a survey of trends. In G. W.
  Stocking Jr, pp. 218–35.
1985b. The past as power: anthropology and the North American Indian.
  In I. McBryde, pp. 11–40.
1985c. Archaeology as Historical Science. Varanasi, Banaras Hindu Univer-
  sity, Department of Ancient Indian History, Culture and Archaeology,
  Monograph no. 14.
1986a. ed. Native Shell Mounds of North America: Early Studies. New York,
  Garland.
1986b. Prehistoric archaeology and American society. In D. J. Meltzer et al.,
  pp. 187–215.
1986c. The role of technology in V. Gordon Childe’s archaeology. Norwe-
  gian Archaeological Review 19: 1–14.
1989a. A History of Archaeological Thought. Cambridge, Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press.
1989b. Hyperrelativism, responsibility, and the social sciences. Canadian
  Review of Sociology and Anthropology 26: 776–97.
1989c. Archaeology and anthropology: current and future relations. Cana-
  dian Journal of Archaeology 13: 1–11.
1990. Maintaining economic equality in opposition to complexity: an Iro-
  quoian case study. In S. Upham, pp. 119–45.
1992. Daniel Wilson and the Scottish Enlightenment. Proceedings of the
  Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 122: 55–75.
1993. Marxism in contemporary Western archaeology. Archaeological
  Method and Theory 5: 159–200.
1994a. The coming of age of the history of archaeology. Journal of Archae-
  ological Research 2: 113–36.
1994b. Paradigms in Sudanese archaeology. International Journal of African
  Historical Studies 27: 323–45.
1995. Expanding middle-range theory. Antiquity 69: 449–58.


                                    670
                                 References

  1998a. Sociocultural Evolution: Calculation and Contingency. Oxford,
     Blackwell.
  1998b. Archaeology and epistemology: dialoguing across the Darwinian
     chasm. American Journal of Archaeology 102: 1–34.
  2003a. Understanding Early Civilizations: A Comparative Study. Cam-
     bridge, Cambridge University Press.
  2003b. Artifacts and Ideas: Essays in Archaeology. New Brunswich, NJ,
     Transaction Publishers.
  2003c. All people are [not] good. Anthropologica 45(1): 39–44.
  2003d. Archaeological Theory: The Big Picture. Grace Elizabeth Shallit
     Memorial Lecture Series. Provo, UT, Department of Anthropology,
     Brigham Young University.
Trigger, B. G. and I. Glover. 1981–82. eds. Regional Traditions of Archaeo-
     logical Research, I, II. World Archaeology 13(2); 13(3).
Tringham, R. 1978. Experimentation, ethnoarchaeology, and the leapfrogs in
     archaeological methodology. In R. A. Gould, 1978a, pp. 169–99.
  1983. V. Gordon Childe 25 years after: his relevance for the archaeology of
     the eighties. Journal of Field Archaeology 10: 85–100.
  1991. Households with faces: the challenge of gender in prehistoric archi-
     tectural remains. In J. Gero and M. Conkey, pp. 93–131.
Trinkaus, E. and P. Shipman. 1993. The Neanderthals: Changing the Image of
     Mankind. New York, Knopf.
Truncer, J. 2003. ed. Picking the Lock of Time: Developing Chronology in
     American Archaeology. Gainesville, University Press of Florida.
Tully, J. 1989. Progress and skepticism 1789–1989. Ottawa, Transactions of the
     Royal Society of Canada 5: 22–33.
Tunbridge, J. E. and G. J. Ashworth. 1996. Dissonant Heritage: The Manage-
     ment of the Past as a Resource in Conflict. Chichester, UK, Wiley.
Turner, D. 1990. Heinrich Schliemann: the man behind the masks. Archaeology
     43(6): 36–42.
Turner, F. M. 1981. The Greek Heritage in Victorian Britain. New Haven,
     CT, Yale University Press.
Turner, V. 1967. The Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual. Ithaca, NY,
     Cornell University Press.
  1975. Revelation and Divination in Ndembu Ritual. Ithaca, NY, Cornell
     University Press.
Tushingham, S., J. Hill, and C. H. McNutt. 2002. Histories of Southeastern
     Archaeology. Tuscaloosa, University of Alabama Press.
Tylor, E. B. 1865. Researches into the Early History of Mankind and the Devel-
     opment of Civilization. London, John Murray.
  1871. Primitive Culture. London, John Murray.
Ucko, P. J. 1983. Australian academic archaeology: aboriginal transformation
     of its aims and practices. Australian Archaeology 16: 11–26.
  1987. Academic Freedom and Apartheid: The Story of the World Archaeolog-
     ical Congress. London, Duckworth.


                                     671
                                 References

  1989a. Foreward. In D. Miller, M. Rowlands, and C. Tilley, 1989a,
    pp. ix–xiv.
  1989b. Foreward. In P. Gathercole and D. Lowenthal, 1990, pp. ix–xxi.
  1995a. ed. Theory in Archaeology: A World Perspective. London,
    Routledge.
  1995b. Introduction: archaeological interpretation in a world context. In
    P. J. Ucko, 1995a, pp. 1–27.
Ucko, P. J. and T. Champion. 2003. eds. The Wisdom of Egypt: Changing
    Visions through the Ages. London, UCL Press.
Ucko, P. J., M. Hunter, A. J. Clark, and A. David. 1991. Avebury Reconsidered:
    From the 1660s to the 1990s. London, Unwin Hyman.
Ucko, P. J. and A. Rosenfeld. 1967. Palaeolithic Cave Art. London, Weidenfeld
    and Nicolson.
Uhle, M. 1907. The Emeryville shellmound. Berkeley, University of California
    Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 7: 1–107.
Upham, S. 1990. ed. The Evolution of Political Systems: Sociopolitics in Small-
    Scale Sedentary Societies. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
van der Leeuw, S. and J. McGlade. 1997. eds. Time, Process and Structural
    Transformation in Archaeology. London, Routledge.
Van Dyke, R. M. and S. E. Alcock. 2003. eds. Archaeologies of Memory. Oxford,
    Blackwell.
VanPool, C. S. and T. L. VanPool. 1999. The scientific nature of postproces-
    sualism. American Antiquity 64: 33–53.
VanPool, T. L. and C. S. VanPool. 2003. eds. Essential Tensions in Archaeo-
    logical Method and Theory. Salt Lake City, University of Utah Press.
Van Reybrouck, D. 2001. Howling wolf: the archaeology of Lewis Binford.
    Archaeological Dialogues 8: 70–85.
Van Riper, A. B. 1993. Men Among the Mammoths: Victorian Science and
    the Discovery of Human Prehistory. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago
    Press.
Van Sertima, I. 1977. They Came Before Columbus: The African Presence in
    Ancient America. New York, Random House.
Van Seters, J. 1983. In Search of History: Historiography in the Ancient World
    and the Origins of Biblical History. New Haven, CT, Yale University
    Press.
Vansina, J. 1985. Oral Tradition as History. Madison, University of Wisconsin
    Press.
Vastokas, J. M. and R. K. Vastokas. 1973. Sacred Art of the Algonkians:
    A Study of the Peterborough Petroglyphs. Peterborough, ON, Mansard
    Press.
Vaughan, A. T. 1979. New England Frontier: Puritans and Indians, 1620–
    1675. 2nd edn. New York, Norton.
  1982. From white man to red skin: changing Anglo-American per-
    ceptions of the American Indian. American Historical Review 87:
    917–53.


                                     672
                                  References

Vázquez León, L. 1996. El Leviatán Arqueológico: Antropologı́a de una
     Tradición Cientı́fica en México. Leiden, Research School CNWS. 2nd edn.
     Mexico, DF, CIESAS, 2003.
Vázquez Varela, J. M. and R. Risch. 1991. Theory in Spanish archaeology since
     1960. In I. Hodder, 1991a, pp. 25–51.
Veit, U. 1984. Gustaf Kossinna und V. Gordon Childe: Ansätze zu einer the-
     oretischen Grundlegung der Vorgeschichte. Saeculum 35: 326–64.
  1989. Ethnic concepts in German prehistory: a case study on the relationship
     between cultural identity and archaeological objectivity. In S. J. Shennan,
     1989a, pp. 35–56.
  2001. German prehistoric archaeology. In T. Murray, 2001a, pp. 576–85.
Vidal de la Blache, P. 1952. Principles of Human Geography. London,
     Constable.
Vinsrygg, S. 1986. Time in archaeological thought: China and the West. In
     Time, Science, and Society in China and the West (Study of Time, 6), ed.
     by J. T. Fraser, N. Lawrence and F. C. Haber, pp. 225–40. Amherst,
     University of Massachusetts Press.
Vishnyatsky, L. B., A. A. Kovalev, and O. A. Scheglova. 2004. eds. The
     Archaeologist: Detective and Thinker. St. Petersburg, St. Petersburg Uni-
     versity Press.
Vishnyatsky, L. B. et al. 1992. Review of B. Trigger, A History of Archaeological
     Thought. Rossyskaya Arkheologiya 3: 251–62.
Vita-Finzi, C. and E. S. Higgs. 1970. Prehistoric economy in the Mount
     Carmel area of Palestine: site catchment analysis. Proceedings of the Pre-
     historic Society 36: 1–37.
von Daniken, E. 1969. Chariots of the Gods? New York, Putnam’s.
  1971. Gods from Outer Space. New York, Putnam’s.
von Gernet, A. D. 1985. Analysis of Intrasite Artifact Spatial Distributions: The
     Draper Site Smoking Pipes. London, ON, Museum of Indian Archaeology
     Research Report no. 16.
  1993. The construction of prehistoric ideation: exploring the universality-
     idiosyncrasy continuum. Cambridge Archaeological Journal 3: 67–81.
von Gernet, A. and P. Timmins. 1987. Pipes and parakeets: constructing mean-
     ing in an Early Iroquoian context. In I. Hodder, 1987a, pp. 31–42.
von Haast, J. 1871. Moas and moa hunters. Transactions of the New Zealand
     Institute 4: 66–107.
  1874. Researches and excavations carried out in and near the Moa-bone
     Point Cave, Sumner Road in the year 1874. Transactions of the New
     Zealand Institute 7: 54–85.
Vyverberg, H. 1989. Human Nature, Cultural Diversity and the French
     Enlightenment. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Wace, A. J. B. 1949. The Greeks and Romans as archaeologists. Société royale
     d’archéologie d’Alexandrie, Bulletin 38: 21–35.
Wahle, E. 1915. Urwald und offenes Land in ihrer Bedeutung für die Kul-
     turentwicklung. Archiv für Anthropologie N.S. 13: 404–13.


                                      673
                                 References

 1921. Die Besiedelung Südwestdeutschlands in vorrömischer Zeit nach ihren
    natürlichen Grundlagen. Bericht der Römisch-germanischen Kommission
    12. Frankfurt, Baer.
 1941. Zur ethnischen Deutung frühgeschichtlicher Kulturprovinzen: Gren-
    zen der frühgeschichtlichen Erkenntnis 1. Heidelberg, Sitzungsberichte
    der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philologisch-historische
    Klasse, Jahrgang 1940/41, 2 Abhandlung.
Walde, D. and N. Willows. 1991. eds. The Archaeology of Gender. Calgary,
    Archaeological Association of the University of Calgary.
Walker, M. 2003. The Ludlow Massacre: labor struggle and historical memory
    in southern Colorado. Historical Archaeology 37: 66–80.
Walker, S. T. 1883. The aborigines of Florida. Washington, DC, Annual
    Report of the Smithsonian Institution for 1881: 677–80.
Wallace, A. F. C. 1950. A possible technique for recognizing psychological
    characteristics of the ancient Maya from an analysis of their art. The
    American Imago 7: 239–58.
 1999. Jefferson and the Indians: The Tragic Fate of the First Americans. Cam-
    bridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
Wallerstein, I. 1974. The Modern World-System, vol. 1. New York, Academic
    Press.
Walters, H. B. 1934. The English Antiquaries of the Sixteenth, Seventeenth and
    Eighteenth Centuries. London, Walters.
Wang, Gungwu. 1985. Loving the ancient in China. In I. McBryde, pp. 175–
    95.
Wang, Tao. 1997. Establishing the Chinese archaeological school: Su Bingqi
    and contemporary Chinese archaeology. Antiquity 71: 31–6.
Wanklyn, H. G. 1961. Friedrich Ratzel: A Biographical Memoir and Biblio-
    graphy. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Waring, A. J., Jr and P. Holder. 1945. A prehistoric ceremonial complex in
    the southeastern United States. American Anthropologist 47: 1–34.
Warren, C. N. and S. Rose. 1994. William Pengelly’s Techniques of Archaeo-
    logical Excavation. Torquay, UK, Torquay Natural History Society, Pub-
    lication 5.
Warren, S. H. 1905. On the origin of “eolithic” flints by natural causes, espe-
    cially by the foundering of drifts. Journal of the Royal Anthropological
    Institute 35: 337–64.
Washburn, W. E. 1967. Joseph Henry’s conception of the purpose of
    the Smithsonian Institution. In A Cabinet of Curiosities, ed. by
    W. M. Whitehill, pp. 106–66. Charlottesville, University Press of
    Virginia.
Watkins, J. E. 2000. Indigenous Archaeology: American Indian Values and
    Scientific Practice. Walnut Creek, CA, AltaMira Press.
 2003. Beyond the margin: American Indians, First Nations, and archaeology
    in North America. American Antiquity 68: 273–85.
Watson, J. B. 1925. Behaviorism. New York, Norton.


                                     674
                                 References

Watson, P. J. 1979. Archaeological Ethnography in Western Iran. Viking Fund
    Publications in Anthropology no. 57. Tucson, University of Arizona Press.
 1986. Archaeological interpretation, 1985. In J. Meltzer et al., pp. 439–57.
 1990. Trend and tradition in southeastern archaeology. Southeastern Archae-
    ology 9(1): 43–54.
Watson, P. J. and M. Fotiadis. 1990. The razor’s edge: symbolic-structuralist
    archeology and the expansion of archeological inference. American
    Anthropologist 92: 613–29.
Watson, P. J., S. A. LeBlanc, and C. L. Redman. 1971. Explanation in
    Archeology: An Explicitly Scientific Approach. New York, Columbia Uni-
    versity Press.
 1984. Archeological Explanation: The Scientific Method in Archeology. New
    York, Columbia University Press.
Watson, R. A. 1972. The “New Archaeology” of the 1960s. Antiquity 46:
    210–15.
Watson, W. 1981. The progress of archaeology in China. In J. D. Evans et al.,
    pp. 65–70.
Wauchope, R. 1962. Lost Tribes and Sunken Continents: Myth and Method
    in the Study of American Indians. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago
    Press.
 1965. Alfred Vincent Kidder, 1885–1963. American Antiquity 31:
    149–71.
Webb, W. S. and W. D. Funkhouser. 1928. Ancient Life in Kentucky. Frankfurt,
    Kentucky Geological Survey.
Weber, E. J. 1976. Peasants into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural
    France, 1870–1914. Stanford, CA, Stanford University Press.
Wedel, W. R. 1938. The Direct-Historical Approach in Pawnee Archeology.
    Washington, DC, Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections no. 97(7).
 1941. Environment and Native Subsistence Economies in the Central
    Great Plains. Washington, DC, Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections
    no. 101(3).
Weeks, K. 1979. ed. Egyptology and the Social Sciences: Five Studies. Cairo,
    American University in Cairo Press.
Weiss, R. 1969. The Renaissance Discovery of Classical Antiquity. Oxford,
    Blackwell.
Welch, P. D. 1998. Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley by E. G. Squier
    and E. H. Davis: the first classic of US archaeology. Antiquity 72: 921–7.
Welinder, S. 1991. The word förhistorisk, “prehistoric,” in Swedish. Antiquity
    65: 295–6.
Wells, P. S. 1984. Farms, Villages, and Cities: Commerce and Urban Origins
    in Late Prehistoric Europe. Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press.
Wendt, H. 1955. In Search of Adam. Boston, MA, Houghton Mifflin.
Wengrow, D. 1999. The intellectual adventures of Henri Frankfort: a missing
    chapter in the history of archaeological thought. American Journal of
    Archaeology 103: 597–613.


                                     675
                                  References

 2003. Landscapes of knowledge, idioms of power: the African foundations
     of ancient Egyptian civilization reconsidered. In D. O’Connor and A.
     Reid, pp. 121–35.
Wenke, R. J. 1981. Explaining the evolution of cultural complexity: a review.
     Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory 4: 79–127.
Whallon, R., Jr. 1968. Investigations of late prehistoric social organization in
     New York State. In S. R. and L. R. Binford, pp. 223–44.
 1982. Comments on “explanation.” In A. C. Renfrew and S. Shennan,
     pp. 155–8.
Wheeler, R. E. M. 1954. Archaeology from the Earth. Oxford, Oxford
     University Press.
White, J. P. 1974. The Past is Human. Sydney, Angus and Robertson.
White, J. P. and J. F. O’Connell. 1982. A Prehistory of Australia, New Guinea
     and Sahul. Sydney, Academic Press.
White, L. A. 1945. “Diffusion vs. evolution”: an anti-evolutionist fallacy.
     American Anthropologist 47: 339–56.
 1949. The Science of Culture. New York, Farrar, Straus.
 1959. The Evolution of Culture. New York, McGraw-Hill.
 1975. The Concept of Cultural Systems. New York, Columbia University
     Press.
White, N. M., L. P. Sullivan, and R. A. Marrinan. 1999. eds. Grit-Tempered:
     Early Women Archaeologists in the Southeastern United States. Gainesville,
     University Press of Florida.
White, R. 1993. Introduction. In A. Leroi-Gourhan, pp. xiii–xxii.
Whiteley, P. M. 2002. Archaeology and oral tradition: the scientific importance
     of dialogue. American Antiquity 60: 405–15.
Whitley, D. S. and J. D. Keyser. 2003. Faith in the past: debating an archaeology
     of religion. Antiquity 77: 385–93.
Wiener, N. 1961. Cybernetics. 2nd edn. Cambridge, MA, M.I.T. Press.
Wilcox, D. R. and W. B. Masse. 1981. eds. The Protohistoric Period in the North
     American Southwest, AD 1450–1700.Tempe, Arizona State University,
     Anthropological Research Paper no. 24.
Wilcox, D. J. 1987. The Measure of Times Past: Pre-Newtonian Chronologies
     and the Rhetoric of Relative Time. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago
     Press.
Wilk, R. R. 1985. The ancient Maya and the political present. Journal of Anthro-
     pological Research 41: 307–26.
Wilkinson, J. G. 1837. Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians. 6 vols.
     London, John Murray.
Willett, F. 1967. Ife in the History of West African Sculpture. London, Thames
     and Hudson.
Willey, G. R. 1948. A functional analysis of “horizon styles” in Peruvian
     archaeology. In A Reappraisal of Peruvian Archaeology, ed. by W. C.
     Bennett, pp. 8–15. Menasha, WI, Society for American Archaeology
     Memoir 4.


                                      676
                                 References

 1953. Prehistoric Settlement Patterns in the Virú Valley, Peru. Washington,
     DC, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin no. 155.
 1956. ed. Prehistoric Settlement Patterns in the New World. New York, Viking
     Fund Publications in Anthropology no. 23.
 1966. An Introduction to American Archaeology, vol. 1, North and Middle
     America. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall.
 1971. An Introduction to American Archaeology, vol. 2, South America.
     Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall.
 1974a. ed. Archaeological Researches in Retrospect. Cambridge, MA,
     Winthrop.
 1974b. The Virú Valley settlement pattern study. In G. R. Willey, 1974a,
     pp. 147–76.
 1985. Ancient Chinese-New World and Near Eastern ideological traditions:
     some observations. Symbols, spring issue, 14–17, 22–3.
 1988. Portraits in American Archaeology: Remembrances of Some Dis-
     tinguished Americanists. Albuquerque, University of New Mexico
     Press.
Willey, G. R., W. R. Bullard Jr, J. B. Glass, and J. C. Gifford. 1965. Prehis-
     toric Maya Settlements in the Belize Valley. Cambridge, MA, Papers of the
     Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology no. 54.
Willey, G. R. and P. Phillips. 1955. Method and theory in American archeology,
     II: historical-developmental interpretation. American Anthropologist 57:
     723–819.
 1958. Method and Theory in American Archaeology. Chicago, IL, University
     of Chicago Press.
Willey, G. R. and J. A. Sabloff. 1974. A History of American Archaeology.
     London, Thames and Hudson.
 1980. A History of American Archaeology. 2nd edn. San Francisco, CA,
     Freeman.
 1993. A History of American Archaeology. 3rd edn. New York, Freeman.
Williams, H. 2003. ed. Archaeologies of Remembrance: Death and Memory in
     Past Societies. New York, Kluwer Academic.
Williams, S. 1991. Fantastic Archaeology: The Wild Side of North American
     Prehistory. Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press.
Wilmsen, E. N. and J. R. Denbow. 1990. Paradigmatic history of San-speaking
     peoples and current attempts at revision. Current Anthropology 31: 489–
     525.
Wilson, D. 1851. The Archaeology and Prehistoric Annals of Scotland.
     Edinburgh, Sutherland and Knox.
 1862. Prehistoric Man: Researches into the Origin of Civilisation in the Old
     and the New World. London, Macmillan.
 1876. Prehistoric Man. 3rd edn. London, Macmillan.
Wilson, D. 1975. Atoms of Time Past. London, Allen Lane.
Wilson, D. M. 1976. ed. The Archaeology of Anglo-Saxon England. London,
     Methuen.


                                     677
                                 References

Wilson, E. O. 1975. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Cambridge, MA,
    Harvard University Press.
Wilson, J. A. 1964. Signs and Wonders upon Pharaoh. Chicago, IL, University
    of Chicago Press.
Winstone, H. V. F. 1990. Woolley of Ur: The Life of Sir Leonard Woolley.
    London, Secker and Warburg.
Wiseman, J. 1980a. Archaeology in the future: an evolving discipline. American
    Journal of Archaeology 84: 279–85.
 1980b. Archaeology as archaeology. Journal of Field Archaeology 7:
    149–51.
 1983. Conflicts in archaeology: education and practice. Journal of Field
    Archaeology 10: 1–9.
Wissler, C. 1914. Material cultures of the North American Indians. American
    Anthropologist 16: 447–505.
 1917. The new archaeology. American Museum Journal 17: 100–1.
Wittfogel, K. A. 1957. Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total
    Power. New Haven, CT, Yale University Press.
Wiwjorra, I. 1996. German archaeology and its relation to nationalism
    and racism. In M. Dı́az-Andreu and T. Champion, 1996a, pp. 164–
    88.
Wobst, H. M. 1974. Boundary conditions for Paleolithic social systems: a
    simulation approach. American Antiquity 39: 147–78.
 1978. The archaeo-ethnology of hunter-gatherers or the tyranny of the
    ethnographic record in archaeology. American Antiquity 43: 303–9.
Wolf, E. R. 1982. Europe and the People without History. Berkeley, University
    of California Press.
Wolfram, S. 2000. “Vorsprung durch Technik” or “Kossinna Syndrome”?
    Archaeological theory and social context in post-war West Germany. In
    H. Härke 2000a, pp. 180–201.
Wood, E. M. 2000. Capitalism or enlightenment? History of Political Thought
    21: 405–26.
Wood, M. 1998. The use of the Pharaonic past in modern Egyptian national-
    ism. Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt 35: 179–96.
Woodbury, R. B. 1973. Alfred V. Kidder. New York, Columbia University
    Press.
Woodman, P. C. 1995. Who possesses Tara? Politics in archaeology in Ireland.
    In P. J. Ucko 1995a, pp. 278–97.
Woolley, C. L. 1950. Ur of the Chaldees. Harmondsworth, UK, Penguin
    (1st edn 1929).
Worsaae, J. J. A. 1849. The Primeval Antiquities of Denmark, trans. By W. J.
    Thoms. London, Parker.
Wortham, J. D. 1971. British Egyptology, 1549–1906. Newton Abbott, UK,
    David and Charles.
Wotzka, H. P. 1997. Massstabsprobleme bei der ethnischen Deutung neolithis-
    cher “Kulturen.” Das Altertum 43: 163–76.


                                     678
                                 References

Wright, G. A. 1971. Origins of food production in southwestern Asia: a survey
     of ideas. Current Anthropology 12: 447–77.
Wright, R. P. 1996. ed. Gender and Archaeology. Philadelphia, University of
     Pennsylvania Press.
Wylie, M. A. 1982. Epistemological issues raised by a structuralist archaeology.
     In I. Hodder, 1982c, pp. 39–46.
  1985a. The reaction against analogy. Advances in Archaeological Method and
     Theory 8: 63–111.
  1985b. Facts of the record and facts of the past: Mandelbaum on the anatomy
     of history “proper.” International Studies in Philosophy 17: 71–85.
  1985c. Putting Shakertown back together: critical theory in archaeology.
     Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 4: 133–47.
  1989a. Archaeological cables and tacking: the implications of practice for
     Bernstein’s “Options beyond objectivism and rationalism.” Philosophy of
     the Social Sciences 19: 1–18.
  1989b. The interpretive dilemma. In Critical Traditions in Contemporary
     Archaeology, ed. by V. Pinsky and A. Wylie, pp. 18–27. Cambridge, Cam-
     bridge University Press.
  1992. The interplay of evidential constraints and political interests: recent
     archaeological research on gender. American Antiquity 57: 15–35.
  1993. A proliferation of new archaeologies: “Beyond objectivism and rela-
     tivism.” In N. Yoffee and A. Sherratt, pp. 20–26.
  1996. The constitution of archaeological evidence: gender politics and
     science. In The Disunity of Science: Boundaries, Contexts, and Power,
     ed. by P. Galison and D. J. Stump, pp. 311–43. Stanford, CA, Stanford
     University Press.
  1997. The engendering of archaeology: refiguring feminist science studies.
     Osiris 12: 80–99.
  2000. Questions of evidence, legitimacy, and the (dis)unity of science. Amer-
     ican Antiquity 65: 227–37.
  2002. Thinking from Things: Essays in the Philosophy of Archaeology. Berkeley,
     University of California Press.
Wyman, J. 1875. Fresh-Water Shell Mounds of the St. John’s River, Florida.
     Salem, MA, Memoirs of the Peabody Academy of Science no. 4.
Yalouri, E. 2001. The Acropolis: Global Fame, Local Claim. Oxford, Berg.
Yates, F. A. 1964. Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition. Chicago, IL,
     University of Chicago Press.
Yellen, J. E. 1977. Archaeological Approaches to the Present: Models for Recon-
     structing the Past. New York, Academic Press.
Yellowhorn, E. C. 2002. Awakening Internalist Archaeology in the Aborig-
     inal World. PhD dissertation, Montreal, Department of Anthropology,
     McGill University.
Yelton, J. K. 1989. A comment on John Rowzée Peyton and the Mound
     Builders: the elevation of a nineteenth-century fraud to a twentieth-
     century myth. American Antiquity 54: 161–5.


                                     679
                                  References

Yengoyan, A. A. 1985. Digging for symbols: the archaeology of everyday mate-
     rial culture. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 51: 329–34.
Yentsch, A. 1991. The symbolic division of pottery: sex-related attributes of
     English and Anglo-American household pots. In R. H. McGuire and R.
     Paynter, 1991, pp. 192–230.
Yoffee, N. 1999. Robert McCormick Adams b. 1926. In T. Murray, 1999a,
     pp. 791–810.
  2005. Myths of the Archaic State: Evolution of the Earliest Cities, States, and
     Civilizations. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Yoffee, N. and G. L. Cowgill. 1988. eds. The Collapse of Ancient States and
     Civilizations. Tucson, University of Arizona Press.
Yoffee, N. and A. Sherratt. 1993. eds. Archaeological Theory: Who Sets the
     Agenda? Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Zammito, J. H. 2002. Kant, Herder, and the Birth of Anthropology. Chicago,
     IL, University of Chicago Press.
Ziadeh, G. 1995. Ethno-history and “reverse chronology” at Ti’innik, a
     Palestinian village. Antiquity 69: 999–1008.
Zimmerman, A. 2001. Anthropology and Antihumanism in Imperial Germany.
     Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Zittel, K. A. von. 1901. History of Geology and Palaeontology to the End of the
     Nineteenth Century. London, Scott.
Zvelebil, M. 1996. Farmers our ancestors and the identity of Europe. In
     P. Graves-Brown et al., pp. 145–66.




                                      680
                                         INDEX

Abbott, Charles C., 186                             Albright, William F., 272, 375
Abdi, K., 571                                       Alcock, S. E., 560
Abercromby, John, 223                               Aldrovandi, Ulisse, 93
aborigines (Australia): and concept of              Alexander VI, Pope, 55
  dream-time, 41; and cross-cultural studies of     Algonquian speaking peoples, 183, 285, 475
  hunter-gatherers, 441; and Darwinian              Allen, H., 567
  evolutionism, 170; and evolutionary               Allen, J., 569
  archaeology, 189–93, 209; and studies of          Allen, Susan, 558
  seasonality, 358; and totemism in cave art,       Allesbrook, M., 558, 561
  155. See also indigenous peoples                  Alpert, H., 573
Abu El-Haj, Nadia, 13, 557, 571                     Altamira (Spain), 155
Abydos (Egypt), 502                                 alternative interpretations, and multiple
Academia Sinica (Beijing), 267                         working hypotheses, 514–15
Académie Celtique, 213                             Althusser, Louis, 444, 467, 469
Achaemenian dynasty (Persia), 272                   Amarna (Egypt), 502
Achulean handaxes, 139, 140f, 150, 308              American Anthropological Association, 393,
Acosta, José de, 115–16                               449, 549–50
Adams, Barbara, 502                                 American Antiquarian Society, 161
Adams, E. W., 572                                   American Philosophical Society, 161
Adams, Robert McC., 352–3, 379, 402, 413            American Revolution, and Enlightenment, 177
Adams, William Y., 298, 568, 572                    An, Z., 570
adaptive systems, cultures as, 398                  analogies: and Clark on ethnography, 357; and
Adena culture (U.S.), 159–63                           direct historical approach, 511, 516; and New
Adorno, Theodor, 445                                   Archaeology, 416–17; and theory in
aerial photography, 317, 556, 573                      culture-historical archaeology, 307–8. See also
Africa: decolonization since 1960s and changes         ethnography; homologies
  in archaeology of, 275–6; postprocessual          analytical theory, 432
  archaeology and Hodder’s research in,             Anau (Turkmenistan), 234, 317
  452–3; and racism in evolutionary                 Andah, Bassy, 275, 511, 567, 571
  archaeology, 195–207; resources on                Andersen, Knud, 358
  development of archaeology in, 554, 567,          Anderson, B., 568
  571. See also Great Zimbabwe; South Africa        Andersson, J. G., 265, 266
African-Americans, and historical archaeology,      Andrén, A., 556
  515                                               androcentrism, and gender archaeology, 459
African burial ground site (New York), 515          animals. See domestication; extinct mammals;
Afrikaaners, 197, 203                                  faunal remains; fossils; zooarchaeology
Agassiz, Louis, 169                                 Annales School, 478
agency, and postprocessual archaeology,             Annapolis (Maryland), 515
  468–70                                            anthologies, of papers on history of
Agricola, Georgius, 93                                 archaeology, 559
agriculture: development of in Africa, 206; and     anthropology: cultural evolution in American
  economic approaches to                               of 1950s and 1960s, 387; and
  functional-processual archaeology, 323; and          culture-historical archaeology in Germany,
  environmental functional-processualism,              235; diffusionism and Viennese school of,
  318–9; and hunter-gatherers, 533, 534; and           219; and education of prehistoric
  New Archaeology, 411; oasis theory of, 12,           archaeologists, 22; and future of
  317. See also irrigation systems                     archaeology, 538–9. See also cultural
Alberti, B., 571, 580                                  anthropology; ethnography; ethnology;
Alberti, Leon Battista, 54                             physical anthropology;



                                                  681
                                              Index

anthropology (cont.)                                Archaeology as a Process (O’Brien, Lyman, and
  psychological anthropology; social                   Schiffer, 2005), 576
  anthropology; sociocultural anthropology          Archaeology in the U.S.S.R. (Mongait, 1961),
anthropomorphizing, and biological                     574
  archaeology, 492–3                                “Archaic Civilization,” 220
antiquarianism: ancient Egyptian and                Archaic period (U.S.), 182–3, 283, 289, 533
  Mesopotamian interest in past and, 44; in         archaiologia, 45, 47
  Arab world, 77; bibliographical resources on,     architecture: domestic in early modern
  557, 562–3; and classical archaeology, 80;           England, 505; of Great Zimbabwe, 199; and
  and early archaeology in Japan, 76; and              medieval view of history, 49; and Renaissance
  evolutionary archaeology, 209; impasse of in         antiquarianism, 54
  late 18th and early 19th centuries, 118–20; in    Armillas, Pedro, 391
  India, 77; in northern Europe, 81–92; and         Arnold, B., 570
  prehistoric archaeology, 80, 135; and             art: Australia and aboriginal, 192; and
  Renaissance, 52–61; and romanticism,                 biological interpretations of human
  110–14; scientific, 106–10; and stone tools,         behavior, 492; and medieval view of history,
  92–7                                                 49; and Renaissance antiquarianism, 54. See
antiquitates, 55                                       also art history; cave art
Antiquity (journal), 554                            Artamonov, Mikhail, 338, 341
Antonaccio, C. M., 560                              art history, and Assyriology, 72
Anuchin, D. N., 316–17, 327                         Arthur (King) and Arthurian legends, 81, 82,
Anyang (China), 75, 265–6                              84
Appel, T. A., 566                                   artifactology, 330, 339, 342
Archaeological Institute of America, 500,           artifacts: culture-historical archaeology and
  558                                                  classification of, 297–9, 572; and ecofacts,
Archaeological Society (Japan), 262                    361; Soviet archaeology and classification of,
Archaeological Survey of India, 269                    339; Soviet archaeology and use-wear
archaeologists: amateurs as, 543, 558, 565;            patterns, 336; technomic, sociotechnic, and
  bibliographical resources on, 556–7, 565; and        ideotechnic aspects of, 398, 399; see ceramics;
  concepts of time, 41; histories of archaeology       diagnostic artifacts; seriation; stratigraphy;
  written by, 550–1; history of education of,          stone tools; style and stylistic analysis
  22; influence of individual on practice of        Artsikhovskii, A. V., 328, 574
  archaeology, 23; and prehistorians, 307, 354;     Arundel, Thomas Howard, Earl of, 55
  and social context, 17; types of data and         Aryans, 269, 270. See also Indo-European
  networks of, 518–19; and                             speaking peoples
  underrepresentation of women as                   Ascher, Robert, 431
  professionals, 458; and unethical practices,      Ashmolean Museum, 85, 93
  544. See also autobiographies; biographies;       aspects, and Midwestern Taxonomic Method,
  professionalization                                  283, 284
archaeology: broader implications of                Assyriology, 15, 70–3, 78–9, 562
  discoveries, 3–4; and competing theoretical       astronomy, and megalithic circles, 257
  approaches in post-2000 era, 486–96;              Athenian agora, 64
  contemporary relevance and future of,             Atlantis, 541
  529–48; convergent model of development,          Atwater, Caleb, 161
  6; Enlightenment and development of, 100;         Aubrey, John, 93, 106–107, 557, 562, 563
  first use of term, 56; and high-level theory in   Audouze, F., 570
  post-2000 era, 519–28; and middle-ranging         Aurignacian Epoch, 150, 255
  theory in post-2000 era, 508–19; as social        Aurochs Age, 148
  science, 28–29; and theoretical convergence       Australia: and Childe’s career in archaeology,
  in post-2000 era, 497–508; use of term in            242; and evolutionary archaeology, 189–93;
  German academic tradition, 80. See also              resources on development of archaeology in,
  antiquarianism; archaeologists; artifacts;           566–7. See also aborigines
  chronology; classical archaeology;                Australopithecines, 204–5
  culture-historical archaeology; evolutionary      Austria, 258
  archaeology; excavation;                          autobiographies, and literature on history of
  functional-processual archaeology; historical        archaeology, 16, 558, 570, 572, 575
  archaeology; history of archaeology;              autochthonous development, and medieval
  postprocessual archaeology; prehistoric              Russian towns, 252
  archaeology; processual archaeology;              Avdiyev, V., 574
  stratigraphy                                      Avebury (England), 106, 107f, 109f, 110, 118
Archaeology and Society (Clark, 1939), 354,         Avebury, Lord. See Lubbock, John
  356–7                                             Aztec Ruins (New Mexico), 183



                                                682
                                              Index

Aztecs, 42, 116, 178, 179                           behavioral correlations, and middle-ranging
                                                      theory, 509–10, 512, 516
Babylon, 44, 70, 72                                 Beiser, F. C., 563
Bachofen, Johann, 154                               Belgae, 223
Bacon, Francis, 26, 97                              beliefs: future of archaeology and popular, 541;
Bagford, John, 139                                    and historical archaeology, 505; and
Bahn, Paul, 552, 580                                  postprocessual archaeology, 450; and
Bahrani, Z., 571                                      processual archaeology, 424. See also
Bailey, G., 575                                       ideology; religion
Baines, J., 560                                     Bell, A. S., 558, 564
Bakker, J. A., 569, 570                             Bel-Shalti-Nannar (Iraq), 44
Balter, Michael, 16, 559, 579, 580                  Belzoni, Giovanni, 68
Bandelier, Adolf, 280                               Benedict, Ruth, 365, 370
Bandinelli, Baccio, 55                              Benjamin, Walter, 18
Bantu, and Great Zimbabwe, 199, 201                 Benjamin of Tudela, Rabbi, 70
Barford, P. M., 569                                 Bennett, John W., 367, 575
Barkan, E., 568                                     Bent, J. Theodore, 197, 198f
Barkan, L., 560–1                                   Ben-Yehuda, N., 571
Barnard, F. M., 563                                 Berkhofer, R. F., Jr., 563
Barnes, A. S., 152                                  Bernal, Ignacio, 553, 571
Barnes, Barry, 18, 468, 542                         Bernal, M., 561, 567
Barnes, G., 562, 570                                Bernbeck, R., 571
Barnett, S. A., 564                                 Bernier, Franc¸ ois, 169
Barreto, C., 571                                    Berr, Henri, 256
Barrett, John, 472                                  Bersu, Gerhard, 300
barrows (England), 113                              Bertalanffy, Ludwig von, 419, 578
Barth, Frederick, 309                               Best, Elsdon, 193–4
Barthélemy, Jean-Jacques, 70                       Bianchini, Francesco, 56
Barton, Benjamin, 159                               Bibby, Geoffrey, 552, 563, 573
Bartram, William, 117–18, 159, 184                  Bible: and antiquity of humanity, 142–3, 168;
Bar Yosef, O., 571                                    and culture-historical archaeology in
Basalla, G., 559                                      Palestine and Israel, 272, 274; and early
Basketmaker cultures (U.S.), 280, 281–2               European views of Indians, 115; and
Bastian, Adolf, 154, 218, 219, 235                    Egyptology, 68; and evolutionary
Baté, Luis, 496                                      archaeology in Africa, 197; and medieval
Batres, Leopoldo, 276                                 view of history, 50–1; and Middle Eastern
Bayard, D. T., 578                                    archaeologists, 158; and Montelius’s
Bazelmans, J., 570                                    interpretation of European prehistory, 228;
“Beaker folk,” 223                                    and stone tools, 93, 95; and text-aided
Beard, Mary, 65–6                                     archaeology in Israel, 503–504; and
Beardsley, Richard, 380                               traditional chronology, 137, 138
Beauchamp, Joseph de, 70                            biblical archaeology, 556
Beazley, John, 65–6                                 bibliographical resources: and antiquarianism,
Becker, C., 547                                       562–3; and classical and text-based
behavior and behaviorism: and abandonment             archaeologies, 560–2; and culture-historical
  of dysfunctional patterns, 488; archaeological      archaeology, 567–72; and evolutionary
  interpretation and changing theories of, 24;        archaeology, 565–7; and
  and biological archaeology, 491–5; and              functional-processual archaeology, 572–6;
  cognitive archaeology, 491; and cultural            and pragmatic synthesis, 580–1; and
  evolutionism in American anthropology,              prehistoric archaeology, 563–5; and
  387; and diversification of processual              processual and postprocessual archaeology,
  archaeology, 425; high-level theory and             576–80; and study of history of archaeology,
  comprehensive theory of, 523; material              549–60
  culture and goals of archaeology, 506–508;        Bieder, R. E., 565, 566
  and New Archaeology, 394, 400, 402, 415,          Biehl, P. F., 580
  417–18; and postprocessual archaeology in         Bietak, Manfred, 502
  Europe, 481–2; rationalist versus romantic        big-game hunting societies, 412, 533. See also
  views of, 11; subjectivity and explanations of,     hunting practices
  545; and universal generalizations, 37. See       Bignamini, I., 561
  also behavioral correlations; cognition           Billman, B. R., 576
behavioral archaeology, 426–8, 497. See also        binary oppositions, and postprocessual
  biological archaeology                              archaeology, 463, 465, 511



                                                683
                                             Index

Binétruy, M.–S., 570                             Braudel, Fernand, 524
Binford, Lewis, 8, 33, 312, 393–6, 410, 414,      Braun, David, 429–30
  415, 416, 417, 419, 424–5, 426, 430–1, 439,     Brazil, 571
  440, 442, 443, 478, 506, 508–509, 518, 530,     Breasted, James, 68, 70
  576–7, 578                                      Breuil, Henri, 254–5, 280, 570
Binford, Sally, 393, 403, 577                     Britain. See England; Scotland
binomial nomenclature, and artifact               British Academy, and Major Research Project
  classification, 298                               in the Early History of Agriculture, 361
Bintliff, J. L., 579, 580                         British Association for the Advancement of
bioarchaeology, 361. See also biological            Science, 146, 197, 199
  archaeology                                     British Museum, 254, 557
biographies, and literature on history of         Brittany, and prehistoric megaliths, 89
  archaeology, 16, 557, 561, 562–3, 565, 568–9,   Brodrick, A. H., 570
  570, 572                                        Broken K. Pueblo (New Mexico), 404f
biological archaeology, 491–5. See also           Brongniart, Alexandre, 144
  behavioral archaeology                          Bronze Age: and Montelius’s typological
biological evolution, Darwin’s theory of, 147       system, 226f, 227–8 ; and Thomsen’s scheme
biological sciences, and technical developments     for relative dating, 125, 127, 132
  in archaeological interpretation, 23            Brothwell, Don, 310
biome, 354                                        Browman, D. L., 550, 562, 572
Birdsell, J. B., 191                              Brown, Donald E., 43
Biskupin (Poland), 249                            Brown, J. A., 393
Bison Age, 148                                    Brück, J., 579
Black, Davidson, 265                              Bruford, W. H., 561
Black, S. L., 571                                 Brunhouse, R. L., 565, 571
Black Sea, and Greek colonies, 64                 Bruno, Giordano, 67–8
Blanton, Richard E., 380, 438                     Brutus (Trojan prince), 81
Bleed, P., 562, 570                               Bruwer, A. J., 200
Blegen, Carl, 375–6, 501                          Bryson, G., 563
Bloch, M., 575                                    Buck, Peter (Te Rangihiroa), 194
Boardman, J., 560                                 Buckingham, George Villiers, Duke of, 55
Boas, Franz, 180–1, 219, 278–9, 283, 365, 370,    Buckland, William, 10, 141
  371–2, 387, 435, 575                            Buckley, W. F., 578
Boas, G., 563                                     Buffon, Georges-Louis Leclerc, comte de, 139,
Bodin, Jean, 99                                     178
Bodnar, E. W., 561                                Bulkin, V. A., 574, 575, 578
Boivan, N., 580                                   Bulleid, Arthur H., 294
Bonyhady, T., 566–7                               Bulletin of the History of Archaeology, 550
Bordes, Franc  ¸ ois, 255, 297, 403               Bunge, Mario, 27, 520
Borgstede, G., 556                                Bure, Johan, 86, 87
Boriskovsky, P. I., 336, 574                      Bureau of American Ethnology, 181, 184,
Borrero, L. A., 567                                 185–6, 188
Boserup, Ester, 12, 32–3, 411, 521                Burger, R. L., 571
Boston University, 501                            Burgwall culture (central Europe), 234
Botta, Paul-Emile, 70                             burials, and social stratification, 405, 453, 455,
Boucher de Crèvecoeur de Perthes, Jacques,         513. See also barrows; kurgans; skeletal
  143–4, 146, 563                                   remains
Boule, Marcellin, 25, 152, 255                    Burkitt, M. C., 201–2, 242, 244
boundaries, and postprocessual archaeology,       Burl, A., 562
  465                                             Burmeister, S., 568
Bourdieu, Pierre, 12, 469–70, 520                 Burnett, James (Lord Monboddo), 99
Bourgon, Maurice, 297                             Burrow, J. W., 564
Bowden, M., 550, 571                              Butterfield, H., 560
Bowker, Thomas, 196                               Butzer, Karl, 379–80, 502
Bowler, P. J., 564, 567                           Byers, Martin, 469, 486
Bowman, S., 576
Boyd, Robert, 525                                 Cabrero, M. T., 571
Boyle, David, 558                                 calabash motifs, in Kenya, 454f
Brackenridge, H. H., 161                          Calder, W. M., 571
Bradley, R., 43, 473, 571                         Caldwell, Joseph, 375, 392, 395, 577
Braidwood, Linda & Robert, 352, 575               Cambridge University, 191, 539
Braithwaite, Mary, 451                            Camden, William, 55, 86, 118



                                              684
                                             Index

Canada: collecting societies on west coast of,    Cherry, J. F., 560
   533; and combination of culture-historical     Cherry, T., 319
   and processual archaeology, 312; and early     Chiappelli, F., 563
   functional-processual archaeology, 362; and    chiefdoms, and processual archaeology, 436
   ecological archaeology, 524–7; resources on    Chifflet, Jean-Jacob, 89
   development of archaeology in, 554, 558. See   Childe, V. Gordon, 7, 12, 233, 241–8, 254, 299,
   also North American indigenous peoples            300, 301, 303, 307, 309, 322–6, 344–53, 360,
Cannon, Aubrey, 453, 578                             376, 385, 397, 408, 424, 428, 443, 482, 487,
capitalism, and New Archaeology, 397                 496, 499, 524, 552, 558, 560, 564, 569, 573,
Carian people (Greece), 46                           574
Carr, E. H., 5                                    Childeric I (Merovingian king), 89
Carrott, R. G., 561                               Chile, 496
Carson, Rachel, 410                               China: and concepts of time, 41; and
Casa Grande (Arizona), 188                           culture-historical archaeology, 265–8; early
Caso, Alfonso, 277                                   archaeology in, 74–6, 78; and interest in past,
Casson, Stanley, 242, 552, 560                       47, 562; resources on development of
caste system, in India, 269                          archaeology in, 570
cataclysmic evolutionism, 412, 414                Chippindale, C., 557, 558
Çatalhöyük (Turkey), 16, 515, 580              Chorley, Richard, 430, 564
catastrophe theory, 24, 413, 578                  Choy, Emilio, 496
catastrophism, and geology, 141, 145              Christenson, Andrew, 549, 565
Caton Thompson, Gertrude, 199, 201, 255,          Christian IV, King (Denmark), 86
   570                                            Christian-Albrechts University, 568
causality: and Childe as Marxist archaeologist,   Christol, Jules de, 141, 142
   351; and materialism in American               Christy, Henry, 148
   anthropology of 1960s, 390                     chronology: and Bible, 137, 138;
Cauvin, Jacques, 485–6                               bibliographical resources on, 556; and
cave art, 155, 464                                   culture-historical archaeology in U.S., 282,
Cave Bear Age, 148–9                                 285–6; Mexico and cultural, 277; and
Caylus, Anne Claude Philippe de Turbières,          Montelius’s typology for Bronze Age, 227–8;
   comte de, 56                                      and Palaeolithic archaeology, 148–9; and
Cazeau, C., 559                                      relative dating, 121–9; Soviet archaeology
Celenko, T., 567                                     and relative, 343–4; U.S. archaeology before
Celtic peoples, 89, 214, 223, 250, 253, 260          20th century and lack of concern with,
Central America, prehistoric archaeology of,         179–80, 280. See also radiocarbon dating;
   177–8. See also Latin America; Mesoamerica        relative dating; sequence dates
Ceram, C. W. See Marek, Kurt                      Circumpolar ecological zone, 358
ceramics, and gender studies in New               Ciriaco de’ Pizzicolli (Cyriacus of Ancona), 19,
   Archaeology, 403, 405. See also pottery           55, 60, 561
chaı̂ne opératoire, and postprocessual           civilization, and concept of “culture,” 234
   archaeology, 464, 478                          Claasen, C., 558
Chakrabarti, Dilip, 269, 270–1, 570, 580          Clark, Geoff, 393
Chamberlin, R., 561                               Clark, Grahame, 191, 205, 206, 306, 317,
Chambers, Robert, 145                                353–61, 382–3, 385, 397, 409, 569, 574, 575
Champion, T., 554, 555, 569                       Clark, J. Desmond, 206
Champollion, Jean-Franc   ¸ ois, 68               Clark, Kenneth, 552
Chanaiwa, D., 567                                 Clark, L., 562
Chang, K. C., 379, 562, 570                       Clark, W. G., 318
Chapman, John, 16                                 Clarke, David, 6, 8, 18, 21, 33, 298, 300, 343,
Chapman, Robert, 8, 495, 558, 575, 580               425, 426, 471, 478, 506, 518, 537, 575, 577,
Chapman, W. R., 571                                  578
Chard, C. S., 574                                 class, socioeconomic: and diffusionism in
Charlemagne, 49                                      culture-historical archaeology, 217; and
Charles I, King (England), 55                        ethnic and gender biases in U.S., 460; and
Charles II, King (England), 106                      evolutionary archaeology, 176, 207; and New
Chavin horizon (Peru), 366                           Archaeology, 410; and social context of
Chazan, M., 564, 570                                 archaeology, 19–20; Soviet archaeology and
Chellean Epoch, 150, 308                             Marxist theory of, 332–3, 334, 347. See also
Chen, C., 570                                        elites; intellectuals; preclass societies
Chêng, T.–K., 562                                classical archaeology: and antiquarianism, 80;
Chernetsov, V. N., 574                               bibliographical resources on, 556, 560–2;
Chernykh, E. N., 575                                 changing focus of in post-2000 era, 500–502;



                                              685
                                              Index

classical archaeology (cont.)                       Communist Revolution of 1949 (China), 266
   and culture-historical archaeology, 216,         community archaeology, 260
   290–1, 506; development of in 18th century,      comparative philology, 114
   61–7, 78–9; and disciplinary specialization,     comparative studies: and conjunctive approach
   15; and text-aided archaeology, 498–9;              to functional-processual archaeology, 370;
   Winckelmann as founder of, 58. See also             and high-level theory, 522–3. See also
   Assyriology; Egyptology                             analogies; cross-cultural studies
Classic period, and culture-historical              complex societies, 533–4
   archaeology in U.S., 289                         “components,” and Midwestern Taxonomic
classical studies, 62–4, 67, 73, 78–9, 500             Method, 283–4, 289
classification. See artifacts                       computers, and archaeological analysis, 24
Cleere, H., 554, 569                                Comte, Auguste, 320
Clement VIII, Pope, 50                              Condorcet, Marie-Jean de Caritat, marquis de,
Clermont, N., 564                                      99
climate zones, in Europe, 358                       Confucianism, 47, 74, 102
Clinton, De Witt, 159                               Coningham, R., 571
“closed finds” method, 124, 133, 225                conjunctive approach, in functional-processual
“cluster interaction,” in Mesoamerica, 438             archaeology, 367–72
CM 79 (Mexico), 370                                 Conkey, Margaret, 458
Cobet, J., 571                                      Conn, S., 566
Cocherel (Normandy), 94                             consciousness, and Marxist dichotomy between
Coe, M. D., 556                                        “true” and “false,” 351
cognition, and theories of human behavior, 24,      conservatism: of classical archaeology, 66; and
   349, 424, 433, 435                                  U.S. politics, 487; and prehistoric
cognitive archaeology, 491–5                           archaeology, 167; and romanticism, 112. See
cognitive-processual archaeology, 433, 435,            also neoconservatism
   511                                              “conserving societies,” 412
Cohen, C., 570                                      contextual approach, 513–14
Cohen, S., 574                                      contextual archaeology, 455–6
coherence truth, 35–6                               Conze, Alexander, 63, 290
coins, Anglo-Saxon, 225                             Cooney, Gabriel, 257
Cold War, 373, 573                                  Cordell, Linda, 429
Cole, Fay-Cooper, 363                               cores and peripheries, and Montelius’s
Coles, J., 578                                         interpretation of European prehistory, 228.
collecting societies, 533, 534                         See also world-system theory
collective amnesia, 25, 537                         Corinth (Greece), 46, 64
Collier, Donald, 288, 363                           “correlates,” in behavioral archaeology,
Collingwood, Robin G., 1–2, 18, 29, 39, 303–6,         426–7
   506, 514, 530, 572                               correspondence truth, 35–6
colonial archaeology: bibliographic resources       cost-benefit analyses, and evolutionary ecology,
   on, 556, 567, 571; and ethnology, 208; and          489
   evolutionary archaeology in U.S., 177–89;        “counter archaeologies,” 559
   and historical archaeology in North America,     Courbin, P., 577
   505                                              covering-law model, 400–401, 402
colonialism: and culture-historical archaeology     Cowgill, G. L., 578
   in India, 269–70; and culture-historical         Coyote Cave (Mexico), 370
   archaeology in U.S., 290; and evolutionary       Crawford, O. G. S., 242, 317, 375, 425,
   archaeology in New Zealand, 195; and                563
   historical archaeology, 500; resources on role   creationism, 156–7, 547
   of in development of archaeology, 562, 566;      creativity, and diffusionism, 221–2
   and social anthropology, 441–2; and study of     Cree (Quebec), 524–7
   past in New World, 114–18                        Creek Indians, 117–18
colonization: and decolonization of                 Crete, 64, 66
   sub-Saharan Africa, 275; European projects       Crimea, and Greek colonies, 64
   of in North Africa and Middle East, 73; and      critical theory, 460, 462
   evolutionary archaeology, 175–6; Russian in      Croce, Benedetto, 304, 479
   Siberia, 91                                      Cronin, Constance, 403
Colt Hoare, Sir Richard, 113, 119                   Crooke, E. M., 554
Colton, Harold S., 298                              cross-cultural studies: and behavioral
Combier, J., 574                                       correlations, 509; and Binford’s influence on
Communist Party, and Soviet archaeology,               New Archaeology, 406–407; and
   327, 330                                            postprocessual archaeology, 476; of religious



                                                686
                                              Index

  beliefs of early civilizations, 493–4. See also     prehistory, 223–32; nationalism and
  comparative studies                                 development of in Europe, 248–61; and
Crumley, Carole, 449                                  overview of history of archaeology, 535–6;
Cuba, 496                                             and processual archaeology, 430–3; and
cultural anthropology, 8–9, 278–9, 448–9. See         romanticism, 537; in U.S., 278–90, 301, 303;
  also Boas, Franz; cultural evolution                and technical developments, 290–303; and
cultural archaeology, 495                             theory, 303–11
cultural areas, and American ethnology,             “culture-historical integration,” 289
  180–2                                             culture history, and American Southwest,
cultural diversity: and processual archaeology,       280–2
  437; and Soviet archaeology, 341                  cuneiform texts, 70
cultural ecology, 33, 34                            Cunningham, Alexander, 269
cultural evolution: and anthropology in U.S.        Cunnington, R. H., 563
  during 1950s and 1960s, 387; and beginnings       Cunnington, William, 113
  of prehistoric archaeology, 135; and Childe,      Curl, J. S., 561
  348; and Enlightenment view of history, 98,       Curtius, Ernst, 63, 290
  104; and evolutionary archaeology, 173–6,         Cushing, Frank, 183
  207, 486–7; and Marxist scholarship, 345–6        Cutler, Rev. Manasseh, 161
cultural formation processes (C-transforms),        cut marks, on bones, 142
  427–8                                             Cuvier, Georges, 129, 140–1, 144, 173
cultural heritage, of indigenous groups, 544–5.     cybernetics, 420
  See also heritage management                      cyclical views, of history of archaeology, 10–11
cultural materialism, 33, 34, 389                   cylindrical faience beads (Egypt), 227
cultural particularism, 308                         Cyriacus of Ancona. See Ciriaco de’ Pizzicolli
cultural relativism, 219, 279, 521–2. See also      Czech Republic, 215, 490
  relativism
cultural resource management, 444, 544. See         daily life, and Egyptology, 69
  also heritage management                          Dall, William, 180
cultural revolution, in Soviet Union, 328–9,        Daniel, Glyn, 10–11, 104, 105, 113, 153–4, 242,
  339, 342                                            305–6, 552–3, 558, 559, 561, 562, 564, 568,
Cultural Revolution (China, 1966–1977), 266           573, 577
cultural structuralism, 463                         Daniels, S. G. H., 431
culture: Binford and concept of in New              Danilova, L V., 575
  Archaeology, 394–5, 396, 398; Boas and            Darius I, King (Persia), 70
  concept of in U.S., 279–80; Childe’s              Dark, K. R., 2
  definition of archaeological, 244; and            Darwin, Charles, 36–7, 104, 146–7, 170
  culture-historical archaeology, 232–5, 243,       Darwinian archaeology, 486–8, 490–1, 494,
  244, 299–300, 310, 312, 568; and culture            497, 537, 556
  history of American Southwest, 282; and           Darwinian evolution: and antiquity of
  functional-processual archaeology, 377;             humanity, 139; and Montelius’s typological
  Hodder on distinction between nature and,           patterns, 227; and racism, 170, 177, 189,
  465–6; Kossinna’s concept of archaeological,        565–6
  243; and Midwestern Taxonomic Method,             data collection, and social context of
  283, 284; and postprocessual archaeology,           archaeology, 21
  444, 477; and societal interpretations of         Davenport Academy, 537
  archaeological data, 425; and Soviet              Davidson, J. M., 567
  archaeology, 343; systems and subsystems of,      Davies, G. L., 564
  425. See also cultural anthropology; cultural     Davis, Edwin H., 161–2, 180, 565
  archaeology; cultural evolution; culture          Davis, R. S., 574, 575
  history; popular culture; subculture              Davis, T. W., 571
culture-historical archaeology: beginnings of in    Davy, Georges, 323
  Germany, 235–41; bibliographical resources        Dawkins, William Boyd, 153, 214, 223
  on, 567–72, 577; and Childe’s The Dawn of         Dawn of European Civilization, The (Childe,
  European Civilization, 241–8; in China,             1925), 242–8
  265–8; and concept of culture, 232–5; and         Dawson, John William, 157, 564
  Darwinian archaeology, 497; development of        Debetz, G. F., 574
  since 1990s, 489–91; and diffusionism,            Déchelette, Joseph, 254, 570
  217–23; and early functional-processual           “Declaration of the Rights of Man and the
  archaeology, 314, 535; and ethnicity, 211–16;       Citizen” (1789), 101
  in India, 268–71; in Japan, 261–5; and            deduction, and scientific method, 36, 37
  material culture, 505–506; in Middle East,        deep structure, and binary oppositions, 511
  271–5; and Montelian synthesis of European        Deetz, James, 393, 403, 460, 499, 577



                                                687
                                             Index

degeneration and degenerationism: and debate       Doran, J. E., 578
   on antiquity of humanity, 157; and European     Dörpfeld, Wilhelm, 290–1
   views of indigenous cultures of New World,      Douglas, James, 113
   116; and future of archaeology, 541; and        Dowson, T. A., 476
   Lubbock on cultural evolution, 174; and         Dravidians (India), 270
   medieval view of history, 50, 51; and stone     Drovetti, Bernardino, 68
   tools, 95                                       Drower, M. S., 562
De Grummond, N. T., 560                            Druids, 111, 213
Deir el-Ballas (Egypt), 69                         Duff, A. G., 565
Deism, 98, 111                                     Dugdale, William, 93
Deloria, Vine, Jr., 517                            Dumézil, Georges, 479
Delos (Greece), 46, 64                             Dumond, D. E., 578
Delphi (Greece), 64                                Dumont, L., 563, 568
Demoule, J.–P., 570                                Dumont d’Urville, J. S. C., 134
dendrochronology, and Southwestern U.S.,           Dunnell, Robert C., 13, 26, 180, 429, 486, 490,
   384                                               506, 556, 559, 572, 575, 578
Deng Xiaoping, 268                                 Durkheim, Emile, 320–1, 573
Denmark: and antiquarianism, 86, 87f, 88, 110;     Duvignaud, J., 573
   and beginnings of prehistoric archaeology,      Dynastic Race (Egypt), 202, 222
   121–9, 132, 136; nationalism and                Dyson, Stephen L., 66, 501, 556, 558, 561
   archaeological finds in, 249, 250; resources
   on development of archaeology in, 554, 559.     Earle, T. K., 578, 579
   See also Scandinavia and Scandinavian history   Earlier Stone Age Settlement of Scandinavia,
depositional theory, 431–2                            The (Clark, 1975), 360–1
Descartes, René, 98                               earthquakes, and frequency analysis, 408
Desmond, Adrian, 26, 565                           Eastern Europe: and culture-historical
determinism, and Marxist archaeology, 333–4,          archaeology, 489; and national identity, 215.
   349–50. See also technological determinism         See also Czech Republic; Poland
Deuel, Thorne, 283, 363, 559                       Eastern Zhou Dynasty (China), 47
Dever, William G., 274–5, 556, 571                 Echo-Hawk, Roger, 517
Devon Downs rock shelter (Australia), 191          Eckart, Johann von, 90
DeVore, Irven, 412                                 “ecofacts,” 361
diagnostic artifacts, 149, 153, 244–6              ecological zones, and cultural areas, 181–2
Diamond, Jared, 167                                ecology: and culture-historical archaeology,
Dı́az, Porfirio, 276                                  258; diversification of processual archaeology
Dı́az-Andreu, M., 554, 558, 568, 569, 570             and, 419; and functional-processual
Die Herkunft der Germanen (The Origin of the          archaeology, 357, 358, 360, 372–82; and
   Germans) (Kossinna, 1911), 236–7                   high-level theory, 524–7; and New
Dietler, M., 570                                      Archaeology, 395, 410–11, 414; and
diffusion and diffusionism: and beginnings of         postprocessual archaeology, 445. See also
   prehistoric archaeology, 129; and Childe on        ecosystem; environment; evolutionary
   cultural change, 246, 324, 345; and                ecology
   culture-historical archaeology, 217–23, 238,    economics: and culture-historical archaeology,
   246, 286, 288, 308, 311, 568; and future of        258; and functional-processual archaeology,
   archaeology, 542, 543; and Kossinna on             322–6, 361; and social context of
   ancient Germans, 238; and Montelius’s              archaeology, 530; and substantivism, 37–8.
   interpretation of European prehistory, 228,        See also capitalism; Great Depression;
   229, 230; and Soviet archaeology, 328, 341.        Marxism; trade
   See also hyperdiffusionism                      ecosystem, 360, 356f
Diop, Cheikh Anta, 203                             education: and classical studies, 63–4; reform of
Diospolis Parva (Egypt), 295                          in eighteenth-century Prussia, 61–2. See also
direct historical approach, 117–18, 184, 510–11,      classical studies; universities
   512, 513, 572                                   Edwards, Amelia, 561
discourse, and ritual in postprocessual            Edwards, David, 513
   archaeology, 451. See also narratives           effigy mounds, 162
Dixon, R. B., 183, 228                             Efimenko, P. P., 328, 341
Dobrovsky, J., 119                                 Eggers, Hans-Jürgen, 259
Dolitsky, A. B., 573, 574                          Egypt (modern): and acquisition of ancient art
Dolukhanov, P. M., 574, 575                           by France and England, 68–9, 254; and
domestication, of animals and plants, 132, 429        interest in past, 42–4, 45, 271; Islamic period
Domestication of Europe, The (Hodder, 1990),          in, 73, 77. See also Egyptology and ancient
   465                                                Egypt



                                               688
                                               Index

Egypt Exploration Society, 158                       Enlightenment: and American Revolution, 177;
Egyptology and ancient Egypt: and Africa, 567;         and development of evolutionary view of
   and biblical archaeology, 158; bibliographical      past, 97–105, 120; and French Revolution,
   resources on, 556, 560, 561–2; and Childe on        113, 122; and prehistoric archaeology, 164–5,
   development of civilization, 323; and classical     167; and romanticism, 112; and Scandinavian
   studies, 67, 73; and culture-historical             archaeology, 135–6; studies of, 563
   archaeology, 294–5, 296f ; development of in      environment: and functional-processual
   18th century, 67–70, 73, 78–9; and                  archaeology, 315–19, 573; and
   diffusionism, 220, 221, 222; and disciplinary       neoevolutionism, 391–2; and Thomsen’s
   specialization, 15; and functional-processual       relative dating system, 131. See also ecology;
   archaeology, 379–80; and origins of                 forest change
   agriculture, 318–19; and prehistoric              eoliths, 150
   archaeology, 502; and persistence of              Epicureans, 45
   meanings over time, 510–11; and racism,           epigraphers and epigraphic data: and Maya,
   202–3                                               503; and Mesopotamia, 72. See also language
Ehret, C., 571                                         and linguistics; written records
Ehrlich, Paul, 411                                   epistemes (modes of knowledge), 9–10, 470
Eickhoff, M., 570                                    epistemology: and Binford’s New Archaeology,
Eiseley, L. C., 564, 565                               401; and idealism, 306; and intellectual
El Daly, O., 561                                       history of archaeology, 2; processual
Elgin, Lord Thomas, 254                                archaeology and positivist, 29; and realism,
Eliade, Mircea, 479, 509                               30
elites, and written records, 503                     equifinality, and statistical correlations, 440
Elkin, A. P., 568                                    Erciyas, D. B., 571
Elsner, J., 560                                      Erman, Adolf, 69
Emery, F., 578                                       Esper, Johann, 141
emic types, and artifact classification, 299         ethics: and decertification of archaeologists,
Emilo, Paolo, 89                                       544; and use of narratives in postprocessual
Emmerichs, M. B., 550, 558                             archaeology, 472
empiricism: and culture-historical archaeology,      ethnicity and ethnic groups: archaeology and
   259, 305, 307; and middle-ranging theory,           national unity in China, 268; bibliographical
   511, 513                                            resources on, 554; and culture-historical
empowerment, of indigenous groups, 471,                archaeology, 211–16, 234–5, 237, 264, 268,
   544–5                                               272, 308, 309–10, 312, 490, 568; and ideas
Encyclopedia of the History of Classical               about the past, 41–2; and interpretation of
   Archaeology, An (De Grummond, 1996),                early history of India, 269–71; and limitations
   560                                                 of archaeological data, 516; and management
energy flows, and cultural systems, 420                of archaeological research, 22; and origin of
Engels, F., 331, 332, 337, 445                         Japanese people, 264; and Persian past of
England: antiquarianism and early history of,          Iran, 272; and prejudice in American
   82; and colonialism in India, 269–70; and           postprocessual archaeology, 457–8; and
   culture-historical archaeology, 213–14, 216,        racism in African archaeology, 202; and
   253–5, 257, 293–4, 430; domestic                    Soviet archaeology, 338, 339, 340–1. See also
   architecture in early modern, 505; early            race; racism
   scientific archaeology and antiquity of           ethnoarchaeology, 399, 400, 405, 455, 578
   humanity, 138, 142, 145; and Egyptology,          ethnocentrism, and European views of
   68–9; and Enlightenment, 99; and                    indigenous cultures of New World, 117
   environmental functional-processualism,           ethnogenesis, and medieval Russian towns,
   317–18; evolutionary archaeology and                252
   Victorian, 176; and functional-processual         ethnography: and behavioral correlations, 509;
   archaeology, 361; and future of archaeology,        and Childe’s interest in evolutionary
   539; and gender archaeology, 459; and               processes, 347–8; and Cree hunting
   Marxism, 347; and nationalism, 212, 257;            practices, 525; and direct historical approach,
   and New Archaeology, 433–6; and                     510, 511; and functional-processual
   postprocessual archaeology, 450, 462–78;            archaeology, 357, 369; and Palaeolithic
   and processual archaeology, 430–3; and              archaeology, 153; and postprocessual
   Renaissance antiquarianism, 55; resources on        archaeology, 475; and processual
   development of archaeology in, 552–3, 561,          archaeology, 440–1. See also analogies
   562, 564, 566; and romanticism, 112–13;           ethnology: Childe’s diffusionist approach to,
   stone circles and scientific antiquarianism,        246; and colonialist archaeology, 208; and
   106–10; stone tools and beginnings of               cultural areas in U.S., 180–2; and
   prehistoric archaeology in, 93–4                    evolutionary archaeology in Australia, 189;



                                                 689
                                             Index

ethnology (cont.)                                     century, 58, 60; and technical developments
  and early functional-processual archaeology,        in culture-historical archaeology, 293–4,
  366; and New Archaeology, 399, 415;                 571–2. See also chronology; stratigraphy
  and prehistoric archaeology, 130, 166; and       ex oriente lux (“light from the east”) school,
  views of indigenous peoples in U.S., 184;           228
  and Soviet archaeology, 327                      explanation, and prediction in New
Eurocentrism, in culture-historical                   Archaeology, 400–401
  archaeology, 241                                 externalist approaches, to history of
Europe: and alignment between prehistoric             archaeology, 25–26, 559
  archaeology and ethnology, 166;                  external phenotype, and Darwinian
  antiquarianism in northern, 81–92; Childe           archaeology, 488
  on development of civilization in, 241–8; and    extinct mammals, and antiquity of humanity,
  “continentalist” versus “national”                  142, 143, 146
  archaeology, 216; and development of             extraterrestrial salvationism, 541, 542
  prehistoric archaeology, 164; Montelian
  synthesis of prehistory of, 223–32;              facts, as distinct from interpretations in
  nationalism and development of                      archaeological theory, 206. See also “ecofacts”
  culture-historical archaeology in, 248–61;       Fagette, P., 559, 572
  and nation states, 212; prehistoric and          Fagan, Brian, 195–6, 205, 552, 561, 567, 571,
  historical archaeology in post-2000 era, 499;       575
  processual and postprocessual archaeology        Fagg, Bernard, 205
  in, 478–80. See also Eastern Europe;             Fairbanks, Charles, 363
  Medieval period; Scandinavia and                 Fairchild, H. N., 563
  Scandinavian archaeology; specific               Falkenhausen, L. von, 570
  countries                                        “fantastic archaeologies,” 559
European Union, 260                                faunal remains, 300, 301, 361
Evans, Arthur, 223, 241, 579                       Faussett, Rev. Bryan, 113
Evans, C., 572                                     Fawcett, C., 554, 570
Evans, Joan, 558                                   Feder, K. L., 559
Evans, John, 22, 146                               feedback, and systems theory, 420
Evans, R., 565                                     Feinman, G. M., 576
Evans-Pritchard, E. E., 360                        Fell, Barry, 409
Evasdottir, E. E. S., 570                          feminism, 458, 459–60, 558
evolution and evolutionary theory: and cultural    Ferguson, Adam B., 99, 550
  change, 102, 120; and diffusionism, 220;         Ferris, N., 580
  literature on developments in, 564; and          Fetten, F. G., 569
  Montelius’s typology, 227; and Palaeolithic      feudalism, and classical studies, 78
  archaeology, 138–9, 148, 150; prehistoric        Fewkes, J. W., 183
  archaeology and reaction against, 156–8; and     Feyerabend, Paul, 18, 468, 542
  processual archaeology, 424, 429–30, 440,        fibulae (safety pins), 227
  486; and Scandinavian archaeology, 136–7;        Field, H., 574
  of technology in early prehistoric               field archaeology, development of in China,
  archaeology, 130. See also biological               265. See also excavation
  evolution; creationism; cultural evolution;      fieldwork, and social anthropology, 320
  Darwinian evolution; natural selection; social   Finkelstein, I., 571
  evolution; unilinear evolutionism                Finley, Moses, 47
evolutionary archaeology: in Africa, 195–207;      Fiorelli, Giuseppe, 63, 290
  and approaches to history of archaeology, 10;    First Kitchen-Midden Commission (established
  and Australian prehistory, 189–93;                  1848), 132–3, 315
  bibliographical resources on, 565–7; and         Fischer, A., 559, 564
  colonial archaeology in the U.S., 177–89;        Fischer, G., 574
  and culture-historical archaeology, 247; and     Fischer, Ulrich, 258, 572
  Kuhn’s concept of paradigm, 8; legacy of,        Fitting, James, 553
  207–10; Lubbock’s synthesis of, 171–6; in        Fitzpatrick, S., 574
  New Zealand, 193–5; and Palaeolithic             Five Points Archaeological Project (New York),
  archaeology, 535; and racism, 167–71,               515
  195–207; and rationalism, 537; in Russia,        Five-Year Plan of 1928 (Soviet Union), 328
  230; and use of term culture, 232. See also      Flannery, Kent, 393, 410, 419, 420, 422, 433,
  Darwinian archaeology                               440, 579
evolutionary ecology, 488–9, 494                   Flaubert, Gustave, 16
excavation: and classical archaeology, 290–1;      Fleck, Ludwig, 7
  development of systematic in eighteenth          Fletcher, Roland, 492, 577



                                               690
                                              Index

Fleure, Herbert J., 12, 318–19, 325                 Fuller, D. Q., 580
Fleury-Ilett, B., 570                               Funari, P., 571
flint-knapping, first use of by Nilsson, 130. See   functionalism, 314
    also stone tools                                functional-processual archaeology:
floral remains, 300, 301, 361. See also pollen        bibliographical resources on, 572–6; and
    analysis                                          Childe as Marxist archaeologist, 344–53; and
foci, and Midwestern Taxonomic Method, 283,           conjunctive approach, 367–72; definition of,
    284                                               314; ecological and settlement approaches
folklore, and Clark’s use of ethnographic             to, 372–82; economic approaches to, 322–6;
    analogies, 357. See also oral traditions          and environmental functional-processualism,
Folsom (New Mexico), 279                              315–19; and influence of Grahame Clark,
Forchhammer, Johan Georg, 132, 315                    353–61; and overview of history of
Ford, Henry, 407                                      archaeology, 535; and social anthropology,
Ford, James A., 286, 287f, 288, 296–7, 298,           319–22; and Soviet archaeology, 326–44; in
    557–8, 572                                        U.S., 361–7; and world archaeology, 382–4.
Ford, Richard, 409                                    See also processual archaeology
forest change, 130–1, 316                           Furst, L., 563
Forge, Anthony, 492                                 fur trade (North America), 442, 527
förhistorie (prehistory), 130                      Furtwängler, Adolf, 65, 229
formalist school: of economics, 37; of Russian
    archaeology, 232                                GAIMK. See State Academy for the History of
Formative period, and culture-historical              Material Culture
    archaeology in U.S., 289                        Galaty, M. L., 569
Fort Ancient culture (U.S.), 279, 280, 362          Galileo Galilei, 97
fossils, 92, 149, 203–204. See also extinct         Gallatin, Albert, 159–60, 178
    mammals; palaeontology                          Gallay, Alain, 475, 512, 579
Fotiadis, M., 579                                   Gamble, Clive, 312–13, 567
Foucault, Michel, 9, 470, 473, 537                  Gamio, Manuel, 277
Fowler, D. D., 550                                  Gándara, M., 578
Fowles, J., 562                                     Garbage Project (Arizona), 426
Fox, Cyril, 242, 318, 353                           gardens, and historical archaeology, 461f
Fox, L., 562                                        Gardin, Jean-Claude, 11, 28, 386, 479, 507,
Fox Farm site (Kentucky), 362                         519
France: and culture-historical archaeology, 216,    Garlake, Peter, 4, 200, 201, 567
    253–5, 260; early scientific archaeology and    Garrigou, Félix, 149
    antiquity of humanity, 138, 142, 143; and       Garrod, Dorothy, 255, 383, 570
    Egyptology, 68–9; and Enlightenment, 99,        Garstang, John, 3
    100, 105; and heritage management, 260;         Gathercole, Peter, 194, 451, 452, 566, 567,
    nationalism and national identity of, 212–13,     569
    250; and Palaeolithic archaeology, 148–56;      Gauls (France), 89
    and postprocessual archaeology, 444–6; and      Gayre, R., 200
    Renaissance antiquarianism, 55, 60, 88–9;       Geer, Gerard de, 315, 316
    resources on development of archaeology in,     Geertz, Clifford, 449
    553, 561, 562, 564–5, 570; and scientific       Geikie, A., 564
    antiquarianism, 110. See also French            Gellner, Ernest, 1, 211, 530, 568, 575
    Revolution; logicism                            gender: and ceramics studies in New
Francis I, King (France), 88                          Archaeology, 403, 405; and early prehistoric
Franco, Francisco, 250                                archaeology, 134; and Enlightenment
Frankfort, Henri, 70, 562                             philosophy, 101; and postprocessual
Frankfurt School, 17, 445, 452, 467                   archaeology, 458–60; problems with
Frazer, James, 464                                    archaeological study of, 516–17
Frederick II (Holy Roman Emperor), 49               gender archaeology, 14, 459–60
Freemasonry, 68                                     generalizations: and behavioral correlations,
French Revolution, 112, 113, 122, 167,                509–10; processual archaeology and
    212–13                                            evolutionary, 440; and scientific theory,
“frequency seriation,” 295–7                          30–8
Frere, John, 139                                    General Systems Theory, 419–20, 578. See also
Friche, V. M., 328                                    systems theory
Fried, Morton, 389, 436, 576                        Gening, V. F., 573
Friedman, J., 307                                   Geoffrey of Monmouth, 82
Frobenius, Leo, 201                                 geographical possibilism, 319
Frumkin, G., 574                                    Geological Survey of China, 265



                                                691
                                              Index

geographical areas, and ethnology in U.S.,         “Gothic” literary movement, 112
  180–2                                            Götze, A., 234
geology: and catastrophism, 141; and               Goudie, A., 573
  Palaeolithic archaeology, 138–9, 149; and        Gould, Richard, 462, 578
  stone tools, 93; and uniformitarianism,          Gould, S. J., 566
  144–5, 564. See also earthquakes; glaciers and   government: Childe’s criticism of Soviet, 345;
  glaciation                                         and culture-historical archaeology in Japan,
Gerhard, Eduard, 65                                  263; and culture-historical archaeology in
German Archaeological Institute, 216                 U.S., 301, 303, 559; and evolutionary
German Society for Anthropology, Ethnology,          archaeology in U.S., 184–5, 187, 566; and
  and Prehistoric Archaeology, 235                   future of archaeology, 544; and heritage
Germany: and antiquarianism, 53, 55, 89–90;          management, 260–1; and protection of
  and classical studies, 61, 62; and                 cultural resources, 22. See also public policy
  culture-historical archaeology, 216, 235–41,     Gradmann, Robert, 316
  258, 259, 489; and national identity, 214–15;    Graebner, Fritz, 219
  processual and postprocessual archaeology        Graham, L., 574
  in, 479; and rejection of Scandinavian           Gramsci, Antonio, 451, 479
  archaeology, 136; resources on development       Gran-Aymerich, Eve, 291, 554, 561, 564, 570
  of archaeology in, 552, 554–5, 557, 561, 569,    grand narratives, and postprocessual
  570; and use of term culture, 232, 233. See        archaeology, 471, 555
  also Nazi party; West Germany                    Grant, Madison, 168
Gero, Joan, 458                                    Gräslund, Bo, 127, 225, 557, 563, 564, 568, 572
Gerrard, C., 556                                   Graves-Brown, P., 554, 569
Gibbon, G. E., 578                                 Gray, Harold St. George, 294
Giddens, Anthony, 467, 469                         Grayson, Donald K., 25, 139, 144, 550, 557,
Giffen, Albert Egges van, 300                        564, 565
Gillen, F. J., 189                                 Great Depression (1930s), 301
Gillespie, C. C., 564                              Great Exhibition (London 1851), 146
Gilman, Antonio, 449                               Great Fish River (South Africa), 196
Gimbutas, Marija, 16, 558                          Great Plains (U.S.) hunting groups, 441, 533
Givens, Douglas, 550, 557, 572                     Great Pueblo period (U.S.), 475–6
Glacial Kame culture (U.S.), 279                   Great Serpent Mound (Ohio), 188
glaciers and glaciation, 137, 315                  Great Soviet Encyclopedia, 574
Glacken, C. J., 566                                Great Zimbabwe, 197–201, 567
Gladwin, W. & H. S., 282–3, 284                    Greece (ancient): and classical archaeology, 61,
Gladwin system, and Midwestern Taxonomic             64; and culture-historical archaeology, 216;
  Method, 284                                        and interest in the past, 45–7; and
Glass, H. B., 566                                    Mycenaean period, 227; and Renaissance
Glassie, Henry, 460                                  antiquarianism, 53–4, 57, 58, 60–1; and
Glastonbury (England), 82, 294, 434f                 text-aided archaeology, 505
Gledhill, John, 451                                Greece (modern), 249–50, 560
Gliddon, George R., 169                            Green, S., 569
global prehistory, 382–3                           Greene, K., 564, 569, 573
Glover, I., 12                                     Greener, L., 561
Glueck, Nelson, 375                                Greenhalgh, M., 560
Gobineau, Joseph-Arthur, comte de, 168, 212        Griffin, James B., 283, 577
Godelier, Maurice, 444                             Griffiths, T., 566, 567
Godwin, Harry, 316, 353                            Grignon, Pierre-Clément, 89
Goes Neves, E., 571                                Groenen, M., 564
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 40                    Grotefend, Georg, 70
Goguet, Antoine-Yves, 105                          Gruber, J. W., 564
Golden, C. W., 556                                 Grünert, H., 558, 568
Golomshtok, E., 574                                Guest, Edwin, 317
Goodfield, J., 560                                 Guidi, A., 570
Goodrum, M. R., 562                                Guo Moruo, 266
Goodwin, A. J. H., 203                             Gustavus II Adolphus, King (Sweden), 86
Goodwin-Van Riet Lowe system, 203, 204             Guthe, Carl, 283
Gopal, Lallanji, 269                               Gu Yenwu, 74
Gorenstein, S., 553
Gorodtsov, Vasily, 231–2, 297, 328                 Haber, F. C., 564
Gosden, Christopher, 2, 472, 473, 500, 579         Habermas, Jürgen, 18, 445
Gothic architecture, 49                            habitat, and ecology, 354



                                               692
                                             Index

habitus, and postprocessual archaeology,            Heyne, C. G., 62
  469–70, 474, 520                                  Hides, Shaun, 9
Habu, Junko, 12–13                                  Hierakonpolis (Egypt), 502
Haggett, Peter, 430                                 hierarchies: and biological archaeology, 493; of
Hall, John, 511–12                                     levels in settlement patterns, 379
Hall, M., 567, 571                                  Higgs, Eric S., 310, 361, 428, 430, 575
Hall, Richard, 199, 200                             high-level theory: and archaeology in post-2000
Halle, U., 570                                         era, 519–28, 545–6; and scientific
Halley, Edmund, 110                                    generalizations, 33–8
Hallote, R. S., 571                                 Hildebrand, Bror Emil, 225
Hallpike, Christopher, 511–12                       Hildebrand, Hans, 225
Hallstatt (Austria), 291, 293f                      Hill, James, 393, 403, 404f
Hamada Kosaku, 262–3                                Hindenburg, Paul von, 236
Hamell, George, 475                                 Hinduism, 77, 270–1
Hamilton, Sir William, 57                           Hinsley, C. M., Jr., 550, 558, 566
Hamites (Africa), 202, 241                          Hippopotamus Age, 149, 150
Hammond, N., 571                                    historia, 45, 47
Hampson, N., 563                                    historical archaeology, 460, 461f, 476:
Hanbury-Tenison, J., 571                               development of, 535–6; and gardens, 461f ;
Handsman, Russell, 460                                 and participation of interest groups, 515; and
Han Dynasty (China), 74                                prehistoric archaeology, 517, 527; and
Hanen, M., 578                                         relationship between meanings and material
Han Feizu, 47                                          culture, 476; and study of class, 460; and
Hanke, L., 563                                         text-aided archaeology, 498, 499,
Hargrave, Lyndon, 298                                  504
Härke, H., 568, 570                                historical interpretation, 510
Harrington, M. R., 362                              historical materialism, 33
Harris, Marvin, 33, 389–90, 395, 481, 518, 566,     historical particularism, 219
  568, 573, 575, 576                                historical-processual archaeology, 497
Harrison, Jane, 66                                  historiography: ancient Egyptian and
Harvard University, 187, 253                           Mesopotamian, 560; Chinese tradition of,
Hassan, F. A., 571                                     265, 267; and early functional-processual
Hassmann, H., 570                                      archaeology in U.S., 369; and postprocessual
Haven, Samuel, 162–3, 184, 551                         archaeology, 471; training of archaeologists
Haverfield, F. J., 317                                 in methods of, 550
Hawes, Harriet Ann Boyd, 66, 558, 561               history (discipline): and antiquarianism in
Hawkes, Christopher, 306–7, 499, 517, 572              England, 82; archaeology and changes in
Hawkes, J., 559, 571, 577                              perception of, 547; archaeology and study of
“Hawkes’ hierarchy,” 306                               Chinese, 265–6; archaeology and study of
Hayden, B., 578                                        early India, 269–70; and direct historical
Hébert, Edmond, 144                                   approach, 510–11, 512, 513; and education of
Heffernan, M., 570                                     prehistoric archaeologists, 22; Enlightenment
Hegardt, J., 564                                       and evolutionary view of, 97–105; European
Hegel, Georg, 479                                      nationalism and document-based, 249, “flat”
Hegewisch, M., 570                                     view of aboriginal in U.S., 183; and future of
Hegmon, Michelle, 497, 580                             archaeology, 538, “great men”
Heidegger, Martin, 472, 474                            preoccupation of, 133; and historical
Heizer, R. F., 559, 562, 564, 571, 577                 archaeology, 500; and interest in the past,
Hellmich, Max, 316                                     40–8; and independence in Africa, 205, 206;
Hempel, Carl, 400                                      interpretation of as form of myth-making, 4;
Henri IV, King (France), 88                            and Islamic culture, 77; and Marxist theory,
Henry VIII, King (England), 84                         263, 333–4, 340, 345, 446; medieval view of,
Henry, Joseph, 162–4, 551, 565                         48–52, 81–2, 560; and New Archaeology,
Herculaneum, 58, 59f, 60                               407, 409; and oral traditions, 510, 517;
Herder, Johann, 112, 167, 214, 232, 535,               philosophy and development of Italian
  563                                                  archaeology, 304; of pre-colonial Africa,
heritage management, 260–1. See also culture           275–6, 571; and reconstruction of past, 530,
  resource management                                  531; of science, 26, 401, 576. See also culture
Herman, A., 563                                        history; historiography; Medieval period;
Herodotus, 45                                          past; Renaissance; theoretic history
Herrmann, J., 571                                   History of American Archaeology, A (Willey &
Hewett, Edgar Lee, 184, 280                            Sabloff, 1974–1993), 5



                                                  693
                                              Index

History of Archaeological Thought, A (Trigger,        hominid behavior, 415; and body in
   1989), 555                                         postprocessual archaeology, 473–4; and
history of archaeology: approaches to                 Palaeolithic studies in South Africa, 203–204;
   systematic study of, 5–17; and bibliographical     polygenesis and origins of, 168–9. See also
   essay, 549–60; in China, 74–6, 78; and             human nature
   Enlightenment, 97–105; growing interest in,      humanism, and classical archaeology, 61, 63,
   456–7, 531; in Japan, 76, 78; of modern            67, 535, 538
   Israel, 273; problems of subjectivity,           humanist archaeology, 472–5
   objectivity, and knowledge in, 1–5; and          human nature: and Enlightenment view of
   progress in archaeological interpretation,         progress, 102; recent studies of, 494–5; and
   38–9; and relativism, 40; and science, 26–38;      universal generalizations, 37
   and social context, 17–26; and subjectivity,     Humboldt, Wilhelm von, 61–2
   546–8. See also antiquarianism; classical        Hume, David, 99
   archaeology; culture-historical archaeology;     Hungary: and antiquarianism, 90–1;
   evolutionary archaeology;                          archaeology in, 242
   functional-processual archaeology;               Huns, 82
   postprocessual archaeology; prehistoric          Hunter, J. D., 567
   archaeology; processual archaeology              Hunter, M., 557, 563
Hitler, Adolf, 168, 241                             hunter-gatherers: and behavioral correlations,
Hobbes, Thomas, 95                                    509–10, 517; and complex societies, 533–4;
Hobsbawm, E. J., 568                                  and concepts of time, 41; and ethnographic
Hodder, Ian, 9, 16, 38–9, 248, 260, 444, 450,         analogies in processual archaeology, 441–2;
   452–6, 464–6, 471, 473, 474, 477, 515, 522,        literature on, 564, 567; and New
   538, 569, 578, 579, 580                            Archaeology, 412, 417; subsistence patterns
Hodgen, M. T., 560                                    of, 525
Hodson, F. R., 578                                  hunting practices, of Cree, 524–7. See also
Hoebel, E. A., 399                                    big-game hunting societies
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., 110                             Hussein, Saddam, 272
Hoffman, Michael, 76, 502, 552, 562                 Husserl, Edmund, 472
Hogarth, A., 577                                    Hussey, Christopher, 552
Hogarth, D. G., 79                                  Hutcheson, Francis, 99
Hohokam (U.S.), 282                                 Hutchinson, H. G., 565
Hokkaido (Japan), 263                               Hutson, S., 474, 538, 579, 580
Holder, Preston, 366                                Hutton, James, 144
Hole, Frank, 393, 577                               Huxley, Thomas, 170, 569
holism: in analogues, 209, 222–3; in theoretical    Hvojko, V. V., 234
   approaches, 581                                  hyperdiffusionism, 220–1, 541, 568
Holmes, W. H., 180, 181, 182f, 184
Holtorf, Cornelius, 472, 580                        Ibn Khaldun, Abu Zayd Abd ar-Rahman, 77
Holy Roman Empire, 49, 53                           Ice Man (Austria), 471
Home, Henry (Lord Kames), 99, 101                   idealism: and culture-historical archaeology,
Homeric texts, 255, 324                               304–5; and high-level theory, 520–1; and
homologies: and direct historical approach,           postprocessual archaeology, 29, 30, 446, 447
   511, 516; and theory in culture-historical       ideology: of middle classes and social context of
   archaeology, 307–8. See also analogies             archaeology, 19–20, 146; and postprocessual
Hooton, Ernest, 3                                     archaeology, 450–1. See also beliefs
Hopewell culture (U.S.), 159–63, 279, 280, 395      ideotechnic aspects, of artifacts, 398, 399
Horkheimer, Max, 445                                Ikawa-Smith, F., 562, 570
Horsman, R., 566                                    Im Hof, U., 563
Horton, D., 566                                     Imperial Odessa Society of History and
housing units, at Glastonbury Iron Age site,          Antiquity, 64
   434f                                             Imperial Russian Archaeological Commission,
Howe, J. E., 575                                      230–1
Hoyle, Rafael Larco, 276                            independence: and colonial archaeology in
Hrdlička, Aleš, 186                                 Africa, 205; and interest in history in Egypt,
Huddleston, L. E., 563                                271; and prehistoric archaeology in Ireland,
Hudson, K., 558                                       253
Huffman, Thomas, 200                                independent development, and diffusionism,
Hull, David, 576                                      218–19
Hulse, E., 564                                      index fossils, and Palaeolithic archaeology, 149
human(s): antiquity of, 138–47, 152, 155–8,         India: and antiquarianism, 77; and
   186–7, 557, 564; and Binford on early              culture-historical archaeology, 268–71; and



                                                694
                                                Index

   functional-processual archaeology, 379;               functional-processual archaeology, 379; and
   resources on development of archaeology in,           Islamic period, 73; and Jarmo Project, 373
   554, 570–1, 580                                    Ireland, 249, 253, 257
Indians. See North American indigenous                Iron Age: and housing units at Glastonbury
   peoples                                               site, 434f ; and Thomsen’s scheme for
Indians Before Columbus (Martin, Quimby,                 relative dating, 123–7, 132
   and Collier, 1947), 363                            Iroquois and Iroquoian sites (Canada/U.S.),
indigenous archaeology, 43                               42, 179, 285, 362, 475
indigenous peoples, and future of archaeology,        irrigation systems, 342, 379, 408
   544–5. See also aborigines; North American         Irvine, W., 564
   indigenous peoples                                 Irwin, J. T., 561
individualism, and postprocessual archaeology,        Iselin, Jacques-Christophe, 90
   470                                                Islamic civilization, 73, 77, 257, 271
Indo-European speaking peoples: and                   Islamic Revolution of 1979 (Iran), 272
   antiquarianism, 114; and British colonialism       Israel, 272–5, 503–504, 571
   in India, 269; Childe’s interpretation of, 246,    Italy: philosophy and development of
   248; and cognitive-processual archaeology,            culture-historical archaeology in, 304;
   435; and Eurocentrism, 241; and German                political influences on archaeology in, 250,
   nationalism, 236, 237–8                               251; and Renaissance antiquarianism, 52–5,
inductivism, and Baconian tradition of science,          60; resources on development of archaeology
   36, 37                                                in, 554, 560, 561. See also Pompeii; Roman
industrial archaeology, 556                              Empire
industrialism, 145, 217, 563                          Iversen, E., 561
Industrial Revolution, 164, 174, 217
Ingersoll, D., 578                                    Jacks, P., 560–1
Inka (Peru), 42, 178, 179                             Jacob-Friesen, K. H., 239
innovation: and Childe’s definition of                Jaenen, C., 563
   knowledge, 350–1; and culture-historical           Jairazbhoy, R. A., 409
   archaeology in U.S., 286, 288; and                 James I, King (England), 84
   Darwinian archaeology, 486; and                    Jankuhn, Herbert, 258
   diffusionism, 221; and Montelius’s                 Japan: and concepts of time, 41; and
   interpretation of European prehistory, 228;           culture-historical archaeology, 261–5; early
   and processual archaeology, 428–9                     archaeology in, 76, 78; and interest in past,
Institute of Archaeology (London), 569                   42; and postprocessual archaeology, 474;
Institute of Vertebrate Palaeontology and                resources on development of archaeology in,
   Palaeoanthropology (Beijing), 267                     562, 570. See also Jomon culture
institutions, role of in history of archaeology,      Jarman, M. R., 361
   15–16, 558–9. See also museums; universities       Jarmo Project (Iraq), 373
intellectuals, and Soviet archaeology, 327–8          Jefferson, Thomas, 117, 159, 161
intentionality, and postprocessual archaeology,       Jeffreys, D., 555, 561
   469                                                Jenkins, I., 557, 561
interaction, and processual archaeology 395,          Jenkyns, R., 561
   437–8, 439–40                                      Jennings, Jesse, 514
interest groups, and postprocessual                   Jewish settlement and culture, and Israeli
   archaeology, 451                                      archaeology, 273–4
internalist approaches, to history of                 Jochim, M. A., 578
   archaeology, 25–26, 559                            Joffe, A. H., 571
International Congress of Slavic Archaeology,         Johnson, J. P., 203
   252–3                                              Johnson, Matthew, 469, 484
International Union of Prehistoric and                Johnson, Samuel, 94, 119
   Protohistoric Sciences, 554                        Johnston, W. M., 572
interpretations, as distinct from facts in            Jomon culture (Japan), 12–13, 262, 263, 474
   archaeological theory, 306. See also alternative   Jones, A., 580
   interpretations; interpretive theory               Jones, H., 563
“interpretive archaeology,” 471                       Jones, R., 566, 567
interpretive theory, 432                              Jones, William, 114
intuitive approach, and middle-ranging theory,        Jonker, G., 560
   512, 513                                           Joseph of Arimathea, 82
Inuit, 186. See also Nunamiut Eskimos                 Joyce, Rosemary, 522, 579
Iran, 72, 272, 562                                    Julius Caesar, 46, 108, 213
Iraq: and Assyriology, 70, 72; and                    Junker, K., 570
   culture-historical archaeology, 271–2; and         Jussieu, Antoine de, 94–5



                                                  695
                                              Index

Kaeser, M.–A., 564                                   Krasnoiarsk (Russia), 91
Kaner, S., 570                                       Krech (Crimea), 64
Kant, Immanuel, 492                                  Krichevsky, Yevgeni, 330
Karlsson, H., 579, 580                               Kristiansen, Kristian, 11, 27–28, 261, 450, 559,
Keen, B., 563                                          564, 573, 580–1
Keene, A. S., 427                                    Kroeber, A. L., 180, 295–7, 313, 568
Kehoe, Alice, 550, 554, 558, 564, 566, 572, 576      Kruglov, A. P., 330, 336, 348
Keith, Arthur, 25                                    Kuhn, Thomas, 6–9, 18, 538, 553
Keller, Ferdinand, 134                               Kuklick, B., 550, 559, 562
Kelley, J. H., 578                                   Kuklick, H., 567, 568, 573
Kelly, Robert, 485                                   Kulturgeschichte (culture history), 232
Kemp, Barry, 502                                     Kunstkammer (Royal Collection), 88
Kendrick, T. D., 84, 557, 562                        Kupperman, K. O., 563
Kent, S., 578                                        kurgans (tumuli), 91–2, 231
Kenya, 204, 454f                                     Kus, Susan, 451, 485
Kenyon, Kathleen, 272–3, 571
Khaemwese (Egypt), 44                                labor movements, 217
Khorsabad (Iraq), 70                                 Lafitau, Joseph-Franc ¸ ois, 111
Khudyakov, M., 338                                   Lagerheim, Gustav, 316
Kidder, Alfred, 280–2, 288, 408–409, 557, 572        Lake Dwellings (Switzerland), 134–5
Killan, Gerald, 558                                  Lal, Makkhan, 379
Kingsley, Mary, 196                                  Lamarck, Jean-Baptiste, 145
Kircher, Athanasius, 68, 111                         Lamberg-Karlovsky, C. C., 578
Ki-Zerbo, J., 567, 571                               Laming-Emperaire, Annette, 464, 553, 562, 564
Klein, R. G., 574                                    landscape archaeology, 473–4
Kleindienst, M. R., 578                              landscapes, and interest in past, 42–3
Klejn, Leo, 12, 28, 91, 252, 341, 343, 344,          Lane Fox, Augustus. See Pitt Rivers, Augustus
  415–16, 484, 489–90, 568, 569, 570, 573, 575          Lane Fox
Klemm, Gustav, 168, 232, 233, 237                    language and linguistics: and biological
Kletter, R., 571                                        archaeology, 492; and Childe’s The Aryans,
Klindt-Jensen, Ole, 553, 562, 563, 568, 573             248; and Kossinna’s research on ancient
Kluckhohn, Clyde, 367, 401, 568                         Germans, 236; and Soviet archaeology,
Klüver, Philip, 90                                     337–8. See also Algonquian speaking peoples;
Knapp, A. B., 450                                       epigraphers and epigraphic data;
knowledge: Binford’s view of, 395; and Childe           Indo-European speaking peoples; Siouan
  as Marxist archaeologist, 350–1; and                  speaking peoples
  Foucault’s concept of epistemes, 9–10; and         La Peyrère, Isaac de, 93, 168–9
  future of archaeology, 548; gradual                Laplace, G., 297–8
  accumulation of as problem in history of           Lapstone Creek rock shelter (Australia), 191
  archaeology, 1–5; individual calculations          Larsen, C. S., 559
  versus long-term transmissions of, 525–6;          Larsen, M., 562
  and scientific theory, 28                          Larson, P., 578
Kobayashi Yukio, 264                                 Larsson, T. B., 581
Kofun period (Japan), 262                            Lartet, Edouard, 142, 148–9, 152
Koganei Yoshikiyo, 263                               Las Casas, Bartolomé de, 115
Kohl, Philip, 438, 449, 472, 495, 554, 568, 569,     Laszlo, E., 578
  575, 578                                           La Tène artifacts, 223
Kohn, H., 569                                        Latin America: and culture-historical
kojiki (Register of Ancient Things), 76                 archaeology, 276–8; Marxism and social
Kokkonen, J., 574                                       archaeology in, 496; resources on
Kokugaku (national learning movement), 76               development of archaeology in, 554, 571,
Kolakowski, Leszek, 448, 576                            580. See also Central America; Mesoamerica;
Koldewey, Robert, 72                                    Mexico
Kolpakov, E. M., 574                                 Laufer, Berthold, 280
Korea, 41                                            Laurent, O., 562, 570
Kossack, Georg, 258, 570, 572                        La Vega, Francesco, 58
Kossinna, Gustaf, 235–41, 243, 246, 247, 248,        Layard, Austen, 70, 71f
  258, 558, 568–9                                    Leach, Edmund, 386, 444, 491–2
Kostenki (Ukraine), 231                              Leakey, Louis & Mary, 204–5
Kostrzewski, Józef, 237                             LeBlanc, Stephen A., 393, 419, 578
Kozlowski, Leon, 239, 243                            Lech, J., 569, 570
Kramer, C., 578                                      Lee, Richard, 412



                                                   696
                                               Index

Leeds, E. T., 214                                   Ludlow Massacre site (Colorado), 515
Lefkowitz, M. R., 567                               Lumbreras, Luis, 496
Legendre, J.–P., 570                                Lyell, Charles, 144–5, 146, 157
Legrand d’Aussy, Pierre, 110                        Lyman, R. Lee, 15–16, 180, 556, 557, 558, 559,
Leibniz, Gottfried, 90                                572, 576, 576
Leland, John, 85                                    Lynch, B. D. & T. F., 562
Lelas, S., 559                                      Lyon, E., 559, 572
Leman, Thomas, 113                                  Lyttelton, Bishop Charles, 94
Le Moustier site (France), 148–9
Lenin, V. I., 326, 327                              McBryde, Isabel, 566
Leone, Mark, 393, 428–9, 460, 577, 578, 579         McCall, D. F., 571
Leppmann, W., 561                                   McCann, W. J., 570
Lepsius, Karl, 68, 202                              McCarthy, Fred D., 191, 566
Leroi-Gourhan, André, 307, 463–4, 466, 476,        McCarthy, Joseph, 396
   478, 492, 570                                    McCulloh, James, 159
Le Roy, Julien-David, 60                            McDonald, William, 501, 561
Leroy, Loys, 99                                     McGregor, John C., 284
Leube, A., 570                                      McGuire, J. D., 181, 187
levels, in settlement patterns, 379                 McGuire, Randall, 495, 576
Levine, P., 558, 564                                McIntosh, R. J., 567
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 463, 465, 467, 479, 511      McKay, A. G., 564
Levitt, J., 574                                     McKern, William C., 283, 284, 558
Lewer, N., 571                                      McKusick, M., 558, 566
Lewis-Williams, J. D., 476                          McLennan, John, 154
Lhwyd, Edward, 94                                   McNairn, B., 569
Libby, Willard F., 382, 576                         McNeill, William, 4
Li Ji (Li Chi), 76, 265, 266, 562, 570              MacCormack, S., 563
linearization, as evolutionary mechanism, 424       MacDonald, S., 561
Linnaean-style system, for classifying pottery,     Macedonia, 249
   298                                              MacEnery, Rev. John, 141, 142
Linnaeus, Carolus, 169                              MacGaffey, W., 567
Linton, Ralph, 375                                  Macintosh, N. W. G., 568
Lissarrague, Franc ¸ ois, 505                       MacKendrick, P., 560
literature, revival of German in 18th century,      Mackinder, H. J., 317
   214. See also autobiographies; bibliographical   MacNeish, Richard S., 373, 558, 575
   resources; biographies; Gothic literature        Macpherson, James, 112
lithic debitage, analysis of, 300. See also stone   MacWhite, Eóin, 308, 310
   tools                                            Madison, Rev. James, 159
Lithic period, and culture-historical               Magdalenian culture (France), 255
   archaeology in U.S., 289                         Maglemosian culture (Denmark), 238, 353
Lithuania, 250                                      Mahr, Adolph, 253
Liu, L., 570                                        Mahudel, Nicolas, 105
Lloyd, Seton, 551–2, 562                            Maischberger, M., 570
localities, and culture-historical archaeology in   Majewski, Erazm, 239
   U.S., 289                                        Major, Johann, 90
local nationalism, and ethnicity in Soviet          Malina, Jaroslav, 10, 555
   Union, 339                                       Malinowski, Bronislaw, 319–20, 321, 365
Locke, John, 116                                    Mallows, Wilfrid, 200
logicism, 479–80                                    Malmer, Mats, 479
Lombard kings (Italy), 48                           Malone, C., 570
London Society of Antiquaries, 84                   Malthus, Thomas, 36
Long, Edward, 169                                   mammoths, 142, 143
Longacre, William A., 393, 403, 405                 Mammoth and Wooly Rhinoceros Age, 148
Longshan culture (China), 266                       Man Makes Himself (Childe, 1936), 345–6
Lorenzo, J. L., 571                                 Maori, 193–5
Lowenthal, D., 560                                  Mao Zedong, 266
Lowie, Robert, 365                                  Marchand, S. L., 550, 557, 561
low-level generalizations, 31–2, 36                 Marcus, Joyce, 424, 503, 514, 571
Lubbock, John, 147–8, 171–6, 177, 189, 208,         Marcuse, Herbert, 18, 445
   565                                              Marek, Kurt (C. W. Ceram), 551
Lucretius Carus, Titus, 104                         Mariátegui, José, 496
Lu Dalin, 74                                        Mariette, Auguste, 69



                                                697
                                             Index

marine archaeology, 556                            meanings, and material culture in historical
Marlowe, G., 576                                    archaeology, 476
Marr, Nikolay, 337–8, 339, 526                     Medieval archaeology: and historical
Marschalk, Nicolaus, 90                             archaeology, 499; in Russia, 231, 251–2;
Marsden, B. M., 562                                 written records and development of, 15
Marshall, John, 269                                Medieval period: and travel to Egypt, 68; and
Martin, Paul, 288, 363, 366, 393, 408, 429, 577     view of history, 42, 48–52, 81–2, 560, 562
Martire d’Anghiera, Pietro, 93                     Mediterranean ecological zone, 358
Maruiwi (New Zealand), 193–4                       megalithic tombs, 94, 110
Marx, Karl, 20, 320, 445, 469, 519–20              Megaw, R., 566
Marxism: bibliographical resources on, 557,        Meggers, B. J., 391–2
 575, 576; and Childe, 322, 344–53; and            Meiji revolution of 1868 (Japan), 261
 culture-historical archaeology in China, 266,     Meillassoux, Claude, 445
 267, 268; and culture-historical archaeology      Meinander, C. F., 568
 in Japan, 264; and interpretations of Japanese    Meisterlin, Sigismund, 53
 history, 263; and Latin American social           Mel’gunov, Aleksy, 92
 archaeology, 496; and materialism, 521; and       Meltzer, D. J., 184–5, 550, 557, 566, 578
 neoevolutionism of archaeologists in U.S.,        memory archaeology, 473
 391; and New Archaeology, 416; and                Mendel, Gregor, 30
 postprocessual archaeology, 444–6; and            Mendyk, S., 550
 Soviet archaeology, 328, 330–4; and               Menghin, Oswald, 219
 technological determinism, 388; in U.S.,          mental constructs, culture as, 369
 449–50                                            Menzel, D., 566
Marxist archaeology, 326–353, 489, 496             Mercati, Michel, 93, 95
Masada (Israel), 273                               Merensky, A., 197
Mason, Otis, 177, 181                              Merhart, Gero von, 259
Masry, A. H., 571                                  Merneptah, Pharaoh, 158
Massachusetts Bay Colony, 115                      Merovingian rulers (France), 48–9
Masson, V. M., 341, 342                            Meskell, Lynn, 28, 569, 580
Masterman, Margaret, 9                             Messenger, P. M., 565
material culture: Clark on preservation as issue   Messenia Project (Greece), 376
 in interpretation of, 355; and concept of         Mesoamerica: influence of on cultures of
 archaeological culture in Europe, 299–300;         southeastern U.S., 367; and macroregional
 and current disagreement on goals of               units in processual archaeology, 438. See also
 archaeology, 505–507; and historical               Aztecs; Central America; Maya; Mexico
 archaeology, 476; and postprocessual              Mesolithic period, and Palaeolithic
 archaeology, 453; and structuralism, 466–7;        archaeology, 148, 533, 564
 Taylor and concept of in                          Mesopotamia: and acquisition of ancient works
 functional-processual archaeology, 369; and        of art by England and France, 254; and
 theory in culture-historical archaeology,          Assyriology, 72, 73; bibliographical resources
 309–10                                             on, 560; and Childe on development of
materialism: and American anthropology in           civilization, 323; and concept of time, 41;
 1960s, 390; and Childe’s influence on              and culture-historical archaeology in Iraq,
 processual archaeology, 349; and high-level        271–2; and hyperdiffusionism, 220; and
 theory, 33, 520–1; and technological               interest in past, 43–4; and processual
 determinism, 388; and theory in                    archaeology, 437–8; public interest in, 158
 culture-historical archaeology, 306               Messikommer, Jakob, 134
Matsumoto Hikoshichiro, 262                        Messinia (Greece), 501
Matthews, R., 555, 561                             metallurgy; and African archaeology, 206;
Mauch, Carl, 197                                    Childe’s study of origins and spread of, 324;
Maya: and beginnings of prehistoric                 and interpretation of stone tools, 95–6
 archaeology in U.S., 160, 177;                    Mexican Revolution of 1910–1917, 276
 bibliographical resources on archaeology of,      Mexican War (1848), 178
 556, 565, 571; flow diagram of                    Mexico: and culture-historical archaeology,
 food/monument allocation in, 423f; and             276–8; functional-processual archaeology
 interest in past, 42; and psychological            and settlement patterns in, 380, 382f ; and
 anthropology, 371; and subcultures, 308;           interest in past, 42; New Archaeology and
 urbanism and ceremonial centers of, 513; and       regional surveys of, 402; prehistoric
 views of time, 41; and written records, 503        archaeology of, 177–8; resources on
Mayes, S., 562                                      development of archaeology in, 554, 565,
Mazar, A., 571                                      571; Spanish colonialism and destruction of
Mazel, A. D., 567                                   archaeological monuments, 116–17. See also



                                               698
                                              Index

  Aztecs; Central America; Maya;                   Morrell, J. B., 559
  Mesoamerica; Mixtec culture; Olmec               Morris, Ian, 9, 66, 216, 501–502, 504, 506, 510,
  culture; Zapotec culture                          561
Meyer, Eduard, 234                                 Morse, Edward, 14, 262
Michael, H. N., 574                                Morse, M., 564
Michelangelo, 55                                   Mortillet, Gabriel de, 149–56, 208, 209, 255,
Middle East: and Christian view of world            564
  history, 50–1; and culture-historical            Mortimer, N., 562
  archaeology, 255–6, 271–5; and Montelius’s       Morton, Samuel, 160, 169
  interpretation of European prehistory, 229;      Moscow Archaeological Society, 231
  resources on development of archaeology in,      Moser, S., 566
  554, 571                                         Moszyńska, W., 574
middle-range theory: New Archaeology and           motifs, and Thomsen’s classification of Iron
  development of, 414–15; and scientific            Age artifacts, 125–7
  generalizations, 32–3, 34, 36; types of in       Moundbuilders (U.S.), 159–63, 181, 185,
  post-2000 era, 508–19                             200–1, 557, 565, 566
Middle Woodland Period, 182–3                      Mousterian Epoch, 150, 255, 403
Midwestern Taxonomic Method, 283–5, 362,           Much, Matthäus, 229
  364, 393, 572, 577                               Müller, Gerhard, 91
migration: and Childe on cultural change, 246;     Müller, Sophus, 223, 328, 375
  and culture-historical archaeology in U.S.,      multidisciplinary studies, and contextual
  286; and interest in ethnicity in Europe, 214;    approach to middle-ranging theory, 513–14
  and Kossinna’s research on ancient Germans,      multilinear evolution: and ecological approach,
  238. See also diffusion and diffusionism          389; and economic approach to
Millar, John, 99                                    functional-processual archaeology, 325–6;
Miller, A. A., 328, 341                             and Marxism, 333, 350
Miller, Daniel, 19, 450–1, 452, 567, 579           multiple working hypotheses, 514–15
Miller, Mikhail, 553, 573                          multiregional model, of cultural origins in
Millon, René, 391                                  Chinese archaeology, 268
Mills, William C., 279                             multivocality: and multiple working
Mink, L.O., 572                                     hypotheses, 515; and postprocessual
Mississippian culture (U.S.), 159–63, 283. See      archaeology, 471
  also Moundbuilders                               Mulvaney, D. John, 191, 566
Mitchell, T., 561–2                                Murdock, G. P., 350
Mithen, Stephen, 492, 579–80                       Murray, Kenneth, 205
Mixtec culture (Mexico), 424                       Murray, Tim, 15, 26, 556, 558, 562, 564, 565,
Mizoguchi, Koji, 474, 570                           566, 567, 570
Moa hunters (New Zealand), 193, 194, 195           Museum of Northern Antiquities (Denmark),
Moberg, Carl-Axel, 415, 478, 573                    123, 127
modernism, and postmodernism, 448                  museums: and antiquarianism in Scandinavia,
modular housing units, 434f                         88; and classical studies, 64; and interest in
Mogollon (U.S.), 282                                past, 44; and culture-historical archaeology
Molino, Jean, 9                                     in Mexico, 277; and professionalization of
Mongait, A. L., 574                                 archaeology in U.S., 187; and Soviet
monogenism, and evolutionary archaeology,           archaeology, 327
  114, 565                                         Mussolini, Benito, 251
Monte Albán (Mexico), 277                         Mycenaean period, in Greece, 227, 229
Montelius, Oscar, 7, 224–32, 239, 241, 243,        Myres, John L., 241–2, 317, 569
  246, 247, 568                                    myths: and historical interpretation, 4; and
Montesquieu, Charles-Louis, baron de, 99            interest in the past, 41–2
Montezuma Castle (New Mexico), 183
Montfaucon, Bernard de, 56, 90, 94                 Nabonidus, King (Iraq), 44
Moore, Clarence B., 180                            Nader, Laura, 25, 537
Moore, J. A., 427                                  Nagel, Ernest, 31
Moorehead, Warren K., 187, 279                     Napoleon I (Napoleon Bonaparte), 60, 68, 104,
Moorey, P. R. S., 556, 571                           167, 213, 254, 557
Mora, G., 570                                      Napoleon III, 213
Moret, Alexandre, 323                              Narr, Karl, 259
Morgan, C., 578                                    narratives, and postprocessual archaeology,
Morgan, Jacques de, 72, 291                          471–2, 580. See also discourse; grand
Morgan, Lewis H., 154, 177, 179, 187                 narratives; oral traditions; story-telling
Morlot, Adolf, 163, 551, 563, 564, 573             Nash, S. E., 556



                                               699
                                             Index

National Bureau of Cultural Relics (China),       Nihon Shoki (Chronicles of Japan), 76
  266–7                                           Nilsson, Sven, 12, 129–30, 315, 564
National Institute of Anthropology and            Nineveh, 70, 71f
  History (Mexico), 277                           Nippur (Iraq), 72
nationalism: and antiquarianism in France, 89;    nomothetic generalizations, and New
  and Australian prehistory, 192; and               Archaeology, 408, 409
  beginnings of prehistoric archaeology, 133,     non-cultural formation processes
  136; bibliographical resources on, 554, 568,      (N-transforms), 427–8
  569–70; and culture-historical archaeology in   Nordenskiold, Gustaf, 280
  India, 270–1; and development of                Normans, and English national identity, 214
  culture-historical archaeology in Europe,       North American indigenous peoples: and
  248–61, 300; and early interest in ethnicity,     beginnings of prehistoric archaeology in
  212; emergence of African, 205; and               U.S., 158–64; and culture-historical
  Kossinna on ancient Germans, 236, 240; and        archaeology in U.S., 286, 288–9; and
  romanticism, 112; and Scandinavian                diffusion, 542; early European theories on
  archaeology, 214; and Zimbabwe, 200. See          origins of, 114–18, 177, 563; evolutionary
  also patriotism                                   archaeology in U.S. and views of, 183–5,
National Museum of Ireland, 253                     188–9, 566; and New Archaeology, 409–10;
National Polytechnical School (Mexico), 277         political activism by and postprocessual
National Science Foundation (U.S.), 373, 407        archaeology, 458; and polygenic theories of
Native Americans. See North American                human origins, 169. See also Algonquian
  indigenous peoples                                speaking peoples; Cree; Creek Indians;
natural selection: and antiquity of humanity,       Moundbuilders; Pueblo Indians; Shoshone;
  146–7; and biological archaeology, 495; and       Siouan speaking peoples; Zuñi sites
  evolutionary archaeology, 173–4, 175, 176,      Norway, 234, 250. See also Scandinavia and
  487; and processual archaeology, 429; and         Scandinavian archaeology
  racism, 170; and role of induction and          Nott, Josiah C., 169
  deduction in scientific theory, 36–7            November Uprising of 1830 (Poland), 250
nature, distinction between culture and, 465–6    Novgorod (Russia), 251–2
Nazi party (Germany), 240–1, 487, 570             Nubia, and Egyptology, 68, 380, 505, 513
Neal, W. G., 199                                  numismatics, 564
Neanderthals, 170, 255, 403                       Nunamiut Eskimos (Alaska), 405–406, 417,
Nederveen Pieterse, J., 566                         418f
Nelson, Nels C., 280, 281, 295                    Nünningh, J. H., 90
Neo-Confucianism, 76                              Nyerup, Rasmus, 119, 123
neoconservatism, 260, 543                         Nzewunwa, N., 571
neoevolutionism, 386–92, 395, 396, 410, 436,
  437, 449, 576                                   oasis theory, of origin of food production, 12,
Neo-Marxism, 34, 445, 449                           317
neoracism, 495                                    Obermaier, Hugo, 255, 280
Netherlands, 99, 478, 570                         Obermeilen (Switzerland), 134
networks, and settlement archaeology, 377         objectivity, problem of in history of
neuroscience, and binary oppositions, 463           archaeology, 1–5. See also subjectivity
New Archaeology: bibliographical resources        O’Brien, Michael, 15–16, 180, 556, 557, 558,
  on, 577; and conjunctive approach to              559, 572, 576
  functional-processual archaeology, 371–2; in    “occurrence seriation,” 294–5, 297
  England, 433–6; processualism and early,        O’Connor, David, 502, 567
  392–418; and role of institutions, 16; and      O’Connor, T., 574
  views of North American indigenous              Odell, George, 440
  peoples, 542. See also processual archaeology   Okladnikov, A. P., 574
“new classical archaeology,” 501                  Oldovai Gorge (Kenya), 204–5
“new Culture History,” 581                        Olmec culture (Mexico), 42
New Economic Policy (Soviet Union), 327,          Olsen, J. W., 570
  328                                             Olympia (Greece), 63
New Guinea, and lake dwellings, 134               On the Origin of Species (Darwin, 1859), 104,
Newton, Charles, 66                                 146–7
Newton, Isaac, 97, 106, 351                       Opovo site (Yugoslavia), 471
New World, and study of past in colonial          optimal foraging theory, 419
  settings, 114–18                                oral traditions: and historical interpretation,
New Zealand, 193–5, 567                             510, 517; and New Zealand archaeology,
Niebuhr, Barthold, 62                               194, 195 See also folklore; myths
Nigeria, 205, 275                                 Orenstein, H., 573



                                              700
                                                Index

orientalism, 73                                      Peabody Museum of Archaeology and
Orme, Bryony, 11, 579                                   Ethnology (Harvard University), 566
Orser, C. E., Jr., 569                               Peacock, D. P. S., 560
Ortelius, Abraham, 86                                Peake, Harold J. E., 12, 242, 318–19, 325, 552
Ortman, Scott, 475–6                                 Pearce, R. H., 563
Orton, C., 578                                       Pearson, R. J., 570
Ossian (Celtic bard), 112                            Pecos Conference (1927), 282
Ottaway, J. H., 569                                  Pecos Pueblo (New Mexico), 280–1
Ottoman Empire, 255                                  Peel, J. D., 564
Outline of Cultural Materials (Murdock et al.,       “peer polity” interaction, 438
  1938), 369                                         Peiresc, Nicolas Fabri de, 89
                                                     Pengelly, William, 146, 565
Paddayya, K., 564, 580                               Peregrine, P., 580
Pagden, A., 563                                      Pérez Gollán, J. A., 571
Pahlavi, Mohammad Reza, 272                          Pergamon (Greece), 64
Paine, R., 571                                       Péringuey, Louis, 203
palaeobotany, 361                                    Perry, W. J., 220, 319
palaeoeconomy, 361                                   Persepolis (Iran), 70
paleoethnography, 371                                Persian Empire, 70, 229, 272
palaeoethnological archaeology, in Soviet            Peru: and culture-historical archaeology, 276;
  Union, 327–8, 330                                     and early functional-processual archaeology,
Palaeo-Indian sites (U.S.), 279                         366, 375; Marxism and social archaeology in,
palaeolithic archaeology: and African colonial          496; prehistoric archaeology of, 177–8;
  archaeology, 203–5; and antiquity of                  Spanish colonialism and destruction of
  humanity, 138–9; and beginnings of                    archaeological monuments, 116–17. See also
  prehistoric archaeology, 147–56;                      Inka; Latin America
  bibliographical resources on, 564–5; and           Peter the Great, Czar, 91
  culture-historical archaeology, 255, 267; and      Petrarch, 53
  disciplinary specialization, 15; and migration     Petrie, W. M. F., 3, 24, 69, 158, 221–2, 291,
  of hominids, 532–3; and radiocarbon dating,           292f, 294–5, 296f, 297, 562
  384; and Soviet archaeology,                       Petrova-Averkieva, Yu, 575
  335, 341                                           phases, and Midwestern Taxonomic Method,
palaeontology, 138–9, 141, 149, 519                     283, 284, 289
palaeopsychology, 371, 401                           phenomenology, and postprocessual
Palestine, 272–5, 571                                   archaeology, 472–3, 474, 579
Pan-Russian Conference for Archaeology and           Phidias (Greece), 57
  Ethnography, 330                                   Phillips, Philip, 289, 307, 308, 390, 401, 409
paradigms, and Kuhn’s model of scientific            philosophy: and Enlightenment, 99; and
  practice, 6–9, 538, 553                               processual archaeology, 400–401, 578; and
Paris Exposition of 1867, 155                           theory of culture-historical archaeology,
Parker, A. C., 362                                      303–6. See also epistemology; idealism;
Parker Pearson, Michael, 450, 451                       materialism; positivism; rationalism
Parry, G., 563                                       Phoenician alphabet, 70
Parslow, C. C., 557                                  physical anthropology, and Soviet archaeology,
Parsons, J. R., 402                                     338
Parsons, T., 573                                     physical sciences, and technical developments
past: classical archaeology and interest in, 40–8,      in archaeological interpretation, 23, 540
  560; Enlightenment and evolutionary view           Picard, Casimir, 143
  of, 97–105; history and reconstruction of,         Piggott, Stuart, 10–11, 305–6, 307, 499, 537,
  530; medieval view of, 49–52; study of in             557, 558, 562, 563, 569
  colonial settings, 114–18                          Pigorini, Luigi, 250
patriotism: and antiquarianism in northern           Pinsky, V., 572, 578
  Europe, 82; and early interest in ethnicity,       Pitt Rivers, Augustus Lane Fox, 291, 293–5,
  211; and Kossinna on ancient Germans, 236;            300, 571
  and prehistoric archaeology in Denmark,            plants. See agriculture; floral remains; forest
  121; and Slavic archaeology, 340. See also            change; pollen analysis; vegetation zones
  nationalism                                        Platonova, Nadezhda, 574
Patterson, Thomas C., 449, 495, 557, 566, 567,       Plekhanov, G. V., 334
  569, 576, 578, 579                                 Pliny the Elder, 46
Pauketat, Timothy, 497                               Plog, Fred, 393, 408, 429
Paul II, Pope, 55                                    Pluciennik, M., 564
Pausanias (Greece), 46                               Podgayetsky, G. P., 330, 336, 348



                                                 701
                                             Index

Poland: and culture-historical archaeology          postmold patterns, 300
  since 1990s, 489, 490; nationalism and            postprocessual archaeology: bibliographical
  archaeology in, 215, 250, 256; resources on         resources on, 555, 576–80; and biological
  development of archaeology in, 570                  explanations of human behavior, 494; and
Polanyi, Karl, 432                                    classical archaeology, 501–502; and
Poliakov, L., 569                                     competing theoretical approaches in
“political archaeology,” 409                          post-2000 era, 485–6; as conscious alternative
politics: aborigines and Australian, 192; and         to processual archaeology, 444–78; and
  biological explanations of human behavior,          cultural archaeology, 495; and Egyptology,
  494; Childe and racism, 248; Cold War and           502; in Europe, 478–80; and high-level
  functional-processual archaeology in U.S.,          theory, 521–2; and historical archaeology,
  373, 396; and culture-historical archaeology        517; and ideas as principal determinants of
  in Japan, 263, 264; and culture-historical          behavior, 8; psychological states and
  archaeology in Mexico, 277; and ideas about         determinants of human behavior, 526; and
  the past, 41–2; Indian activism and                 scientific theory, 29–30; and text-aided
  postprocessual archaeology in U.S., 458;            archaeology, 504–505
  influence of on archaeology, 3–4; and             poststructuralism, and postprocessual
  interpretation of archaeological data, 250–1;       archaeology, 467–8, 469
  and Israeli archaeology, 274; and Kossinna’s      pottery types, and cultural history of American
  misuse of archaeological data, 236–7, 240–1;        Southwest, 281, 295–9. See also ceramics
  and postprocessual archaeology, 470–1; and        Powell, John Wesley, 184, 185, 187
  poststructuralism, 467; and protest               practical applications, emphasis on in New
  movements in U.S. of 1950s and 1960s,               Archaeology, 408–409. See also empiricism
  410–11; and social context of archaeology,        practice theory, 469–70
  530, 543–4, 555. See also conservatism;           Praxiteles (Greece), 57
  government; nationalism; patriotism               preclass societies, and postprocessual
Politis, G. G., 496, 571, 580                         archaeology, 445
pollen analysis, 316                                predepositional theory, 431–2
Pollock, S., 571                                    prediction, and explanation in New
polygenesis, and origins of human beings,             Archaeology, 400–401
  168–9, 565                                        prehistorians, and archaeologists, 307, 354
Polynesians, 193–4, 195, 436, 514                   prehistoric anthropology, and culture-historical
polythetic definition, of archaeological              archaeology in Germany, 235
  cultures, 300                                     prehistoric archaeology: and antiquarianism,
Pomian, K., 563                                       80, 110; beginnings of, 121–65, 535;
Pompeii, 58, 60, 63, 427                              bibliographical resources on, 563–5; and
Pontoppidan, Erik, 95, 110                            culture-historical archaeology, 216; and
Popper, Karl, 27                                      ethnology, 166; and historical or text-aided
popular culture, images of Africans in, 566           archaeology, 498–505, 517, 527; and Maya,
population: and colonial archaeology in U.S.,         503; recognition of stone tools and
  183; and development of civilization,               development of, 92–7. See also prehistory
  129–30, 324–5, 411                                Prehistoric England (Clark, 1940), 357
Porter, R., 564                                     Prehistoric Europe: The Economic Basis (Clark,
Portugal, 253                                         1952), 358, 360
positivism: and Binford’s influence on New          Prehistoric Man (Wilson, 1876), 178
  Archaeology, 400; and cultural evolutionism       Prehistoric Society, 575
  in American anthropology, 387; and                Pre-historic Times (Lubbock, 1865), 171–2, 175
  epistemology in history of archaeology, 2;        prehistory: broad outline of trends in, 532–4;
  and postprocessual archaeology, 452; and            and culture-historical archaeology, 307;
  processual archaeology, 29, 30, 578; and            Mortillet’s epochs of, 150, 151f; use of term,
  social context, 17, 530                             133, 564; and psychological anthropology,
Posnansky, M., 567, 571                               401; and world archaeology, 383. See also
Possehl, Gregory, 485–6                               prehistorians; prehistoric archaeology; world
possibilism, and cultural change, 319. See also       archaeology
  environmental possibilism                         Prescott, William H., 178
Post, E. J. Lennart von, 316                        presentism, in histories of science and
Postclassic period, and culture-historical            archaeology, 26, 559–60
  archaeology in U.S., 289                          preservation, of material culture, 355
postdepositional human activities, 427–8, 432       Press, G. A., 560
postmodernism, and postprocessual                   Preston, D., 576
  archaeology, 446–8, 449. See also radical         Prestwich, Joseph, 146
  postmodernism                                     Preucel, R. W., 578, 579, 580



                                                  702
                                               Index

Prichard, James Cowles, 169–70                         Euro-American views of Indians,
Priest, Josiah, 160                                    159, 160; and evolutionary archaeology,
processual archaeology: bibliographical                167–71, 189, 195–207, 565–6, 567. See also
  resources on, 576–80; Canada and                     ethnicity
  combination with culture-historical               Radcliffe-Brown, E. R., 319–20, 321, 365
  archaeology, 312; and competing theoretical       radical postmodernism, 447
  approaches in post-2000 era, 485–6;               radiocarbon dating, 382–4, 576
  definition of, 314; diversification of, 418–44;   Raglan, Lord, 220
  and early New Archaeology, 392–418; in            Raleigh, Walter, 97
  Europe, 478–80; and historical archaeology,       Ramage, N., 561
  499; and indigenous peoples, 458; in Israel,      Ramsden, P. G., 504
  274; and Kuhn’s idea of scientific                Randall-MacIver, David, 199
  revolutions, 7–8; and materialism, 349; and       random intrasite sampling, 402
  neoevolutionism, 386–92; and positivist           Ranov, V. A., 574
  epistemology, 29; and prehistoric                 Raphael, 54
  archaeology, 517; and Soviet archaeology,         Rappaport, Roy, 424
  489; and universal generalizations, 37. See       Rathje, William, 393, 426
  also functional-processual archaeology;           rationalism: and antiquarianism, 110; Binford
  postprocessual archaeology                           and New Archaeology, 395; and ecological
“processual-plus” archaeology, 497                     archaeology, 525; and Enlightenment, 98;
production, and Marxist archaeology, 331–2,            and logicism, 480; and romantic approaches
  334, 496                                             to archaeology, 537; and views of human
professionalization: and classical archaeology,        behavior, 11
  64–5; and evolutionary archaeology in U.S.,       Ratnagar, S., 571
  187–8; and prehistoric archaeology in             Ratzel, Friedrich, 218–19, 233, 279, 567
  Germany, 235                                      Ravdonikas, V. I., 329f, 330, 334, 338, 574
progress, concept of, 98, 101–102, 346,             Ravetz, A., 569
  446                                               Rawlinson, Henry, 70
promotion, as evolutionary mechanism,               Raynal, Guillaume-Thomas, 178
  424                                               Read, D. W., 578
propaganda, and misinterpretation of                realism: and epistemology of science, 30; and
  archaeological data, 543–4                           processual archaeology, 578
Proskouriakoff, Tatiana, 558                        Redfield, Robert, 366
Prostov, E., 574                                    Redford, D. B., 560
Protestant Reformation, 82                          Redman, Charles L., 393, 419, 425, 577
Prussia, and classical studies, 61–2                refuse disposal, patterns of, 426, 427
psychic unity, 100–102, 154, 167, 491               regional catastrophism, 141
psychological anthropology, 365, 371, 401           regional cultural chronologies, and
psychology: and behaviorism, 387; and Binford          culture-historical archaeology in U.S., 285–6,
  on understanding of prehistory, 401–402              288
public interest: in controversies concerning        regional diversity, in history of archaeology,
  archaeological finds, 3; in Japanese history,        12–15, 536
  264–5; in literature on history of                regional surveys, and New Archaeology,
  archaeology, 551–2; in pre-Islamic history in        402
  Middle East, 271                                  regions, and culture-historical archaeology in
public policy, and future of archaeology, 548.         U.S., 289
  See also government                               Reid, A., 567
Pueblo Indians, 183, 280, 475–6                     Reid, D. M., 556, 562, 571
Pumpelly, Raphael, 12, 234, 317                     Reid, Thomas, 99
punctuated equilibrium, 413                         Reinach, Salomon, 229
Puritans, in Massachusetts, 115                     Reindeer Age, 148, 150
Putnam, Frederic W., 180, 186, 187, 188             Reisner, George, 69, 203, 280
Puycournian Epoch, 150                              relative dating, and prehistoric archaeology,
                                                       121–9, 135
Qing Dynasty (China), 74–5                          relativism: and biological explanations of
Quimby, G. I., 288, 363                                human behavior, 494; continuing challenge
                                                       of, 529–31; and cultural construction of
race and racism: and biological explanations of        gender, 516; and postmodernism, 446, 447;
  human behavior, 494, 495; and colonialism,           and postprocessual archaeology, 468, 470,
  556; and culture-historical archaeology,             477; and scientific theory, 28; and social
  236–7, 248; and diffusionism, 217; in                context of archaeology, 18–19, 40; use of
  Egyptology and Assyriology, 73; and                  term, 2–3. See also cultural relativism



                                                  703
                                                 Index

religion: and antiquarianism, 77, 120; and             romanticism: and antiquarianism, 110–14; and
   archaeology in Palestine and Israel, 273, 274;        rationalist approaches to archaeology, 537;
   and biological archaeology, 492–4; and                and views of human behavior, 11
   development of archaeology in Japan, 76,            Rose, M. A., 565
   263; and fundamentalism in contemporary             Rosellini, Ippolito, 68
   U.S., 547; and interest in past, 44–5; and          Rosetta Stone, 68
   Montelius’s interpretation of European              Rosicrucianism, 68
   prehistory, 228; and postprocessual                 Rossi, P., 560, 561
   archaeology, 450; and sacrifices as behavioral      Rous, John, 84
   correlations, 509; and transmission of Cree         Rouse, Irving B., 289, 299, 363–4, 415, 568
   ecological knowledge, 525. See also Bible;          Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 111, 174
   creationism; deism; Hinduism; Roman                 Rowe, J. H., 561, 566
   Catholic Church                                     Rowlands, Rev. Henry, 118
Renaissance: and antiquarianism, 52–61;                Rowlands, M. J., 307, 452
   bibliographical resources on, 561; and              Rowley-Conwy, Peter, 354, 563, 564, 568, 575
   Egyptology, 67                                      Royal Geographical Society, 197
Renfrew, Colin, 259–60, 383–4, 393, 413, 425,          Royal Museum of Ethnology (Berlin), 154
   433–6, 501, 568, 576, 577, 579, 580                 Royal Society of London, 106, 107, 112, 146,
rescue archaeology, 301, 303, 444                        537
retrieval theory, 432                                  Rudbeck, Olof, 88
revisionist studies, of Soviet archaeology,            Rudenko, S. I., 328, 574
   573                                                 Rudolph, R. C., 562
revolution: and Childe’s influence on                  Ruskin, John, 217
   archaeology, 247, 324–5, 573; Kuhn’s model          Rushton, J. P., 495
   of scientific, 6–9. See also cultural revolution;   Russia: and antiquarianism, 91–2; and classical
   French Revolution                                     archaeology, 64; and culture-historical
Rey, Estrella, 496                                       archaeology since 1990s, 490; and
Rey, Pierre-Philippe, 444                                development of archaeology in late 19th
Reyman, J. E., 550, 575                                  century, 230–2; and environmental
Rhode, Andreas & Christian, 90                           functional-processualism, 316–17. See also
Rhodes, Cecil, 197                                       Soviet Union
Rhodesia Ancient Ruins Limited, 197, 199               Russian Academy for the History of Material
Rice, M., 561                                            Culture (RAIMK), 326
Rich, Claudius, 70                                     Russian Academy of Sciences, 91
Richerson, Peter, 525                                  Russian Archaeology Society, 231
Ridgeway, William, 66                                  Rygh, Olof, 234
Ridgway, D., 569
Ridley, R. T., 550, 557, 561, 562                      Sabloff, Jeremy A., 5, 282–3, 364, 532, 553,
Rigollot, Marcel-Jérôme, 144, 146                       556, 559, 562, 565, 566, 571, 575, 576, 578
Rindos, David, 429–30                                  Sabloff, P., 576
Ripley site (New York), 362                            Sackett, James, 142, 564
Ritchie, William, 363                                  Sahlins, Marshall D., 389, 436, 441, 449, 469,
ritual, and postprocessual archaeology, 451               494, 576
Rivers, W. H. R., 219–20                               Saint-Simon, Henri de, 320
Robenhausen (Switzerland), 134                         Saitta, Dean, 509
Robertshaw, P. T., 567, 571                            Salazar, António, 253
Robertson, William, 99, 103, 178                       Salmon, Merrilee H., 440, 492, 578
Robinson, Keith, 201                                   Salmon, W. C., 440
Rodden, J., 562, 564                                   salvage archaeology, 340, 556
Roemer, C., 555, 561                                   Samothrace (Greece), 63
Rogers, G. M., 567                                     sampling strategies, and New Archaeology,
Roman Catholic Church, 49–52, 115                         402, 404f
Roman Empire: and culture-historical                   San (South Africa), 417, 441
   archaeology, 216; and evolutionary view of          San Cristóbal Pueblo site (New Mexico), 280,
   cultural development, 104; French interest             295
   in, 213; and interest in past, 46–7; and            Sanders, William T., 380, 402
   medieval view of history, 48–9; and                 Sanderson, S. K., 564
   Renaissance antiquarianism, 53–4, 56, 57, 60.       Sandford, E. M., 560
   See also Pompeii                                    San Juan baskets (southwestern U.S.), 370
Romanesque architecture, 49                            San Miguel Amantla (Mexico), 277
Roman-German Boundary Commission, 300                  Sanoja, Mario, 496
Roman-Germanic Central Museum, 216                     Santley, R. S., 402



                                                   704
                                              Index

Sarauw, Georg, 315                                 seriation, and technical developments in
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 16                                 culture-historical archaeology, 294–7. See also
Sarzec, Ernest de, 72                                 stratigraphy
Saudi Arabia, 453, 455                             Service, E. R., 389, 436
Saunders, P. T., 578                               settlements and settlement archaeology:
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 463                           bibliographical resources on, 556, 575–6;
Scandinavia and Scandinavian archaeology: and         Binford’s view of, 397–8; and diversification
   beginning of functional-processual                 of processual archaeology, 419; and
   archaeology, 315–16; development and               functional-processual archaeology, 372–82;
   spread of prehistoric archaeology, 129–38;         and landscape archaeology, 473–4; and
   and ecological research, 315; literature on,       technical developments in culture-historical
   557, 563–4; nationalism and archaeology in,        archaeology, 303; Willey’s view of, 375–8,
   214, 257, 300; and processual archaeology,         379. See also housing units; seasonality;
   478, 479; systematic antiquarian research in,      urbanism
   86, 88. See also Denmark; Norway; Sweden        Setzler, F. M., 372
Schanfield, Sally. See Binford, Sally              shamanism, and hunter-gatherers, 509–10, 517
Schiffer, Michael B., 2, 8, 16, 393, 426–8, 443,   Shang Dynasty (China), 74, 75, 265–6
   481, 506, 556, 559, 576, 578, 580               Shanks, Michael, 65, 467, 468–9, 470, 500, 501,
Schlanger, Nathan, 550, 567, 571                      556, 561, 579
Schliemann, Heinrich, 234, 255–6, 291, 571         Shapin, S., 559
Schliz, Alfred, 316                                Shapiro, J., 574
Schmerling, Philippe-Charles, 141, 142             Shaw, Charles Thurstan, 206
Schmidt, P. R., 567                                Shaw, T., 567
Schmidt, Wilhelm, 219                              Shay, T., 571
Schnapp, Alain, 47, 550, 555, 560, 562,            Sheehan, B. W., 563
   565                                             Sheets-Pyenson, S., 564
Schneer, C. J., 564                                shell middens and shell mounds, 14, 132–3,
Schneider, L., 563                                    163, 179, 180, 262, 565
Schofield, John, 205                               Shennan, Stephen, 475, 490–1, 580
Schoolcraft, Henry, 166                            Shepherd, N., 567, 571
Schrire, C., 567, 571                              Sherratt, A. G., 432–3, 569, 579
Schuchhardt, Carl, 228–9, 235, 300                 Shetrone, H. C., 279
Schwartz, Douglas, 5, 553                          shield motifs, in Kenya, 454f
Schwerin von Krosigk, H., 568                      Shinnecock site (New York), 362
science: archaeology and Baconian model of, 5;     Shinto religion, 76, 263
   history of, 26, 576; history of archaeology     Shnirelman, V. A., 339, 575
   and concepts and methods of, 26–38, 555;        Shorr, P., 552
   social context of, 18–19; and Soviet            “short chronology,” of European prehistory,
   archaeology, 326; and use of term scientist,       227
   565; and view of history in New                 Shoshone, 420, 421f
   Archaeology, 401. See also geology; physical    Shrimpton, G. S., 560
   sciences; scientific revolutions                Sibbald, Robert, 94
scientific antiquarianism, 106–10                  Siberia: and kurgans, 91; and shamanism,
scientific revolutions, 6–9                           509–10
Scotland: and beginnings of prehistoric            Siedlungsarchäologie (settlement archaeology),
   archaeology, 133, 564; Childe’s                    237
   interpretation of prehistory, 348, 352, 376;    Sielmann, B., 258
   and Enlightenment, 100, 563                     Sieveking, G., 575
Scott, S., 559                                     Silberman, N. A., 571
Scott, Walter, 112                                 Silbury Hill (England), 108, 118
Searle, John, 469                                  Silverberg, Robert, 457, 557, 565, 566
seasonality, and functional-processual             Sima Qian, 47
   archaeology, 357–8                              Simonsen, Vedel, 123
Second Kitchen-Midden Commission                   Singh, S., 571, 580
   (1885–1900), 315                                Siouan speaking peoples, 475
selectionism: and competing theoretical            sites, and conjunctive approach to
   approaches in post-2000 era, 486–7, 490–1;         functional-processual archaeology, 369
   and high-level theory, 33, 428–9                Skara Brae (Orkney), 243f, 301, 352
Seligman, Charles, 202                             skeletal remains: and biological anthropology,
Semenov, S. A., 336, 574                              513–14; and culture-historical archaeology,
sequence dates, and Petrie’s chronology for           301. See also burials
   Predynastic Egypt, 295, 296f                    Skinner, Henry D., 194



                                               705
                                                 Index

Skjoldborg, Johan, 211                                 Solomon, Char, 558
Sklenář, K., 562                                     Solutrean Epoch, 150, 255
Skrotzky, N., 570                                      Song Dynasty (China), 74
Slavic archaeology, 231, 252–3, 340                    Sørensen, M. L. S., 558
Slotkin, J. S., 560                                    Sorrenson, M. P. K., 567
Small, D., 571                                         South, Stanley, 460, 558, 577
small-scale societies, and settlement patterns,        South Africa, 196, 197, 199, 203, 204, 567. See
   380                                                    also Africa
Smith, Adam, 99, 473                                   Southern Illinois University, 549
Smith, George, 158                                     Southwest (U.S.), and culture history, 280–2,
Smith, Grafton Elliot, 220, 221, 318, 319, 325,           295–7, 298, 384
   568                                                 Sovetskaya Arkheologiya (journal), 340
Smith, Harlan, 362                                     Soviet Anthropology and Archeology (journal),
Smith, M. A., 307                                         575
Smith, Monica L., 495                                  Soviet Union: culture-historical archaeology
Smith, P. E. L., 564                                      following collapse of, 489–90; and
Smith, P. J., 570, 575                                    functional-processual archaeology, 326–53,
Smith, S. Percy, 193                                      573–5; influence of nationalism on
Smith, Stuart T., 505                                     archaeology in, 251–3. See also Russia
Smith, William (Strata), 144                           Spain: bibliographic resources on development
Smith, W. D., 567                                         of archaeology in, 554, 570, 580; colonialism
Smithsonian Institution, 184, 366, 536–7, 558,            in New World and destruction of
   566                                                    archaeological monuments, 116–17; Marxism
Smolla, Günter, 259                                      and archaeology since 1990s, 496;
Snodgrass, Anthony M., 501, 556                           nationalism and archaeological research in,
social anthropology: and colonialism, 441; and            250, 257
   functional-processual archaeology, 319–22,          Spanheim, Ezechiel, 56
   365, 379, 573; and postprocessual                   Sparrman, Andrew, 196
   archaeology, 444–6                                  Sparta, 64
social archaeology, 425, 495–6                         Spate, O. H. K., 573
social context: and approaches to history of           spatial units, and culture-historical archaeology
   archaeology, 17–26; bibliographical resources          in U.S., 289
   on, 555; and Childe on technology, 351–2;           Speck, Frank, 365
   and cultural interpretations of archaeological      Spector, Janet, 458, 471
   data, 425; and subjectivity, 543. See also class,   Spencer, Baldwin, 189, 191
   socioeconomic; politics; social stratification      Spencer, Herbert, 145–6, 147, 564
social Darwinism, 176                                  Spier, Leslie, 296
social networks, in processual archaeology, 439        Spinden, H. J., 390
social sciences: archaeology as, 28–29; and            Spitsyn, Aleksander, 232, 234
   distinguishing of influences on archaeology,        Spon, Jacob, 56
   24; and future of archaeology, 538–9; and           Spriggs, Matthew, 449–50
   New Archaeology, 415–16; social history of          Squier, Ephraim G., 161–2, 178, 180, 565
   (Bourdieu), 12. See also anthropology;              Stalin, Joseph, 328, 339
   psychology; sociology                               Stallings Island (Georgia), 363
social stratification, and burials, 405, 453, 455,     Stanton, W., 565
   513. See also class, socioeconomic                  Star Carr (England), 358, 359f, 575
social variability, and processual archaeology,        State Academy for the History of Material
   436                                                    Culture (GAIMK), 326–7, 329–30, 337
Society for American Archaeology, 549–50               statistical correlations, and processual
Society of Dilettanti, 60                                 archaeology, 440, 578
Society for German Prehistory, 236                     Steenstrup, Japetus, 10, 130–1, 132–3, 137, 315,
sociobiology, 494, 495                                    316
sociocultural anthropology, 484–5, 539                 Steiger, W. L., 578
sociocultural evolution, 145–6, 147, 267, 268,         Steno, Nicolaus, 92, 139–40
   321                                                 Stepan, N., 566
“sociological archaeology,” 341–2                      Stephens, John L., 160, 177
sociology, and ceramics analysis in New                Steuer, H., 570
   Archaeology, 403, 405. See also social sciences     Steward, Julian, 346, 372–3, 375, 376, 387, 389,
sociotechnic aspects, of artifacts, 398, 399              390, 395, 396, 410, 425
Soffer, Olga, 312–13, 573, 574                         Stewart, Dugald, 99, 102
Sollas, W. J., 222                                     Stiebing, W. H., Jr., 552, 559
Solli, Brit, 472                                       Stiles, Ezra, 115



                                                   706
                                                Index

Stjernquist, Berta, 558                               Sutton, D. G., 567
Stobeus, Kilian, 95                                   Swartz, B. K., 431
Stocking, G. W., Jr., 565, 566, 573                   Sweden: and antiquarianism, 86, 88; and
Stoddard, Amos, 159                                      beginnings of processual approach, 315; and
Stone Age, and beginnings of prehistoric                 pollen analysis of postglacial floral changes,
   archaeology, 126, 127, 129, 131, 132, 147–8           316. See also Montelius, Oscar; Scandinavia
stone circles, in England and Scotland, 106–10,          and Scandinavian archaeology
   257. See also Stonehenge                           Switzerland, 134–5, 258, 564
Stone Grave “race” (Tennessee), 279                   symbols and symbolism: and Clark’s influence
Stonehenge, 82, 83f, 106, 110, 118, 261, 557             on functional-processual archaeology, 360–1;
Stoneman, R., 560                                        and direct historical approach, 510; and
stone tools, 42, 92–7, 117, 562. See also                historical archaeology, 505; and
   Achulean handaxes; flint-knapping; lithic             postprocessual archaeology, 464–7
   debitage                                           synthesis, and conjunctive approach to
story-telling, and postprocessual archaeology,           functional-processual archaeology, 369–70
   471–2, 518. See also narratives                    “Syro-Palestinian” archaeology, 274–5
Stow, G. W., 196                                      systems theory, 24, 355f, 419–24, 439–40, 578
stratigraphy: and antiquity of humanity, 139,
   143–4; and classical archaeology, 63, 290;         Tabı́o, Ernesto, 496
   and colonial archaeology in U.S., 179–80;          Tacitus, Cornelius (Roman historian), 51,
   and culture-historical archaeology, 280–1,           89–90
   285, 290–4, 571, 572; and Palaeolithic             tacking, and independent lines of evidence, 515
   archaeology, 149; and Thomsen’s scheme for         Tainter, Joseph, 413
   relative dating, 127. See also chronology;         Tait, J., 555, 560
   excavation; Pitt Rivers, Augustus Lane Fox;        Tallgren, A. M., 239, 330, 354, 574
   Schliemann, Heinrich                               Tamarkin, B., 559
Strauss, L. G., 570                                   Tanaka, M., 570
Street, B. V., 566                                    Tansley, A. G., 360
Strong, Eugénie, 558, 561                            taphonomic studies, and culture-historical
Strong, William D., 366, 441                            archaeology, 259, 415
structuralism: and middle-ranging theory,             Tara (Ireland), 249
   511–12, 513; and postprocessual archaeology,       Tasmania, 153, 209
   444, 463–7. See also poststructuralism             Tax, T. G., 565
structuration, theory of, 469                         Taylor, R. E., 576
Struever, Stuart, 393, 419, 439                       Taylor, Walter, 364, 367–72, 385, 392, 397, 401,
Study of Archeology, A (Taylor, 1948), 367–72,          409, 455, 553, 575
   392                                                technological determinism, and
Stukeley, Anna, 110                                     neoevolutionism, 388, 392
Stukeley, William, 107–108, 109f, 110, 111,           technology: at beginnings of prehistoric
   118, 541, 557, 562, 563                              archaeology, 130; Childe on social context
style and stylistic analysis: of ceramics, 297; and     of, 351–2; and Egyptology, 69; and technical
   Childe, 244, 299–300; and classical                  developments in culture-historical
   archaeology, 65–6; and Thomsen’s                      archaeology, 290–303; and technological
   classification of Iron Age artifacts, 125–7           determinism, 388. See also innovation
subcultures, and culture-historical archaeology,      technomic aspects, of artifacts, 398, 399
   308                                                Tehuacan Archaeological-Botanical Project,
Su Bingqi, 268                                           373, 374f
subjectivity: and future of archaeology, 540–8;       Tell el Daba’a (Egypt), 502
   and postmodernism, 447, 448; and                   Tell el-Hesy (Palestine), 291, 292f
   postprocessual archaeology in U.S., 457, 477;      Tell el-Muskhuta (Egypt), 158
   problem of in history of archaeology, 1–5,         Tello, Julio C., 276
   38–9                                               Tello (Girsu), 72
subsistence patterns, as conceived by                 Temperate ecological zone, 358
   hunter-gatherers, 525                              Temple, William, 12
substantivism, and universal generalizations,         Teotihuacán (Mexico), 42, 276, 277, 402
   37–8                                               Terray, Emmanuel, 444
Sudan, and Egyptology, 202–203                        Terrell, John E., 529
Suhm, P. F., 105                                      Teviotdale, David, 194–5
Sumer (Iraq), 72                                      text-aided archaeology, 498–505, 560–2
Summers, R., 201                                      Thapar, B. K., 570
“survival of the fittest,” 147                        Thenaisian Epoch, 150
Susa (Iran), 72, 291                                  theoretic history, 102, 103, 120, 154



                                                  707
                                             Index

theory: and culture-historical archaeology,        Tsetskhladze, G. R., 575
   303–11; definition of scientific, 28; and       Tsuboi Shogoro, 262
   generalizations, 30–8; literature on current    Tularosa black-on-white pottery, 298
   status of, 580–1; and New Archaeology, 415.     Turgot, Marie-Robert-Jacques, baron de
   See also high-level theory; middle-range          l’Aulne, 99, 101, 103
   theory                                          Turkmenia, and Soviet archaeology, 342
thermodynamic systems, and cultural                Turner, D., 571
   evolution, 388                                  Turner, F., 561
Thom, René, 413                                   Twyne, John, 85, 93
Thomas, C. G., 561                                 Tylor, Edward B., 154, 233, 525
Thomas, Cyrus, 180, 181, 183, 185, 201             typological method, and Montelian synthesis of
Thomas, D., 578                                      European prehistory, 224–32
Thomas, Isaiah, 161
Thomas, Julian, 470, 472, 579, 580                 Ucko, Peter, 25, 467–8, 555, 563, 567, 569
Thomas, N., 561                                    Uhle, Max, 180, 280, 566
Thompson, J., 562                                  Ulkestrup (Denmark), 358
Thompson, M., 571, 574                             Umehara Suezi, 263
Thomsen, Christian, 7, 22, 121–9, 132, 135,        Únětice culture (Czech Republic), 234
   137, 233–4, 564                                 uniformitarianism, 29, 144–5, 259, 416, 564
Thomson, Donald, 309, 357–8                        unilinear evolutionism, 153, 173, 184, 208–9,
Thomson, George, 347                                 338, 341, 346
Thorlacius, Skuli, 105                             unilinear views, of history of archaeology, 10,
Three-Age concept, 104–105, 123, 128, 132,           559–60
   562, 564                                        United States: and beginnings of prehistoric
Thruston, G. P., 279                                 archaeology, 158–64; and contemporary
Thucydides, 46                                       beliefs on evolution, 52; cultural resource
Thule culture (Canada), 308                          management and rescue archaeology in, 444;
Tiahuanaco horizon (Peru), 366                       and culture-historical archaeology, 278–90,
Tilley, Christopher, 19, 450–2, 464, 466, 467–9,     301, 303, 368; and early functional-processual
   470, 472, 579                                     archaeology, 361–7, 380, 382; and early New
time, culturally variable concepts of, 41            Archaeology, 392–418; evolutionary
Timmins, Peter, 476                                  archaeology in, 177–89; and future of
Tindale, Norman, 191                                 archaeology, 539, 547; and link between
Tiye, Queen (Egypt), 44                              prehistoric archaeology and ethnology, 166;
Tokugawa period, 76                                  and Marxism, 449–50; neoevolutionism and
Tokyo National Museum, 262                           processualism in, 386–92; and postprocessual
Tolstov, S. P., 341, 342                             archaeology, 448–9, 456–62, 477–8;
Tooker, E., 578                                      radiocarbon dating and prehistory of, 384;
Tosi, Maurizio, 496                                  resources on development of archaeology in,
Tószeg (Hungary), 242                               553, 554, 556, 559, 561, 565, 566, 572, 575–6,
Toulmin, Stephen, 10, 560                            577, 578–9. See also North American
tourism: and culture-historical archaeology in       indigenous peoples
   Mexico, 277–8; and future of archaeology,       universal laws, on human nature, 37, 491–5,
   544; and Pharaonic heritage in Egypt, 271;        516–17
   and prehistoric archaeology in Switzerland,     universities: and archaeology courses in Africa,
   135                                               206; and future of archaeology, 538–9;
Tournal, Paul, 141, 142                              Kossinna’s followers in German, 240; and
Tracing Archaeology’s Past (Christenson, 1989),      professionalization of archaeology in U.S.,
   549                                               187; and Soviet archaeology, 327
trade: functional-processual archaeology and       University of Chicago, 393
   definition and context of, 324; and             University of Melbourne, 191
   Montelius’s chronology for European             University of Michigan, 393
   prehistory, 227–8                               University of Minnesota, 501
Tradescant, John, 85                               University of Moscow, 327
Tret’yakov, P. N., 330, 336, 341                   University of Petrograd, 327
Trevor-Roper, H. R., 205                           University of Sydney, 191
Trigger, Bruce, 12, 380, 555, 559, 563, 564,       Uppsala (Sweden), 88
   565, 566, 567, 568, 569, 575–6, 577, 578–9      Ur (Iraq), 70, 72, 158
Tringham, Ruth, 471, 569, 574, 578                 urbanism: and Childe on development of
Tripolje culture (Russia), 231, 234                  civilization, 324–5; and Maya ceremonial
Trois-Rivières (Quebec), 117                        centers, 513
Troy, Schliemann’s excavation of, 291              Urgeschichte (history of beginnings), 80



                                               708
                                               Index

Urnfield culture (Europe), 246                       Watson, Patty Jo, 393, 405, 419, 577, 578, 579
Uruk (Iraq), 72                                      Watson, R., 578
use categories, and relative dating, 124             Watson, W., 570
Ussher, Archbishop James, 50                         Wauchope, R., 559
Uvarov, Count Aleksey, 231                           Webb, William S., 362–3
Uvarova, Countess Praskovia, 231                     Weber, Karl, 58, 557, 568
                                                     Wedel, Waldo R., 366, 441
Valle, Pietro della, 70                              Weiss, R., 560–1, 564
Van Hoepen, Egbert, 203                              Welch, P. D., 565
“vanished societies,” 413                            Welinder, Stig, 478, 564
VanPool, Christine, 8, 580                           Wendat (North America), 504
Van Reybrouck, D., 576                               Wendorf, Fred, 393
Van Riet Lowe, Clarence, 203                         Wendt, H., 564
Van Riper, A. B., 564                                Wengrow, David, 25, 28, 562
Van Sertima, Irvan, 409                              Westropp, Hodder, 148
Van Seters, J., 560                                  Wetherill, Richard, 280
Vargas, Iraida, 496                                  Whallon, Robert, 393, 403
Vašı́ček, Zdenek, 10, 555                          Whately, Richard, 157
Vaughan, A. T., 563                                  What Happened in History (Childe, 1942),
Vázquez León, L., 571                                345–6
Vedel Simonsen, L. S., 105                           Wheeler, Mortimer, 269, 294, 571
vegetation zones, in Europe, 358                     White, Charles, 169
Veit, U., 569, 570                                   White, J. P., 559, 566
Venezuela, 496                                       White, Leslie, 387–8, 390, 394, 398, 424
Vergil, Polydore (Polidoro Vergilio), 84             White, N. M., 558
verification, of scientific explanations, 35–6       White Horse (England), 110
Vico, Giambattista, 58, 98                           Whitehouse, W. E., 318
Vidal de La Blache, Paul, 319                        Wiener, N., 578
Viking period, and Scandinavian archaeology,         Wilcox, D. R., 550
  257                                                Wilkinson, John Gardiner, 69, 490–1
Vinsrygg, S., 562                                    Willey, Gordon R., 5, 282–3, 286, 287f, 288,
Virchow, Rudolf, 235, 239, 569                         289, 308, 364, 375, 376–7, 380, 390, 397, 401,
Virú Valley project (Peru), 376, 377, 378f, 379      409, 501, 532, 553, 558, 562, 565, 566, 575,
Vishnyatsky. L. B., 574                               576, 578
Vitruvius (Vitruvius Pollio, Marcus), 56             William Paca Garden (Maryland), 461f
Volkov, F. K., 327                                   Williams, S., 550, 559, 562
Voltaire, Franc¸ ois-Marie Arouet, 99                Williams-Freeman, J. P., 318
von Gernet, Alexander, 476                           William of Worcester, 84
von Haast, Julius, 193                               Wilson, Daniel, 133–4, 136, 178, 390, 566
von Ranke, Leopold, 306, 531                         Wilson, David, 577
Vorgeschichte (early history), 80                    Wilson, J., 556, 561
Vyverberg, H., 563                                   Winckelmann, Johann, 57–8, 561
                                                     Wintemberg, William, 362
Wace, A. J. B., 560                                  Winters, Howard, 393
Wagner, Richard, 168                                 Wise, Richard, 118
Wahle, Ernst, 239, 316                               Wiseman, James, 501, 579
Wahpeton Dakota village, 471                         Wissler, Clark, 281
Wajima Seiichi, 264                                  Wittfogel, Karl, 521
Walker, S. T., 179                                   Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 479
Wallace, Alfred, 170                                 Wiwjorra, I., 570
Wallace, Anthony, 371                                Wolf, Eric, 391, 437, 576
Wallerstein, Immanuel, 438, 576                      Wolf, Friedrich, 62
Walmsley, H. M., 197                                 Wolfram, S., 570
Walters, H. B., 562                                  Wood, M., 562
Wang, G., 562                                        Woodbury, R., 557, 572
Wang, T., 570                                        Woodland cultures (North America), 283,
Wanklyn, H. G., 567                                    286
Waring, A. J., Jr., 366                              Wood Quay (Ireland), 257
Warren, C. N., 564–5                                 Woodward, John, 95
Warren, S. H., 150                                   Woolley, Leonard, 3, 72, 158
Washburn, W. E., 565                                 wooly rhinoceros, 142, 143
Watkinson, C., 569                                   World Archaeological Congress, 452, 555



                                                   709
                                                 Index

world prehistory, and functional-processual         Yangshao culture (China), 265, 266
  archaeology, 382–4                                Yates, F. A., 561
World Prehistory (Clark, 1961), 382–3               Yayoi period (Japan), 262, 264
world-system theory, 438–9                          Yellen, J. E., 578
Worm, Ole, 86, 88, 94                               Yengoyan, A. A., 578
Worsaae, Jens J. A., 122, 131–3, 135–6, 137,        Yen Rozhü, 74
  148, 223, 233–4, 315                              Yoffee, Norman, 495, 579
Wortham, J. D., 561                                 York (England), 257
Wotzka, H. P., 308
Wright, G., 573                                     Zammito, J. H., 563
written records: and interest in past, 43; and      Zapotec culture (Mexico), 424
  Maya, 503. See also epigraphers and               Zhao Mingcheng, 74
  epigraphic data; text-aided archaeology           Zhoukoudian (China), 265, 415
Wylie, Alison, 437, 459, 470, 515, 531, 578         Zhukov, B. S., 328, 341
Wyman, Jeffries, 14, 179                            Zimbabwe, 196–201
                                                    Zimmerman, A., 567, 569
Xia Dynasty (China), 47                             Zionist movement, and history of Israel, 273
                                                    Zittel, K. A. von, 564
Yadin, Yigael, 273                                  zooarchaeology, 361
Yalouri, E., 561                                    Zuñi sites (U.S.), 295–7




                                                 710
